I Have diligently perused this Treatise, (called Vindiciae Clavium) and
perceiving that the judicious Author has exactly performed what he
undertakes, I cannot but conceive it will conduce very much to the ending of
our Unchristian Contentions concerning Church Government, the settling of some
that waver, and reclaiming of some that are mis-lead, and appose

Imprimatur

IA. CRANFORD,
July 4, 1645.
VINDICIAE CLAVIVM:

OR, A Vindication of the KEYS of the Kingdom of Heaven, into the hands of
the right Owners.

Being some Animadversions upon a Tract of Mr. I. C. called, The Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

As also upon another Tract of his, called, The way of the Churches of
NEW ENGLAND.

Manifesting; 1. The weakness of his proofs. 2. The Contradictions to
himself, and others 3. The Middle-way (so called) of Independents, to be the
Extreme, or By-way of the Brownists.


By an earnest well-wisher to the Truth.

IER. 6.16. Stand ye in the ways, see and ask for the old paths, where is
the good way, and walk therein. LONDON, Printed by T.H. for Peter Whaley, and
are to be sold in Ivy-Lane, at the Sign of the Gun. 1645.

To the READER.
IT is true, which the Prefacers to the Tract, called, The way of the Churches
of Christ in New England, do say, That we have long called for a fuller
Declaration of themselves. For all that has as yet bin published, has not
satisfied our expectation, Nor do we think them able to satisfy any
unprejudiced man. The 32. Questions, The Apologeticall Narration, The Reasons
of the dissenting Brethren, The way of the Churches, etc. Now by them
published, have all been answered; which yet these Brethren take no notice of.
The Keys are now in question, in the following discourse; how well they do
fit the words in The way described, or how suitable they are to the parties
allowed to wear them. There is one thing very suspicious, That the Brethren
do not agree among themselves, in the use and application of them: For those
two Brethren tell us in their Epistle, That they hold with the Churches of
New England, yet it is evident they agree not with their Author, in The way:
For they profess, That they do not yet fully close with some expressions,
passim, (frequent) in the Book, before some of which, (belike there are more)
they minded it, to note a Star in the Margin. This they could not but say and
do (pace tanti Authoris) or they could not assert the Book. And will this
satisfy any indifferent Reader? In the Title page, they promise us a full
declaration of the Church Way in all particulars. But in the second page of
their Epistle, they tell us, They do not close with some expressions in the
Book; And there are no less than ten Stars affixed in the margin of the
Book; wherein they intimate, they cannot assert the Book. Of the same mind
are the other two Brethren, Ep. p. 6.
the Prefacers to the Keys; and that not in bare expressions, but in
Doctrinall assertions. How should such Tracts satisfy us, when themselves are
not satisfied? And no marv^ll, for those Brethren, in their Apologeticall
Narration, do (wisely) profess, they keep a reserve open, to alter their
judgments, upon occasion of New-light. Besides this, its evident, that the
Author of the Keys, does directly contradict the Author, of The way, that is,
himself, which, when I have pleaded to some friends of his, I have been told,
that he has altered his judgment, since he writ The way, in many particulars.
I have heard indeed he has often altered his judgment since he went to
New England: But I cannot well believe it in this; because the Prefacers to The
way, Ep. p. 3.
bring us his own words, in a Letter newly written, coming to their hands,
when their Epistle was in the Press; wherein he affirms, That there is not a
jot of difference in any Doctrine of Divinity, or Church practice. So Mr.
Cotton, in his Letter to Mr. R.M. If it be true, that he has altered his
opinion since he writ the Way, they have done him wrong to publish it, after
the Keys, wherein the alteration is; If he have not, they would be requested
to reconcile him to himself. For I find he does as flatly contradict himself,
as ever any man did. I will instance but in one place (and leave the rest to
the following Discourse.) In the Keys, page 4. he says, The Keys were
delivered to Peter, as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a Believer. The sense of
the words (says he) will be most full, if all the several considerations be
taken jointly together. But in The way, page 27, he says, The power of the
Keys is given to the Church, to Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but
as a professed Believer, in the name of Believers, etc. Is not this a flat
contradiction? and yet the Prefacers seem to approve it, for they set no
Star in the margin. I shall leave it to them to reconcile. How justly then
may we call for a fuller Declaration? and how unjustly do the Brethren
quarrel us for calling for it? Ep. p. 5.
Do not they themselves promise us yet a fuller Treatise of the same Subject,
with amplier demonstrations, by joint consent of the Churches of Old and
New England? That's it that we expect, the joynt-consent of the Churches and
Brethren; for their inconstancy, and difference in judgment, has caused, as
our non-satisfaction, so our just lamentation, That they should rend a
poore-rent-already-Church into pieces, by setting up the practice of a New way,
and not be agreed of the platform whereby they practice. There are (as I
touched before) no less then ten several Stars, affixed by these Brethren;
wherein, I should conceive, they differ from their Author (if not their
Master) not in bare expressions but in the Doctrine there delivered, as page
45. Whether the Church has power to proceed against all her Officers, if they
be culpable in heretical Doctrine, or scandalous crime: The Author holds the
affirmative; they seem to hold the Negative. Again, page 53. Whether a
Church may consist of less than seven, p. 55: Whether confession of sins,
and profession of faith be necessary for a member admitted, page 68. Whether
sitting at the Sacrament, have a Symbolicall use (made by Christ himself) to
teach the Church their Majority over their Ministers in some cases, etc In
these and the rest, we are unsatisfied, and these Brethren may do well to
declare their judgment in their fuller Treatise promised. This disagreement
amongst themselves, is prejudicious to their cause and way, to those that are
judicious, that are not sworn to the words of any Master, but Christ; much
more, when the same person is not at agreement with himself; which, if it be
not the case of the Author of the Keys, I refer to the judgment of the
indifferent Reader, when he has read the following Discourse.

Animadversions upon the Brethrens Epistle to the Reader.
IT is indeed the great controversy of the times, [What is the complete
subject of Church power, or the power of the Keys.] These Brethren say,
(perhaps truly) that the Truth herein has been long lost in a double extreme:
The one was the tyranny of the Clergy (so called) or rather of the Prelacy, who
engrossed all, or the chief part of that power unto themselves, not only from
the people, but also from the Pastors of particular Congregations. The other
is, the Anarchy or popularity of the Separatists, or Brownists, (as they after
call them) who gave the people a place and claim to the whole power, and made
the Elders set over them; but their servants to exercise that power which was
properly theirs.

Probable it is, that Truth may lie in the middle, between these two extremes;
but how to find it out, is not so easy. Our Brethren go about it; but, me
thinks they do not hit it: They say, [ The Saints (in these knowing Times)
finding that the Key of knowledge has so far opened their hearts, that they
see with their own eyes into the substantials of godliness, etc. They do
begin more than to suspect, that some share in the Key of power should likewise
appertain unto them] Truly just one as much as another: The Brethren suppose
the Saints have a share in the Key of Knowledge; when they say, they suspect
they have likewise a share in the Key of power. But first, they have no share
in the Key of knowledge, (which is, preaching and administration of the Seals,
as the Author speaks) except passively, as to have their hearts opened by it
(as the Brethrens words are:) So, nor have they any share in the Key of power,
except it be by a voluntary [consent, in obedience to the Will and Rule of
Christ] as the Author himself speaks, page 15. And diverse times elsewhere, as
we shall hear; [ even an orderly subjection, according to the Order of the
Gospel, page 11.] Though the truth is, some have taken more upon them than to
suspect they have a share, even to practice the Key of power, and that [through
the instruction and guidance of their Teachers;] which, how little it comes
short of the plea and practice of the other extreme, shall ere long appear.
For the present: These Brethren say, they conceive [the disposal of this power
may lie in a due allotment into diverse hands, according to their several
concernments, rather than in an entire and sole trust committed to any one man,
or any one sort, or rank of men, or Officers.] Herein perhaps we might agree
with them: But I am sure they agree not with their Author herein, who places
all the power in one sort of men alone; that is, The way, p. 45.
the Brethren without Officers, and gives them leave [to elect ordain
Officers, admit members, and pass Church censures without any Officers, yea,
to censure all their Officers.] though, we think, he contradicts himself in
this Tract of the Keys.

The Brethren tell us, The Author (to whom they Preface) takes upon him to
distribute the bounds of this power. And lays down this as a maxim; [ That
look in whose hands soever it fall, they have it immediately from Christ; that
is, in regard of delegation or dependence on each other.] And thus far we do
not dissent: [He then (say they) considers the power of a Congregation; which
supposing to have a Presbytery of its own, he asserteth to be the prime
subject of entire power within it self yea, and the sole native subject of the
power of Ordination and Excommunication.] But 1. he needed not to have made
such a supposition, that the Congregation has a Presbytery of its own: The
way, p. 50, 51.
For if they have no Presbytery of their own, he asserteth, that they have the
power of Ordination and Excommunication, which is the highest censure within
themselves; and [want a Warrant to repair to the Presbytery of another Church
for either.] 2. Both he and these Brethren know, that this is denied by many,
who make the first Subject of all Church Power to be the general visible
Church, and secondarily the Congregation, though having a Presbytery of its
own: As a man is the first subject of Risibility, Peter, but at second hand.
The Congregation consisting of Elders and Brethren; [For as for women and
children, there is a special exception by a Statute Law of Christ, against
their enjoyment of any part of this public power] (say the Brethren) which I
see no reason for, in regard of some part of this power, (as we shall see anon)
the Author labors to share the interest and power between the Elders and the
Brethren. And he manifests it (say they) by way of a parallel. [As in some of
our Towns corporate, the power is given to a company of Aldermen the Rulers
and a Common Council, a Body of the people.] But I pray observe the
dissimilitude in this similitude: His maine design is, to give the people a
share in the Church power of Government: But then the parallel will not run
even. For the Company of Aldermen, and the Common Council, are both Rulers of
the Corporation, though in several ranks and subordination: But I suppose,
neither the Author, nor the Brethren, can truly say, the whole company of the
people are Rulers in the Church, as the Common Council is in the Corporation.
If all the people be Rulers, who are the ruled? In the City there are
multitudes of people, subject to the Company of Aldermen, and Common Council;
but here are all Governors, or governed. The parallel were fairly laid thus;
The Company of Aldermen, resemble the Pastors and Teachers; The
Common Council, the Ruling-Elders (Officers of another rank;) The Citizens
besides those, the Brethren out of Office, in the Congregation. Thus all things
correspond well. But they make the Presbytery to be the Aldermen, and the whole
Body of the people to be the Common Council; which sure they are not, what
ever they say; for then the distinction of Rulers and ruled is lost: And this
appears clearly in his application of this similitude. [He gives to the Elders
or Presbytery, a binding power of Rule and Authority; unto the Brethren, a
power to concur with them; and that such affairs should not be transacted
without a joynt-agreement of both.] What power? such as the Common Council
has in the Corporation? that's more than a bare privilege; that's a power of
Rule and Authority, a binding power, concurring with the Aldermen; But they
should have said: Not the Common Council, but the Common people of a City,
have such a power to concur with the Aldermen, that such affairs be not
transacted, but with their joynt-agreement. But this they cannot say, and then
the parallel will not hold, unless they change the Common People for the
Common Council, thus. As the people of a City only cannot proceed to any
public sentence, unless they have Aldermen over them: so, nor have the
Aldermen power to sentence without the concurrence of the people, which is
apparently false. The parallel must be thus: As the Brethren only cannot
proceed to any public censure without their Elders: so, nor have the Elders
power to censure without the concurrence of the Brethren; which is as false as
the former. Indeed these are very parallel: As on the one side, the
Common Council cannot do any valid act, without the Aldermen; nor the
Aldermen, without the Common Council, (unless there be some reserved cases)
so, as the Ruling-Elders cannot censure without the Pastor, so nor the Pastor,
without the Ruling-Elders; but applied to the Brethren, is (as in the City, if
so it were) to make the Government popular, as those do, that are in the one
extreme, or I understand nothing. And then, the last clause of the Brethren, is
to be paralleld thus: As the Common Council have not power of censuring the
whole Court of Aldermen; nor the Aldermen, the whole Common Council, though
together they have power over any particular person or persons of each: so the
Presbytery alone, have not power of excommunicating the whole Body of the
Brethren; nor the Brethren, the Presbytery, though together they have power
over any person in each: But then there is one thing wanting; The Aldermen and
Common Council have power over all the people of the City, as well as over
particular persons amongst themselves. But in these Brethrens way; There are no
other people, over which the Presbytery and Brethren should have power; and so
the Scene is mislaid. I only note again, That the Brethren and the Author are
not both of one mind: They say, [ The Brethren only could not proceed to any
public censures, without they have Elders over them, nor retro:] But whether
he say, [The Elders have power to censure the Body of the Brethren] or no, we
shall hear anon; this I am sure he says: The way, p. 45:
[The Brethren have power to censure the whole Presbytery;] as was noted before.

The next thing which they comment on, is the power of Synods, because
Congregations may miscarry. [Wherein (say they) he grants an Association of
Churches, as an Ordinance of Christ, with power above that of a Congregation, a
Ministerial power, to determine and enjoyne things concerning the
Congregations.] The words are full and fair, but the sense is flat and empty:
For all this power of determining and enjoining, is but Doctrinall, or
declarative, Every Minister has in himself, alone, a Ministerial Doctrinall
Authority, over the whole Church that is his charge, and every person in it,
Ep. p. 9.
differing nothing in kind from the power of every single Pastor, but in degree
of weight, as a greater Testimony; as three cords twisted together, are
stronger than each of them single. A power not binding or loosing, but
doctrinally only, not armed with power of censures, if injunctions be not
obeyed. But if this power of the Synod, be not juridicall, what is it? All
power in those Pastors thus assembled as an Ordinance of Christ, is either a
power of Order, or of jurisdiction: The power of determining or decrecing
together, is not the power of Order; for then every Pastor, qua Pastor, by
virtue of his Order, might decree and impose it upon the Congregation: which is
denied by all; Therefore it must be a power of jurisdiction; which yet these
Brethren, and their Author do deny. And if it be not armed with power of
censure, it will come to nothing; as shall appear hereafter. For as for their
withdrawing communion, it will be little regarded by an offending obstinate
Congregation.

The Brethren Epistolers now begin to applaud themselves as jumping in
judgment with their Author, though so far remote as New England (But men
agree in error sometimes, that never knew one another.) Their middle way, is
this very way held forth by this Author: Yet they say afterward, in some
things, in his Discourse, Hic Magister non tenetur. They say, [ It is the
middle way, between that which is called Brownisme, and the Presbyteriall
Government, as it is practiced, etc.] But if they remember themselves well, the
two extremes were Prelacy and Brownisme: [Whereof the one does in effect put
the chief (if not the whole) of the Rule and Government into the hands of the
people, etc. The other taking the principal parts of that Rule (the due of
each Congregation) into the jurisdiction of a common Presbytery of several
Congreg^tions etc.] I appeal their wisdom, if the latter part do not better
fall upon the Prelacy; who in the other extreme, took the principal parts of
Rule (due in part to the Pastors of Congregations) into their own hands. Then
the middle way, may chance fall out to be the Presbyteriall way, and not
theirs. For certainly, that is between those two extremes. And their way, I
dare say, (and hope to make it appear) comes nearer to Brownisme, than the
Presbyteriall way, to the Prelaticall. For the present, only mark; That the
Presbyteriall way, gives the power of Church Government; neither to the Clergy
alone, as the Prelacy, nor to the people alone, or chiefly, as the Brownists
do, but to both. For the Presbyteries (Classical as well as Congregationall)
consist of Pastors, and Ruling Elders, who are the Representatives of the
people, and chosen by their consent. But to give the Brethren, the people
alone, without Officers, a power, to elect, ordain, censure, etc. (as the
Author does, whatever these Brethren do) is to put, not only the chief (as
Brownists do) but the whole of the Rule into their hands: which, for ought I
know, the Brownists do not. Nor does the Presbytery swallow up the peoples
interests, (as they affirm) for their interest is saved, in their
Ruling-Elders, chosen by themselves; as the interest of the common people of a
Corporation, is saved in their Common Council, chosen by themselves. And that
the votes of the Elders of that Congregation concerned, should be swallowed up
in the Classis, etc. is no more absurd, than that the votes of the Burgess of
a Corporation, should be swallowed up in the Parliament; or that the votes of
the Elders should be swallowed up in a Synod, confessed to be the Ordinance of
Christ; unless the Brethren think, a Synod may not determine or decree any
thing without the joynt-consent of every Elder there assembled.

After all this agreement of the Brethren, with this absent Author, (to a
wonder, if not to a miracle, as they would have us think, though we believe
they were not strangers to the plot of this Author, either before or since his
going over) they enter their dissent, against some opinions and passages of
this Author, in the platform by him described. I purpose not here to debate,
much less to decide the controversy between them. I only desire to have it
observed, That it may rather seem a wonder, that these and other Brethren,
having so long studied and professed this middle way, should not yet be able to
walk hand in hand therein. When will they be agreed, that we may see their new
platform to be uniforme? One of them must needs be beside the way, and why may
not both? But we shall observe greater differences than these hereafter.

They now again resume the difference between the peoples interest, and the
Elders Rule and Authority; and illustrate it by the former similitude, [Of a
Company of Aldermen, and a Common Council, or Body of the people, in some
Corporations, where the interest of the one is distinct from the other; so as
without the concurrence of both, nothing is esteemed as a City act:] But so as
in this Company of the Elders, this power is properly Authority, but in the
people is a privilege or power.] Enough has been said to this already: Only I
would know why they call the Common Council a Body of the people? Sure they
do not know any Corporations, I think, where the whole Corporation meets with
the Aldermen, as a Body. The Common Council are a distinct Body from the
common people; a Body representative only. But then the parallel is spoiled;
for the Brethren as distinct from the Elders, are not a representative Body,
for whom should they represent? And if all the people of a corporation should
meet as the Common Council, so that nothing may be esteemed as a City Act,
without their concurrence; Surely the Government were Democraticall: The great
mistake in the plot is; That the Presbytery is compared to the Court of
Aldermen, and the Brethren to the Common Council. But so they are not; for the
Common Council are Governors of the Corporation. It cannot be said, in the
Company of Aldermen it is Authority, but in the Common Council a privilege;
for it is Authority also in the Common Council; and if it be so in the
Brethren (as it must, if they be parallel to the Common Council) I see not
but the Independent way, and the way of the Brownists, one of the extremes
forementioned, is one and the same. And let the Brethren consider, The
multitude of the Church does ordinarily execute all discipline and censures by
the Presbyters; and the Presbyters by their consent. The way, p. 98.
whether the Brownists do not select two or three, or more persons, and put
them in Office, and betrust them with an entire interest of power for a
multitude, to which that multitude ought (by a command from Christ) to be
subject and obedient, as to an Ordinance, to guide them in their consent; and
in whose sentence, the ultimate formal Ministerial Act of binding and loosing
shall consist; and yet place the Rule and Authority, originally and chiefly in
the people; And then see how little difference there is between themselves, and
them. Its true indeed, that without the concurrence of the Aldermen and Common
Council, in the major part, nothing is esteemed as a City Act: But without the
concurrence of the body of the people it is. So without the concurrence of the
Pastors and Elders, nothing is to be esteemed as a Church act; but (if the
parallel be right) without the Brethren it is. That the Brethren have any
power of concurrence with the Elders in their Acts, is begged, not proved. And
their own words confute it: [The multitude (say they) ought (by a command from
Christ) to be subject and obedient to the power of the Elders, as to an
Ordinance, etc. as Rulers set over them:] But if they ought to be subject and
obedient to the acts of their Elders or Rulers, they have no more concurrence
to their acts by way of power, than the common people have to the acts of the
Aldermen and Common Council; which is a mere passive concurrence and consent.

The next similitude of a Virgin, is nothing parallel to the case in hand. [A
Virgin (say they) has a power ultimately to dissent, upon an unsatisfied
dislike, and the match is not valid, without her consent.] But the common
people in a Corporation, have no such power ultimately to dissent (then again
the Government were Democraticall.) And if they give this power to the Brethren
ultimately to dissent; they give them more than an interest, even a power of
Authority, to annull all acts and censures made by the Elders; which, I take
it, is no less than Brownisme; for they can say no more.

Again, they suppose [a Government tempered of Aristocracy and Democracy, in
which the people have a share, and their actual consent is neccessary to all
Laws and sentences; whereas, a few Nobles that are set over them, in whom the
formal sanction of all should lie, in these it were Rule and Authority, in
that multitude, but power or interest.] But I pray, is not that Government,
where the peoples actual consent (and so their dissent) is necessary to all
Laws and sentences, merely popular, and in show only Aristocraticall? The
case is just the Brownists: Their Church seems to be tempered of Aristocracy
in their select Officers, chosen and ordained by themselves (as yours are) and
Democracy in the body of the people. But they granting the peoples actual
consent (and dissent) necessary to all Acts and sentences, swallow up the votes
of the Elders, and so their Government is wholly or chiefly popular. Give such
a power to the people (as you do) and I will use your own words: [All that is
said in the New Testament about the Rule of the Elders, and the peoples
obedience to them, is to be looked upon, but as Metaphors, and to hold no
proportion with any substantial reality of Rule and Government.

The Brethren, to make their way more plausible, show a reason of the
difference between the Times of the Old and New Testament. [ Then the Church
was in her Nonage; and therefore the sole power of all Church Matters, was in
their Tutors and Governors: But now the Church is out of her Nonage, and more
generally able, being visible Saints (as they should be) to join with their
guides, etc.] But they forget themselves presently, confessing, [the weakness
and unskilfulnesse of the people (for the generality of them) in comparison of
their Officers, gifted for the Government: He has therefore placed a Rule and
Authority in those Officers over them, not directing only, but binding; so as
not only nothing should be done without them, but not esteemed validly done,
unless done by them.] Now I pray, was it any more in the Government of the
Church of the Old Testament? were not they to be visible Saints? were not their
Guides gifted for that purpose, suitable to those Times? And I think the
Brownists may grant them thus much: Their Officers are but the Churches
servants, and yet they say nothing may (in an ordinary way of
Church Government) be done without them, nor validly done, unless done by
them. But I marvel they should call the power of the Elders a binding power,
when as they said before; [The Elders had no power to censure without the
concurrence of the people, as nor the people without the Elders] which is just
the same which Brownists say.

Nor can this ballancing of the power prevent Anarchie (what ever it may do,
Tyranny) for certainly if the peoples consent and concurrence be necessary to
every Church-act, its an easy thing for them to bring in Anarchy, being
always the greater number, and so to swallow up the votes of the Elders, as
Brownists do.

That Ministerial Doctrinall Authority should be severed from the power of
excommunication, in some parties, we never doubted; because excommunication is
an act of jurisdiction, which is common to many; but Doctrinall Authority is an
affluxe of Order. But to sever Rule and Authority from the power of concurrence
to excommunication and censures, (as they do in the people) is a mere nullity
of Rule and Authority too.

That the power of excommunication should be inseparably linked to a
Congregation; they would feign illustrate by a known comparison; As the
custom is in our Land, [The sentencing of a man to death, is not by Lawyers*
nor by Judges alone, but by his Peers, a Jury of men like himself.] Their
similitude still halts on the maine leg: For who are the Judges with them,
but the Presbytery? and who are the Jury, but all the Brethren? But this is not
so in a Corporation: All the City are not the Delinquents Peers, but a select
dozen of men. Now suppose a man be accused as an offender in a Corporation;
shall the whole City be his Peers or Jury, to try him? have they any such
interest or privilege? is their consent or dissent regarded? So the parallel
required. If a brother deserve censure, he shall not be judged by the Pastors
alone, or with the Elders, chosen by the people (as his Jury) for the
Government of the Congregation; but all the people are to be his Peers or
Jury: This were strange to see in a City, and would breed nothing but Anarchy
and confusion. So in the Church:

That Christ has not betrusted a general Assembly of Elders, with that power
he has done the Congregation, is begged, not proved. The reason is invalid:
[Because (say they) they are abstracted from the people.] But that's not true;
for the people are there representatively in their Elders, who are able to
represent the case of the offender, with all the circumstances, as fully as if
all the people were there present.

But Christ (say they) [would have this Tribe of men (the brethren personally
concurring, not by delegation alone, not to the execution only; but even to the
legal sentence also of cutting men off:] This is all begged, and is the
question. And it is, as if they should say (in the parallel instance) God
would have all the Corporation personally concurring to the legal sentence, or
cutting off a malefactor, not by delegation only (as the Jury do) nor to the
execution only; which were a strange confusion. So that, as at the Assizes, the
multitude of the people present, have no concurrence to the legal sentence,
etc. but the Judge and Jury only: so the Brethren are to have no concurrence to
the legal sentence of excommunication, (except to yield obedience in the
execution) but the Elders only: and so the parallel is full.

And to conclude, if the distance of the Presbyteries Clasficall, etc. may
necessitate the censure to pertain to the particular Congregation, because of
the circumstances better known to them: By the same reason, every Town where
a malefactor lives, should have the Sessions kept amongst them; because there
the person and fact is better known, and not one man to be absent from the
censure: Nay, a man being to be excommunicated out of a particular Church, is
excommunicated out of all Churches, therefore all the Churches must be present
at the censure.

VINDICIAE Clavium: OR, A Vindication of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.
CHAP. I. What the Keys be, and what their power.
1. THat by the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant both the Kingdom of Glory, which
is above, and the Kingdom of Grace, which is the Church on Earth, I easily
grant. But I only desire (in the beginning of this discourse) to be informed
what you mean by the Church: Whether 1. The invisible and mystical Church of
true Believers opposed to Reprobates; or 2. The Catholic visible Church,
opposed to Heathens; or 3. The particular Congregation of Believers associated
in Church Communion, as you use to speak. If we may guess at your meaning by
the whole proceeding of this Tract; or by your discovery of your self in the
other Discourse, called, The way of the Churches in New England; (which though
it was published after this of the Keys, yet was written, and went up and
down in the dark before it) I think you mean it in the latter sense, for a
particular Congregation. For your first Proposition, there gives us this
Resolution; [That the Church which Christ in the Gospel has instituted, The
way p. 1.
and to which he has committed the Keys etc. it coetus fidelium, a
combination of godly men, commonly called a particular visible Church.] But of
all the rest, this is the most improbable sense of our Saviors words, Mat.
16.19. For 1. By the Kingdom of Heaven (on Earth) he means that Church, of
which he had spoken before, in v. 18. But that was, either the Catholic
visible Church, or rather, the invisible mystical Church; for that only is
built upon the rock, and against that the gates of hell shall never prevail:
whereas, particular Churches may fail. 2. The kingdom of Glory, the one part
of the meaning of the Kingdom of Heaven, is not contradistinguished to a
particular Congregation; but to the general visible Church on Earth, opposed
to the World by your self, The Keys, p. 2. [On Earth, that is say you) in the
Church on Earth, for he gave him no power to bind in the World.] 3. That Church
was there meant (say you, the way p. 1.) whereof Peter was one: But Peter was
not a member of such a particular congregation; for there was none such extant,
when Christ spoke these words to Peter. 4. You say again, it was that Church
unto which Peter or any offended brother might tell the offense, and have it
censured: But that was never done in a Church of Saints, Believers, without
officers; neither was the church of Corinth, such a church as you described
before; for that had Officers, who authoritatively might censure the incestuous
person, yet you join them both together. 5. It was (say you) a Church, who all
met in one place for the administration of the Ordinances of Christ: But the
Ordinances of Christ are not to be found, much less administered in a Church of
Believers, without Officers. 6. When you say, Christ committed the Keys to the
Church, that is, a particular Congregation; you must mean it either
Subjective, or Objective: If you mean it in the latter sense, That the Keys
are committed to the Church, as the object of the exercise of the Keys, that
is, for the use and good of the Church, you say true, but nothing to the
purpose. In this sense, the Keys are given, first and more immediately to the
invisible mystical Church (All are yours, whether Paul, etc.) then to the
general visible Church, for their sakes: and then to the particular
Congregation, as a part or member of that general visible Church: But if you
mean it in the former sense, (as you do and must, or else you aequivocate
with us from the beginning, and throughout your whole Book) you fall into that
extreme of the Brownists, which you so labor to avoid: For to take the Church,
in Mat. 16. for a particular Congregation of Believers, without Officers, is a
new, and strange, and false gloss, maintained by none but Brownists, and such
like Separatists. To conclude, The Church of which our Savior speaks, is
called here, the Kingdom of Heaven (on Earth:) But a particular Congregation
of Believers is never called the Kingdom of Heaven; being but a member or
corporation of that Kingdom. It were as improper to call a congregation
Christ's Kingdom, as to call London, the Kingdom of England; yet so your party
speak sometimes. This I thought good to note, to clear the way, for the
better understanding of that which follows: And now go on.

2. The next thing to be explicated is, what the Keys of the Kingdom be;
wherein you resolve us thus: [The Keys are the Ordinances of Christ, which he
has instituted to be administered in his Church; as the preaching of the Word,
as also the administering of Seals and censures.] I take what you grant, only I
shall animadvert some things. In this Paragraph, as you do clearly lay down
the state of the question: so you do strongly confute the scope of your whole
Book, which is to give the people a share in the power of the Keys, that is,
in the government of the Church: which appears upon these considerations; 1.
You say, the Keys are the Ordinances, which Christ has instituted: But the
Ordinances of Christ are given indeed for the Church of Believers, that is, for
their good and benefit, objective: But are never in all the Scripture, nor in
all Antiquity, said to be given to that Church, subjective. It sounds ill at
first hearing, to say that the people have any power to exercise Ordinances, of
preaching, or administering of Seals or Censures. The power of preaching or
administering Sacraments by the people, as none but Separatists do usurp: so
your self complain of it page 6. And why you should allow them power in
censures, there is very little reason. 2. You say, the Keys are Ordinances,
which Christ has instituted to be administered in his Church: What Church? the
Church of Believers, a particular Congregation; for so you mean, as was showed
before: Mark it; to be administered in that Church ( scil. by Officers
instituted for that purpose) not by that Church without Officers. 3. You add
that which to me clearly excludes the people of your Church: [These Keys are
neither sword nor scepter, etc. for they conveigh not sovereign power but
stewardly and ministerial.] Whence thus I argue: The people or Congregation of
Believers have no stewardly, or ministerial power over themselves; ergo, they
have nothing to do with the power of the Keys: They are not as Hilkiah was,
whose Office was over the house, Isa. 22.15, 22. nor Stewards in the house, as
he was, Gen, 43.19. nor as those are, who are spoken of, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
Stewards of the mysteries of God. But you add a clause to draw in the people,
saying, [This power (to open and shut the gates of Heaven) lies partly in
their spiritual calling (whether it be their Office, or their place and order
in the Church, etc.] I suppose the word calling, should be taken here of a
special calling, or office, as we use to call it: which again, would exclude
the people from any power in the Keys, as having no office in the Church: But
you add, by way of explication of your own sense: [Whether it be their
Office, or their place and order in the Church] on purpose to steal in the
interest of the people, in some share of the Keys: But if place and order in
the Church, give the people out of office, any power in the Keys, that is, the
Ordinances, (so you say again) then may women and children claim an in^erest in
those Keys; for they have a place and Order in the Church as well as men;
which yet you would seem to deny: But let me profess at first, what I shall
make good from your self hereafter, I see not, but women and children may
challenge a great part of that power of the Keys, which you give to the Brethren.

3. Concerning the third: What are the Acts of the Keys, and the fourth, what
is the subject, to be bound and loosed, I shall not contend with you. The
fifth, To whom the power of the Keys is given, requires a more serious
consideration, as being the very foundation of all your new Fabric, which
stands or falls with it. The Text is express: [To thee (Simon Peter) will I
give the Keys, etc.] in a clear contradistinction to the Church before
mentioned: upon this rock (of thy confession) will I build my Church: which you
take for a particular congregation, (though by a great mistake, as was showed
above.) But let it be granted for the present to be so; then the words in all
clear construction run thus: I will build my Church, the particular
congregation, upon that rock; and I will give the Keys of that Church (called
the Kingdom of Heaven, and so by you interpreted) to thee Peter, and to such
Officers as thou art: Otherwise he would have said: On this rock will I build
my Church, and I will give unto it the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that
is, of the Church it self; which is scarce a reasonable interpretation of the
words. To make way therefore for your great design, you undertake to resolve
that busy question (as you call it,) [ How Peter is to be considered in
receiving this power of the Keys; whether as an Apostle, or as an Elder, or as
a Believer, etc.] Before I come to consider your answer, I would make bold to
put one ingredient more into the question; whether Peter was not considered as
a Deacon, as well as an Elder, or Believer: For seeing a Deacon is one of the
Officers of the New Testament; The Keys, p. 32. The way, p. 83.
(some say Judas was Christ's Deacon) and your self say, all the Officers of
the Church were virtually in the Apostles; They were Pastors, Teachers,
Ruling-Elders, Deacons, etc. It may not unfitly be questioned, whether Peter
did not then represent a Deacon as well as an Elder or Believer. And then
again, whether the Keys were not given to Peter as a Deacon; and why a Deacon
only is denied any power in the Keys, when believers are admitted to have a
share therein; seeing a Deacon has power to collect and distribute the goods
and treasury of the Church; I leave these to your consideration, or theirs who
shall reply, and come to your answer. To show your desire of peace, and your
impartiality in inclining to any party, you consider (you say) Peter in a
threefold notion when he received the Keys [As an Apostle, Elder, Believer; so
the sense of the words (you say) will be most full, if all the considerations
be taken jointly together.] The sense indeed is most full to your purpose, but
(I think) least of all true. The power of the Keys is given to the Church, to
Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but as a professed Believer; in the
name of Believers, etc. The way, p. 27. a flat contradiction.
And you do beg the question, to say Peter received the power of the Keys, as
all these, and in particular, as a Believer: For of all the senses, the last
was least thought on in any age of the Church, till this last, when the
Brownists and such like stumbled upon it. When Saint Austin said, [Peter
received the Keys in the name of the Church:] Whether he did mistake the sense
of the place or no, you do utterly mistake him, to draw him to your meaning:
For 1. he did not mean your Church, a particular congregation; but either the
general v^sible Church; or the invisible mystical Church. 2. Nor that
neither, subjective, but objective, that the Keys were given to Peter as an
Officer, for the use and benefit of the Church.

But you proceed to say: [ It appears Christ gave the power of the Keys to
the Body of the Church, even to the fraternity, with the Presbytery, Mat.
18.17, 18. When they are met in his Name, and agree together in the censure of
an offender.] But by this place (and your former notion of Peter as a Believer)
you may as well infer, that the Keys are given to the Sororietie, q.d. as to
the Fraternity, as Believers, and as a part of the Body of the Church, which I
think is flat Anabaptisme, worse than Brownisme. You know there are some, who
deny that, Mat. 18.17, 18. holds forth any censure of excommunication at all:
Others that grant it, yet by Church there, understand the Officers of the
Church, such as the Apostles were, to whom Christ spoke: [ What ye bind, what
ye loose, etc.] You must not therefore beg a foundation to your building, lest,
if it be fetched home, your building fall on your own head. But you say, [All
agree in this, That no offender is to be excommunicated, but with some
concourse of the congregation; at least, by way 1. of consent to the sentence.
2. of actual execution of it, by withdrawing themselves from him; and this we
conceive is some part of the exercise of the power of the Keys.] But truly,
this is but the gingling of the Keys at most, no part of the power of the
Keys: For 1. it belongs to Stewards in a Family, only to exercise the power of
the Keys, to take in, and cast out what servants they please: The rest of the
servants hear the Keys gingle, when they turn the Keys, but have no part in
the exercise of them; no, not so much as by consent, active consent, I mean,
so that if they consent not, nothing is done; but by a passive consent only, as
approving what the Steward has done: If you grant the Fraternity any more, you
make them joint Stewards of the Family, the Church, as you shall hear
hereafter. Nay, sometimes you seem to give them no more [The people discerning
and approving the justness of the censures before administered by the Elders,
The Keys, p. 15.
they give consent in obedience to the will and rule of Christ] which is no
part of the exercise of the power of the Keys. For suppose the censure be
justly administered, and the people deny their consent; shall not a Delinquent
be censured unless they will consent? If not, they have full power in the
Keys, arising to authority, which is the error of the one extreme: If so only
as passively to consent, its evident, this is no part of the power of the
Keys. 2. For their withdrawing, that's much less any power in the Keys. The
Steward of a Family having discharged a naughty servant, and turned and locked
him out of doors, all the rest of the servants are to withdraw from him; but
this is not by way of active power, but passive obedience. Is the withdrawing
of people from a man outlawed in civil affairs, any interest in the Keys of
Judicature? If it be said, except the people consent and withdraw communion
from a censured person, the censure is in vain. I answer: If the people should
be so rebellious to civil Authority, as not to withdraw from an outlawed man,
nothing were done, the sentence was so far in vain. If no man could be
gotten to execute a malefactor condemned, the sentence were frustrated in
respect of the execution. But does this infer, that the people have an
interest in the Keys of secular power? The question is not de facto, what the
people stubbornly may do; but whether they ought not to consent and withdraw;
and whether if they do not, they can challenge any interest in the power of
the Keys. Again, if the Keys were given to Peter as a Believer, I see no
reason but women and children may come in and challenge a power in the Keys.
It suffices not to say (as the Epistolers say, page 3.) [Women and children are
excepted by a Statute Law of Christ, against their enjoyment of any part of
this public power.] For though they be forbidden to speak in the
Congregation, or might by impotence (as some say) be excepted in some
particulars; yet there seems no reason why they should be exempted from that
power here given to the Fraternity, which concerns them as well as men, and
they are as well able to exercise it as men; viz. to give a (passive) consent,
or to withdraw from the party excommunicated; which they may and must do as
well as men: For as women may be offended, so they should in reason have
satisfaction, by consenting to the sentence: And as women may offend, in
keeping company with a brother or sister excommunicated, so they ought to
withdraw from them and then if this be any exercise of the power of the Keys,
you may hear them gingle at the women's girdles; which is an extreme beyond the
Brownists, even downright Anabaptisticall. But you give the Fraternity more
power than this hereafter, there we shall consider it. Hitherto you have given
them nothing, but what is common to them with women.

CHAP. II. Of the distribution of the Keys.
YOu first lay down the ordinary Distribution of the Keys, and then except
against it, as defective in four things.

1. [That any key of the kingdom of heaven should be left without power; for
the key of knowledge is contradistinguished from a key of power.

To this I answer: It may be this distribution is not every way exact and
perfect, yet I think yours is rather worse: And your exception falls upon your
own distribution, a little more remotely. For your key of Faith, or knowledge
(for you make them both one) is distinguished from the key of Order; which
Order is either of power, or authority, and so your key of knowledge is left
without power also. 2. Your key of power (as you call it) is it self left
without all power, at least active power, being only an obedientiall power, to
consent and yield submission to the will of Christ's, made known by the Elders.

2. [There wants (say you) an integrall part of the keys, the key of power or
liberty, belonging to the Church it self.] But to this I say: This is so far
from being an integrall part of the keys, that it is no key at all, no proper
power at all, as has partly been showed already. A key, in all men's judgment,
that ever writ of the power of the Church, carries in the notion of it, a power
and authority, properly called, power in government, till now of late; yea,
even the Brownists themselves make it a key of Authority and Rule in the
people: Only you, to make us believe you differ from them, call it a power
(improperly called Authority, page 36.) or a liberty, or a privilege; which
was never before called a key, till now: For there are many liberties or
privileges belonging to servants in a family, or people in a State; which no
man calls a key of power, or a power in the Keys. And the truth is, you are not
constant to your self: For sometimes you call it only liberty, etc. sometimes
you give the Church, the Brethren, without their Officers, as full power as the
Officers themselves have; and as full rule and authority as the Brownists give
them, as we shall manifest in the sequel.

But you add; [Protestant Churches having recovered the liberty of preaching
the Gospel, and ministry of the Sacraments, have looked no farther, some of
them nor d scerned the defect of Church power or liberty due unto them in point
of discipline.] To this I say: The error of the Protestant Churches, was not,
that they looked not after the power of discipline for the people; but that
they labored not to recover it for their Elders, letting the Prelates keep
quietly the discipline to themselves. But the error on the other hand was more
easy to be fallen into, and more dangerous (which you observe to have
followed) [That others finding themselves wronged (as they did but suppose) in
the withholding a key of power which belongs to them, have wrested to
themselves an undue power, which belongs not to them, the key of Authority.]
True it is, some have done so; for being allowed (by some, perhaps your self)
the key of power, or liberty in discipline, as you call it, they have wrested,
not only the key of knowledge, in preaching and administering Sacraments, which
belongs not to them; but also the key of authority, as you speak; And so will
your people too ere long, I fear, when they are once possessed a while of the
key of power, wrest the key of authority in all; both in preaching, and
administering Sacraments, and pronouncing censures; and well they may by your
own grants, as we shall hear anon.

3. A third defect you observe; [ In dividing the Key of Order, from the Key of
jurisdiction, of purpose to make way for the power of Chancellors, etc.] But 1.
That might be the error of the distributors, not of the distribution. For the
distribution, gives both the keys to the same men. For the same men that had
the key of knowledge, had also the key of order and jurisdiction, in the
intention of the first sounders of that distribution, which after ages divided
in practice. And yet, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, etc. some of them at
least were Deacons, who were reputed of the Clergy (as they speak) and might
preach if they would; and so had both keys in one person, though limited in
some particular acts of them. But if our late Deacons were (as some of our
brethren have said they were) virtually Presbyters, and needed no new
Ordination; then certainly they had the power of jurisdiction, with the power
of Order, though limited, by the corruption of the distributors. 2. This defect
may chance to fall upon your own distribution. Do not you divide the key of
Order from the key of jurisdiction in your own Deacons: You say expressly in
these words: [The Order of Deacons, The Keys, page 6.
whereof our Lord spoke nothing touching jurisdiction] I hope you will not say,
the Office of a Deacon, falls not under the key of Order; yet, for ought I
perceive, you make little account of him in your distribution. 3. You say [
Those Chancellors, etc. were invested with jurisdiction, and more than
ministerial authority, even above those Elders, who labor in Word and
Doctrine.] But do not you invest the people with as much power and
jurisdiction more than ministerial, even above those Elders, who labor in the
word and doctrine, both to open and shut the doors of the Church against them,
page 9. besides what you say elsewhere. 4. I would gladly be resolved, whether
you do not divide the key of Order, into a key of power or liberty, and a key
of authority, on purpose to make way for the power of the people, as they of
old did, for the power of the Chancellors, etc. Lastly, I pray you seriously to
consider, whether by this [ sacrilegious breach of Order, investing the people
with a key of power, even above those Elders that labor in the Word and
Doctrine, to open and shut the doors against them, page 9. (which is the
breaking as it were of the files and ranks in an Army; they are your own
words) Satan is not like again to rout and ruin a great part of the liberty
and power of Church officers, and the purity of the Churches, and of all the
Ordinances of Christ in them.]

4. A fourth defect is, [That Order is appropriated to the Officers of the
Church only: We put a difference between Office and Order.] We shall speak
more fully to this hereafter. All we say for the present is but this: That
Office and Order in the strict and Ecclesiastical sense of the word (Order)
have hitherto been taken for the same. And your self grant, page 7. [They may
be admitted as aquivalent] in a right sense.

Let us now consider your own Distribution: [There is (say you) a key of
Faith, and a key of Order,] and you have a Text of Scripture for it, Col. 2.5,
6.

But by Faith and Order there, the Apostle means not the keys of the kingdom
of Heaven, as they are understood in this controversy; but (as I take it)
their Faith manifested in their orderly walking, as becomes Christians
professing the Gospel. So that by Order there is meant their moral orderly
walking, as in other duties according to the Rule: so in their submission to
the order of government, or exercise of the keys, in the hands of their
Officers. I believe no Interpreter (but your self and some others of late)
ever took those words in an Ecclesiastical sense, for the keys delivered
unto Peter. But we go on.

[The key of Faith (say you) is the some with the key of knowledge, Luke 11.52.
which the Lawyers had taken aw y.] But 1. by your favor, the key of Faith and
knowledge are not both one, if you understand it of justifying Faith: A man may
have much knowledge and no Faith: Knowledge may in a sense be said to be the
key of Faith, as being the inlet or Antecedent of Faith; but so Faith and
knowledge are not the same. 2. The key of knowledge is one thing, and knowledge
is another: The key of knowledge is the great Ordinance of preaching (you said)
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven were the Ordinances of Christ, as the
preaching of the Word (the opening and applying of it, p. 2) etc. But this key
of knowledge here you speak of, is (you say) common to all Believers; but a
little before this, you complain that private Christians had usurped this key,
to preach the Gospel, etc. page 6, Whereas this key of knowledge is peculiar
to the Ministers of the Gospel: [The Priests lips keep the key of knowledge,
etc. and Faith comes by the Word preached.] This was the key of knowledge which
the Lawyers had taken away, either by not interpreting, or misinterpreting the
Scripture: They could not take away the peoples knowledge, much less their
Faith. They might take away the key, both of knowledge and Faith, that is,
preaching, as the Papists do, by locking up the Word in a strange language;
and ours lately did, by crying and putting down preaching. 2. Whereas you say:
[They that had the key of knowledge, had power to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, and it may be, to open the door to others to enter also.] I answer:
The key s given to Peter, Matthew. 16. were not to open the Kingdom of Heaven to
himself (for that key, if a key it was, he had before) but to open it to
others, by opening and applying the Word (as you said above) our Savior speaks
of binding and loosing others: Whose sins ye bind on earth, etc. and of opening
for, and shutting out others, not himself. Keys are given to Stewards, not
properly to let in, or shut out themselves; but by way of Office, to let in, or
lock out others. Besides, A privilege to find an open door to enter into the
fellowship of the Church, p. 11. which is passive, and in plain sense, one fit
to be admitted into the Church. So the Epistolers, p. 2. The key of knowledge
has opened their hearts; that is, I think, preaching.
the key of knowledge and Faith which you describe here, is common to all
Believers, even women; but I believe you will not give them a key to open and
shut heaven to others, that is the key of preaching. Then again, why do you
dislike the former distribution; when you also make one key to be the key of
knowledge, and so leave one of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven without
power, contra-distinguishing the key of Faith or knowledge (for with you they
are both one) from the key of power, which falls under your key of Order?
Lastly, whereas you say a faithful soul by this key enters into a state of
grace, and into the fellowship of the Church, etc. You may remember, that by
the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the Church on Earth, you understand a
particular Congregation. But a man may have this key of Faith or knowledge, and
never enter into your particular Church, and so this key is given to a man out
of the Church; and yet you say, the keys are given to the Church, I leave you
to consider it. These things hang not well together.

In the next place you come to the key of Order; of which you thus write: [The
key of Order, is the power whereby every member of the Church walks orderly
himself, according to his place in the Church, and helps his brethren to
walk orderly also.] But this is a strange expression of the key of Order,
never heard of before, too generally and aequivocally spoken: For Order may be
taken either morally, or Ecclesiastically; Passively, or Actively. Morally, so
it is taken passively, for a conformity in carriage, to the rules of the word,
in Doctrine, as well as discipline: But Ecclesiastically, it is an Active
power, acting upon others. The very name of a key, imports a power, entrusted
for others good, and not their own properly. Every one is to keep Order, but
every one has not the key of Order. Order and Office in this Ecclesiastical
sense are both one. None has the key of Order, but one in Office. But your key
of Order is common to every member of the Church: The Keys, p ge 21.
And that it is no more than moral or passive Order, your self do seem to
grant, when you say, [The brethren stand in an Order, even in an orderly
subjection, according to the order of the Gospel.] Every servant in a Family,
and every man, woman and child in a corporation stand in such an order, and
must walk orderly themselves, and help others to walk orderly also; but will
any man say, therefore these have interest in the keys of the Family or
Corporation? If every member of a Congregation have this key of Order, how and
why are women and children excepted? or are they no members of the Church? or
may they walk disorderly? The instance of Saint Paul's walking orderly,
according to the orders of the Jewish Church, manifests the moral sense of the
word: For certainly, the Fraternity of the Jews had no power of the Keys. The
meaning was, that Saint Paul by his conformity to some Jewish Ceremonies,
should manifest, that he did not absolutely oppose the Rites of the Jewish
Church, not that he had any power of the Keys of the government of that
Church. Surely the Jews were bound all of them to withdraw from every brother
that walked disorderly; yet did not believe that that was any part of the
exercise of the key of Order. No more was it in those of Thessalonica; when
they did warn the unruly, or withdraw from him that walked disorderly: And
this Key of Order, if a Key it were, was common not only to Elders and
Brethren, as you say, but even to women and children, as I said before.

[ Of Order (you say) there be 2. Keys; one of power or interest, another of
Authority or Rule; The first of these is called in Scripture, Liberty, etc.]

Before I examine the particulars, I shall note some few things: 1. How modest
error is at first: Here it is first called power, mollified by interest, and
then by liberty, after by privilege; all which are rather passive than active;
but afterward it is called (...), power, which though it sometimes signifies a
privilege, honor, or dignity, John 1.12. in a passive construction, as given
and received; yet when it relates to Government, or a power of the Keys,
civilly, it then is taken actively, and signifies Authority, Romans 13.1. But
page 36. it is called, (...), which properly, (though you say otherwise,
signifies Authority; [Authority, after a sort, may be acknowledged in the
people.] And the acts there (and elsewhere) given to the people, some of them
at least; as [ joining in Censures, and in determination of Synodall acts,
etc.] called, [a great stroke or power in ordering Church affairs;] amounts
almost to as full authority, as the Elders have any. 2. Another thing I note
is, that this power, interest, privilege of the people, etc. was never called
a Key, till some new Lock smiths made this new pick-locke of the power of
Church Officers. For what is all that is given them, if no more than is their
due) to the government of the Church? In a Family, in a Corporation (I say it
again) the servants and Citizens have some privileges and interests, who yet
have no stroke in ordering of the Keys, either of Family, or City. 3. I desire
to know, under which of the parts of this distribution does the Deacon fall.
There be 2. Keys of Order; of power or interest; of Authority or Rule. Now a
Deacon, qua Deacon, falls under neither of these: Not the first, for so he is
considered only as a Believer: Not the second, for so he is denied
jurisdiction, as we heard before. If you say he falls under the Key of Order, as
an Officer; yet then you divide the Key of Order from the Key of jurisdiction,
(which you blamed in the other distribution) and level the Deacon an Officer,
with people no Officers. We should now come to the particulars of the power, or
interest of the Brethren: They have a liberty (say you) in many things; but
they are more fully laid down in Chapter 4. there we shall consider them: Only
now we shall consider the proof of this power of the people, out of the
Scripture: Your Text is, Gal. 5.13. Brethren, you have been called unto
Liberty, etc.] This Text (under favor) is miserably mistaken; and that not in
mine only, but in the judgment of all Interpreters; which you knowing, had
rather appeal to the Context, than to the Commentators. I shall follow you at
your own weapon; Your strength lies in the word Liberty. [They have a power
and liberty, to wit, to join with the sounder part of the Presbytery in
casting them out, etc.] But I shall appeal the Apostle himself to be Judge
between us: In the first verse of this Chapter he uses the same word, [ Stand
fast in the Liberty, etc.] where it is without all controversy, understood of
their liberty, or freedom from the Ceremonial Law; called there, the yoke of
bond^ge, which some false teachers would impose upon their necks. Now that the
Apostle speaking still of the same matter, should use the same word in so
different a sense, is no ways probable. Nay secondly, in the 11. verse, the
Apostle says: [If I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution,
etc.] And then ver. 13. comes in again with this: [ Brethren you are called
unto Liberty, etc.] viz. from that Law of Circumcision, and the like, not to
the liberty by you pretended; [ To choose Officers, or to join in Censures,
etc.] though, these were granted to them, yet not in this place: And your
gloss is very far fetched and improbable. [I would they were cut off that
trouble you; where (say you) he declares what censure he wishes against those
that troubled them, viz. cut off, to wit, by excommunication. Obj. But what
power have we to cut them off? The Apostle answers: They have a power and
liberty, to wit, to join with the sounder part of the Presbytery, in casting
them out: For (says he) you are called unto Liberty.] There is not one word of
this gloss in the Text. And if there were any such power, the people have full
power given themselves to cut them off; for here is not one word of joining
with a Presbytery. See again, v. 16. where the Apostle resumes his
exhortation, ver. 13. [Vse not your liberty as an occasion unto the flesh;
saying, I say then, walk in the spirit, and you shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh:] Which makes it evident, that the Apostle chiefly exhorts ad bonos
mores, though he touch other things by the bye, but discipline is least of all
intended. And lest they should use their liberty from those legal and
ceremonial yokes, to contention or licentiousness, he cautions against it, v.
13, 16. [Carnall contention is indeed (as you say) an usual disease of popular
liberty;] which I fear, you and your partners too much foment, by giving the
people this power and liberty, which you so much talk of; and by gingling
these Keys in the ears of the people, have almost made them wild; not only
one against another, but against their Elders or Governors also. And no
marvel, when you grant them so much power [As to open a door of entrance to
the Ministers Calling: so to shut the door of entrance against them in some
cases, page. 9.] much more than which the Brownists do not grant then. And so
much of the pick-locke of Order.

The Key of Authority is a moral power, in a superior order or state, binding
or releasing an inferior in point of subjection.] To this I say; 1. To call
Authority a moral power, is very improper: For every single Pastor, (yea,
perhaps brother,) has a moral power to bind and release, not only an
inferior, but a superior also, in point of subjection, by propounding the
commands of God. You might rather have called it, a juridicall, or
Ecclesiastical power, and that without any danger, seeing you reserve this
power to the Officers or superiors in Order. But 2. you speak too confusedly:
For the people have a power to join with the Officers in the censures, that
is, in binding and releasing, as you say, page 14. [The whole Church may be
said to bind and loose;] Nay, to open and shut the doors against their
Ministers, who are their superiors; and so Authority is a moral power in
inferiors also. And page 12. you say the people have a power, [To prevent the
tyranny, and Oligarchy, and exorbitance of the Elders.] Surely this must be by
a negative voice, and that's more than liberty, even full authority; and being
by inferiors, is flatly against your own definition. Furthermore, as you say
[ the Brethren with the Elders have power to open and shut, etc.] So you say,
[the Elders with the Brethren do bind and release,] page 10. So it seems, as
the Brethren can do nothing without the Elders: so the Elders can do nothing
without the Brethren, as the Epistolers say expressly, page 4. And who would
not now conclude, that the liberty is equal in both; or rather, the authority
is the same in both, and what say the Brownists more?

And now I think you cannot truly say, you have received this distribution of
the Keys from the Scripture, nor yet from antiquity; though you would feign
have us believe, you would not stick upon the former distribution, if the
words be rightly explained. As how? 1. [Let them (say you) allow some
spiritual power to the Key of knowledge, though not a church power.] But have
you not all this while been speaking of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, the Church; and now is the power of the Key of knowledge, no Church
power? Again, have not you your self taken away from the Key of knowledge,
not only Church power, but all power whatever, by contradistinguishing it to
the Key of power? 3. Is that Key, whereby he that has it, [ not on^y enters
himself into the Kingdom of Heaven, but also opens the door for others to
enter, no Church power?]

You add secondly, [Let them put in a Key of liberty, as well as of authority
into Church power.] But both these are but one Key, or nothing, as we have
said; Nothing indeed to purpose, if both these must consent, or nothing is
done, as you and the Brethren assert. 3. [Let them not (say you) divide from
the Key of Order or Office, the Key of jurisdiction; for Christ has given no
jurisdiction, but to whom he has given Office.] But 1. Christ (it seems) has
divided the Key of Office, from the Key of jurisdiction; for he has given no
jurisdiction to Deacons. 2. You should have said, and your scope required it,
Christ has given to none the Key of Order or Office, but to whom he has given
the Key of jurisdiction, but that had contradicted your self in the instance
of Deacons: [Concerning whom (say you) our Lord spoke nothing of jurisdiction,
page 6.] Now is it not as strange, that there should be an Office in the
Church, without some jurisdiction; As that there should among the Prelates, be
jurisdiction without an Office, at least, instituted by Christ? as it was in
Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. Nay, is it not as strange that there should be
Authority, that is, jurisdiction, to bind and loose, in those that have no
Office at all; as there is in the people in your way; as that there should be
an Office without jurisdiction? And now I leave you to consider, whether of
these Distributions is most consentaneous to the truth.

CHAP. III. Of the Subject of the Key of Knowledge and Order.
YOu first tell us in general; [That as the Keys be diverse, so are the
Subjects to whom they are committed diverse.] But this is very doubtful and
disputable; because at first, all the Keys were given to Peter at once, and
therefore one subject may possess them all: And sure they all meet in Pastors,
every one of them has all the Keys; of knowledge and of power; of Order and
jurisdiction, according to the old distribution, and perhaps in yours also. As
the Apostles had all the Keys by your confession; [They might exhort as
Pastors, The Keys, p. 32.
teach as Teachers, rule as Rulers, receive and distribute the oblations of the
Church as Deacons:] So, I see no reason, but every Minister of the Gospel has
virtually in him all the same power and Offices: And if they be since divided
into more hands, for case and Order, yet the subject is primarily but one; and
for the diversity of subjects of the Keys, it concerns them who plead it, to
make it good by Scripture. Upon this reason, there are some, who as they
question the Office of a ruling Elder, having 1. no direct or express
instituted for it in the Scripture. 2. No instance of any such, that ruled, and
were not also Pastors. 3. Nor do you say, That Peter received the Keys as a
ruling-Elder, but as a Pastor: so they would not yield the Office of the
Deacon, but that they find express instituted of it afterward by the
Apostles. But I will not multiply controversies, but come to your particulars.

1 [The Key of knowledge (or which is all one, the Key of faith) belongs to
all the faithful, whether joined to any particular Church or no.] But 1. Then
one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to women, yea to Infidels;
When God gives them Faith, [he gives them a Key to receive Christ, and to find
an open door to enter into the fellowship of the Church.] But sure the Apostle
Peter did not represent Infidels when the Keys were committed to him. 2. The
Keys (you said) were given to the Church; but now you say, they are given to
some before they enter into the Church. But I pray, Sir, is not he entered into
the Church, who has received Christ, and makes profession of his faith? Yes,
you may say, into the mystical Church, but not into a particular
church fellowship. I answer, he is entered also into the general visible
Church, by profession of his faith; to which Church, we think, the Keys were
first given, and after, to the particular Church. But you have so long dreamed
of a particular Church, to be the first and only instituted Church, that you
seem to forget the visible general Church, The way, p. 10
and indeed, to call it a Chimara. This, we think, you learned from your
Cousins, if not your Brethren, the Brownists. Heretofore, in Scripture
language, so soon as men believed, and professed their faith, they were said,
to be added to the Church, not to a particular Congregation (for so some were
never added, for ought we know, as the Eunuch, and some others) but to the
general visible Church. And I pray, what Key was it that opened the door to
enter them into the Church? Was it the key of their own particular knowledge
or Faith? or the key of preaching, viz. the key of knowledge in the Ministers
of the Gospel, and not in themselves? You say here (which is the truth) that
[they find an open door to enter into the fellowship of the Church:] which is
passively, to be capable to be admitted into the Church, and not actively, to
open the door to themselves.

2. [The Key of Order, belongs to all such as are in Church order, whether
Elders or Brethren.] But this is doubtfully spoken in a double respect: 1. What
you mean by Order as before. If Order and Office be all one (as you seemed to
yield) then the key of Order belongs not to the Brethren at all, but to the
Elders, who are in office. If Order be taken for orderly carriage, or, (as you
your self speak in this very Paragraph) For [orderly subjection, according to
the order of the Gospell] it is just nothing to the power of the Keys: For
keys imply an active power, orderly subjection is morally passive. 2. It is
also doubtful, what is meant by Church in this place: If it be taken for the
general visible Church, that has nothing to do with the power of the keys,
which are committed (say you) to the particular Church: If for the particular
Congregation, it is then doubtful still. For it may be asked, what power have
the Brethren in Church Order, in the keys of Order, more than one not yet in
Church Order? Your self speak confusedly here, in my judgment, when you say;
[Every faithful soul that has received a key of knowledge (you should rather
say, knowledge, by the key of preaching) is bound to watch over his Neighbors
soul, as his own, etc. non ratione ordinis sed in tuitu charitatis; Not by
virtue of a state or order which he is in (till in Church Fellowship) but as of
common Christian love and charity; one in Church Order, is bound to do it in
both respects, etc.] But 1. A Christian of no particular Church as yet, is in a
Church Order, with respect to the general visible Church, (or else what
differs he from an Infidel?) and so is bound to watch over his Neighbor, not
only by virtue of common charity, but of that Christian-Order, wherein he
stands. 2. Nay, an Infidel is bound, in tuitu charitatis, by virtue of common
natural love and charity, to watch over, and admonish his brother: and is a
Christian (not yet in Church Order, as you call it) bound no more than he, to
watch over his brother? If he be, (as he is, by a nearer relation unto the
mystical body, and visible Church of Christ) then he is to do it, by virtue
of his Order, or state of Christianity: If he be not, what differs he from an
Infidel? It was a moral Law, Lev. 19.18. [ Thou shall not hate thy brother,
but rebuke him, etc.] Which Cain despised, when he said;, [Am I my brothers
keeper?] Surely it is want of natural charity, not to watch over a brother,
that is not in Church Order as you mean it. And it is not becoming a
Christian to say: [ A Christian in Church Order is not to watch over a brother
not in Church Order, ratione ordinis, but only in tuitu charitatis:] He is
bound to do so for an Infidel, and is he bound no more to a Christian?
Suppose one in your Church Order, see a Christian not in Church Order, walk
unorderly; is he not bound to admonish him, by that royal Law of Church Order,
Mat. 18.1. And if he will not hear him, to take two or three more; and if he
will not hear them, to tell it to the Church; and afterward, to walk toward
him, as God directs the Church to order it? Has Christ ordained no better
remedy to reclaim a Christian, not in Church Order, than to reclaim an
Infidel? But further: An Officer, or one in a superior Order, by reason of
his office, is bound to watch over his brothers soul, not only in tuitu
charitatis, but also ratione ordinis. Is a brother bound as much as he? or he
no more then a brother out of office? Again, a Deacon is in a superior Order,
by reason of his office (as you speak here of Elders) in what different
respect is he bound to watch over his brother? no otherwise then a brother out
of office? Truly then it is all one in your way, to be in an office, and out of
office. And this is the way to banish, if not Christian, yet natural charity
out of the Church: And it is observable, that since this new Church Fellowship,
and Church covenant has been set up, charity is grown very cold, and some of
them have been heard to profess [they had nothing to do with an offender, not
of their own particular Church Communion:] And do indeed account all not of
their way, little better than Infidels, or as they speak without; and in a
manner say with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Never was there so little
charity, so much scorn and contempt of all not in their own way, as is found
in them that profess themselves the only people, that have found the way of
Christ, though in several Sections.

CHAP. IV. Of the Subject of Church-Liberty.
THis Key is given to the Brethen of the Church; for so faith the Apostle, Gal.
5.23. Brethren you are called unto liberty] Concerning the vindication of that
Text enough has been said above. Before you come to the particulars of their
liberties, you Rhetoricate a little, to make it more passable. [As in the
commonwealth, the welfare of it stands in the due ballancing of the liberties
or privileges of the people, and the authority of the Magistrate: so in the
Church, the safety of it is in the right ordering of the privileges of the
Brethren, and the ministerial authority of the Elders.] All this is granted:
But the right ballancing of either, lies not in the multitude of the people, as
having any immediate influence into the government of Church or State: For then
the government of both were Democraticall. But as in our State, the ballancing
of the privileges of the people, and the authority of the Magistrate supreme,
lies in the authority of the Parliament; where there are Knights and Burgesses
representing the people: so, I think it is in the Church; the ballancing of
the Brethrens privileges, and the Ministers authority, seems to lie in the
Ruling-Elders, who are the representatives of the people. But take away this
ballast or poise of the government, and it will be either absolutely
Monarchical, and so easily Tyrannical, or else Democraticall, and so liable
to Anarchy and confusion, as experience shows us, in the Papal and Episcopal
tyranny, and the Separatists Anarchy; the two extremes before observed. But let
us take a view of the particulars. Their Liberties are;

1. [ To choose their own Officers: so Acts 1. and 6. and 14.] In general I
answer thus: The election of the people, was no more but a designation, or
propounding the persons, and presenting them to the Apostles, not by way of
vote or suffrage, but by way of desire, if they were found fit, to have one or
some of them ordained. But this is little or nothing to the power of the Keys.
That place Acts 1. was an extraordinary case, wherein the people had little or
no hand: For 1. they were confined to some sort of men, hat had conversed with
our Savior. 2. They propounded two, it was not in their power so much as to
nominate the particular man. 3. The Lord himself determined it, and not the
Apostles, much less the people; As for that word, (...), stood upon, it cannot
be properly taken, as if they by their votes or suffrages, had constituted or
ordained Mathias to be an Apostle, but barely thus: Seeing God had chosen and
ordained him, they accepted him by an orderly subjection to the revealed will
of Christ. For the second, Acts 6. It was expedient, that the people should at
least have the nomination of their Deacons, because better known to them, and
so better to be trusted with their own stock. But they did but nominate or
present the men, they did not ordain so much as a Deacon; [Looke you out seven
men, whom we (mark it) may appoint, or ordain to this business.] It is never
found in all the New Testament, that ever the people ordained or imposed hands
upon any Officer; which makes me wonder at the liberty taken by Separatists,
and allowed and practiced by your self; The way, p. 41.
[That the Church or Brethren without Officers, may not only elect, but ordain
and impose hands upon their highest Officers.] As for the third place, Acts
14.23. The word cannot be well rendered: [They ordained them Elders, chosen by
lifting up of hands:] For it is not to be referred to the people, but to Paul
and Barnabas: who surely did not ordain Elders by lifting up, but by laying on
of hands. And so taken, it excludes the people; for the Substantive to (...),
is Paul and Barnabas: If they chose the Elders by lifting up of hands, then the
people are excepted, not only from ordination of their Officers, but from
election too, by this Text. But further: some of your Brethren hold, that
election is the chiefest piece of a Ministers calling, and ordination, but a
complement to the solemnity of it: And if so, the people do ordain them as
well as elect, and that's more then a liberty, even as full authority as the
Brownists give to the people: Your self do acknowledge some where, The way,
p. 48.
that [Ordination is a work of Rule,] And yet you say also, Ibid. 45.
[That the Brethren may ordain their Officers;] Therefore the people have more
than a key of liberty, The Keys, p. 8. and often. Ordination and jurisdiction
pertain indifferently to all the Presbyters. The way, p. 49
they have a key of rule and authority; which yet again you do reserve as
proper to the Elders. Consider how you can reconcile the contradictions. That
the people have a liberty, justly to except, or rationally, to approve of their
Officers, is granted; but this is (I still say) nothing to the power of the
Keys, which consists in Ordination of Officers chosen, not in the election of
Officers to be ordained.

2. The second liberty of the people is, [To send out messengers for the
public service of the Church, Phil. 2.25.] This may be granted a liberty, but
nothing to the power of the keys: People may assent to, or approve of the
reasonable choice of messengers to be sent forth, just as poor Cottiers in the
Country, that have no votes in the election of their Knights and Burgesses,
have yet a consent and approbation to send them to the Parliament.

3. A third Liberty* [To accept against such as offer themselves to communion,
or unto the seals of it, Acts 9.26.] This is nothing more to the power of the
keys, than the former. Any woman may in a scandal, except against any that
offers to partake of the Sacrament, by way of information to the Officers; yet
has no interest in the keys.

4. A fourth: [To join with the Elders, in inquiring, hearing, judging of
public scandals, so as to bind notorious offenders under censures, and to
forgive the penitens.] If this be not aequivocaly spoken, it is certainly more
then a liberty. That they may enquire for their own satisfaction, and hear by
way of presence, is a liberty not to be denied. But if you mean any more, it
is more then a liberty, an act of rule and authority. Hear your own words,
spoken with respect to Bishops, but will better fit our purpose: The way, p. 48.
[If the Holy Ghost had appointed the people to any share in the keys, he
would have appointed them also some eminent work. But what shall that be?
Shall it be Ordination? Why that is a work of Rule: Or shall it be hearing
accusations against Elders, and censuring them accordingly? Why that is a work
of Rule also.] Let me add, shall it be judging of public scandals, so as to
bind notorious offenders under censure? Why, that is a work of Rule also. And
consider now, whether they have not a key of authority, as full as the Elders
themselves. If you mean a judgment of discretion only, which all the
multitude have at an Assizes, it is just nothing to the purpose; a stranger,
none of the Congregation, a woman, an heathen may do as much. But you say, [
The Apostle allows to all the Brethren a power to judge them that are within,
1 Cor. 5.22.] But either this is fallacious; There was a power in the Church of
Corinth, to judge those within; ergo, this power was in the people, or else it
is false, if meant of authoritative judgment; or if only a judgment of
discretion, it is quite besides the question. But you fearing an objection,
prevent it, to judge is an act of Rule, which is proper to the Elders: you
answer, [There is a judgment of discretion; As in the Jury it is an act of
their popular liberty, in the Judge an act of judicial authority.] To this I
have many things to say: 1. A judgment of discretion will not serve your
turn; for that (as I said) is common to all the people at an Assizes; and that
is common to women, and heathens, if present, at your Consistories; and if this
be all, what difference is there between the judgment of a woman, an heathen,
and of one of your Church Members. 2. The judgment of the Jury is indeed an
act of popular liberty; but not of their liberty, more than of those that are
not of the Jury. For I ask, why are not all the rest of the people, whom it
concerns as much as those twelve men of the Jury, admitted to the same
judgment with them? Are not they wronged in point of popular liberty? would
not you say, [The Brethren not admitted to the hearing and judging of an
offender, were wronged, if only twelve of the Congregation were designed to
hear and judge him.] In our native Country, the Judge dispenses no sentence,
but according to the verdict of the Jury, etc. The way, p. 102.
] 3. The judgment of the Jury, is more than of discretion (so all bystanders
judge) even of authority, in some degree and kind, though not complete: For
they condemn, or acquit the party, which all the rest together cannot do. 4.
The Judge, I take it, may not condemn who they acquit, nor acquit whom they
condemn, (except by a special indulgence) and that's far more than a
judgment of discretion in the Jury. If it be so with the Brethren here (as the
Epistolers say it is) certainly they have more than a judgment of discretion:
But your self say as much; you give the Brethren, not only joined with their
Elders, but without any Officers at all, full power to censure offenders:
Remember your own words; The way, p. 45, 101.
[As for mutual instruction, and admission, election, and ordination of
officers, opening the doors of the Church, by admission of members, and
shutting the same by Church Censures: These things they may do (if need be)
without Officers: yea, and if all their Officers were found culpable, either in
heretical doctrine, or scandalous crime, yet the Church has lawful authority
to proceed to the censure of them all.] If this be not as full or more
authority than the Elders have over all the Brethren, I profess, I understand
nothing in this controversy: yet this I understand, that you speak clear
otherwise sometimes; denying the Brethren any rule or authority, reserving it
only to the Elders: As if you meant no more, but that the people did but yield
consent to the judgment of their Elders, by obedience to the will of Christ,
and many such like words. 5. But to the point in hand: The Jury then does not
represent the Brethren, but the Ruling Elders; which ruling Elders stand in
stead of all the Brethren, as the Jury does in stead of all the people; and so
the privilege of the people is saved. Otherwise, all the people should be of
the Jury, as all the Congregation are allowed by you, and others, to be Judges
of the offender. And the truth is, it is a liberty or privilege to the party
that is arraigned, that he may be judged by his Peers; It is not a liberty of
the Jury: So it is a privilege for any accused brother, that he shall be tried
and judged by his Peers, the ruling-Elders: It is no privilege of the rest of
the Brethren to be his Judges; as it is no privilege of all the people at the
Assizes, that they may claim a place in the Jury. 6. That which you add, that
there is great difference between the Judge and Jury: [ For (say you) though
the Jury have given up their verdict, yet the malefactor is not thereupon
legally condemned, much less executed, but upon the sentence of the Judge.]
This being rightly paralelld, will make against you: so, though the
ruling-Elders (representing the people,) give up their votes and judgment; yet
the party is not excommunicated, but upon the sentence of the Pastor. And
indeed, the Jury rather seem to acquit or condemn, than the Judge; he does
but pronounce the sentence, as they have adjudged it: so the ruling-Elders,
being more in number, by votes determine the cause, which is pronounced by the
Pastor, and so the parallel is fair and full. But that all the people at the
Assizes should give up their verdict, as well as the Jury, is not in practice
in the Commonwealth; and so spoils the parallel of the votes of all the
Brethren in the Church. And yet you persist to say: [ The whole Church may be
said to bind and loose, in that they consent and concur with the Elders, both
in discerning it to be just, and in declaring their judgment, by lifting up of
hands, or by silence, and after, by rejecting the party, etc.] Just as all the
people at an Assizes, may be said to condemn or acquit, because they consent
with the Judge and Jury, both by discerning it to be just, and in declaring
their judgment, by lifting up their hands, or by silence, and after, by
rejecting the party. But what if the people do not consent (as discerning it
not to be just) nor will reject the party? Is he then acquitted? Thus it must
be, or it holds not proportion with the case in hand: For if the Brethren do
no more but approve and execute the sentence of the Presbytery, this is just
nothing to the power of the keys, intended to be given them, and is a mere
passive privilege. And that you may see your own inconstancy, consider what
you say elsewhere, page 11. [ The Brethren stand in an Order, even in an
orderly subjection, according to the order of the Gospel page 15. They give
consent, in obedience to the will of Christ, page 37. They (the people)
discerning the light and truth, readily yield obedience to their overseers,
page 41. That they may consent to the judgment and sentence of the Elders.]
Had you kept your self constant to these expressions, you had both preserved
the truth of the Gospel, and the peace of the Church.

And now for a conclusion of this Section; Let me urge you with an argument of
your own, against Episcopacy. page 39. [ Hierome says, the Churches were
governed by the Common Council of the Presbyters] That nothing was done
without their counsel, implies, that nothing was done without their
authority. The way, page 31.
The Prelates evasion is, [By their counsel asked, not followed:] You answer:
This would imply a contradiction to Hieromes words: For in asking their
counsel, and not following it, the Bishop should govern the church against
their Council, which is a contradiction.] So say I: The Church (say you) is
governed by the consent of the Brethren: I ask, whether you mean their
counsel and consent asked only, or followed also. If the later, then the
Brethren have as full authority with the Elders, as the Presbyter, had with the
Bishop: If the former, it is a contradiction, to say, The Church is governed by
the consent of the Brethren, and yet is governed against their consent; so that
the question clearly stated is this: [Whether the Brethren have such
concurrence and consent, as that they have a negative vote, or casting voice:]
If they have, its that popular Anarchy, of you know whom: If not, its nothing
to the power of the Keys. Only, let me but remember you what elsewhere you
say, concerning the peoples power in government of the Church: The way, p. 100.
[In case the Officers do err, and commit offense, they shall be governed by
the whole body of the Brethren; though otherwise, the Brethren are bound to
obey and submit to them in the Lord.] How you can reconcile these things I know
not.

But now you propound a sad question: [Whether the Church has power of
proceeding to the utmost censure of their whole Presbytery.] Before I take your
answer, I observe 1. That you might have made the question also, whether the
Presbytery has power to proceed to the utmost censure of the Church, and the
Brethren the Epistolers, resolve both negatively, Epist. p. 4. 2. That you
suppose here, that the Church may proceed to some, though not to the utmost
censure of their Presbytery; and that (as you would seem to deny it in your
answer, so) is more than liberty, it is a great degree of Authority, not only
over one of your members, but over your Overseers: And now I shall view your
answer.

1. Answ. [It cannot (say you) be well conceived, that the whole Presbytery
should be proceeded against, because some, a strong party perhaps, will side
with them, and then the Church ought not to proceed, without consulting with
the Synod.] Reply. But 1. this is besides the question, which supposes the
whole Presbytery, and the whole Church opposed; and so your answer may seem to
intimate, that if none did side with them, the Church might proceed against
them, and that to the utmost censure; but only in a dissension of the Church,
they may not. 2. If in any case, they ought not to proceed, does not this
destroy their independency, if they must fly to a Synod? No (say you) they
ought only to consult the Synod. But if the Synod have no power to determine,
and censure, they are still but where they were. What if the Presbytery or
Church will not submit to their determination, or Declaration? (for it is no
more) what remedy has the Church against their erring, heretical, scandalous
Presbytery? If the Synod have a power of censure, then again you destroy your
Independency: No; [The Church may withdraw from them:] So they might before
they consulted the Synod; nay, they were bound to do it in your way, without
consulting the Synod. But you may call to mind your former thoughts. In your
other Tract, you give them full power [to censure their Officers without any
Officers;] as has more then once been said above.

And thus your second answer is also answered already. You say,
[Excommunication is one of the highest acts of Rule, The way, p. 101.
and ergo, cannot be performed but by some Rulers;] Yet you contradict this
f^^^ly, in your other Tract, when you say; [In case of offense given by an
Elder, or by the whole Eldership together, the Church has Authority, (mark
that, Authority, which in this Book you often deny) to require satisfaction of
them; and if they do not give due satisfaction, to proceed to censure
according to the quality of the offense.] And yet (which is strange, me thinks)
here you resolve the clean contrary: [The Church cannot excommunicate the
whole Presbytery, because they have not received from Christ an office of Rule,
without their Officers.] But now if this reason be good, then on the other side
it might seem reasonable; That the Presbytery might excommunicate the whole
Church Apostate, because they have received from Christ an office of Rule,
without the Church: No, say you, [They must tell the Church, and join with the
Church in that censure.] But this is to say and unsay: For if the Church must
join with them, then the Church has received some piece of an Office of Rule,
which was before denied: If you say, they have not received any Office of Rule,
without their Officers; This may imply, that with their Officers they have
received an Office of Rule, which all this while you have seemed to deny,
allowing them a Liberty, but no Rule or Authority. And whereas you say; [They
must tell the Church, but that cannot be, when the Church is Apostate:] I
rejoyne, this makes it reasonable to me, That there is another Church, to which
they must tell the offense, by way of appeal; or else, both an erring
Presbytery, or an Apostate Church, have no remedy to recover them, instituted
by Christ; and so the Church, a multitude, or a Presbytery, is not so well
provided for, as one particular member.

But you have found a remedy; [The Church wants not liberty to withdraw from
them.] Is not this even tantamount with excommunication? Is it not the
execution of that sentence, to withdraw, especially in your way.
Excommunication is the contrary to communion. Now how does the Church
communicate their Elders? Take your own words: [ As they set up the
Presbytery, The Keys, p 17.
by professing their subjection to them in the Lord: so they avoid them (that
is, in sense, excommunicate them) by professed withdrawing their subjection
from them, according to God] And this is as much as any people do, or need to
do, to persons excommunicate; unless you grant them a power to the very Act
and decree of excommunication; which as you have clearly done in your other
Tract, so you do here, giving them a power more than Ministerial, even a
Kingly, and more than a Kingly power, when you say; [ They rule the Church, by
appointing their own Officers, and likewise in censuring offenders, not only
by their Officers (which is as much as Kings are wont to do) but also by their
own Royal assent, which Kings are not wont to do, but only in the execution
of Nobles.] Satis pro imperio.

5. The last Liberty of the Church, is Liberty of communion with other
Churches, which is seven ways exercised, etc.] To this I say in general: This
is rather communion of Saints, than communion of Churches; because in your way,
every Church is independent, and has no Church State, in relation to any, but
its own members. We suppose this communion is the liberty or privilege of
every Christian, by virtue of his interest in the general visible Church, and
not by any peculiar interest in a particular Congregation. He that is a
professed Christian, and baptized, has a right to all the Ordinances of God,
where ever he find them; As of old, he that was a Citizen of Rome, or so borne,
was a freeman, through all the Roman Empire, and enjoyed the privileges of a
Roman. A Christian is a free Deacon in any part of the Christian world; [ A
Citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19.] And this to me
seems reasonable upon these grounds: 1. Because every Christian, not yet in a
particular Church, or Congregation, is at liberty to join himself to any
Church, tied by no obligation to one more than another. 2. Because it is
lawful for any member of a particular Church, upon just reasons to leave that
Church, and to join himself to another, and nothing can hinder his removal
or communion with another Church, except he be scandalous, etc. 3. It was the
custom of the first times, before Congregations were fixed, to add them to
the visible Church, were their number lesser or greater, and give them
communion in all the Ordinances of Christ. 4. Because the whole visible Church
is but one City, one Kingdom, though for orders sake, divided into several
Corporations. It is not so in civil respects; A Citizen of one Corporation,
cannot go and set up trade in another, because they have their several
Charters: But in the City of God, the Kingdom of Christ, there is but one
Charter for all; and no more is required to admit a man a member of any
Congregation, but that he profess himself a Christian, and live accordingly.
Your New Covenant to tie men to your particular Church, that he may not remove,
without a general leave, will, I fear, prove a snare and a tyranny, worse
than yet we can imagine.

1. But come we to your particulars: [First, by way of participation of the
Lords Supper, the members of one Church coming to another Church, etc.] But 1.
Why do you instance in this Ordinance only? Have not their children
occasionally borne there, a liberty also of Baptism? Where neither of the
parents can claim right to the Lords Supper; there their Infants cannot claim
right to Baptism. The way, p. 81. Nor the child of an excommunicate person,
p. 85.
The rather, because Baptism is not administered with respect to this or that
Church, but to the general visible Church: Unless you hold, that a man or
child is baptized to no Church, but that particular, and an Infidel to all
the rest. Yet some of your brethren will hardly baptize a child of any, but a
member of their own Church, which is next door to Anabaptisme. 2. I ask by
what power of the keys, do your Pastors admit a member of another Church, to
partake of the Lords Supper, in yours? Or in what relation does your Pastor
stand to that member of another Church? You say, Pastor and Church are relates,
and he is a Pastor to none but of his own Church: Either then, to administer
the Lords Supper to a member of another Church, is no Pastoral act, but may be
done by a gifted brother: Or else, a Pastor and his Church are not so relates,
but that he is a Pastor beyond the limits of his own Congregation, which yet
you do deny. 3. You are also very sparing in granting this liberty: For you
add; [In case, neither himself, nor the Church from whence he comes, do lie
under any public offense.] But what if that party be free from the guilt of
that offense? Shall the innocent suffer for the nocent? what charity, what
justice is in this? 4. But your reason I like very well: [For we receive the
Lords Supper, not only as a Seal of our Communion with the Lord Jesus, and
with his members in our own Church, but also in all the Churches of the
Saints:] Whence I infer, then it is not any favor dispensed by you, to a
member of another Church, but a dignity or privilege, common to every member
of that body, by virtue of that membership, and not with respect to his
particular Church membership. And I pray, is not Baptism also a Seal of our
Communion, with all the members of Christ's body? Why then may you not admit the
children of the members of any Church, to be baptized by your Pastors, upon
just occasion, as well as to admit the parents to the Lords Supper? Nay
further: If the Sacraments be Seals of our communion with all the members of
Christ, why do you not admit any true Christian, and his children, to the
communion of the Sacraments, though they be not as yet admitted members of any
particular Congregation? How dare you deny any member of that Body, communion
with its fellow members, when it has union and communion with the Head?
Consider it.

2. A second way of your communion of Churches, is, [ By way of recommendation
as Paul in the behalf of Phoebe, etc.] But this is so far from being any
part of the power of the Keys, that it is a duty, which a Church or party owe
to any Christian that is godly, not by virtue of any particular
Church Membership, but by the common interest of Christianity; yea, by the
common right of humanity, even to an honest Heathen, according to the ninth
Commandment, which requires us, to bear true witness to our brother, if we
be thereto required. The letters are only declarative, of the good behavior of
the party, occasioned to remove to such a place. Was this (think you) a part
of the power of the Keys, delivered to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles?
Besides, if there be any virtue in these letters, to admit a member into
communion, is there not a like virtue in them, to excommunicate one ungodly?
And if these letters dimissory have power to admit a member of one Church, to
be a member of another, without any new covenanting, have they not the like
power to admit the Pastor of one Church, to be a Pastor of another Church,
without any new Ordination? which yet, I believe, you do not practice.

3. [By way of Consultation; and 4 by Congregation into a Synod.] But what is
all this to the power of the Keys? If upon Congregation, and consultation of
other Church Officers, there be not a binding power, it is rather a latch of a
door, which may be opened and shut at any bodies pleasure, than a Key to let
in, or lock out with any Authority. But of the power of Synods more hereafter.

4. A fifth way is: [ The liberty of giving and receiving mutual supplies one
from another; gifted men, or benevolences, etc.] I conceive first, these are
rather duties of common charity, than of Church liberty, or any power of the
Keys: And I desire to know what those gifted men were, that the Church of
Antioch sent to other Countries? Were they not Apostles, or Prophets, or
Teachers in Office? Then they were Pastors or Teachers by Office, before they
were sent, before they were elected or ordained by the Churches to which they
were sent. Thereupon it follows, that a Pastor or Teacher (because you may say
a Pastor relates to his own flock) a Teacher (so was Barnabas, Acts 13.1.) is
a Teacher to the general visible Church, not to the particular Church only, as
you hold. And then again, a Teacher, qua Teacher, may preach to another
Church, and convert Heathens; and not as a gifted brother only, as you
sometimes speak.

A sixth way is, [ By way of mutual admonition, when a public offense is
found amongst them: One Church may send to admonish another, and if that Church
will not hear, take two or three other Churches; and if not hear them, then
withdraw, etc.] This admonition is a duty of every brother, at least of every
Christian, as a Christian, and no power of the Keys at all: And let it be
considered, that the place, Matthew. 18.15, 16. Those two or three are not
considered as a Church-body, but as a sufficient number of witnesses, to join
with a brother offended, etc. agreeing in a duty of brotherly love, etc. The
way, p. 53.
does not make the admonition of one or more brethren, any power of the Keys,
but a duty only concerning every man, in order to the censure of the Church:
But if one or more Churches may proceed with a Church-offending, as private
persons with an offending brother; why may they not take the third step, as the
last remedy, to excommunicate her, being obstinate, as the Church does an
obstinate b^o her? No; [Because the Churches are all of equal authority:] But
so are all the members of a Congregation of equal authority, yet the whole may
excommunicate him: And if there be as much Church Communion between Churches,
as there is between members of a particular Congregation; I see no reason, why
many Churches assembled in a Synod, may not as well excommunicate an obstinate
Church, as a Congregation, a particular member. If you deny excommunication of
a Church, others will (and do) deny excommunication of a member, and say,
non-communion, or withdrawing is as much as can be done. And if you say, the
Churches may withdraw communion; I demand, first, what is that in effect, but
excommunication, wanting only a Synodicall Decree; yet page 25. you say, [A
Synod has power to determine, to withdraw communion from an offending Church:]
And is it any more in the excommunic^tion of an offending brother? They do but
determine all shall withdraw communion from him. This is therefore but a mere
Logom^chie.

6. The last way of Communion of Churches, is, [by way of prop^gation, or
multiplication of Churches:] But 1. This is rather a division of Churches, than
either propagation, or multiplication: For these very Churches were before all
one Church, now only divided into two The Apostles and the first Planters, did
not thus propagate Churches; but went into places, where no Churches were, no
Christians, and there gathered and multiplied Churches. We have enough of this
division of Churches, (since your way set up) but little of the propagation or
multiplication. Primitive and Apostolical. For I pray Sir, tell us, next time
you write over, how many Churches have you multiplied amongst the Indians in
New England? Not one, that I ever heard of: You have d vided Churches indeed,
from old England, but propagated none. And our Brethren at home, how many
Churches have they divided and d^stracted since their return, but have
multiplied none? If some new Teachers should arise in New England, and gather
(or rather steal) some members out of every of your Congregations, would you
call this multiplication of Churches, or rather division? Had you gone into New
England, and sent out your Pastors, (who are by calling, spiritual Fathers) to
convert Indians, (as was pretended) or our Brethren here gone and sent into
Wales, and other parts, little better than heathens, and converted them, and
had gathered them into Churches, this had been a propagation of Churches
indeed. But this they do not, nor will do, nor well can do: For their
opinion is, (and yours too in New England) that no Pastor is a Pastor to any,
but his particular Congregation: so their Pastors are only Nurses to give
suck, not spiritual Fathers, to propagate and beget children to God and his
Church. That they leave to every gifted brother, to raise up seed to their
Brethren, and not to themselves. For if once the children be borne, and a
little grown up, then these (Fathers in Law) take them up, or rather steal
them from them, who have spent their strength in begetting, and breeding them,
traveling in pain, till Christ was formed in them. But if a Pastor and flock
be relates, is a Teacher so too? They may do well then to send Teachers to
beget children for their Pastors; lest it be said: [No man in Office has any
skill, or will, or power, to propagate but only to divide Churches.]

Again, why do you call this a power of the Keys; for a Church to send out a
Congregation (as an Hive does a swarm) when they are too full? This is their
liberty, not yours. They have power without you, to gather themselves together,
and to enter into a Church Way, and to choose their Officers, and do all, as
well as you had.

Lastly, if Pastors, qua Pastors, or Teachers, qua Teachers, are tied to a
particular Congregation, then cannot they propigate Churches; only gifted
Brethren can do that: And so gifted Brethren, not Pastors and Teachers, are
the Successors of the Apostles: We think Pastors and Teachers are Officers to
the whole Church as the Apostles were; You will say, then they are Apostles:
First, will you say your gifted Brethren are Apostles, because they go abroad
to convert and propagate Churches? Secondly, it follows not; That which made
the Apostles differ from the Pastors, is delivered by your self, to stand in
two things: 1. The Keys, p. 32.
[ That an Apostle had in him in all ministerial power of all the Officers of
the Church. 2. That Apostolical power extended to all Churches as much as to
any one.] But withal you say, [That this power conjoined in them, is now
divided by them, amongst all the Churches, and all the Officers of the Churches
respectively.] I ask then, what Officer of the Church has power to plant and
propagate Churches? Your gifted Brethren are no Officers of the Church: I hope,
Ruling Elders and Deacons are tied as well to their particular Churches, as the
Pastors and Teachers; ergo, it must fall upon the Pastors and Teachers, or
there is no such thing now, as propagation of Churches. But take once more your
own grant in this Paragraph, where now we are: [ Though the Apostles be dead,
whose Office it was to plant and gather Churches; yet the work is not dead,
but the same power of the Keys is left with the Churches in common, etc.]
Mark, first, you call it a power of the keys, to plant and gather Churches,
and an Office of the Apostles: But this power of the Keys, this Office is not
bequeathed to gifted Brethren, nor to Ruling-Elders, or Deacons; ergo, it is
left to the Pastors or Teachers. Next, you say, the same power of the Keys is
left with the Churches in common: You should say, with the Pastors or Teachers
of the Church, or with the Churches indeed, but in the hands of her Officers:
Otherwise, you make not only the brethren, but sisters too (according to their
measure, as you speak) Fathers and Mothers [To propagate and enlarge the
Kingdom of Christ, throughout all generations, as God shall give opportunity.]
But were it so, yet then much more would it concern the Pastors and Teachers
(the Successors of the Apostles, if they have any at all) to propagate and
enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, as God shall give opportunity.

CHAP. V. Of the Subject of the Key of Authority.
THe Key of Authority or Rule is committed to the Elders of the Church, and so
the Act of Rule is proper to their Office.] But, me thinks, you should have
done well, to distinguish both of Authority and Rule, and also of Elders,
preaching from those they call Ruling-Elders: For Authority and Rule may be
distinguished; because there is Rule in those that are called Ruling-Elders,
but not Authority to preach and administer Sacraments: I would not have noted
it, but that you confusedly reckon up the particulars of Authority and Rule,
without distinction, what belongs to one sort of Elders, what to another; As if
they did equally belong to both.

1. The first is: [ That which the Eld^rs, who labor in the Word and Doctrine,
are to attend unto chiefly, that is, the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacrament^.] For the first, [the preaching of the Word,]
some of your Brethren say, that private gifted Brethren may prophecye, that is,
preach, and others say they may baptize too; who yet are denied power in
ruling, as being not Elders, not Officers, to whom the Act of Ruling is proper:
Indeed you seem to deny gifted Brethren power to prophecy publicly; but your
Prefacers write, Magister hic non tenetur. Yet their own resolution of the
case, and their practice does not well agree. They say, a gifted Brother may
[occasionally preach, not in an ordinary course.] But we see, they do it
ordinarily and constantly; witness all their Lecturers, their double and
treble beneficed Lecturers; and one who takes a Benefice, (but perhaps not the
charge of souls, nor administration of Sacraments) where he constantly
preaches. If you say, They are Elders or Pastors: I answer, they are so, to
their own select Congregations, but they are but as gifted Brethren to other
Congregations; for their principle is, [Pastor and flock are relates:] which,
if it be not a fine delusion, let the world judge. We deny not, but gifted
Brethren, of such abilities as are fit for Office, for learning and judgment,
etc. may for approbation, exercise their gifts. But we only note the difference
of these Masters; and that these of ours are nearer to Brownisme; who by their
constant preaching as gifted Brethren, countenance and encourage private
members, supposing themselves gifted sufficiently to preach ordinarily; yea,
and to administer the Seals, which as it is less Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel.
than preaching, so also is annexed unto preaching, Mat. 28. as your self here
speaks, and complain of this practice, page 6.

2. A second Act of Authority common to the Elders, is, [They have power to
call the Church together.] 1. You said before, Rule was an Act proper to the
Office of Elders: Now you say it is common, you mean perhaps common to both
sorts of Elders: But then you should have explained the difference, or resolved
us, whether the Ruling-Elders have equal power with the preaching Elders in
this Act. For your instance of the Apostles, calling the Church together, Acts
6.2. is but for one sort of Elders, and you bring nothing for the other. 2.
Besides, to call the Church together, seems rather a matter of Order, than of
Authority: For one Elder of either sort, may be deputed to this work. But if
this be proper to Elders, what if the Elders be all offenders, who shall call
the Church together then? Truly, this power seems first to be in the Church,
in your way; who as they had power to gather themselves into one Body, without
Officers, so much more, to call an Assembly of themselves. That of Joel 2. for
the Priests, is weakly alleged: For it appears not that they were called on,
to call an Assembly, (but only to weep, v. 17.) it was rather the Magistrates
Act to proclaim a Fast.

3. [To examine all, members or Officers, before they be received of the
Church.] But this, according to your principles, is spoken to the whole Church,
and so no proper Act of Elders. And expressly above, you made this one part of
the privilege or liberty of the people, to propound just exceptions against
such as offer themselves; and if so, then also to examine them, page 13.

4. A fourth Act of their Rule, is, [Ordination of Officers.] But 1. This is
too confused: What Elders do you mean? Preaching or Ruling? Have the
Ruling-Elders power of Ordination of Pastors and Teachers? This, as it is
without all president of Scripture, so it is against a Rule: [The greater is
blessed of the lesser;] which cannot be by the Apostles Divinity. 2. This is no
Act proper to the Elders, but common to the Brethren, by your own judgment,
if your mind be not altered since you writ, The Way, p. 50, 51. See it.

5. [To open the doors of speech and silence in the Assembly.] But 1. one
Elder does this; ergo, one Elder has power and authority, not over the Church
only, but over his fellow Elders also. 2. You take it from them presently in
some cases: [ When the Elders themselves lie under offense, the Brethren have
liberty to require satisfaction, etc.] That is, the Brethren may open the
door, and begin to speak. And still you are confused, not declaring whether
this power belongs to either sort of Elders, or both alike; especially your
instance of the Rulers of the Synagogue, seeming to carry it to the Ruling
Elders.

6. [ To prepare matters before hand for the Church, and to reject causeless
and disorderly complaints, etc.] But do not you hold, Mat. 18.17. to speak of
the Church of the Brethren, with the Elders? then that place is impertinently
alleged, to prove an Act proper to the Elders. 2. Have the Elders power to
judge a complaint to be causeless, and to reject it, without the cognizance of
the people? why then have they not power to judge a complaint to be just, and
to censure it, without their cognizance also? Do you not entrench a little too
much upon your peoples Liberty?

7. [ The Elders have authority in handling an offense, before the Church, both
jus dicere, and sententiam far.] But all this, I think the Brownists yield,
who yet give the chief, if not the only power to the people; and give the
Elders leave, sententiam far, to pronounce the sentence, as their mouth and
Deputies. And you say: [ They are first to inform the Church, what the Law of
Christ is, which is, jus dicere; and then when the Church discerns the same,
and condiscendeth to it, by consent, to give sentence.] But what if the people
discern it not, or condescend not, that the sentence shall pass? Then they
may have power, jus dicere, which every understanding brother has, but not
sententiam far: A goodly Authority!

8. [They have power to dismiss the Church, with a Blessing.] To this I say
little; only I say, it is too confused, what Elders you mean, preaching or
Ruling? and then, I say, this is but a matter of Order, one only does it, and
yet I think you will not say, he has Authority over his fellows.

9. [ The Elders have power to charge any of the people in private, that they
live not inordinately, etc. 2 These. 3.6. etc.] This is very weakly alleged by
a man of your strength: The Apostle speaks this to all the Brethren, the
Thessalonians, yea, it may concern women sometimes, to warn the unruly,
especially being to be done in private; and do you bring this for the power of
your Elders? which sort of Elders does it concern to do this, for neither are
mentioned? Again, the Apostle speaks not of charging or warning at all; but
peremptorily bids them withdraw, v. 6. and to [ note him by a Letter, and have
no company with him, v. 14.]

10. [ If the Church fall away to blasphemy against Christ, etc. and no Synod
hoped for, or no help by it; The Elders have power to withdraw the Disciples
from them, and to carry away the Ordinances with them, etc.] But 1. the case is
mislaid; for Acts 19.9. the Jews that there blasphemed, were not of the
Church; but only such as came to hear Paul preach, which an Infidel might
do; but then this was no proper withdrawing, as a power of the Keys: For what
had Paul to do, or the Elders with them that are without. 2. Suppose the whole
Church fall away, what shall the Elders do now? They may not excommunicate
them, you said above; and if they may withdraw, that's no more power than the
Brethren have of the Elders Apostate. 3. How can the Elders carry away the
Ordinances from them? For first the Elders cease to be Elders, when the flock
is separated, and ceases to be their flock. Secondly, the Brethren may keep
the Ordinances with them, and have power in your way, to choose new Officers, to
exercise the Ordinances; and then what care they for their withdrawing, either
themselves or the Ordinances? 4. It seems not justifiable, that Elders should
withdraw, and carry away the Ordinances from a company of erring Brethren. The
Prophets of old did not so, but continued still to preach, though the people
were obstinate: For this is the remedy to cure their obstinacy, and so the
Apostle directs, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

In the close of this Chapter, you propound a question: [If the Elders have
this power of Rule, how are they then the servants of the Church?] You answer
by a similitude: [ A Queen may call her servants her mariners, to conduct her
over Sea; yet they being called by her to such an Office, she must not rule
them in steering their course, etc.] If such be the case between the Church and
her Elders (as you say it is) I see little or no difference between you and the
Brownists; For they make the Church a Queen, and the Elders but her servants,
called by her to such an Office; to exercise the power of the Keys in her
name: You say here, [ The Elders rule the Church from Christ, and so from their
call; and above, sect. 7. The Church condiscending to the information of the
Elders, what the Law of Christ is, it is a further act of the Elders power, to
give sentence against the offender.] Just as the Mariner, when the Queen, who
has called him to that Office, tells him she is resolved to go to such a
place, puts her command in execution, by steering his course to that place.

CHAP. VI. Of the Authority of Synods.
IN that you acknowledge Synods as an Ordinance of Christ, and set down the
causes of assembling Churches into Synods, we shall easily agree with you: The
maine controversy is about their power. Concerning which you move three
questions.

1. Q. What power it is they have received; which you thus resolve: [Not only
to counsel and give light, but also to command and enjoyne things to be
believed and done.] But this (as was noted in your Prefacers Epistle) is but an
empty grant. For you mean it rather materially, than formally, by any
Authority the Synod has to bind them to obedience or censure: Yes, formally
(you say) [from the authority of the Synod, which being an Ordinance of Christ,
binds the more for the Synods sake.] But the great scruple is, To make their
counsel the more weighty and acceptable; but not to invest them with more rule
or authority. The way, p 51.
what kind of Authority this is, whether it differ specifically from the power
of a single Pastor, or of a Congregationall Presbytery, or only gradually, as a
greater testimony; for so some of yours understand it: If in this latter sense,
I see not how it can be called an Ordinance of Christ, or authority distinct
from the Authority of one single Pastor: For he has Authority ministerially to
declare and command people, what God commands and declares to be his will, with
all Authority: And this seems to be your meaning; for you say [A truth of the
Gospel taught by a Minister, binds to faith and obedience, not only because
it is Gospel, but also because it is taught by a Minister for his callings
sake.] Now suppose 20, or 40, or more Pastors met together, teach and declare a
truth of the Gospel; and enjoyne it to their several Congregations, by way of
a Decree; I ask what difference is there between this Authority of theirs, and
the Authority of any one of them single? If you say, none but graduall, then I
say, they have no Authority as a Synod, but as Pastors: If you say,
specificall, that is, juridicall, whereas a Pastors is but doctrinall, you
yield the cause as we would have it. But then they have a power, not only of
decreeing, which one Pastor has not; but also of censuring upon the
disobedience of the people, which you will not easily grant. Again, I think
you take the authority of a Presbytery in a Congregation, to be an Ordinance of
Christ, and to differ, not only gradually, but specifically; And the authority
of a Pastor, or Teacher, or Ruling-Elders single. Now it may seem strange, if
a Synod be an Ordinance of Christ (as you grant) that a single Presbytery
should have a juridicall authority, to decree and censure; and yet a Synod,
which is a Presbytery of Presbyteries, should have but only a doctrinall
authority: You may rather deny Synods to be an Ordinance of Christ, and call
them (as your Prefacers call the first Synod of the Apostles) a Consultation,
or if you will, a Reference by way of Arbitration, for deciding of
controversies, etc. Which the particular Churches (unless they bind themselves
by promise) need not stand to, but may plead their own Liberty. But (say you)
[they have a power, (if they cannot heal the offenders) to determine to
withdraw communion from them.] This power all the Brethren have, as to withdraw
from their own Elders, apostate: so from other Churches obstinate, against
their admonitions. Or if you place any emphasis in the word (determine) that
is, to decree a separation from them; then you give them a juridicall power,
which is aequivalent with the power of excommunication, whereof withdrawing is
but the execution.

2. Q. [How far the Fraternity may concur with the Elders in the power of the
Synod.] You resolve it in 3 particulars: 1. [ They have liberty to dispute
their doubts among the Elders, Acts 15.7.12.] The place I think is much
mistaken. The disputation, for ought appears, was amongst the Apostles and
Elders, before the Brethren; not by the Brethren. And when in v. 12. the whole
multitude are said to keep silence, it proves not that they did dispute: For 1.
certainly that had been too much confusion, for a multitude to speak all at
once. 2. Their silence now, argues not that they disputed before; Acts 21.40.
and 22.2.
the word (...), signifies no more but this; they were quiet, or held their
peace from noise or murmurings, usual with multitudes, as at an Assizes; we
fear it; they hearkened attentively. 2. [They had liberty to join with the
Apostles and Elders, in approving the sentence, and determining the same, as
the common sentence of them all.] That they had a liberty to join in approving
the sentence, is no more than the multitude at an Assizes have to join with
the Judge in approving of his sentence: But that they joined in determining the
same, as the common sentence of them all, is far more than the multitude have
at the Assizes, and is as full Authority as the Elders have; And yet this you
presently deny, when you say: [ Yet the Authority of the Decrees lay chiefly
(if not only) in the Apostles and Elders^] The Apostles and Elders did no more
but join with James in determining the sentence, as the common sentence of
them all. 3 [They had liberty to join with the Apostles and Elders, in choosing
and sending messengers, and writing Synodall Letters, in the names of all.] If
you meant no more than a passive approbation, it might be yielded; but if you
mean an actual, or active concurrence, that they had not been valid without
their votes and consent; its far more than liberty, as good authority as any
the Apostles and Elders had.

Obj. But Elders in a Synod have no authority to determine any act to bind the
Churches, but according to their instructions. You answer: [We do not so
apprehend it: For what need Churches send to a Synod for light and direction,
if they be resolved before hand, how far they will go?] Reply: Here either you
destroy the liberty of the Brethren, before granted, and give the Synod a
binding power, which you seem to deny? or else prevaricate in this cause. For
according to your principles, the Synod has no power to bind the Churches to
stand to their arbitrament (for that's the true power of your Synods) under any
penal censure; only they may withdraw; And then I return you your own words:
[ What need Churches send to a Synod for light and direction, etc. if they be
resolved before hand, how far they will go?]

3. Q. [Whether the Synod has power to enjoyne things both in their nature and
use indifferent.] You resolve it negatively.

1. [ From the pattern of Synods, Acts 15.28. who enjoined nothing but
necessaries, in nature or use.]

Sol. This is an Argument from Scripture, negative; they did not here enjoyne
any thing but necessaries; ergo, they had no power to enjoyne things
indifferent: The consequence is naught. 2. [ The Apostles are commanded to
teach what Christ commanded; ergo, if they teach more, they exceed their
commission.]

Sol. This Argument is like the former: They were to teach what Christ
commanded; ergo, they might teach nothing else in things indifferent: They
might teach nothing as a commandment of Christ doctrinally, in matters of
Faith or worship; but this hinders not, but they might enjoyne some things
indifferent; as they did forbid the use of some things indifferent in their
own nature; viz. blood, and strangled. If it be said, those were not
indifferent in their use, at that time: I answer; There is nothing in the
individual, properly indifferent in the use; because it falls under some
general rules of Scripture; and so is to be used or not used accordingly: The
question therefore should be; [Whether a Synod may enjoyne (or forbid) the use
of a thing in its own nature indifferent?] And then I should answer
affirmatively, and defend my self by this very president of the Apostles, Acts
15. Who did forbid the use of somethings in their own nature indifferent? I
would not therefore answer: [Christ speaks only of teaching such things which
he had commanded, as necessary to salvation:] But I would say, Christ speaks of
matters of faith, or worship: That they should teach nothing to be believed, as
a Doctrine of Faith: or practiced as a part of Gods worship, but what he had
commanded them. Otherwise the Apostles did go beyond their commission, in
teaching as necessary, to abstain from blood, etc. which Christ never
commanded them, but rather forbad, in abrogating the Ceremonial Law. And
whereas you say; [ The Apostle 1 Cor. 14.40. does not at all enjoyne, nor allow
the Church to enjoyne such things as decent, whose want or whose contrary is
not undecent: nor such orders, whose want or contrary would be no disorder.] I
answer: that for men to pray or prophecy with their heads covered, or with
long hair, and women uncovered, were things in their own nature indifferent
(unless you make it necessary, as a moral duty, for men to pray or prophecy
uncovered, and women contra; which no Interpreters upon that Text do) and yet
the Apostle enjoynes the Corinthians so to do; ergo, the Synod may do so too:
And for your instance of preaching in a gown; [ A gown (say you) is a decent
garment to preach in, yet such an injunction (for Ministers to preach in a
gown) is not grounded upon that Text of the Apostle: For then, a Minister in
neglecting to preach in a gown, should neglect the commandment of the
Apostle; which yet he does not; for if he preach in a cloak, he preaches
decently enough.] True, he sins not in point of decency; but supposing such a
custom in a Church (as the custom was for men, amongst Corinthians, to preach
uncovered, and the women to be convened in the Congregations) the Synod might
enjoyne all the Ministers to preach in a gown, (as the Apostle did enjoyne
them to preach uncovered) and he that shall preach in a cloak, preaches
decently indeed, but not orderly; and so sins against the Apostles rule of
order, though not of decency. You so speak, as if there were only one Rule to
be observed, or two at most, in the use of things indifferent; whereas there
are at least five to that purpose: And by the same reason, that the Apostle
enjoynes men to keep decency, he enjoynes to keep order; and so other rules,
concerning things indifferent. Does not the Apostle complain of disorder in
the Corinthians preaching covered? yet the contrary Order was not necessary,
but in it self indifferent. The eating of things offered to Idols, was a thing
in it self, before that decree of the Apostles, indifferent, 1 Cor. 10.25. 1
Cor. 8.8. yet was now forbidden: If you say, this was offensive to the Jews,
and ergo necessary pro hic and nunc: I answer, this reason made it necessary
only, where such eating was known to be offensive, but the Canon made it
necessary every where.

3. A third reason is taken (you say) from the nature of the [ Ministerial
Office in Church or Synod: which is stewardly, not Lordly, and ergo, they may
dispense no more injunctions to Gods house, than Christ has appointed them.] I
answer, its true, he may dispense nothing as an institution of Christ, but what
he has commanded: But yet a Steward may require of the Family, and enjoyne
them the use of things in themselves indifferent, for Order and uniformity. As
that all shall meet in such an hour, in such a place, to prayers, etc. So I
think you do in your own Churches. It is indifferent to receive the Lords
Supper at Morning or at Evening, yet some of you enjoyne it to be done at
Evening. It is indifferent to baptize, in a river, in a paile, in a Font, in a
Basin; yet, I believe, you enjoyne one of these, and forbid the other. And
whereas you say, [Christ in these things never provided for uniformity, but
only for unity.] I answer: then the Apostle exceeded his commission, in
enjoining the Corinthians uniformity, in their orderly praying or prophesying;
yea, unity is much preserved by uniformity.

But you propound a question; [Whether a Synod has power of Ordination or
excommunication:] And answer 1. That you doubt it was not so from the
beginning. 2. That if any such occasion should arise amongst you, you (in a
Synod) should determine it fit to be done, but refer the administration of
both, to the Presbytery of several Churches.] So perhaps would the
Presbyteriall Churches. But the question is, what is to be done, if the
Officers of the particular Churches be dead, or heretical, who then shall do
those acts? Either the Synod must do it, but that you refuse, or a Classis,
The way, p. 50, 51.
or a Presbytery of another Congregation; but that you also deny, as having no
warrant: Then it follows, the Brethren without Officers must both ordain
Elders, Page 100.
and excommunicate offenders; which you fully grant in the other Tract. But as
clearly contradict in this, as is evident in the former Chapter.

If it be said, for Synodicall Ordination, [that Matthias was so called to be
an Apostle, Acts 1.] you answer: [It appears not, they acted them in a
Synodicall way.] But I pray Sir, remember what you said above, concerning that
Synod, Acts 15. [That it rise up to be a Synod, or general Council, by the
Apostles presence, they being Elders of all the Churches.] So it may be said of
that Assembly, Acts 1. the Apostles presence, and the whole Church, then
extant, there assembled, made it a Synod; and if so, then in a Synod, there was
an Apostle ordained: If I may use that word of an Apostle, which I may the
better to do, by your grants, who urge the word (...), The Keys, p. 12.
[he was voted by the common suffrages of them all.] And if an Apostle, much
more a Deacon, or other Officers, as Acts 6. in another like Assembly. The
other instance of the Presbyters imposing hands upon Paul and Barnabas, Paul
and Barnabas were ordained to that Office (of Apostleship) by the imposition of
hands of some Officers or members of the Church: The way, p. 45
was not indeed an Ordination, properly so called, though you call it a
[separation of them to the work of the Apostleship.] nor in a Synod, but in a
particular Church; yet it was in a Presbytery of Prophets and Teachers, perhaps
of several Churches, there occasionally met, and yields us this instruction;
That Elders of one or more Churches, may impose hands, that is, ordain (in
your sense) Elders employed in other Churches; for so were Paul and Barnabas.
Whence we would infer two things more: 1. That if a Classis or Presbytery may
ordain, then may a Synod ordain. 2. That however the people or Brethren have
no power to ordain or impose hands: for those were Prophets and Teachers, that
imposed hands on Paul and Barnabas.

To conclude this Chapter: whereas you said, [ The Synod, Acts 15. did dispense
no censure against the false Teachers, an evident argument, they left the
censure to the particular Churches.] I answer: This is an Argument like the
former: They dispensed no censure, ergo, they had no power, perhaps they
revoked their error, and repented, and so there was no need: However, the
Synod could not censure them, till they knew them obstinate. What was after
done, we know not.

CHAP. VII. The first Subject of all this Power; and of Independency.
LEtting pass what is said of Christ, the sovereign Subject of all power, as
out of all question, we consider only what you say of Ministerial power.

1. Propos. [A particular Church, or Congregation of Saints, is the first
subject of all the Church-offices, with all their spiritual gifts and power,]
1 Cor. 3.22, etc. But, under favor, all the Texts produced to prove the
Proposition, are mistaken, or misapplyed. The first, 1 Cor. 3.22. is not spoken
to the Church of Corinth, or any other particular Church, as a peculiar
privilege unto them; but either, of all Saints in the world, or of those in
the Church of Corinth, as Saints, not promiscuously of the whole Church, as a
Church, consisting of good and bad: For, was Paul and Apollos; was life and
death, were things present, and things to come, given to wicked men and
hypocrites in that Church? was Paul an Apostle, and Cephas another, given as a
peculiar privilege to the Church of Corinth only? Yea, is not this meant of
the invisible mystical Church, and not of any particular Church? For the
second, 1 Cor. 14.23. you say, [Theirs was such a Church, of whom it is said;
They came altogether into one place.] But we have told you, at the beginning,
this was not such a Church as you described, [A Congregation of Saints
professing the faith] without their Officers: which I think you mean here
also; (for these things are taken out of, The way, p. 1.) This was a Church
that had many Officers. The third Text, 1 Cor. 12.28. is not meant of a
particular Church. For I pray, were the Apostles set in the Church of Corinth
only, as a particular Church? Were not they Ministers of all, and given to all
Churches? Your labor about (...), some, to refer it to the Apostles, is but
a mere criticisme; for let it be some, or which, it matters not. For those
Apostles or Prophets were not set in the Church of Corinth, as the first
subject thereof, but in the general visible Church: so the parallel place,
Ephesians. 4.12. is necessarily meant of the Church of Saints, or the body of Christ
generally, or indefinitely, not of this or that particular Church. What weak
proofs are these, for a proposition of so great concernment, as being the very
foundation of the Independent Government?

But you read of no National Church, nor National Officers given to them by
Christ: Yet (say we) we read of Officers more than National, given to the
Churches, even universal, as Apostles and Prophets: And some think we read
of National Officers, such was Titus for Crete; as an Evangelist, though we
take these to be extraordinary. 2. We read of National Churches, living under
one common government, as the Churches of Galatia; yet but one Church; and the
Church of Jerusalem, had many Congregations, yet but one Church: And if many
Congregations may be called one Church in a City; why all the Congregations in
a Nation, may not be called one National Church, I see no great reason? Not
indeed in a typical sense, as the Church of the Jews was, a National Church.
3. You grant, that the Officers of particular Churches of a Province, or
Nation, may meet, as a Synod, by an Ordinance of Christ; John speaks of the
dimensions, of many particular Jewish Churches combining together in some
causes, even to the communion of a thousand Churches, and all of them will have
such mutual care, and yield such mutual help and communion one to another, as
if they were all but one Body. The Keys, p. 56.
and there determine, and enjoyne things for all their Churches; and this Synod
you call, a Church of Churches: Now, are not those Officers, Officers to all
those Churches, and may not they be called National Officers, in a candid
sense? It is therefore a mere Logomachy, to dispute, whether there be a
National Church, or National Officers, or no: But [ the Officers themselves
(say you) and the Synods themselves, and all their power, are primarily given
to the several Churches of particular Congregations, either as the first
subject in whom they are resident, or as the first object, about whom they are
conversant, etc.] Let me first tell you, you plainly vary the question, which
is, of the first subject, not of the first object.

2. The first object of all the Church Officers, is not the particular
Churches; certainly the first object of the Apostles and Prophets was the
general visible Church, not any particular Church: Nay, every Pastor is first
given to the whole Church, secondarily to this or that particular Church as the
object; as I think, I have proved above, at least, you do not sufficiently
disprove it: But 3. that the power which a Synod puts forth, [ is subjectively
first in the Synod; The Keys. p. 47.
] is your own assertion in your 4. proposition; you did therefore much forget
your self here, to assert the contrary; and think to evade, by altering the
state of the question, putting the first object, for the first subject, or
joining them together, when the question is of the first subject only. Surely,
if the power of a Synod be any thing more than the power of a particular
Congregation; the particular Congregation cannot be the first subject, in whom
the power of the Synod is resident. But when I consider your first proposition
better, I begin to think your meaning is, that the Church particular, even
without Officers, is the first Subject of all Church Power; because 1. such a
Church you define in, The Way, to be the only instituted Church; and secondly,
you give them power to derive their power upon their Officers, in choosing and
ordaining them, and then sending them to a Synod; and so indeed, they are the
first Subject, even of the power put forth in the Synod: But if this be not
downright Brownisme, I confess, I know not what is. Let me but make use of
your own characters of the first Subject of all power: [The first subject of
any power has it reciprocally:] But a particular Congregation of Saints, has
not all Church-offices, and all spiritual power reciprocally: For it may be
without all Officers: so cannot fire, the first Subject of heat, be without
heat. Again, take the second character: [It first puts forth the exercise
of that power.] But say I, a particular Congregation without Officers, does not
first put forth the power of an Officer, or of a Synod; ergo, If you say, yet
the third will fit it rightly: [It first communicates that power to others.]
because the Church first makes her own Officers, and then imployes them in the
Church or Synod. I ask, whether this be not that extreme which the Brethren
speak of; giving [ the chief, if not the whole of the power into the hands of
the people (without their Officers) as if Christ had radically and originally
estated it in the people, Epist. p. 2.]

2. Propos. [The Apostles were the first subject of Apostolical power.] But
then 1. why do you not say, proportionably, that the Pastors are the first
Subject of Pastoral power; and the Ruling-Elders of Ruling power, etc? 2. If
the first Subject of all the Church-offices, with all their spiritual gifts
and power, be a particular Congregation, how can you say now, that the Apostles
were the first subject of Apostolical power? Nay rather, in your way, the
particular Congregation, is the first subject, even of Apostolical power; and
the Apostles had it by derivation from them; and so make the Church the Queen,
that bestows all these Offices upon her Officers; and so say the Brownists.
But to the contrary, its certain, there were Apostles, who had this
Apostolical power, before there was any particular Congregation; As shall
appear in the particulars.

1. You say, their power stood in this; [That each Apostle had in him all
ministerial power of all the officers of the Church, Pastors, Teachers,
Rulers, Deacons.] But this is a flat contradiction to your first proposition,
That a particular Congregation was the first subject of all the Church-offices
and power: There cannot be two first subjects, much less three first subjects
of one Adjunct; and yet here you join Evangelists with Apostles, and say, that
[one Apostle or Evangelist, carried about with him the liberty and power of the
whole Church; and ergo, might alone baptize and censure.] If you should say,
they received this power from the Church, you say, that which jumps with the
Brownists opinion, and that which is apparently false. Take all your 3.
characters of a first subject: 1. It first receives that power. 2. It first
puts forth the exercise of that power. 3. It first communicates that power to
others: They all fall upon the Apostles, before there was any particular
Congregation; They first received power from Christ; They first exercised that
power; They first communicated that power, by making Pastors, Elders, Deacons:
Besides, in your other Tract you say, expressly as much, or more. The way, p.
83.
[One Apostle received both the gifts and power of all the Officers of the
Church, and might exercise them all alone, without the Church.] Though your
Brethren that published that Tract, do affixe their Star against it, which
(according to their intimation in their Epistle) signifies as much as, Magister
non tenetur. And no marvel, for you are not constant to your self: Your first
and second propositions do directly contradict one another.

2. [ Apostolical power (say you) extended it self to all Churches, as much
as to any one; and so they were the first and last subject of Apostolical
power.] This still makes the contradiction greater: For how then, could you
truly say; [The particular congregation was the first subject of all
Church Power:] when the power of a particular Congregation extends it self no
further then its own bounds, and Apostolical power extends to all Churches?
2. How can you say they were the last subject of all power; when you said
before, The particular congregation is the first subject of all power? And when
you say here, [That ample and universal latitude of power, which was conjoined
in them, is now divided even by themselves, amongst all the Churches, and all
the Officers respectively.] Then it follows 1. That the Church is not the
first subject of all power; for it is divided by the Apostles, amongst all the
Churches. 2. That the Apostles were not the last subject of all Apostolical
power; for it is left with the Churches and Officers: But still the question
is, whom the Apostles did betrust first, with the ordinary power of Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons? The Churches (say you) and the Officers
respectively: But what do you mean? that one part of that power was given
first to the Churches; another part, first to the Officers? This is not
consentaneous to your first proposition: where you say, [The Church is the
first subject of all Church offices, and all Church power:] Or do you mean
(as you should, if you speak congruously) that the Church receives all power
first, and then distributes it among the Officers respectively? Then (say I)
your middle way, falls out to be the extreme of Brownists; who make the people
the first subject of all power. But I think the truth is; That the Apostles
betrusted the power of the Officers, not first with the Churches, but with the
Officers themselves: They, and Evangelists, ordained Elders in every City, not
the Churches: Paul gives Timothy a charge, [ to commit that which he had
received of him, to faithful men, that might be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2.] To conclude this: You said above, That the Keys were distributed
into several hands; the Key of Liberty unto the Brethren; the Key of Authority
unto the Officers; and is not this a contradiction to what your first
proposition does assert; That the particular Church of Brethren, is the first
subject of all Church-offices, and of all Church Power, and so of the Authority
of the Officers? consider it.

3. Propos. [When the Church of a particular congregation, walks together in
the truth and peace, the Brethren are the first subject of Church liberty, and
the Elders thereof, of Church Authority; and both, of all Church Power,
needful to be exercised amongst themselves.] This is very cautelously
delivered, yet not enough to cover your contradiction. Either this proposition
is the same with the first, or else it contradicts it. There you said, that the
particular congregation of Saints, was the first subject of all the
Church-offices, with all their spiritual gifts and power: Now you divide this
power, between them and the Elders; giving the one Church-liberty, the other,
Authority. 2. There is a limitation for this too; it is but when they walk in
truth and Peace: But if they walk not so, what is the first subject of all
that power? Have not the Brethren their Liberty, and the Elders their
Authority, as the first Subjects, when they differ? If so; then your caution is
idle, [ when they walk in truth and peace: If not, then neither of them
single, nor both together, are the first subject of all power needful to be
exercised amongst themselves: And we shall hear anon, a Synod is the first
subject of all power needful to be exercised amongst themselves; When there
are divisions and factions among them, page 47. Yet again, in your other
Tract, you give the particular Congregation of Brethren, the whole power, of
choosing, ordaining Officers, and censures of their Officers, if they be
heretical.

1. That the Brethren are the first subject of Church-liberty, you labor to
prove thus: [By removal of any former subject, whence they might derive it:
Not from their Elders; for they had power to choose their own Elders: Not from
other Churches, for all Churches are equal: Not from a Synod; they of Antioch
borrowed none of their Liberties from Jerusalem.] I answer; the enumeration is
not sufficient: For though they received it from none of those, yet they might
derive it from some others; namely, from the Elders of other Churches, by whom
they were first converted to the Faith: For the Liberties or privileges that a
Congregation has, as distinct from Elders, comes to them by virtue of their
interest, either in the Body mystical, or Catholic visible Church; which is
in Order, before their membership of a particular Congregation: They must be
visible Saints, before they can gather into a congregation of visible Saints;
and every one single has a liberty or privilege to associate, before they can
all be associated: Now thence it follows, that those Elders that first
converted them did virtually derive that liberty or privilege to them; Faith
comes by hearing: How shall they hear without a Preacher? Remember your own
words: The Keys, p. 10.
[The Key of knowledge (or which is all one the Key of Faith) belongs to all
the faithful, whether joined to any particular Church, or no; which argues,
that the key of knowledge is given not only to the Church, but to some before
they enter into the Church.] Now who gave them this key of Faith,
instrumentally, but [the Ministers by whom they believed?] Therefore, the
Church of a particular Congregation, are not the first subject of
Church-liberty; but every particular Believer has it first, and that derived
from some Elders. And certainly, in the first plantation of Churches, the
Officers, Elders I mean, were before the Churches themselves: The Planters
were before the plantation. The Apostles being first converted and ordained by
Christ himself, were sent abroad, and converted people, many times single;
afterward, when they were increased, they united into Churches. Now, you
suppose the Church to be before the Elders; because they choose their own
Elders, which is not generally true. Though it may be so in Churches planted,
yet not in the first plantation of Churches. Indeed, in your way, the Churches
are before their Elders, and do choose and ordain their Elders; but from the
beginning it was not so: And besides, Elders now, in order of nature, if not in
time, are before the Churches, in all Reformed Churches; being ordained for the
most part to be Elders, before they be Elders to this or that particular
Church: And though your Churches do choose their Elders, yet I hope they do
not make or ordain them Elders: but after they are ordained, choose them to be
theirs. The Keys, p 55.
You speak sometimes of [translation of an Elder from one Church to another;]
which, in my apprehension, implies him an Elder before he be translated to
another Church: Though I know you are not constant to your self herein;
holding it as a principle; [Elder and flock are relates:] and giving the
Brethren, without any Officers, power not only to choose, but to ordain their
Elders; and so your Churches are before their Elders, and give them their
power, by election and ordination; and Brownists do no more. I would gladly
know a reason why, if the Churches had power to choose and ordain their own
Officers, the Apostle should trouble himself, and them, to send Timothy and
Titus, to ordain Elders in every City; had it not been easier to have written
to the Churches to do it themselves?

2. That the Elders are the first subject of Rule and Authority, you endeavor
to prove: 1. [Because the charge of Rule over the Church, is committed to them
immediately from Christ.] But this first, is contradictory to your first
proposition, which made the particular congregation, the first subject of all
Church Officers, and all Church Power; and the Church communicates and derives
that power to the Officers, choosing and ordaining them. 2. If the charge of
Rule be immediately committed to them from Christ, how can the Church be the
first subject of all power? The Apostles indeed had all their power immediately
from Christ; but other Officers had it immediately from them, and from others
entrusted by them, with that power: When you say, [The Office it self is
ordained by Christ, though the Elders be chosen to their Office by the Church
of Brethren] You vary the question: For the question is not, who ordaines the
Office; but who ordaines the Officers: Those that the Apostles ordained, had
their Office immediately from Christ, but had not their Ordination immediately
from Christ; that was the privilege of the Apostles. Now from whomsoever the
Officers derive their Ordination immediately, from them immediately they do
derive their Authority. But (say you) the Officers do immediately derive their
Ordination from the Church of Brethren; ergo, they derive immediately their
Authority from the Church of Brethren: And consequently, the Church of Brethren
is the first subject of authority, as well as of Liberty, and not the Elders.
Certainly, all your 3 characters of a first subject, fall upon the Apostles,
and their Successors. 1. They first received their power from Christ. 2. They
first put forth the exercise of that power. 3. They first communicated that
power to others. You say here; [ God has not given a spirit of Rule and
Government ordinarily to the greater part of the body of the Brethren; and
ergo, neither has he given them the first receipt of the Key of Authority, to
whom he has not given the gift to employ it.] But you give the body of the
Brethren alone, the first receipt (and exercise too) of the Key of Authority,
when you give them power to choose and ordain their Officers (which Ordination
is confessed by your self, to be an Act of Rule and authority) ergo, The way,
p. 48.
you do directly contradict your self; without any possibility of
reconciliation, that I can imagine.

Obj. 1. How can the Brethren invest an Elder with Rule, if they had not power
of Rule in themselves? Sol. [Partly by choosing him to that Office, which God
has invested with Rule; partly, by subjecting themselves unto him.] Reply 1.
Your first reason is of no validity; choosing to an Office, does not invest with
the Rule of that Office. Election gives not an Office, but only nominates or
designs a person fit for that Office: It is Ordination that gives the Office,
and the Rule or authority of that Office. The seven Deacons chosen by the
people, were not Officers, till the Apostles had ordained them: If they were
not, then election gives no Office, and consequently, no authority belonging to
that Office: If they were, then Ordination is a mere empty Ceremony; and the
Brethren do properly give them authority, which themselves have not to give:
Besides, election to this or that place, presupposes (at least sometimes) the
party invested with authority before (as in the case of translation of an Elder
from one Church to another) and only admits him to the exercise of it; pro hic
and nunc, as they speak. 2. Your second reason is as weak as the former;
[Because they profess their subjection to him:] This cannot invest him with
the Rule, such as we speak of. Suppose a company of Brethren choose a gifted
Brother to prophecy to them, and profess their subjection to him in the Lord;
does this invest him with authority of an Elder, to rule over them? If it do;
then Ordination is a thing not necessary, either by the Brethren or Elders;
(yet by and by we shall hear you require Ordination of Elders, to make a
complete Elder:) If it do not, then you have not satisfied the objection.

Obj. 2. The Church is Christ's Spouse, Wife, Queen; ergo, she has the Keys
of Rule at her girdle. Sol. [There is a great difference between Queens and
poor men's Wives: The first have their Officers for every business, and
service; and so no Key left in their hands of any Office, but of Liberty, to
call for what they want, according to the Kings Royal allowance: But poor
men's wives, that have no Officers, may carry the keys at their own girdles.]
Reply. This answer overthrows it self: For 1. the liberty which you grant
this Queen, the Church, is part of the power of the Keys, and a great part
too (if not the whole) viz. to choose and ordain her own Officers, and to
censure them offending; which no Queen is allowed to do; ergo, the Church
has the Keys at her girdle, which a Queen has not. 2. You say, and that
truly, [The Queen has only a liberty to call for what she wants;] but has no
power to make her own Officers. The King does that by some Officers deputed by
himself for that purpose, to set them apart, to give them their commission or
oath, etc. Just so it is in the Church: All the Officers are given to the
Church, objective, for the good and benefit of the Church; but they have no
power to make and ordain their own Officers, but only to call upon them for
that allowance which the King of the Church has granted them. 3. If poor men's
wives may carry the Keys of any Office at their own girdles, when their
husbands have no Officers; you seem to give a greater honor and liberty to
them, then to Queens or Ladies; and withal, you give us leave to infer,
That Churches that have no Officers of their own, are in better case than
those that have: They that have Officers, have put the Keys in their Officers
hands: They that have none, may and do wear them at their own girdles; which
if you affirm (as you often do) I dare affirm it to be flat Brownisme, and
not the middle way, you pretend.

Obj. 3. The whole body natural, is the first subject of all the natural
power; as sight is first in the body, before in the eye. Soil. [It is not in
the mystical, as with the natural body; there the faculties are inexistent,
not so here.] Reply 1. This again contradicts your first proposition; where
you say, a particular Church is the first subject of all Church-offices and
power: And here you say, they are not actually inexistent, how then is it the
first Subject, seeing accidentis esse, est inesse? 2. If the Church choose out
of themselves, Officers gifted, are not they then inexistent? 3. You confess
they are in some cases: [ unless (say you) some of them have all the gifts of
all the Officers, which often they have not.] True, but oftentimes they have,
either Presbyters, or men fit to be Presbyters; And then you answer not the
objection: And if they have Presbyters, before they choose them to be theirs,
(as your words seem to import they may) then they do not invest them with
power of Elders, by choosing them, as formerly you seemed to assert. Lastly, you
say; [ If the power of the Presbytery were given to a particular Church of
Brethren, as such, primo and per se, then it would be found in every particular
Church of Brethren.] But say I, you assert both the Antecedent in the first
proposition; [Every particular Congregation is the first subject of all Church
power;] and the consequence, when you say; [Every particular Church has power
to choose, ordain, and censure;] ergo,

Obj. 4. The Government is mixed of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; ergo,
the people have some power in Government. Sol. Your first answer seems to
yield the thing: [ In a large sense, Authority may be acknowledged in the
people: As 1. when a man acts by counsel, he is then Lord of his own
action.] But that's nothing to the objection. The people of the Assizes act by
counsel, in approving the sentence: If you grant the Brethren no more, you
mock them, and grant them nothing. 2. But you grant them far more; [ Election
of Officers, concurrence in censures, determination of Synodall acts, etc. (you
might have added, Ordination, and then you had given them full Authority) by
these they have a great stroke or power in ordering Church affairs.] A great
stroke indeed; as full Authority as you give the Elders: And this you grant,
when you give your reason to the contrary, and would allow them only liberty:
[For (say you) no act of the peoples power or liberty is binding, unless the
authority of the Presbytery concur with it.] No more does any act of the
Presbytery bind, unless the power of the people join with it. So say your
Prefacers, Epist. p. 4. So say your self; when you allow them such a power, as
the want thereof retards the sentence. But why do you darken your own
meaning, by such ambiguous answers? when you grant the Government to be
democraticall, The way, 100
but not [meerely democraticall;] yea, (if I understand any thing) you make it
as merely democraticall, as Brownists themselves, when you give them power,
without any Officers, to choose, ordain, censure, even Officers themselves, as
we have often told you. I pray Sir, when the Brethren ordain, or censure
Officers, without a Presbytery, does not that act of theirs properly bind? It
must, or it is mere vanity, having no Presbytery to join with them: And if
so, is not this properly Authority without more ado?

But you would prove Elders to be the first Subject of Authority, from removal
of other Subjects: [They have is not from the Elders of other Churches; or from
a Synod: All Churches and all Elders are equal.] But 1. This is apparently
false in the Scripture way: For the Elders of the first Churches were ordained
by the Apostles and Evangelists, who were Elders of all Churches; and as
Elders, not as Apostles, ordained Elders, and so gave them their Authority
immediately from Christ. 2. Your reason, because they are all equal, will hurt
your self: For if that be a good reason why they cannot derive it from Elders
of the other Churches, because they are equal, it is much more strong against
you; they cannot derive it from the people, who are their inferiors: Besides,
by this rule, Elders of their own Church cannot ordain any Elders to that
Church, when they want; for they are all ^qu^ll: But by your favor, he that is
to receive the Office, and with it, the Authority of an Elder, is inferior to
those Elders who are to ordain him; for the lesser is blessed of the greater:
though when he is once ordained, he be their equal: And though the Elders of a
Synod be equal, singly considered; yet jointly, they are superior to any one
single, and have more Authority than he has; or else, all you speak of Synods
is but vanity: But if they have not their Authority derived from Elders of
other Churches, nor from Synods; nor from the Elders of their own Church,
because they are all equal; either they must derive it from the people, or
they have none of all; and so the people have as much Authority as any Elder of
them all; yea, in your way more.

3. The third branch of the third Propos. [Both Elders and Brethren together,
are the first subject of all power, needful amongst themselves] You prove it
by instance, 1. [In point of Ordination: which is complete, when the people
have chosen him, and the Presbytery of the Church have laid their hands upon
him.] But 1. I observe, that here you make Ordination an Act of Authority, and
place it in the Elders; ergo, either the Brethren cannot ordain Elders, which
yet you say they may; or else, they have Authority, which yet you seem to
deny. 2. Some of your Brethren here, hold Ordination to be nothing but a
ceremonial solemnity, the substance of a Ministers calling, is (say they) in
the peoples election; ergo, either Authority is in the people, who give the
substance; and liberty only in the Elders, who give but the ceremony: or the
calling of a Minister is complete without Ordination; and yet you require
Ordination to the integrity of it: But if the Brethren may ordain without
their Officers, then they alone are the first Subject not of Liberty only, but
of Authority also: And so this Proposition is needless.

A second Argument, is taken from [their independent and indispensable power in
Church censures, which are ratified in Heaven,] The same answer will serve to
this also: For first, the Brethren alone without Elders (say you) may censure,
and if rightly done, it is indispensable, not to be reversed by any power on
Earth, because ratified in Heaven; ergo, they are the first subject of all
Church Power needful within themselves. 2. And that the rather, if they can
ordain Elders too; for then the Elders derive their power from them. 3. But
suppose, (which is possible enough) the Brethren and Elders err in their
censure of a member, is not the censure then reversible? I ask, by whom? if
all power needful for themselves be within themselves, what shall the wronged
party do? Is he remedilesly miserable? If it be dispensable, and reversible,
it must be by some other Church or Cl^ssis, etc. But then, a Congregation of
Brethren and Elders, are not the first subject of all power needful amongst
themselves. If you say, you mean, when they walk in truth and peace; you
should yet have told us what the party must do, when they walk not in truth
and peace; And if they have not a power to right a wronged party, they have not
all power needful to be exercised among themselves.

The Objections by you brought and answered, rather concern the Episcopal,
than the Presbyteriall way, at least, some of them, only 2 or 3 may be
vindicated.

Obj 1. To tell the Church, is to tell the Presbytery of the Church. Sol. [We
deny not, the offense is to be told to the Presbytery; yet not to them, as the
Church, but as the guides of the Church.] Reply. This is partly to yield the
cause: For you grant that the business is to be told first to the Presbytery;
[ who if upon hearing the cause, and examining the witnesses, they find it ripe
for public censure, they are then to propound it to the Church, etc. And you
grant the people no more, but [consent to the judgment and sentence of the
Elders.] The Presbytery also are to admonish the party authoritatively; and if
he will not hear them, to pass the sentence upon him; ergo, the Presbytery is
the Church there meant, and not the people, who neither admonish, nor censure
authoritatively, but only discern the nature of the offense, and consent unto
the sentence: The Church there meant, is that part of the Church, which the
party refuses to hear; but he refuses to hear the Presbytery, who do speak
to him, not the people, who do not authoritatively speak to him; ergo, to
tell the Church, is to tell the Presbytery. Sol. 2. [The Church is never put
for the Presbytery alone in the New Testament.] Reply 1. This is to beg the
question: we say, it must so be understood in this place, and you do not
disprove it. Nay 2. you rather confirm it by your answer to the first
objection; Our Savior alludes to the Church-censure in the Jewish Church: But
there the Church censuring, was the Synagogue, a Court of the Consistory; ergo,
as shall further appear in the next.

Obj. 2. In the old Testament, the Congregation is often put for the Elders and
Rulers of the Church. Sol. [Not alone, but sitting in the presence of the
Congregation.] Reply: That is enough for our purpose: For we do not deny, but
the people might be present, to hear things then, and so they may now: But if
the Elders be called the Church, as distinct from the people, when they sat in
presence of the people, much more may they be called the Church, when they sit
alone. And to that custom of the Jews (your self acknowledge in answer to
the first objection does our Savior allude; when he says, [Tell the Church]
But the custom of the Jews, was to tell the Elders and Rulers, not the
people. And whereas you say: [If a sentence illegal was passed by them, the
people did sometimes protest against it, sometime refuse to execute it, and the
same they might and ought to do, at any time, in like cases.] Though this may
be true, when things are done in an illegal way, and evidently illegal (as
the instances are) yet it is a dangerous assertion to Government; for under
that pretense, people will take liberty to make void any sentence, if they
conceive it but illegal.

Obj. 3. By Church, he meant a Synod, or Classis of Presbyters of many
Churches. [ Sol. 1. We find not any where that a Church is put for a Synod of
Presbyteries.] Reply: The question is of this place, and you must not beg, that
it is not here meant of a Synod of Presbyteries. If it be meant but of the
Congregationall Presbytery, it quite destroys the power of the people: But we
do not say, it is directly meant of a Synod of Presbyteries, but by a just
consequence: If a Congregationall Presbytery be here meant (as we think it is)
to reclaim a particular offending party in a Congregation: Then by proportion,
here is meant a Synod of Presbyteries, when a whole Church erres, or is
heretical; or else, Christ has not provided so well for a whole Church, as
for a particular person. And thirdly, we cannot see a reason, why a Church may
not be taken for a Synod of Presbyteries, as well as a Synod may be called [A
Church of Churches,] as it is by your self, page 49. [A Congregation of
Churches, a Church of Churches; for what is a Synod, but a Church of Churches?]
so you.

Sol. 2. [As a Congregation cannot reach the removal of all offenses: so it
may be said, that it were not fit to trouble Synod with every offense; and
when they do meet, they may err also, and so may a general Council, and so
no remedy for them.]

Reply 1. We do not say that Synods are to be troubled with every small
offense, or to take the business of a Congregation out of their hands; but
only with greater matters, and when the Congregationall Presbytery cannot end
them, or is so bad it will not. 2. Synods and Councels may err, but not so
easily as a particular Congregation: And alicubi sistendum, there must be an
end of pursuit, and refer the business to the judgment of Jesus Christ, the
King of the Church. As in case of Parliaments, the highest Tribunal that we
have, they may err; and if they do, private persons must sit down, or
appeal to the next. But that is a strange assertion, [ That it was not the
purpose of Christ to prescribe a rule for the removal of all offenses out of
the Church; but only such private and less heinous, as grow notorious by
obstinacy: For if they be public, the Apostle gives another rule, to cast
such a person out of all communion, without that admonition, etc.] Reply: The
Apostle did not mean absolutely, that they should cast out the incestuous
person; but supposing his impenitency, and obstinacy, to give satisfaction: For
I cannot imagine, that the Apostle would have an humbled, penitent offender
cast out of all communion; And you know, it is supposed by many learned
Divines, the man was not excommunicated, but upon the charge, reproof, and
admonition, yielded and escaped the censure: Of which, more by and by.

But (say you) What if the whole Presbytery offend? or such a party as will
draw a faction in the Church? The readiest course is to bring the matter to a
Synod] But you have prescribed two other remedies elsewhere: 1. The Brethren
may withdraw; or 2. they may proceed to censure their whole Presbytery, that
is, (I think) to excommunicate them; why then should they trouble themselves
with a Synod, which is hardly procured? If the Congregation be found faithful
and willing to remove an offense, by due censure, why should the offense be
called up to more public Judicature, and the plaster made broader than the
sore?] They are your own words, page 42. I forbear the other objections.

Arg. 3. From the practice and example of the Church of Corinth.] Obj. This was
the act of Paul, no act of judicial authority in the Church, but rather of
subjection to his sentence, etc. Sol. [The judgment of Paul, was not a
judicial sentence, delivering him to Satan; but a judicious doctrine, and
instruction, teaching them what to do in that case.] Reply: Thus you may evade
that other Text, where yet you grant, that Paul alone did excommunicate
Alexander, and justify his doing of it, as [having in him the power of the
whole Church; and when absent from the Church, or party, he might use it.] Are
not the places parallel? I have delivered him to Satan; and I have judged
already, that such an one be delivered to Satan: Else it might be said, Paul
did not deliver Alexander to Satan, but only judged it doctrinally, that the
Church ought to excommunicate him; And that the Church did, by a juridicall
sentence, deliver the incestuous person to Satan, is not evident (as I said
before) but rather, that hearing of the Apostles sentence decreed against him,
he repented, and so the execution was stayed. Sufficient unto the man is the
rebuke of many, 2 Cor. 2.6] As for their forgiveness of him, it might be only
brotherly, by way of charity, as offended by him, not juridicall by way of
authority: For the brethren (by your own confession) had only Liberty, not
Authority, and ergo, could not authoritatively forgive him, as nor
authoritatively bind him: The same power binds and looses: But the Elders only
did or could authoritatively bind; ergo,

Obj. 2. Some in the Church of Corinth did it; viz. the Presbytery. Sol. [It is
apparent by the Text, that the Brethren concurred, and that with some act of
power; viz. such power as the want of putting it forth, retarded the sentence
and the putting it forth, was requ^site to the administration of the sentence.]
Reply: This is not evident in the Text; yea, if such power be in the Brethren,
surely it is more than liberty, it is direct authority; viz. a negative vote,
to retard the sentence, which is as much as the Elders have: If you mean only
a judgment of discretion, and a withdrawing, to execute the sentence, it is
true, that liberty they have, a rational consent, or dissent; but that is
rather a passive, than an active concurrence to the sentence. But the question
is, whether the sentence be null, if they will not concur to it: If so, then
the Apostles own sentence might have been nullified, when he delivered this
party, or Alexander to Satan; and he could not say, I have delivered him unto
Satan: For it was in the peoples power (and a liberty, you say, purchased for
them by Christ) to retard or speed the sentence. Not one of your reasons prove,
that the Brethren concurred actively to the sentence: For 1. the whole Church
might (and were) reproved, for not mourning, and for not withdrawing, for their
parts; not for not sentencing of him. 2. The Commandment was directed to the
Church, when gathered together, yet not to all alike; the presence of the
Brethren, the sentence of the Elders: Many things are so directed to a whole
Church, which yet must respectively be executed. As if the Apostle should say,
when you are all gathered together, I will that there be preaching and
administration of Sacraments; does this command concern actively the Brethren?
3. The Apostles words do not declare this act of theirs to be a judicial act:
when he says, [Doe not ^ou judge them that are within?] Even this first may be
referred to the Officers; and secondly, it is by your self understood of a
judgment of discretion, not of authority (of which we speak.) A judgment of
discretion, is allowed all the people at an Assizes; but this has no power at
all in it, properly so called: And truly, if the Apostles words carry any
color of judgment in the Brethren, it may seem to import a judgment of
authority, rather than of discretion; so he gives them more than you dare plead
for; though not more than, I fear, they will ere long usurp. 4. It is
granted, the Brethren may and must forgive him, as well as the Elders, but not
with one and the same kind of forgiveness. The people at an Assizes, do in
their judgment of discretion, acquit the party whom the Judge and Jury do
acquit, with the judgment of Authority. What poor and weak proofs are these,
for a matter of such moment? as easily denied, as affirmed.

Obj. 3. Corinth was a Presbyteriall Church. Sol. [No such thing appears.]
Reply: It more than probably appears, it being a Mother-City, where God had
much people, and they had many Elders and Teachers, with excellent gifts (as
you gran^) it is not likely therefore they had but one Congregation: And if
there were many, it may as probably be said, that this command was directed to
the Elders of several Congregations, met together, as the contrary can by you
be proved.

Arg 4. [ From the guilt of offense which lies upon every Church, when any
offense committed by their members, lies uncensured as on Pergamus, Thyatira,
etc.] Sol. It does not appear that those Churches were each, but one single
Congregation; but of some of them the contrary; as Ephesus, which had many
Elders, and much people converted, etc. And besides, I desire you would call to
mind, your own exposition of some of those Texts; when it is said, [To the
Angel of such a Church;] that is, say the Prelaticall party, To the Bishop:
you answer; Angel is put for Angels, The way, p. 49.
a company of Elders; [Not a single person, but the whole company of the
Ministers of the Church, (the whole Presbytery of persons, more than one), as
is evident, by his speech unto them as unto many; unto you, and some of you,
etc.] whence these 3. things may be collected: 1. That the guilt is not imputed
to the whole Church, but to the Angel of such a Church; that is, (say you) the
Ministers; which quite destroys your Argument. 2. That these Ministers were a
whole Presbytery; the whole company of the Ministers of the Church; therefore
its very probable, there were more Congregations than one, in each of those
Churches, and so we find Presbyteriall, not Independent Churches. 3. That the
Church is sometime taken for the Presbytery of the Church, which before you have
denied: However, I pray consider, that the Brethren are never called the Angels
of the Church; nor yet are the Ruling-Elders any where called Angels, but the
Ministers only, as you call these Angels: which makes it more than probable,
that it is spoken to a Presbyteriall Church, the Ministers of several
Congregations, even according to your own exposition; at least, to the
Presbytery of each Congregation, which confutes your assertion, that the
Brethren have any interest in the power of the Keys.

4. Propos. [In case a particular Church be disturbed with error, or scandal,
and the same maintained by a faction amongst them. Now a Synod of Churches, or
of their Messengers, is the first subject of that power and authority, whereby
error is judicially convinced and condemned, the truth searched out, and
determined, and the way of truth and peace declared, and imposed upon the
Churches.

This Proposition you undertake to make good by two Arguments: First, [ From
the want of power in such a Church, to pass a binding sentence; because the
promise of binding and loosing is made to a Church: 1. not erring; 2. agreeing
truth, 18.17, etc.

In answer hereunto, I will not say, That this Argument proves not the
proposition; for it proves indeed, that a particular Church is not the first
Subject of this power and authority, but it does not prove that a Synod is: But
this I say, that by this way of arguing, a Church can seldom or never have
power to bind or loose, when there is not an universal agreement, which how
rarely it happens, experience tells us now, and will do more hereafter, in your
own Churches: Few Churches there are, that so walk together in peace and
truth, that there is no disagreeing party amongst them; therefore that power is
seldom in their hands, but upon every difference or faction amongst them,
their power reverts to a Synod; and so a Synod must be called (which is not
easily done) and troubled with every difference of a Congregation; which you
impute (unjustly) as a fault, upon the Presbyteriall way. 2. You have otherwise
determined in the way. Suppose the whole Presbytery be in an error or scandal
(as they may) shall the faction now divest the Brethren of their power and
authority, to censure and cast them out? which you have fully given them there,
and here do seem to take away. 3. You mitigate the business much; when you
say, [A Synod of Churches is the first subject of that power, whereby error is
convinced, etc. and the way of truth and peace declared and imposed on the
Church.] For all this is only a doctrinall declaration, and imposition, not
authoritatively, by way of jurisdiction. The censure you reserve to the
Congregation, where you had placed it before. But what if the Synod of Churches
err or disagree, and there be a faction also amongst them? you will know your
own words: [An erring, or disagreeing Church binds not.] So all will come to
nothing: The censure of the Synod binds not; for they can but declare what is
truth: The censure of the particular Church binds not; for they are in a
faction: so you give the Brethren a power, and presently take it away again.
If then a considerable party fall into error or faction, by variance, they
presently lose (like the Be her sting) their power of binding and loosing; and
if this be but once known (as it cannot be hid) how easy is it for any
Delinquent to make a party, or faction, and so escape all binding censure;
seeing neither the Church erring, or at variance, nor a Synod has any binding
power?

Your second Argument, is, [ From the pattern, Acts 15.1. etc. When there grew
error and faction in the Church of Antioch, they determine not the case, but
referred it to the Apostles and Elders.] But first, the Church of Jerusalem did
only doctrinally declare the truth; they did not censure the erring Brethren
(so you pleaded above) but referred that to the Church of Antioch. 2. If
declaration had been sufficient, the Church of Antioch needed not to have sent
so far as Jerusalem; Paul and Barnabas were able enough to declare the truth
at home; and so, that particular Church, though erring and at variance, was the
first subject of that power, here given to a Synod. 3. You mislay the
comparison; when you say, As in the case of an offense of a faithful brother,
persisted in, the matter is at last judged in a church, which is a Congregation
of the faithful: so in the offense of a Church, the matter is at last judged
in a congregation of Churches, etc.] For the judgment is not of the same kind,
but you do merely aequivocate with us. The judgment of the Church upon a
Brother, is juridicall, even by way of censure, of excommunication: But the
judgment of a Synod is only doctrinall and declarative. If you grant any more,
you and we are agreed.

Before I conclude this proposition, I only animadvert these few things: 1.
That you grant the Assembly of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Acts 15.1.
to have been a formal Synod, wherein your Disciples here do descent from you,
as appears in their Epistle; and call it only a Consultation, by way of
Arbitration: To which Arbitration, it seems the Church of Antioch was not
bound to stand; for they did not (for ought appears) promise or bind
themselves to stand to their arbitrament; nor might they so bind themselves (by
your doctrine, and theirs too) for that were [to give away their privilege
purchased by the blood of Christ.] 2. You yield also, The Keys, p. 57.
that the Apostles did not act herein as Apostles, and determine the matter by
Apostolical Authority; but as Elders, in an ordinary way, as the whole
proceeding in the business proves, as you well observe: Yet your Scholars
here, submit not to your doctrine, as they profess in their Epistle; though
they neither show any reason for it, nor confute yours. 3. You call a Synod a
Congregation of Churches (for what is a Synod but a Church of Churches) and yet
deny, that a Presbytery of Churches is ever called a Church. 4. You say: The
Elders there (at Jerusalem) were not a few, the Believers in Jerusalem being
many thousands.] Therefore, say we, they were more than could meet together in
one place, and yet called but one Church: whence we may infer, There was not
an Independent Church of one, but a Presbyteriall Church, of many
Congregations. Lastly, you say; [This pattern plainly shows to whom the Key
of Authority is committed, when there grows offense and difference in a
Church.] But the Key of Authority (if you remember what you said above) has
this power in it, as to administer the Seals, so to bind an obstinate offender
under excommunication; and to release and forgive him upon repentance. Grant
but your Synod of Churches, such a Key of Authority, to bind an offending
party, or Church, and to release them upon repentance, and the matter is at an
end. But if you grant no more, but a doctrinall declarative power, you grant
but what every Pastor single has. And whether this be the Key of Authority,
given by our Savior to the Church, let every indifferent Reader judge.

And now you come to your Corollaries, concerning the Independency of Churches,
to show how they are, or are not Independent: Wherein, I purpose not to follow
you; and that for this reason; because, for the most part, you do but repeat
what you have said before: You say, your self, [You take the first Subject,
and the Independent Subject to be all one.] Therefore, say I, if the Church of
a particular Congregation be not the first Subject of all Church Power, as is
evinced above, neither is it the Independent Subject of that power. I have only
some things to observe in your second Corollarie, and then I shall conclude:
You say, [ The establishment of pure Religion, and the Reformation of
corruptions in Religion, do much concern the civil peace: If Religion be
corrupted; there will be war in the gates, Judges 5.8. and no peace to him
that comes in, or goes out, 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5, 6. But where Religion
rejoices, the civil State flourishes.] And this you truly refer to the
Civil Magistrate; [partly by commanding, and by stirring up the Churches and
Ministers thereof, to go about it, in their spiritual way: partly also, by
civil punishments upon the wilful opposers and disturbers of the same.]
Whereupon I desire to know, 1. By what Authority our Brethren here in
Old-England, having not only Christian Magistrates, covenanting to reform; but
also, calling and commanding an Assembly of Divines, to reform according to
the Word, do take upon them to set up, and establish a form of
Church Government of their own, before they have demonstrated it to be the way
of God; to the great disturbance of the peace, both of Church and State? 2. I
do demand also, why many of your disciples here, plead for a Toleration of all
Religions (which you will not tolerate in New England) which they call Liberty
of conscience, and the prosecution of such disturbers, they call persecution:
When as they may hear you say, [It belongs to the Magistrate to punish the
wilful opposers and disturbers of Reformation:] And more then that, you tell
them; [ Of the Times of the New Testament it is prophesied, that in some cases,
capital punishment shall proceed against false Prophets, and that by
procurement of their nearest kindred, Zach. 13.3. And the execution thereof, is
described, Rev. 16.4. to 7. Where the rivers and fountains of waters (that is,
the Priests and Jesuits, that conveigh the Religion of the Sea of Rome,
throughout the Countries) are turned to blood, that is, have blood given them
to drink by the civil Magistrate.] Does this hold true only against Priests
and Jesuits: and are all other erroneous, schismatic, blasphemous Sectaries
to be tolerated? I leave them to consider it, and you and them to reconcile
this and other your many differences and contradictions amongst your selves:
And when you are well agreed in the way, we shall consider how far you agree
with the Truth.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. l. 22. read offender, (and often, after) p. 23. l. last r.
institution. p. 24. l. 4. r. institution. p. 25. l. 16. r. for. p. 26. l. 26.
for. 1. r. 15. p. 30. ^. 23. r. except. p. 32. l. 15. r. whom. p. 34. l. last
but one, r. Counsel. p. 35. l. 8. r. Presbyters. p. 45. l. 17. put out the
second (in) p. 53. l. last, for And, r. from. p. 55. l. 2. for fear, r. hear.
p. 76. l. 10. for of, r. at.


