CERTAIN QUAERES FOR The Public Good, CONCERNING The avoiding of multitudes of
unnecessary Orders, delays, charges and trouble in Courts, called, English
Courts, OR, Courts of Equity.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Leach. 1647. June 28th.

Certain Quaeres for the public good, concerning the avoiding of multitudes of
unnecessary Orders, delays, charges and trouble in Courts, called, English
Courts, or, Courts of Equity.
WHereas it is and has been generally reported that diverse have been and
usually are put to diverse unnecessary and excessive charges, by Registers, and
Enterers, and Writers of Orders, their Deputies, Clerks and Agents in such
Courts, and that diverse and sundry unnecessary Orders have been made in such
Courts, and drawn out much longer then is or has been necessary for Officers
only gains, troublesome and burdensome to such Courts and Counsel there, and
hurtful to suitors there: and that there has been such multitudes of such
Orders made in such Courts that diverse who have followed and prosecuted their
causes in such Courts, have given long and much attendance before they could
procure any Entries or Copies thereof to be made, by reason (as it is thought)
of money or rewards given or promised to Registers, their Deputies, Clerks,
Servants, or Agents, to draw up such Orders stricter, or to some other sense
then such Courts did truly direct and order, under color whereof diverse have
reported, that many good causes have miscarried, and that in many just causes
much charge, perplexity, trouble and travel has been to resort to the
Council in such suits, and after to the Chancellor, Judge or Judges, who made
the same, to have the same drawn and entered according to the true sense thereof.

And whereas it has been also generally reported, that many others (who have
not undergone such trouble, perplexity and toil, before they have procured or
could procure such Orders to be drawn up, according to the true sense of the
Chancellor, Court, Judge, or Judges, who made or pronounced the same) have been
at great charges in giving large rewards to such Registers, their Deputies or
Clerks, (who have agitated therein.) And whereas it is and has been generally
reported, that such Courts have been so full of business, that many suitors
could have no proceedings there without great trouble and charge, and that
diverse before they could have any end of their suits there, have spent as much
or more then that which they have sued for there has been in value, besides
their trouble and perplexity of mind for many years together, and that diverse
others by such occasions, have been almost distracted in mind, and others
utterly undone, and that others have given over and left good causes for lost,
and proceeded no further in them, by reason of the extreme charge and trouble,
which they have not been able to undergo after they have been brought into and
entangled in suit in such Courts, some against their wills.

1. Quere. WHether it be beneficial and good for the Commonwealth, that no
motion or petition shall be made, moved or preferred in or to any such Court,
or to any Chancellor, Judge or Judges of the same in or concerning any suit or
cause there depending, but that first the matter to be moved or mentioned in
such Petition, shall be put into writing, and a copy or note thereof delivered
to the party Plaintiff or Defendent, against or concerning whom such motion or
Petition shall be made, moved, preferred or delivered, or to his Clerk,
Attorney, or Solicitor, in such cause or suit, or left at his, their, or one
of their dwelling house or houses, or place or places of abode, under the hand
of a Counselor learned in the Law.

2. Quere. Whether it be convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, that
within some convenient time next after the delivery of such note or writing, as
aforesaid, that such party Plaintiff or Defendent, his Clerk, Attorney or
Solicitors, (to whom such note or writing was delivered, or shall be so
delivered) shall deliver to or leave as aforesaid for the other party
Plaintiff or Defendent, (to whom, for whom, or on whose behalf such note or
writing was or shall be so delivered or left) or to his Clerk, Attorney, or
Solicitor, an answer in writing to such first note or writing, or leave the
same in writing at his, their, or one of their dwelling house or houses, or
usual place or places of abode, and that each party may reply, and the other
rejoyn, etc. the one party of them after the other of them, in or by some short
convenient time in writing to be delivered or left as aforesaid, till the doubt
of the matter be agreed upon, or put to the question, or stated in the nature
of a case?

3. And Quere. Whether it be not convenient and beneficial for the
Commonwealth, that if either party, Plaintiff or Defendent do not consent
the one party of them to the demand or request of the other of them, that then
each party of them who does or shall so petition or move, (showing and
expressing to the other of them some reason in such writings or notes
respectively, for what cause or reason, by and according to former presidents
or orders, it was and should be requisite and necessary that such the request
of him who shall so petition or move, ought or should be granted) that then and
not before either of such parties may petition or move to or in such Court, or
to such Chancellor, Judge or Judges for his demand in such his writing or note
to be granted, and show forth such notes or writings on either side to be read,
viewed, and considered of in such Courts?

4. And Quere. If it be not convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth if
the demand or request of such motion or petition shall be granted or ordered
against such party, Plaintiff or Defendent against whom such Petition, motion,
or demand is or shall be made, (notwithstanding any thing to the contrary
thereof to be alleged or expressed in his writing so delivered, or left, or to
be delivered, or left) that then such party Plaintiff or Defendent for not
consenting to such motion, petition, or demand, or putting into such writing so
to be delivered, or left any vain or fruvilous matter not material against
such request or demand, shall be compelled to pay the other of them the
ordinary costs, charges, and expenses, of the other of the said parties, if
such motion or Petition be not granted upon some matter, for which there was no
former order or leading president in such like case?

5. Quere. If it be not convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, that
such party (against whom such petition or demand shall be granted or ordered as
aforesaid, or that shall consent to the demand of such motion or petition of
either of such parties, Plaintiff or Defendent) may be compelled to perform
the same Petition, demand or order, which shall be so granted or ordered, or
consented to, without further trouble or charge, under some penalty?

6. Quere. Whether it be convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, to
prevent excessive charges and troubles occasioned by Registers, and their
Clerks, Deputies, and Agents, that such Registers, their Clerks, Agents and
Deputies, shall in and to such note or writing, write what such Court,
Chancellor, Judge or Judges thereof do, or shall order or adjudge of, or
concerning the same and no more, without rehearsing or reciting any of the
matters or contents of any such notes or writings: and that after if any such
parties or either or any of them (within some convenient time) shall set down
in writing under his Counsels hand, and deliver to such Register, his Deputy,
Clerk, or Agent, exceptions against any part of the writing down of such order
and not otherwise, such Registers shall attend such Chancellor, Judge or
Judges, who have made or shall make such order or orders, and to alter or amend
the same, according as such Chancellor, Judge or Judges do, or shall sign or
write to the same, and after to enter so much only in a Book as such Register
or Registers shall write, and such Chancellor, Judge or Judges so sign (if any
need of such signing be) in or to such writing or writings, with the parties
names, and the day when the motion or petition was granted, and to keep safely
in an Alphabeticall manner such notes or writings, together with the
subscription or writing of such note, or writing by such Register, signed by
such Judge or Judges, for further satisfaction of the Court, and either party
Plaintiff or Defendent, or any other concerning the same, if need should
require: And that Registers have only a competent gain (according to rates
usually taken in other Courts by such as have deserved as much as any such
Register etc. deserve for any thing they have written or done) in like case,
for what they write, or copy, or do, and no more.

7. Quere. What right (if they have any at all) have Registers, their Clerks or
Deputies in such Court, to exact such excessive sees as they have taken, and
usually take in such Courts. And quere, whether it may not be found what such
persons anciently had, if records be well searched and examined?

8. And Quere, if it be not fit to be discovered, how and by what degrees from
time to time excessive sums of money have been exacted by them, and what
lawful authority (if they have any at all) they have or can show, to receive,
challenge, or demand any thing near so much as they have usually exacted and
taken, and what authority they have to hinder the proceedings of just Suites
till their large demands be given them?

9. Quere. What reason or equity there is or can be, that such Registers,
their Clerks, Agents, or Deputies in such Courts, should can or may exact above
ten times as much in such Courts, as other Officers of like nature take and
receive, and have usually taken and received in other Courts for the like
things as they do or have done?

10. Quere. Whether delivering notes and writings as aforesaid each to other,
will not avoid many unnecessary References to Masters of the Chancery, and
other Referrers, and thereby save much trouble and expense.

11. Whether it be convenient for the public good, that every Register, etc.
should be chosen out of Clerks, experienced in that way, for their honesty,
experience, and ability only, without money or rewards, and that a competent
gain only may be allowed him to take entirely to himself without account to
any, and whether any but such as have been employed as Registers or their
Clerks, can well understand such Office under a long times practice.

Other Quaeres concerning other proceedings in such Courts, and diverse other
things, shortly are intended to be published, with additions to diverse
Quaeres, concerning Bills, Answers, Replications, Rejoynders, etc. in such
Courts, and taking away the extreme and unnecessarie charges, troubles, and
long delays in just causes in such Courts, and abateing those that may be for
contention and trouble only, and the preservation of many honest men from
great losses, and others from undoing thereby, without hindrance to any but
unnecessary Officers, crept into such Offices without any lawful authority:
and how many hundred thousand pounds yearly may be saved to the Commonwealth
by reducing such things, and others written to be published to the lawful
proceedings, and taking away the unlawfulness thereof, contrived by unlawful
and exacting Officers for their own only gain.

FINIS.

