The Beginning, Progress, and End of Man.
HEre Adam first leads up the Van,
(true Mirror of unstained life;)
Till that he grew a Married Man,
turn up the Leaf and see his Wife.
depiction of Adam, covered by a figleaf, holding a flower

Here Cain the first of Men by Birth,
brings Offerings with his Brother;
Cain brings the first Fruits of the Earth,
turn up and see the other.
depiction of Cain making offering corn on an altar

The Lion roused his floating Mane,
in Curls, displays his fire Breast,
He Rampant breaths forth high disdain,
lift up and see a stranger Beast.
depiction of lion rampant

But see what Providence has done,
the Child is safe, the Eagles flown;
His Heart now after Gold does run,
turn down and see what there is shown.
depiction of child holding a staff

What Stars can this my bliss destroy,
that have so many Bags in store;
Vain Man forbear this flattering joy,
turn down and thou will mind me more
depiction of man holding moneybags

Eve in her Virgins blush Arrayed,
her Face more fair, her smiles are freer;
But would you see a stranger Maid,
turn down the Leaf and you shall see her
depiction of mermaid, holding a flower and combing her hair

Eyes look not on the Mermaids face,
and Ears forbear her Song;
Her Face has an alluring Grace,
more charming is her Tongue.
Here Abel comes and brings to God
the best and youngest of his Fold;
But would you learn his period,
turn down the Leaf and it behold.
depiction of Abel offering a burnt lamb on an altar

depiction of Cain wrestling with Abel

Accursed Cain! what do thou do?
must Brothers Murder thus begin?
And one Man dye, e're more then two
as yet were born, to mourn thy sin?
The Griffins Head and Wings unto
the Lions Back and Legs are joined;
Turn down the lower Leaf, and you
a new and stranger sight shall find.
depiction of eagle with a swaddled baby in its claws

An Eagle here which is displayed,
does gripe (alas) a ^ovely Prey;
Why is there help so ^ong delayed,
to rescue this sweet Babe away?
Possessed with Gold in every part,
a sudden joy and health does warm him,
His heavy purse makes light his heart,
and now he boasts what power can harm him
depiction of a purse of money

A Heart turned upside down, wholly
fixed on this worlds unconstant wealth;
Sick of a greedy Melancholy,
turn up and find its way to Health.
On this false World vain was my stay,
and empty was my Laughter;
I go before and lead the way,
and thou came Jogging after.
depiction of skeleton holding an arrow and pikehead

Dropsies draw nigh, the Fevers burn him
the Chollick girds and lays him waste;
Consumptions threat to dust to turn him,
turn up and you shall read his last.
Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guiltspur-street.

Licensed and Entered, According to Order.


