THE Depths of Satan DISCOVERED: OR, The Jesuits last Design to Ruin RELIGION.
BEING, Some Observations upon a Pamphlet, called, The Swords Abuse Asserted: By
JOHN VERNON.

Presented to the Consideration Of the Army. City. Kingdom.


By PHILOPATRIUS PHILALETHES.

REV. 2.24. To as many as have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the
Depths of Satan.

2 PET. 2.18, 19. For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity, they
allu^e through the Lusts of the flesh, etc. Those that were cl^a^e es^aped from
them who live in Error. While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are
the servants of Corruption.

London, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1649.

To the truly Christian Reader.
IT is very well known, to every understanding Christian, that there are two
maine Pillar^ of a Reformed State, the two great Ordin^nces of God. Magistracy
and Ministry: And its as easily obseruable, that many there are, (whether
ignorantly, or intentially) who are, Sampson* like, laying hold of those two
Pillars, though they pull down therewith, the house of the Kingdom and
Church, upon their own and others heads. How much the latter, (the Ministry)
has been undermind in all times, especially within these last dozen years,
there is no observing Christian but has taken notice. What Innovasions and
subscriptions, have been Imposed upon godly and faithful Ministers, by the
Prelates, to drive them from their Stations, and out of the Kingdom, who does
not yet remember? Within these last seven years the same Design has been
carried on, bu^ in another dress. The great sesuiticall Project (for they lie
behind the Curtain, and Act it) has been to make the Ministers (whom they
could not corrupt) and Ministry, vile and contemptible, which has proceeded
to a very high degree. The (...) to effect it has been this: First, To pour
out upon them whole Dungcarts of the vilest Reproaches in Pamphlets, that ever
Christian ear heard, thereby to expose them to the scorn of the people, and
so to nullify the Success of their Ministry. Secondly, To cry down their
Office, either as Antichristian, or none, Setting up Preachers of the basist of
the people, (as Jeroboam made Priests) admiring and adoring them above the most
Learned, Faithful, able Min^sters of the G spell; from whom, as Instruments
under G d, they re^^^ved the knowledge and grace they have, (if they have any)
yet now contemn them (which true grace cannot do) as the dirt under their
feet. Thirdly, To cry down Learning, Arts, Universities, as useless;
pretending to new Revelations, which are the m^er delusions of Satan. Fourthly,
The last, but not least destructive, to cry down their settled Maintenance by
Tithes* and leave them to the cold and comfortlesse-Charitie of the people,
which will starve them out that are in, and keep others from entering in. (This
alone will do it) if the rest fail.

For the former (the Magistracy) it has been the long policy of Antichrist;
to persuade the world, that the Christian Magistrate, has nothing at all to
do in matters of Religion, that so he might usurp that power into his own
hands. This damnable Doctrine, destructive to Religion, to State and Church,
has long been contended against by all the Reformed Churches, and their
Learned Champions.

And little could we expect, that any men, that pretend to Reformation, should
herein have complied with them. But our fear and jealousy is, they are acted
and agitated, either by strong delusions of Satan, or by the subtle
Insinuations of disguised Jesuits, who have now at last transfrom'd themselves
into Angels of Light, in stead of their former fierce heat. It Is known to all
the world, that the Protestant Religion in England is settled by Parliamentarie
Power, and Laws by them established: And whilst that stands in its
faithfulness and vigor, Popery is not like to enter here. Many ways have
been attempted, either to corrupt it, or break it, in former and later times;
but, blessed be God, all in vain. But now of late, there is at once a double
design upon it; to break the Being of it, and the Authority of it in matters
of Religion, together, or if not both, the latter. And this is the design of
the Pamphlet, entitled, The Swords abuse asserted. Whither this Gentleman, the
Author of it, or any in the Army, have such Intentions, I dare not say; but the
Positions, lately offered to the world, do clearly ponderate that way. This I
find to be his Principle, destructive enough, which ^he asserts, page 15. That
Christians and Heathens in Civil Affairs, are alike subjected to the Civil
Sword, but neither subject in Religious causes; and there can be no Restraint,
where there must be no Superiority; than which, no Jesuit could have spoken
worse. This he obscurely hinted in his Title Page, but kept it for a Reserve,
till he had baffled his Readers eyes with some appearance of reasons against
Restraint, which is but one part of the Magistrates power. We shall weigh what
he says, and clear up to the Reader, The Depths of Satan veiled therein.

The Depths of Satan DISCOVERED.
Quaere.
Whether the Civil Magistrate, though he shall not compel, yet may ^ot
restrain those who profess not Christianity, from divulging their
Principles, especially by visible worship, or practice in Idolary?

BEfore I come to debate this Controversy, I shall say something by way of
distinction, to the stating of the question.

1. For the Title of the Book, it might very well pass, in a right sense, as
applied to the distempers of the Times. If he mean it of them, to whom he
speaks, as he seems to do in that Dedication, A word to the Army, viz. That
it is an Abusing of the Martial Sword, to take upon them to determine of
matters of Religion, or to take power to themselves to limit or extend the
Liberty thereof: We should easily agree with him, to assert it a very great
Abuse, for them, a Parliament sitting, (from whom they have their Commission
only for Martial Affairs) to intermedle in matters of Religion, as beyond
their Sphere, as he speaks. But if he mean, page 3.
(as he expressly discovers himself, page 15.) That the Supreme Magistrate,
hearing the Civil Sword, has nothing to do, about matters of Religion, he
abuses his Reader and his own Reason, to undertake to assert it; as shall
appear in the sequel.

2. We distinguish of Temple-worke, (as his Title Page calls it:) If he mean
it thus, That the Sword is an useless Tool (his own phrase) for the first
Erecting or Constituting Members of a Church, gathered out from Heathens, that
is for the Conversion of men to the Christian Faith; its readily granted: For
Christ's subjects, must be all volunteers, a willing people. But if he mean,
that in a constituted Church, the Christian* Magistrate has nothing to do, to
restrain men from the violation of Christian Truths, or the Rules of Religious
worship, in the external Profession and exercises thereof; he shall find
himself miserably mistaken. Conversion of Souls belongs primarily to Christ,
by the operation of his Spirit; instrumentally to the Ministers of Christ: But
when men are converted to the faith and profession of the Gospel, and have
embraced the Truths and worship of it, if then they shall blaspheme or corrupt
those Truths, or profane that worship, the Magistrate, (we think) has power
to restrain, yea, and to punish them for that violation.

3. Conversion it self, is two ways considerable; either with respect to the
Conscience, which we may call the internal real Conversion to the Faiths
being made thereby tru^ believers; and this is the work of Christ's
Prophetical and Kingly Office; or else with respect to the outward Profession
of the Faith: This latter is the object of the Magistrates power, in regard of
regulation of it, according to the Rules of the word; for he is made the Keeper
of both Tables, in regard of the external acts and exercises thereof.

4. Its one thing for the Magistrate to prescribe a Rule of Faith (as the Pope
presumes) or a form of worship of God; another to look to the preservation of
both (prescribed by Christ) from the corruption of Seducers and False Teachers,
or the violation of profane men: As he, page 4.
The ordering of the visible worship of God, as he speaks, and the ordaining of
the Rule of Faith, whereunto all are alike subject, etc. belong entirely and
solely to Jesus Christ.

5. We note one notable fallacy all along this Dispute^^ Pamphlet; that is,
Petitio principii, that he seems to insinuate it as granted, (which many
others of his way do) That there is no Rule of Faith or Worship determined, or
held forth in the word; but all is now Skepticall: (Sure we are, there is
scarcely one Truth but it is questioned in this Age.) For if there be any one
Fundamental Principle of Truth, or Rule of Worship, held forth clearly in the
Scripture; the Blaspheming of that Truth, and teaching men so; the Profaning
of that Worship, and practicing so, may be restrained by the Magistrate; yea,
and punished too, as we think: And yet this very Restraint or punishment is
deceyed and beaten down by the force of this man's Arguments; which what
strength they have, shall now be considered.

First, he says; His capacity cannot discern the distinction betwixt the
Compulsive and Restrictive Power; being fully persuaded, the former is
sufficiently included in the latter; And he who has power for the latter,
shall by frequent restraining, upon every frivolous occasion, make me
restless till I read his pleasure: That I worship as he worships, and so I
feel his power to the former, etc.

To which I answer: First, Surely then his capacity is very narrow and
shallow, the distinction is so clear and evident. An instance is ready in
Nebem. 13. concerning the fourth Commadement, one of the first Table, and a
part of worship: Nehemiah did not compel the Heathen Merchants to keep the
Sabbath in the prescribed manner, yet did he restrain them from polluting of
it. Secondly, It is so far from Truth, that the fromer is included in the
latter, as that instance and many more demonstrate, that it is rather true
backward; that the latter Restriction is included in the former Compulsion, not
Compulsion in Restriction. Thirdly, The Jewish Magistrates did restrain
Heathens from the Profanation of the Sabbath, and other Services, yet never
did, nor might compel them to the observation of them till they voluntarily
Proselyted: And this Restraint was thus far beneficial, that it prevailed to
bring them to Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, that they might enjoy the
Privileges of it: And if Restraint of Seducers and false-Worshippers have the
same effect upon them, to bring them to embrace the true Faith and right
Worship of God, I know no hurt they have by it. A Stranger (said the Law) shall
not eat of the Passover, nor enter into the Temple till circumcised; And this
difference in partaking of many privileges, was a mercy to the Gentiles, to
win them to come in, for the privilege sake. There are many such Laws of
Restraint in all States, which yet never come to Compulsion; as he cannot but
know. But,

Though the Restrictive may be different, yet it ever cente^'d in the
Compulsive; and the most cruel of Tyrants have first appeared in the
Restrictive, etc. But this, if it be not a contradiction, is contrary to what
he said before: There he said, Compulsion was included in Restriction: Now
Restriction centers in Compulsion. Secondly, That word (Ever) is false, and
contrary to manifold experience, as before. And mark the Logic of these men;
they commonly conclude a general, from one or two particulars. Tyrants, (as
the Pharisees and Jews) have sometimes appeared in the Restrictive, before the
Compulsive; no Restriction ever centers in Compulsion. Thirdly, Nor is the
Restraint, to force them that obey it not, to the contrary practice: Nor does
Compulsion come as the consequent thereof: If any punishment follow, it is for
disobedience to the Law of Restraint, E. G. Nehemiah restraines the Heathens
for selling wares on the Sabbath days; and threatens to lay them in durance,
if they did transgress that Prohibition: but he never intended by the
Restraint or punishment, to compel them to observe the Sabbath, as the Jews
did, in Religious Sanctification of it. Lastly, To prevent this consequent
Compulsion, let it be made a Law, that no man, shall openly Blaspheme the Truth
of God, or Profane the worship of God; and if he do not, he shall not be
compelled to believe as the Magistrate believes, or worship as the Magistrate
worships: And as this may suffice for his security against Compulsion, so it
clearly puts a difference between Restriction and Compulsion: Consider the
next.

Secondly, Hereby (says he) I make the Civil Magistrate Judge of
Christianity, which as none can assume without sin, 2 Cor. 1.24. So none can
consent to, without being guilty of strong endeavors to dethrone the Lord
Jesus to whom alone this judgment is committed, and whose Scepter only can
sway the Conscience, etc.

1. Let him apply this to the state of the Jews, and see how in consequent it
is. The Magistrate then had power to judge of the Rule of Worship, without
sin; else, how could he Restrain men (or punish them) for transgressing the
Rule? And if the Rule of Christian Truth, and Worship, be as clearly prescribed
in the new Testament (as it is) why may not the Christian Magistrate, be as
competent a Judge of Christianity, and Restrain from the violation of it?

2. It is equivocall, the word (Judge) and so he deludes us: It is one thing to
be a Lawmakers, which is (as his Text has it) to have Dominion over their
Faith, by prescribing a Rule of Faith, or Worship: Another to be a Judge of the
Violation of that prescribed Rule: The Apostle Paul himself was a competent
Judge of the Rule of Faith, and so of the Violation of it; though he was not
the Lord of their Faith, to coin new Articles of Faith, without command from
Christ: Say the same of the prescribed Worship: Nor is this to consent to the
dethroning of Jesus Christ, nor to take upon them to Sway the Conscience: For
we suppose the Rule of Worship prescribed, and the Magistrate to have power
only upon the external man, to preserve from the violation of that worship;
not to Compel or Sway Consciences or Hearts, to worship God aright with
internal worship. Therefore this Disputer, (whether ignorantly or
fallaciously, I know not) deceives his disciples with a double false
supposition: First, That there is no certain, He cannot expect a concurrence
of any party considerable in the Nation, in Principles of Christianity, page
8.
determined, clear Rule of Faith or Worship, in the Scriptures, but all is
doubtful and uncertain, without Revelation: Secondly, That the Magistrate by
this Restriction; intends Compulsion, and that of Conscience, to believe or
practice, what it does not believe, to be the Rule of Faith or Worship: And
withal, that those that grant him this power of Restraint, give him a Power to
Sway Conscience, so to believe or practice; which we disclaim as much as
himself. Nor does the Magistrate by this Restraint of Seducers or Idolaters,
take upon him to convert Souls, (the work of Jesus Christ alone) but to keep
them from infecting others, by false Doctrine or false Worship; and in the end,
to reduce the E^roneous to the right ways of God.

3. The instance of Paul's Restrictive Power on Mars-hill, in quite beside the
question: He was a Minister, not a Magistrate; and the work being Conversion
of Heathens to the Faith: for the Constitution of a Church, not in a Church
Constituted: For I demand, If after Paul had settled a Church, and given them
the Rule of Faith and Worship, any Professor thereof should have Apostated
from both, or either; whether he would not by his Apostolical power, have
restrained him, by Church censures? If so, his Texts and proofs falls as
heavily upon the Ecclesiastical power, as upon the Civil: and all his
absurdities pretended here, fall upon S. Paul: He makes himself a Judge of
Christianity, and consents to the dethroning of Christ; takes upon him to Sway
the Conscience, and convert hearts, which is peculiar to the Scepter of Christ,
etc. But this Doctrine, tends evidently to nothing but Skepticisme, and
Profaneness; that every man may not only believe, but publish and practice
Errors and Idolatry, without control, either of Magistrate or Minister. And
thither we see it inclines apace, and there we fear it will end, if not
betimes prevented. But further,

He gives a caution: That if Christ send a Servant, saying, What I have
revealed to you in secret, preach you on the house tops. Go to the public
Synagoge in this Season of their assembling, which otherwise you cannot
procure; Go, I say, and reason with them, for they are in all things too
Superstitious: Do not you run the hazard of restraining in this case, under
pretense of disturbance: If their public way be according to the way of
Christ, the privilege of Disputing is according to the Directory of Christ, 1
Cor. 14, 22. It not, etc.

To this we say, First, This man seems to be a mere Skeptic, and (as was
said before) to suppose there is no Rule of Truth or Worship prescribed; and the
times to be, as in the Apostles days, before the New Testament was written:
And withal, he seems to be a Familist, expecting Revelations, which he
insinuates in those words, [What I have revealed to you in secert] And yet
before, he calls the Army to direct themselves [by Christ's proclaimed Law as
their Line; at least for the work of his own worship and Temple, page 3.] and
to measure their proceedings herein by the pattern of his Scriptures.] But it
is no new thing for Errors to intersere and contradict themselves. For, if
there be any certain Rule of Truth or Wo^ship, what reason is there, that any
man, under pretense of New Light, should have liberty to dispute it? Is not
this a plain disturbance of the Church? Suppose the public way be the Way of
Christ, why should any man dispute it over and over again? What need he go
and reason with them, who are in nothing Erroneous or Superstitious, but
observant of the way of Christ? Will Christ send men to disturb his Settled
Truths and Worship? And yet* if every man, that will pretend a new Revelation,
may have liberty to dispute the old ways of Christ, and by a subtle wrangling
Jesuiticall wit, puzzle weak Christians with new Skepticismes, nothing will
more disturb the Peace of the Church, as was evident once in the Church of
Galatia; and is in Ours at this day. I would they were cut off, that thus
Trouble it; The privilege of Disputing, which he pleads from 1 Cor. 14. was
before the Rule was written, when there was an extraordinary gift of
Prophesying, and new Revelations were discovered concerning the Truths of the
Gospel: But the same Apostle censures this liberty after the Truth and Rule
thereof was clearly delivered, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. [If any man teach otherwise,
and consent not to the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: He is proud,
knowing nothing, doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes
Envy, Strife, Raylings, evil Surmisings, (and mark that) perverse Disputings,
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth: from such withdraw thy
self: Where the Apostle meets just with the practices of our Times;]
Supposing, that when once the Form of sound words (as i^ a called, 2 Timothy
1.13.) is delivered to the Church, and the Doctrine according (...) Godliness
is once Settled, no man may have the liberty to Dispute them: And if he do, he
is proud, doting (or sick) and disturbes the Peace of the Church. He that thus
troubles the Church, shall bear his judgment, who ever be he, Gal. 5.9. But
we proceed.

Thirdly, The conviction of the understanding being the foundation of
Conversion, and that a faculty that cannot be forced, nor satisfied without an
over-comming Reason; A powerful Argument, would soon subdue that noble part,
when civil Restraint would increase prejudice, and confirm obscurity:
Therefore the way of God is rather, Come, let us reason together, etc.

But this man dreams of such a Restraint, as never came into any rational
man's head. Was ever Restraint used as an argument to convince or convert men?
to make a man believe this or that without reason? No: The man shall be
informed by the strength of Scripture-Reason; and Light held forth to him, if
he be able or willing to receive it: And if after all the best information, he
cannot, or will not see that Light, he shall not be forced to believe or
practice what he understands not to be the way of Christ. Only, if he be in an
Error, in Doctrine or Worship (as we suppose him to be, in this Dispute) he
shall be restrained, not from believing or practicing secretly, his own
Erroneous way; but from venting his Error, or practicing openly his Idolatrous
worship, to the Infection of others; and this was ever Gods way: The Leaper,
(suppose he did think himself clean) was not restrained to make him believe
himself a Leaper, but to prevent others infection: The same God that said,
Come, let us reason together; said also, Thou shall not suffer Seducers or
Idolaters, or Sabbath Breakers, within thy gates: The same Apostle, which said,
[I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, etc.] said also of False
Teachers, [whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, etc. and I
would they were cut off that trouble you.]

Oh (but says he) A noble Spirit, a carnal Sword can never restrain! who
attempts it, partakes of other men's Hypocrisy: But this supposes that noble
Spirit to be in the right way, and the Magistrate to be in the wrong: Whereas
we suppose (in this dispute) the man to be in the wrong, and the Magistrate in
the ^ight. Secondly, It is not Restraint (of which we speak) that makes
Hypocrites; but compulsion to make men believe or practice what they believe,
not to be the ways of Christ; which is not now the question.

4. Humane restriction, is inconsistent with the very name and nature of the
Gospel, that a man cannot mention such a thing, without including himself
amongst the enemies thereof; It imparts nothing but a proffer of Peace, Love,
etc. even to the poorest Captives, flat Idolaters, etc.

Here we must distinguish, (what this Disputer, ignorantly or Jesuitically
confounds) For the Conversion or first gathering of a man or people, to make a
Church, the Gospel knows nothing but Peace, etc. But when a Church is
Constituted, it has a Rod of Censures for the Immorige^ous, Apostates, or
Seducers: If be say, that is nothing to the Magistrate, but belongs to the
Ministers: I answer, let him look to that; For his Argument strikes at all
Restriction, as well as Civil: (and so do all his Arguments.) The Gospel
imports (says he) nothing but proffers of Peace, etc. which in a constituted
Church, is utterly false: But if the Civil Magistrate, being a Christian,
should not interpose by a civil Restriction, to restrain Seducers, Idolaters,
etc. they would little regard the Ecclesiastical, to the great, not only
disturbance of the Peace; ^ut utter subversion of the Church.

But says he; If your Presid^nt be from the Law (wherein indeed, such
restriction would better suit with litterall service, especially the
Restrainers, b^ing as well. Typical, as the Sacrificed* you are debtor to the
whole Law to do it^ and Christ shall profit you nothing.

This is first an Antinomian fancy, as may easily be observed, or a conceit of
one, that denies the authority of the Old Testament: For, though the
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws were Typical, and so far void; yet the
Moral Laws (by which the Magistrates power is established) is still in force;
as is abundantly proved by others: The fourth Commandment gives Superiors
power to restrain Sabbath Breakers; and more then that, to punish them, if
Jews, or Christians; And the fifth Commandment gives Magistrates power to
restrai^e, (and punish) all wicked practices: Says not the Gospel the same?
Romans 13.4. [He is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evill] who shall distinguish where the Law distinguishes not; and
say, It respects wickednesses of the second Table, not of the first?

2. He would insinuate, That the Services of the Old Testament were only
literally, and so Typical; whereas they had Moral services also, and in them
the power of the Magistrate apparently did interpose, upon the Profanation of
them.

And, 3. He would have his Reader believe, The Restrainers were also Typical
(as their Sacrifices were) and only Typical, and in nothing Moral: whereas
they had Moral Laws, and exercised their Moral power, in Restraining or
punishing offenders accordingly, as shall appear. It is therefore a Scandalous
wicked Censure, to say [The desire after Civil Power to restrain, etc. is the
character of men not yet reformed by the power of the Gospell] when both Law
and Gospel confirm that power.

But he has Scripture proof, which cannot easily be evaded, Mat. 13.28. [You
shall perceive a zealous servant for the honor of Christ, discerning clearly
the enemies of Christ, and told they were such, Idolaters, for they were the
visible children of the Devil, compared to Tares, etc. Well, the servant
desires to destroy them; No, says Christ, least you pluck up the Wheat
likewise: but might be not restrain them? No, let them grow: whence may be
clearly and safely concluded, That men may not pluck up the enemies of Christ,
or restrain them by an human^ power, etc.]

This is the great place, and grand Argument of all Seducers to plead their own
Liberty and Toleration; I shall therefore digress a little, and take into
consideration what another subtle (if not Jesuited) Author argues in this
point, for Liberty of Prophesying; The book is very plausible, and very
taking (as I perceive) with some of good parts, and great place, especially in
this particular: I think it not amiss to set down the sum of his discourse
also upon this Text, and to Antidote (if possible) the Poison of both. Thus he
proceeds:

The difficulty of Exposition of this Text, D. Tailor, Liberty of
Prophesying, p. 194.
Mat. 12.24. etc. is reducible to these two questions.

1. What is meant, by (Gather not;) that is, what kind of Sword is forbidden;
For the Spiritual Sword, that is not forbidden to any sort of criminalls, for
that would destroy the power of Excommunication. It lies therefore against the
Temporal Sword, in cutting off some persons.

2. What is meant by Tares, or who those persons be. They are either persons of
^ll lives, inre practica, or else faulty in re intellectuali, (in opinion)
there is no third. The former is not meant, because it would destroy all bodies
politic, which cannot consist without a compulsorie power of the Sword. It
must then he meant of the latter sort in opinions, commonly called Heresies.
And the reason here given confirm this; least you pluck up also the Wheat.

For, 1. Heresy is of so nice a consideration, that by our mistakes we may
root up Truths, when we think to root up Heresies.

2. When a revolution of humane affairs, sets contrary opinions in the Throne
or Chair, they should root up and persecute Truths, as they were persecuted
before.] This is the sum and strength of his discourse.

I shall first join issue with the Doctor, and show you how far he agrees
with our Author, and how far he disagrees with the Truth it self.

1. The Doctor, (and so our Author) mistakes the scope of the Parable, (beyond
which it is not Argumentative, as Scholars say). Beza in Loc. and others.
For that is only this, ["That there shall be a mixture of good and bad in the
Church, to the end of the world] Not to show what censures are to be inflicted,
or what persons are to be censured or tolerated.

2. Our Savior himself tells us who the t^^es are, verse. 38. The children of
the wicked; and verse. 41. All things that offend and do iniquity: So that its
apparently meant of ill livers, as well as of ill opinioners.

3. Of evill-livers, it cannot be meant of open wicked men, that they should be
tolerated, for that would destroy, not only Civil Government, but the State
it self and Commonwealth; but of secret Hypocrites, who are so like the
Wheat, that we may easily mistake, and root up one for another.

4. It cannot be meant of all offenders, in re intellectuali, in opinion: for
some Heretics are so gross, and so destructive of Religion, Piety, and
Government, that the Doctor himself elsewhere grants, yea, proves they may,
and must be rooted up; yet if his reason be of any force, it pleads for
toleration of all Heresies; For the Text does not so nicely distinguish as he
does; but speaks indefinitely, if not universally, of all tares, ever clearly
discovered so to be, (as our Author says) and yet bids the servant not pluck
them up, nor restrain them; but let them grow. Therefore one of their glasses,
(if not both) is false, and corrupts the Text, instead of interpreting it.

5. His second Reason from the Revolution of humane affairs, revolves upon his
own head: For he grants, yea, affirms, That those Heresies which destroys
Fundamentals, or undermine Piety, or overthrow Government, may be prosecuted,
( prosecuted he says, improperly.) Now, if those Heretics of those
destructive opinions, get into the Throne or Chair, no doubt but they will
persecute the Orthodox, (as the Arrian^ did, and Papists do.) Therefore by
this reason, the most gross and ^eterodox Heresies must be tolerated, lea^ we
pluck up the Wheat: that is, give them occasion when Times turn, to persecute
the Orthodox: This is new Divinity, which the Jesuits themselves will scarcely
own; I am sure, where they have power, they do not practice.

And now I re urn to my Author: first, observe his Logic, who would conclude a
Theological Proposition from a Parable, not considering, that it proves
nothing besides the scope of it, which is, as I have said, [That these shall be
in the purest Churches, a mixt^^ of bad and good, till the great day of
Discrimination, the day of Judgment.] The rest is but a^ the Lace or Trimmings
of the Garment.

2. Let him, (or let the Reader) take notice, that this Interpretation of his,
utterly destroy^s all Civil Government, and Ecclesiastical too: Civil, in
that he acknowledges these Tares to be wicked livers, Idola ers, children of
the Devil, visibly discovered; and yet allows neither plucking up, nor
restraining; which besides, must needs be the destruction of Commonwealths:
Ecclesiastical, in as much as the Text has no destruction of Power, Civil,
or Ecclesiastical, (though speaking of the Church intentionally, it rather
respects the Ecclesiastical then the Civil) and says ind^^^^^ly, That none
must pluck them up nor restrain them; which not only destroys the Censure of
Excommunication, (as the Doctor before said) but the Church it self; which,
though Wolves and Foxes over-runne and wast it, has no power so much as ^o
restrain them, [with out trespass (as this man says) against the express
command of Christ, who has reserved that work to his harvest.] Is not this
brave Di^initie?

3. To give him, (or the Reader) further satisfaction, take the Parable in
those particulars, an Argumentative; we distinguish of the person^, who may
challenge the power of Restraining. They are either private or public: A
private person, a servant, (as he was that a^ked the question, whether he might
pluck up, or restrain the Tares) has not such power to punish or restrain
Idolaters, or wicked livers: But if he say, A public person, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, has not such power, he begs the question, and besides,
discovers an Anabaptisticall Spirit, denying Magistracy and Ministry: To which
he speak very Suspiciously, page 7. in prosecution of this in the next
argument, when he says. [ the Magistrate, (so called) mark, so called; as if
there were none.

4. One thing more; even the letter of the Parable, though it allow not
plucking up the Tares; yet in common practice, the Husbandmen do restrain
and keep them down, by weeding Hooks, least they over-grow the Wheat: So,
(which is our question) there is allowed a Restraining of Idolaters, and
Heretics, from spreading their Infection, to the destruction of the Church.
And now we come to his last Argument.

5. It is the most usual thing for Christians indeed, to be plucked up and
restrained, though under other notions; and that perhaps might be the Reason
why Christ refused to suffer any restraining president, though by a Tare
discerning servant: Nothing is more common, then to put a Christian into a
Bears skin, when men intend to bai^ him.

This was in part the Doctors fear and reason: If Heretics get power, they
will prosecute the Orthodox: Ergo, the Orthodox having power, must not
prosecute Heretique^, but suffer them to range and ravine, and destroy Souls:
Put it in second Table wickednesses, and see the absurdities: If Thieves and
Traitors get power, they will persecute and destroy the just Magistrates: Ergo,
the Magistrate may neither punish nor restrain Thieves, etc. for freare of
Retalitation: Again, There is nothing more usual than for Tyrants and wicked
Persecutors, to pluck up and destry Godly Christians under other notions then
are true: Ergo, Godly Magistrates may not prosecute, (persecution is for Truth
and the Gospel sake) damnable Heretics, under their own true Notions.

2. This Doctrine, well learned and practiced, would prevent any Persecution at
all; and so evacuate all those Prophesies of persecution; all that will live
godly shall suffer persecution, etc. and all those promises made to the
persecuted, and all preparations to it, by suffering graces, etc. For if there
be no prosecution for the vilest Heresies, not so much as a Restraint; but a
Toleration of all Opinions: I hope poor Truth shall have a Toleration granted
her, as well as others; and then there will be no persecution by the public
Magistrate: which yet is especially foretold, as the worst piece of
persecution. [Yee shall be brought before Kings and Rulers for my names sake;
Scourged in Synagogues, etc.] Had his Doctrine been practiced in the Primitive
times, it might have prevented much of persecution; Had the Christians but
said, We will not prosecute you for your Idolatries, or damnable Opinions, if
we get into place and Power of Government; do not you persecute us; Tolerate
you us, and we will tolerate you: If God call men to suffer under Tyrants and
Persecutors, under what notion soever, he knows how to deliver, support,
crown them for all their sufferings. And men must not cry down the Truths of
God, for fear, that if Tyrants get the Throne, they will make Christians
suffer under other the vilest notions, even in Bears skins.

After he has done with his five Arguments against the question stated at
first; He starts an Objection which no wise man would make; and gives an answer
(nothing to the present business) merely to give himself an occasion, to let
fall some drops of other poisonous Opinions, and to discover the corruption of
his judgment.

1. He seems to plead for Blasphemy, etc. when he censures the Parliament at
an [Oppressing Power; for their Ordinance lately renewed, for the restraining
and punishing of men, as Blasphemers, and Sectaries, for many Points consonant
with sound Christianity.

2. He shows himself again a Skeptic, when he says: [So confused is the
judgment of the universal, that we cannot expect a concurrence of any party
considerable in the Nation, in Principles of Christianity.]

3. He places all Power of Government in the people, which is the next way to
Anarchie; when he says: [I hope here is none that aspire to any power but what
the people shall invest them with, and may repeal, as they shall see such
their servants proceedings conduce to, or against their common safety, which
by Nature all men are enabled to determine.]

4. He Slanders Presbyterians, under the name of Smectimnuus; as Persecutors,
[as in their arbitrarily vestrie power, having used violence, not only to
their fellow sufferers; but toward even those who w^^^d themselves to effect
their freedom,] whereas its evident to all the world, Presbyterians have had
no Power, (and, never used violence to any) and that Sectaries have had the
greatest liberty, or licentiousness rather, to vent their Errors; and have
offered the greatest Persecutions by Tongue and Pen, in the most opprobrious,
reproachful Language that Hell it self could lend them; witness all those
Scurrillous Pamphlets that have flowne abroad these three or four last years;
The Lord lay it not to their charge.

This being done, he comes again to dispute in many places of Scripture more,
and then to answer some Objections. The place is 2 Timothy 2.24. [The Servant of
the Lord must not strive (for his Master did it not) but he gentle;
(gentleness, it seems, best befits a Christian, and restraines the
rebellious) unto all men who oppose themselves (poor Naturalists, Heathens,
Idolaters, etc.) and this simple way, is the Lord Christ's way of restraining.
Though it confound the wisdom of the wise, and be accounted an in^let to all
manner of Libertinisme, etc. He will have no unwilling worshippers, no civil
restrainings, etc.]

The Gentleman, it seems, is well pleased with this Argument that he repeat
it again (though in other terms) for he said the same in his fourth Argument
above, only with some variety and additions here: We might send him back
thither for his answer. But we add: Note First, The mis-application, or
mis-interpretation of that Text: We are speaking of the Magistrates Power, and
the Text speaks of the Qualification of a Minister, that has to do with
Conversion of Infidells and Heathens: Secondly, If he will needs apply it to
the Magistrate; That he must not strive, but be gentle unto all men that oppose
themselves: He directly destroys all Government, and denies power to restrain
the most wicked Thieves and Murderers, etc. (for they must be dealt with as
gently as others, to convert them) and however, opens a door to Di^ertinisme
in Church and State: Thirdly, And this he does expressly, when he says,
["Christ will have no civil restraining] Surely herein, either he speaks
against his conscience, or he ^nowes not what he says.

And now again he makes an excursion to abuse the Parlia^ent, by whose
Commission, he was once a Soldier, and to ^nimate his fellows in destructive
ways, wherein I purpose ^ot to follow him; but consider what he says to some
Objetions against himself, and his own Opinion.

Obj. 1. The Jewish Magistrates restrained Idolaters of old, and that as being
against the light of natural Government, ^hey may do so now.

In answer to this; Let us examine the ground of Idolaters being punished; we
find it in these three things.

1. That they never punished them till they were commanded from Heaven to do
it, Exodus 22.20.

But we Reply; If that Commandment be according to ^he light of nature, it
bound them before, though they knew ^ not, or practiced it not: There are other
Commandments here specified, which are according to the light of nature, ^e
transgression whereof was punishable; though perhaps, be punished, till there
were a settled Commonwealth: Now ^l Nations punished or restrained those that
blsaphemed their Gods: It being a principle of nature, that God must be
wor^hipped alone, and that with his own worship. And may be said of some
transgressions of the Commandments of the second Table, which are according to
the light of nature, that they did not punish them, till they were commanded
from Heaven to do it.

2. The people, as well as the Magistrate, had an hand in punishing the
Idolater, Deuteronomy. 13.9.

Repl. The hand of the people was in it; either as accuser^* Thou shall not
conceal him, verse. 8. or as witnesses, as Deuteronomy. 17.7. or as executioners, in
helping to put him to death; but the man was brought to the gates, the place of
Judgment, verse. 5. and so the condemning and Judging power was in the
Magistrate.

3. The punishment is exactly there described, and so we must not mangle it,
if we make that our Rule. Death even to wives, or nearest relations, was here
commanded.

Repl. There is a distinction to be made, between the Moral and Judicial
part of a Commandment in the Old Testament: When the substance of a
Commandment is Moral, it binds ever; though the circumstances which are
Judicial, may be varied. It were easy to instance in several Commandments,
if it were needful. But he goes on.

All which indeed did lively represent, in every of these particulars the power
of Christ, and the Spiritual order of his Church in the Gospel, etc. and
therefore in order to that work, his servants are to converse with Idolaters,
and may have civil society with them also, 1 Cor. 5.10. etc.

This is the common evasion, to make all Typical in the Old Testament: And
thereupon some have quite dis-a-vowed any proof from the Old Testament, and in
time have come to cast off the New also, and are turned Anti-Scripturists. But
I pray, may we not (as Anabaptists do) as well cast off the power of the
Migistrate in punishing wickednesses of the second Table, and say, The
Magistrates and their Acts of Power were all Typical; and represented the
power of Christ, and the Spiritual Order of his Church in the Gospel? For the
rest of his answer, he seems to distinguish between Converse, and having
civil society with Idolaters: If he take them for both one; its granted, and
his Text allows it; Necessity of conversing, or having civil society with
them, especially in those times, when they were most Heathens, execu^ed their
society; and may do so now in the like cases: yea, Christians may Converse
with them, to convert them in their own Countries. But what is this to the
point in hand, whether Magistrates Christian may restrain Idolaters in their
own Land, from exercising their Idolatry openly, to the seducing of others,
as well as the public dishonor of God? Till this be proved, let him know, It
is an unchristian slander, to say, [That the Civil Sword in Spiritual
Affairs, is (in its own nature) a Supporter of the Beast;] It has been so,
by accident abused, the Magistrates themselves being Antichristian; But if the
Magistrate be Christian and Godly, nothing is more destructive of the Beasts
power, as experience has proved; and nothing which the Beast does more oppose,
then the Magistrates power in Spiritual Affairs; as tha^ which has and does,
and will at last utterly destroy his Usurped Kingdom, Rev. 17.16. Christ's
weapons are very good, and alone powerful to make true Christians, but the
Magistrates Sword is also useful, to regulate them, when so made.

Obj. 2. But would you have Idolaters to dwell amongst us? men may then live as
they list. To this he answers:

I would indeed have all Jews or Heathens, or what ever Ignorants are native,
as freely to Converse as Commerce with you, without restraint upon Religious
Causes; and that you would consider, your selves might never have been
Converted, if you should not so have been freely suffered, etc.

Repl. 1. What ever this man would have, I am sure the Apostle would not have
Christians freely to Converse (which imports familiarity, intimacie) with
Idolaters, no not in Civil Affairs, 2 Cor. 6.14. [ Be not unequally yoked
together (in Marriage; he means) with Infidells or Unbelievers; And verse. 17.
Summon all Christians, to come out from among them, and be Separate; and touch
not the (...) things.

2. When he adds, ["without Restraint upon Religious Causes] it may be meant
there; First, That they shall have free liberty to come to our Assemblies to
hear the Word; and that we may discourse with them, as occasion is offered,
to convert them; or, Secondly, That they shall have liberty to Erect
Synagogues, or build Temples to Exercise their Idolatries, in Christian
^ingdomes, and ours be permitted freely to go to their meetings, where great
danger of corruption of ours, (our nature being made prone to Heresy and
Idolatry, as fruits of the flesh) than hope of our Conversion of them: If in
the former sense he mean it, we grant it; for otherwise, we, or rather our
fathers, had never been Converted: They may come to us, as Heathens of old
might Proselyte to the Jews. If in the latter sense; it is (we think)
clearly against Scripture side and the Saints practice: We may not go to
them to their Idolatrous Temple, nor make marriage with them, etc. nor yet
suffer ours to be Seduced by them: And here comes in the Restraint we speak
of, by Superiors, Fathers, Masters, Magistrates especially; for the reason
being the same, and perpetually Moral, it concerns the Christian Magistrate
in the Gospel, as well as the Jewish Magistrate. Nor does this reprove Christ
for providing no other means to restrain from Idolatry (which he inferres.)
For Christ has provided other means, even this power of Superiors in the
sense aforesaid. And I pray, did this man never hear of whole Churches,
subverted by Heretics and Idolaters? What thinks he of the seven Churches of
Asia, and the Roman Church it self, which he acknowledges and calls
Antichristian? Have not Seducers and Idolaters, by degrees, utterly subverted
them? Yet they, whose names are written in the Book of Life, shall be
preserved unto Heaven, when the rest shall perish by his Toleration.

Obj. 3. But allow this, and we may quickly have our Civil State subverted?
He answers.

To this the experience of other Nations might be a sufficient answer: the
Hollanders flourishing ever since they suffered every man to worship according
to his conscience, even Jews themselves, etc.

Repl. That prosperity and flourishing should be made a Mark of the
Goodness of a State or Church, (by any but a Jesuit) is to me very strange.
More, that the Hollanders should be made a pattern of a true Reformed State.
And he may remember, that if the Arminian Errors had prevailed in Holland, but
for a Toleration; It was feared they had ere long subverted the State, and
reduced it into the King of Spains hand again. As for other States, even the
Roman it self, considered either as Heathen Idolaters, when they had a
Pantheen of Gods, and every one suffered [ to worship according to his
Conscience: or as Antichristian Idolaters; since they worshipped the Host and
Images, they flourished in both Estates: And prosperity is rather a Mark of a
false, than a true Church: Yea, when Rome it self began to be Antichristian,
all Histories tel^ us, how the State of the Empire, was subverted and taken
from the Emperors, and given to the Pope.

But (says he) observe, that whilst every man enjoyes his liberty, it is his
proper Interest, to endeavor the preservation of that Commonwealth; for in
that he preserves himself, etc.

But (say I) this is Athiesticall, profane Policy. Indeed, if there were no
God* or nothing to be respected but men's own Quiet and Interest, this were a
fine way: All Errors will reasonably well agree together (as the Devils do
in Hell.) But if men have any conscience of their own duty, in a zealous
promoting of Gods glory, in an earnest contending for the Faith once delivered
to the Saint, Jud. v. 3. or in a charitable care over the Souls of other men,
this Interest would be quickly laid aside. Is it not the duty of every
Superior, Father, Master, Magistrate, to advance the glory of God, and to
secure the Souls of their Inferiors as well as their bodies? Concerns it not
every faithful Minister, Yea Christian, to maintain the Truth, and oppose
Error? This man speaks of a Matchiavilian politic Religion, without any
zeal for God, any charity to men's souls, where self-love, and selfe-quiet,
etc. only predominates. And if it be the duty of every one, (as it is) to
contend earnestly for the Faith, will not this meet with much opposition, by
heretical Spirits? And will not that cause the most mortal divisions, and so
procure ruin to the Church first, and then to the State? Truth must oppose
Errors: and Errors will oppose Truth: And if there be but one Truth, and many
Errors, will not all Errors oppose that one Truth, though they tolerate one
another? The reason is, Errors are but Diversa, Diverse (for the most part)
amongst themselves; but Truth and Errors are Contraria, Contraries, and can no
more be reconciled, than Light and Darkness. I shall give him but one
instance; at Rome it self; where almost all Errors and Sects are tolerated,
only Protestants are not tolerated; because Protestant Truths oppose all
Errors, Romish as well as others.

Now mark what will be the issue of such a Toleration as the Gentleman pleads
for, viz. a Subversion and utter Suppression of Truth, by the joint opposition
of all Errors at once] And I am confident, this is the last and most desperate
Design of Antichrist, and his Agitators the Jesuits, to destroy this Church
and State, and to subdue it unto Antichrist. They have tried all ways by fraud
and violence, to effect this: nothing (blessed be God, will yet do it. Now
their last refuge is, a Toleration of all Religions; and Popery, its hoped,
shall have a place amongst them. Which if it be granted, I dare be a Prophet,
that Popery shall swallow up all the other Errors, and bring them all to it
self; but poor Truth only shall be denied a Toleration. For whereas before,
we had only or chiefly Popery to oppose, now all the Sects and Errors will
jointly fight against us. And besides, All the Sests in some things agree with
Papists already: All the Arminian Points (which are blanched Popery) having
been kept out at the fore-doore, are crept in at the back-doore of Connivence,
and Preached and maintained by most of the Sectaries, and new Jesuiticall
Seducers. How easy then is it, for Papists and them to be reconciled ^n the
rest, by a Jesuiticall subtle wit? So in the last ruin, Popery will be
predominant. Yea, those very men, that now ^ry up Toleration, when once they
have gotten power, will cry ^owne Toleration, not only of true Portestant
Religion, ^ut also of any Sect, unless it comply with their ends, as
ex^erience tells us, in their own Countries. They that now cry ^ut of
Persecution of their Errors, will be the greatest Perse^utors of the Truth. Oh
the Stupiditie, shall I say, or giddi^esse of the people of this Nation! who
are bewitched with ^esuiticall Counsels, to hasten their own and our ruin.
Oh that the honest men in the Army, would but see how they do, not only the
Cavaliers work in the State, but the Jesuits work ^lso in the Church, to the
destruction of both. The Lord a^aken and open their eyes betimes, to see the
things that be^ong to their and our Peace, before it be too late, and they be
^id from their eyes.

Yet further: A State (says he) cannot be subverted, but either by force, or
by a general consent. The force is easily prevented, when the first thirty
men, meeting in Arms, for such an end, are by the Law Traitors, and may be
proceeded against accordingly: And no man can imagine it possible to subvert
the State by a general consent, when there will be such variety of
judgments, and every man is free, and in fear of a change, least he be a
loses by it.

In answer, we say, First, a State may be subverted by fraud and subtlety,
and that is the way now in Agitation: But se^ondly, I am glad to hear him say,
[Force may easily a (mark that, easily) be prevented, when the first thirty
men meeting in Arms, are by the Law Traitors, and may be proceeded against
accordingly.] I fear the Army will give him little thanks for this
Discovery. For what is the great pretense for all the irregular motions of the
Army, but an impossibility: to prevent the Force of the contrary party, had
the Treaty gone on effectually? And this friend of their^^ says plainly and
honestly; Force may easily be prevented by such a Law. Such a Law there is not
yet established, but such a Law was intended in the Propositions to the King;
and if this might easily prevent Force; all pretenses of Impossibility are
hereby made void. Let all the people hear this. Thus God catches the wise in
their own craftiness, and makes them betray themselves: Thirdly, But may not
a State be subverted by consent? No: [because there will be variety of
judgments, etc.] There may be variety of judgments, and all differing from
the Truth; but who knows not that Errors agree in the root; and most of them
bordering upon Popery, (which is natural in many points to all men, as might
be proved) how easy then is it to reconcile them all against the Truth, to the
subversion of the Church first, and the State next. Nor need they fear a
change, or to be losers by it; for all Sects (its observable enough) propound
one common end to themselves, Liberty; and Popery is a Religion of Liberty
enough: and so no losers by it.

Obj. 4. There is one Objection more come lately to his knowledge, and that is
this: How can it be called an Agreement of the people, when many thousands
(otherwise faithful) in conscience cannot subscribe to it; if you dis-allow of
this Civil Restrictive power, etc. He says,

That the Title of (Agreement) imports nothing without Relation to the
Substance following, which is, for the foundation of Future Peace and Freedom:
and he that lays a foundation of slaverie, to please Oppressors, when he
proclaims out Freedom, shall not answer that Agreement, but the carnal heart
of a deceitful Tyrant. Nor deserves he to be accounted faithful, but deprives
himself of proffered Privilege and Freedom, that cannot subscribe or agree
thereto, except he may make all others his slaves, etc.

This is plain dealing indeed; Here he tells us, First, That Restricto^ power,
is Oppressive, Tyrannical, Antichristian; which yet is proved, to be the very
ordinance of God; unless he will say, That Restrictive power in the Jewish
Magistrates, ^as Oppressive, Tyrannical, Antichristian: The Consciences ^f
those Times, ought no more to be restrained or complled, ^han now under the
Gospel. Secondly, He tells you what ^ou must trust to, be you otherwise never
so Faithful; If you cannot in conscience subscribe that Agreement, you must
not be ^ccounted Faithful, nor may you expect any Privilege or ^reedome; So
that the more Faithful and Conscientious a ^^an is, the more he deprives
himself of the proffered Freedom, which is by another discovered to be
present Slaverie. M. Ashurst, his Reasons, etc.
) And ^e more false and loose a man is, the more benefit shall he ^ave by that
Agreement, a Liberty of Conscience to profess that Errors he will, and a
Licentiousness of life to do that he list, being himself made a Judge of his
subscribed ^greement. Besides, he seems to contradict here what he ^ranted
above, a Liberty to every man, page 14. to worship God ^cording to his
Conscience. Which, if it must be granted to all; ^as by his Doctrine it must)
why shall not those that have ^eene Faithful, who cannot in Conscience,
consent or subscribe ^o that Agreement, have their Liberty of Conscience as
well as others? But I pray, Christians, take notice what you shall ex^ect from
these Jesuiticall Designs. You shall be tolerated so ^ong as you agree with
them, in their Destructive Principles, and when they have gotten you i^ to such
a snare, that you can ^ Conscience proceed no further, farewell your
Privileges and ^reedome. You shall then be made the vilest slaves to
Jesuiti^ll Lusts, and your pretended Toleration end in Intolerable ^averie,
and bitterest persecution. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

FINIS.

