THE GOOD MAN A PVBLICK GOOD, 1. PASSIVELY, 2. ACTIVELY.


As it was Manifested in a Sermon preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS,
at the late Solemn Fast: January 31. 1643.

By DANIEL CAVVDREY. Minister of the Gospel at Great Billing in
Northamptonshire, and one of the Assembly of DIVINES.

2. Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I am loved.

John 10.11.12. The Good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep: But he that
is an hireling and not the Shepherd, whose own the Sheep are not, sees the
wolf coming, and leaves the Sheep, and flees because he is an hireling, and
cares not for the Sheep.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper, for Charles Green, and P. W. 1643.

To the Honorable House of Commons, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable, and ever-Honoured Patriots:
THis poor and plain Sermon, as it was first preached in obedience to your
Command, and heard with a great deal of Religious Attention; so it is now most
humbly presented to your hands and eyes. Wherein the Preachers aim and
intention was not, Q^i monet ut f^^^s, q^od j m s^ci, etc.
either to inform your Judgments in what you knew not, or to persuade your
Obedience to what you did not, but to encourage and comfort you, in what you
already did, even spend your selves in the Public Good. The which he
conceived the rather to be most necessary for him to do: First, because of the
great difficulty of the work you are engaged in, by reason of those Scornful
men, who have brought the City into a snare, or rather set the Kingdom on
fire. Secondly, because of those great discouragements which you have long
wrastled with, through the frowardness and unthankfulness of the people of
this land, who have withdrawn (many of them) their assistance, and stopped up
those wels that should afford you water to quench that fire. And had not the
Lord himself stood by you, and endued you with Wisdom, Goodness, Meekness,
the wickedness of the one sort, and the perverseness of the other sort, might
have caused your hands to faint, and your hearts to fail in the prosecution of
the Work. But blessed be God* who both raised you up unto us, and raised and
kept up your spirits, to be constant and active, for such a time as this: But
it is usual with God so to do. As it is observable in Nature (Physicians say)
that as there are National diseases, so there are peculiar National remedies:
So commonly in the greatest distresses of his Church, and greatest opposition
of Malignants, God is pleased to raise up defendants proportionable to these
necessities. This is evident in many passages of the sacred Story; especially
in the book of Judges, in Nehemiahs and Esthers time. The two parties in the
Text, are not so much opposed one against another, viz. Scornful men, and Wise
men, as they are in the present experience of these times. Never did any
Kingdom know and find so great a generation of Scornful men, not only the
lower rank of mean Malignants, who have scorned and scoffed at Religion and
Goodness so long till they have scoffed themselves out of all, even shows of
Religion, and into unbeleefe of all relations of successes, as false and
fabulous: but even those of the second and third magnitudes, who like Tobiah
and Sanballat, have jeered and derided all your undertakings, as weak and
worthless: saying as they, What do these feeble men? will they fortify
themselves? will they make an end in a day? Will they pull down the Old, and
set up a new Church in a day? Nay, have they not flouted your fastings and
prayings, upon the least successes of their party? and some of them said where
is now your God? But again I say, Blessed be God (who resists the proud, and
gives grace to the Humble) that has as it were, created a generation of Wise
men, in a way of opposition to those Scornful men, to break those snares, and
quench those fires which they have kindled. Wherein God has not only magnified
his own Wisdom and Goodness, in providing and fitting the Remedy to the
Disease; but also manifested to all the world, your Wisdom in discovering
their snares, and your Goodness in quenching their fires. Truly (worthy
Patriots) next under God, we cannot but acknowledge, that the Kingdom, the
whole Island, is beholding to you for its present preservation. And though you
have met with an unthankefull generation for the present, yet we doubt not, but
the children yet unborne, shall have cause to call you Blessed; as the
repairers of our breaches, as the restorers of paths to dwell in, and above
all, as the blessed Reformers of Church and State. Which that you may be, shall
be the daily prayer, of

Your most humbly devoted Servant in the Lord, DANIEL CAVVDREY.

A SERMON Preached before The honorable House of COMMONS, at the public Fast,
Ian. 31. 1643.
Proverbs, 29.8. Scornful men bring a City into a snare, but wise men turn
away wrath.


THis Book of the Proverbs, The privileges of the Proverbs in three things.
as it has the common Honor, with other sacred Scriptures, to be called
Canonical; so it has some special Prerogatives above the rest, and that in a
threefold respect.

1. In the Excellence 1. The Excellencies.
and pre-eminence of the Sentences therein contained; being, for the most part,
received principles or Canons of wisdom, acknowledged generally by all,
especially by the wise. And for this cause they are called Proverbs. Look what
Maxims are in Law, Axioms in Logic, Aphorisms in Physic, Apothegmes in
history or morality, such are these Proverbs in Divinity: the word (...) in
the original, carries their Dignity in the very forehead. It comes from a root
that signifies to Rule, as a Lord or Prince. They are principes, or prinpales
sententiae, princely or principal sentences, not only from their Author King
Solomon, chap. 1. 1. but also from their worth and authority, being, as I may
so say, Lords and Commanders of our Assent and Judgment, for their
Authentical and acknowledged verity: that is the first.

2. In their Independance 2. Their Indepe^d^nce.
usually one upon another; every verse almost, yea every Homistichium, or half
verse, being a complete Doctrine of it self, as Proverbs commonly are short,
and full. In other Scriptures, a man must read many verses, sometimes at least,
before he can make up the sense, or profitable instructions therein contained:
but here he has in two or three words, a full proposition, or Doctrine exposed
to his view. In which respect, they may be compared, not so fitly to a Chain
of Gold, where each piece is linked to, and draws on its fellow; as to a
Chain of precious Pearls, all put upon one string, having indeed, a kind of
Contaction, (as I may say) but no necessary Connection, or Cohaerence, one upon
another. And that is the second.

3. In the mutual Illumination, 3. Their Mutual Illumination.
or Illustration one of another: Sometimes by way of short Comparison, by way of
Similitude, or Dissimilitude, in which respect every thing is (as they say)
twice understood, though but once spoken, sometimes by way of Opposition, and
contraries, we say, set one against another, do illustrate, and enlighten one
another; As light and darkness in nature, white and black in colors, do
make each other more notable or notorious: The verses, or half verses
sometimes, being like unto two Candles, or torches, lighted and set up, which
are seen, both by their own, and by each others light. And that is the third.

All these are observable, and applyable to this present verse, and text of
ours: 2. Applyable to the text.
First, it contains two Ancient and Authorized principles of wisdom, so full
and clear, that Natural men, have been able to see them; The one is this,
That an ill man is an ill neighbor, acknowledged by a Heathen Poet, who said
long ago, The whole City, fares the worse, (...). Hesiod.
for one wicked man: He may seem to have borrowed it from our Solomon, in our
text. Scornful men, bring a City into a snare, or set a whole City on fire:
The other is this, That a good man is a common good: (...).
so said one of the Heathens wise men; whose candle Solomon seems to have
lighted in our Text when he said in opposition to the former, wise men turn
away wrath. Secondly, they are two propositions, but independents, shining with
their own native light: And yet thirdly, though they do not need to borrow,
yet they do easily and willingly lend and afford their assistance to
illustrate one another, as we shall the better see, if we take them, and
consider them asunder by way of explication. 3. The explication of the words.


First, what is here meant by scornful men. 1. Scornful men, what.
The words in the original are (...) viri irrisionis, men of scorn; not
passively, as scorned, but actively as scorners, or scorning. The words are
very emphaticall, and with the Hebrews (who know no degrees of comparison)
carry the force of the superlative degree. The like phrase is used four times
in this very Chapter; as a man of reproves, ver. 1. that is, a man very often
reproved: a man of oblations or gifts, ver. 4. that is, a notorious briber; men
of bloods, verse. 10. that is, as we read it, bloodthirsty men, men soakt in
blood, cruel bloody men. And once more, a man of anger, verse. 22. that is, a
most hasty and choleric man. So here, men of scorn, is more then scorners,
Psalm. 1.1. (who yet, are there made the worst and highest degree of sinners,
ungodly, sinners, scorners) for it implies the worst of scorners, and the
highest degree of wickedness. Not secret scorners as Mical was at first, who
despised David in her heart; but open scorners, professed and proud scorners,
that deride not only good men, and goodness, but the Messengers and Ministers
of God (and in them, God himself) in their admonitions, reproves or
threatenings (as those did, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.) being near of kin to that man
spoken of, verse. 1. A man of reproves, or often reproved, yet scorning all,
and hardening his heart.

Secondly, what is meant by those words, Bring into a snare: 2. Bring into a
snare.
The word in the original is (...), which is diversely rendered by
Interpreters, as they suppose the root of it to be different. Some derive it
from (...), which signifies a snare: Now a snare in Scripture signifies
sometimes perplexities, or perplexing troubles. The ungodly is snared in the
works of his own hands, Psalm. 9.16. Sometimes some fearful judgment of God.
Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest,
this shall be the portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6. According to this sense of
the word, the meaning is, that scornful men do bring perplexities and troubles
upon a place, and provoke God (by scorning reproves etc.) to bring most
fearful judgments upon it. Some again derive it from (...), which signifies
to blow or puff at: as Psalm. 12.5. I will set him at rest from him that puffes
at him: for so scornful men use to express their scorn; or rather to blow at
a coal, and so to set all on fire: Or set on fire.
Scornful men are flabella Diaboli the Devils bellows to blow the coals of
sedition, strife and contention till they set the City on fire, and so our
margin expresses it; or to blow the coals of Gods wrath and fury, till he by
his judgments (compared also to fire in Scripture, Psalm. 11. Psalm. 42. last)
set all on a flame. The sum is, Scornful men are mischievous instruments,
both stirring up seditions and contentions amongst the people, and so ensnaring
them with perplexities (as Demetrius the Silver-smith did at Ephesus Acts 19.)
and also incensing the wrath of God against them, and so enfiring them with
most fearful judgments.

Thirdly, what is here meant by the City, 3. City what.
the word is taken either Metonymically, the subject for the adjunct, the City,
for the Inhabitants of the City; or Synechdochically, the special for the
general; the City, that is, any place where those scornful men live, the
House, the Town, the City, the Country, the Kingdom. Their mischief extends
not to themselves alone, but to all about them; they are the common
pestilences, and public enemies in the places where they live.

Fourthly, what is here to be understood by wise men: 4. Wise men, who.
the word is good, and of great esteem. But perhaps some may question Solomon's
wisdom in the choice thereof, for making an opposition to the former part (as
the particle, But, implies) it may be demanded, how are wise men opposed to
scornful men. It seems more congruous, he should have said, Meek or humble
men turn away wrath; so the opposition had been fairer and clearer; or else,
in the former part he should have said, Foolish men bring a City into a snare,
as directly opposed to Wise men. True, but there is the more secret wisdom in
this opposition, that the Spirit of God intended we should take notice of: For
it intimates unto us two things:

First, That scornful and proud men, how ever they may think themselves wise,
are indeed but fools in Wisdoms account; and in our common speech we so style
them, when we say of a man of a scornful carriage, he is a proud fool: Yea,
in the language of the Scripture, all wicked men, (of which, scornful men are
chiefest, as we said before) are fools and simple: Therefore as sometimes a
scorner and a wicked man are Synonymas in Scripture, as Prove. 9.7. [He that
reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked
man, gets himself a blot.] He that in the first part is called a scorner,
in the second part is called a wicked man, implying them to be convertible,
every scorner is a wicked man; and every wicked man is a scorner: so a wicked
man and a fool, are also one with the Spirit of God. Solomon's fool (so often
mentioned in this Book, and elsewhere) is no better, no other then a wicked
man: And that is the first.

Secondly, That wise men are meek and humble men, and only meek and humble
men are wise: This the Spirit of God would have us to take notice of, by
opposing wise men to proud and scornful men. Therefore, it is worth observing
also, that as proud men, and scornful men, are parallels in Scripture, Prove.
21.24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name who deals in proud wrath: and
sometimes we hear, The proud have laid a snare for me, as here the scornful;
so wise men, and meek men, are very near a kin, or rather one and the same.
So Saint James would have us understand, when he says, [ Who is a wise man and
endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good conversation his
works with meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3.13.] And again, verse. 17. [The
wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc.] By
wise men therefore here, Solomon means meek and humble men, in special and
generally all Good men, who are only wise; his wise man is the same with a good
man, as his fool with a wicked man.

Fifthly, what is here meant by wrath; 5. Wrath, what, and what to turn it away.
by wrath some understand the anger of men, as of a King, Whose wrath is as the
roaring of a Lion, and he is a wise man that knows how to allay it; or of a
tumultuous and enraged multitude set on fire by scornful men. Others
understand it of the wrath of God, which wicked scorners have incensed, but
only wise men and good men know how to quench it. So that here is the cause
put for the effects; the wrath of God for those snares and perplexities, those
fires and judgments inflicted on a people by the wrath of God. And there is a
great deal of wisdom in the choice of this word, for it implies three things
very considerable.

First, The prevention of judgments 1. Prevention of judgments
ready to fall upon a people (by the wickedness of scornful men) by taking
away, or turning away wrath, the cause thereof. So Prove. 15.1. A soft answer
pacifies wrath; the wrath of God or men.

2. The removal 2. Removal.
of those judgments which are inflicted, when a City is ensnared or enfired,
wise men, good men, are so prevalent with God, that they help to break those
snares, and quench those fires, by turning away the wrath of God.

Thirdly, the procuring 3. Procuring blessings.
of mercies and blessings upon the place, for here is a (...); as they call it,
less is said, but more is understood as the opposition does fairly suggest:
Scornful men bring a City into a snare, or set a City on fire: That is, they
deprive a Land of mercies and blessings first, and then help to bring on
judgments: So wise men do not only prevent and remove judgments, but procure
blessings on the places where they live, the House, the Town, the City, the
Country, the Kingdom; which must the rather be observed because in this
latter part, the City is not mentioned but understood, (...), by the rule of
interpretation: So the sum of all will be this, That wise men are common and
public Goods to the places where they live.

The words thus explained, will yield us many good observations, 4. The
observations some.
we shall name some, but insist chiefly upon one.

First, That all scornful men (as all wicked men, whereof these are the worst)
how ever they think of themselves, or others of them, are no wiser then they
should be: that is, are no better, no other then fools in wisdoms account. It
arises from the opposition of scornful men and wise men.

Secondly, That only meek and humble men (as all good men) how ever the world
accounts them simple, are truly wise. It arises also from the opposition of
wise men, and scornful men, who are ever proud men, for scorn arises from
pride, as humility from wisdom.

Thirdly, That scornful men (the worst of men) are public evils and
mischiefs to the places where they live: And that two ways:

1. Passively, as meriting and procuring the wrath and judgments of God upon
these places.

2. Actively, as studying, plotting and endeavoring mischiefs to the places:
They bring a City into a snare, and set a City on fire. In the first sense they
are flagella Dei: In the second, flabella Diaboli.

Fourthly, That on the contrary, wise men (that is good men, for they are
Synonyma's in Scripture) are public Goods to the places where they live: And
that also two ways.

1. Passively, the places being blessed for their sakes.

2. Actively, as seeking, studying, endeavoring the public Good, being men of
public spirits, preferring the public Good, before their own private
interests.

But to handle all these particulars, as it is a little impertinent (some of
them being only hinted, and not directly here intended) so it is as much
impossible, considering that portion of time which is allowed me. I shall
therefore draw out only the last general conclusion, consisting of two
particular branches, taking sometimes notice of the opposite part, and the
other considerations, for illustration, confirmation, or application, as shall
be most expedient.

The general Observation is this; Good men are public Goods 5. The general
Observation, Good men public goods.
to the places where they live. That this is rightly collected, is evident to
an observing eye by the former explication: This we shall endeavor to make
good in both the branches before propounded, both passively as God blesses the
places for their sakes; and also actively, as they are men of public spirits,
seeking principally the good of the Community.

First, Good men are public goods passively; God for their sakes blessing the
Places, 1. P^ssively, as blessings to the places.
Family, Town, City, Country, Kingdom where they live. This is thus made good.

1. There are promises made unto them for this very purpose, 1. This is
promis^d.
as to Abraham, Genesis 12.2.3. I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and
thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse
them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.
To this may be added that other conditional promise to the same Abraham, Genesis
18.26. If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the City, then I will spare
all the place for their sakes. Nay a lower condiscension we find there: I will
not destroy it for tennes sake. The same promise is made to Job upon
supposition of his repentance and turning to God. The innocent shall deliver
the Island, and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands, Job 22.30. The
like or a yet lower condiscension we find, Jer. 5.1. Run ye too and fro
through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in the broad
places thereof, if ye can find a man, (one man) if there be any that executes
judgment and seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Add but one more, and
that is, Ezekiel 22.30. I sought for a man (but one man) among them that should
make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should
not destroy it, but I found none, therefore have I powered out mine indignation
upon them, etc.

2. 2. This is performed.
We find the performances of this promise in many instances. This was made
good to Abraham in the preservation of his Nephew Lot and his family, Genesis
19.29. God remembered Abraham (that is, his prayer and pleading with God that he
would not destroy the righteous with the wicked, Chap. 18.) and sent Lot out of
the midst of the overthrow. Nay Lot himself had experience of this grace and
favor, that as he preserved Zoar, so the City of Sodom, and the rest could
not be destroyed so long as he was in it: See but the power he had with God:
For the first, Lot did not directly petition for the sparing of that little
City Zoar, but for his own safety, yet God is pleased to spare it for his
sake: Thus he says, See I have accepted thee concerning this, that I will not
overthrow this City, for which thou have spoken. For the second, Genesis 19.21.22.
thus more strangely, Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing
till thou come thither. Not only while Lot was in Sodom was it spared for his
sake, but all the while he was going to Zoar, it was not destroyed. The
Israelites had manifold experiences in this kind, in the wilderness, wherein
they provoked God forty years: Therefore he said that he would destroy them,
had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his
wrath (the words of our Text) lest he should destroy them, Psalm. 106.23. And so
verse 29.30. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the
plague brake in upon them: Then stood up Phineas and executed judgment, and so
the plague was stayed. These were examples of favor for prevention, or
removal of judgments: Take some for procuring of Good: God blessed the
Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.5. And the blessing of the Lord was
upon all that he had, in the house and in the field. And what a blessing he was
to the whole land of Egypt, for a blessing of plenty for seven years together,
is to be seen, Genesis 41.47. Saint Paul also was thus highly honored, that he
saved the lives of all that sailed with him in the ship, two hundred threescore
and fifteen souls beside himself, Acts 27.24 Lo, says the Angel, God has
given thee all them that sail with thee. Insomuch, that he confidently tells
them. There shall be no l^sse of any man's life among you, but of the Ship,
verse 22.

3. This was ever a known and confessed truth; 3. This is confessed by all.
both good and bad men have taken it for granted, That they shall fare the
better for Good peoples sake. Hence it was that Bara^ (a good, but a weak man)
desired Deborah an holy Prophetess, to go with him to the war, yea
professed he would not go without her, Judge. 4.8. as placing both his safety
and victory in her presence. And wicked Ahab solicites Jehoshaphat to go to
war with him, as hoping to prosper the better for his sake. In a word, for
this reason wicked men have so often desired the prayers of righteous men, as
distrusting themselves, and trusting more to find mercy for their sakes, then
their own.

4. The same is further confirmed by grounds of reason: 4. This is grounded on
Reasons.
First, Good men, or Righteous men, are Gods Favorites, 1. Good men are Gods
Favorites.
so they are called in the Hebrew (...) his Saints we render it, the word
signifies, his Favorites, from the root (...) which signifies Mercy, and
Favor; so his Saints are such as actually are merciful, The Good man is
merciful and lends; but especially passively as received to the mercy or
favor of God, (as the word (...) is used in Greek, spoken of the blessed
Virgin, Lu. 1.28. that is, graced with God, or highly favored of God) They are
Gods Favorites, I say, and therefore for their sakes much Good is done to
others that have any relation to them. Consider but what Eliphaz says to Job,
persuading him to humble himself, and be acquainted with God, Job 22.21. etc.
and to turn unto him; he uses amongst others, this argument, verse. 27. Thou
shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy
vows. Thou shall also decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee,
ver. 28. And last of all, (as before) The Island shall be delivered by the
pureness of thy hands, verse. 30. Such grace and favor shall thou find with
God. It is very observable that the Psalmist has delivered, Psalm. 146.7.8. The
Lord executes judgment for the oppressed, he gives food to the hungry, the
Lord loses the prisoners, the Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord
raises them that are bowed down. These are all common mercies to wicked men:
but what will he do for righteous men? Sure much more for them; yet mark what
he adds instead of all: The Lord loves the righteous: as if his love were
better then all those before named, or rather because his love is the ground of
all other favors, and because he loves them, he can deny them nothing for
themselves or others. So Psalm. 5.12. The Lord blesses the righteous; the Lord
hears the prayers of the righteous, etc. Insomuch, that when God is resolved
to punish a People or Nation, he is feign to bid his Favorites not to pray for
them, Ier. 14. and 15. Chap. Pray not for this people: Nay to entreat them, not
to entreat him, but to let him alone, that he may destroy them, as he did to
Moses. It is a very extraordinary case when such Favorites as Noah, Job and
Daniel, cannot deliver a Nation, but only their own souls, Eze. 14.14. any
ordinary favor they may procure for others, as well as for themselves.

Secondly, all Good things, as they are promised to, 2. All good things are
intended for them.
so they are primarily, if not only intended for the Good; nothing for wicked
men, but as by reason of their vicinity, and near neighborhood they fall upon
them, because they cannot well be separated. All is yours, says the Apostle to
his Corinthian Saints, the world it self is yours, 1 Cor. 3. last. Our Savior
has made a distribution of the whole world, Matthew. 5. Heaven is given to the
poor in spirit. Earth is bequeathed to the meek: what then remains for the
proud and scornful wicked men, but Hell, their proper inheritance? as it is
said of Judas, that son or heir of perdition, that he was gone to his own
place, Act. 1.25. Now then, if wicked men have any thing, they have it for the
godly men's sakes, because they are mixed together. As the Sun shines upon the
stony rocks, as well as upon the low valleys; and the rain falls upon the
barren mountains, as well as upon the fruitful meadows, but were intended
only for the latter. The tares in the field receive and partake of the dewes
and shoures of heaven, but not for their own, but for the corns sake. The
Heathen man saw this truth by the twilight of nature; God, (says he) provided
all Good things for the Good, but they befall the evil men, because they
cannot be separated. And it is better to profit or do good to evil men for
the Goods sake, then to be wanting to the Good for evil men's sake. The world
it self stands for the Elects sake; if their number were once made up, as the
old world perished by water so soon as Noah and his family were housed in the
Arc, so this present world should be destroyed with fire, 2 Pet. 3.

3. All judgments are provided for wicked men.
Thirdly, as all Good things are intended for the Good: so all judgments and
punishments, are provided and prepared for the wicked, none for Good men,
further then they communicate more or less, in the wickedness of the places
and times where they live. The whip is for the Ass, and the rod for the fools
back, Prove. 26.3. Great plagues remain for the ungodly, Psalm. 32.10. Upon the
ungodly he shall rain snares, storm, and tempest, fire and brimstone, Psalm,
11. Now then, because it is against justice to punish the Righteous with the
wicked, or for wicked men's sake, Abraham pleads it so with God, Will thou
destroy the righteous with the wicked? far be that from thee; Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right, Genesis 18 25. And God admits the plea as just
and reasonable, as you may see, If I find fifty righteous, I will spare all
the place for their sakes. Either therefore God must separate the righteous
from the wicked (as sometimes indeed he does) or else he must destroy the
righteous with the wicked, or for the wickeds sake, which is unjust; or else
he must spare the wicked for the righteous sake. And we have a kind of a
Proverb common amongst us, It is better to save two Nocents, then to destroy
one Innocent. The very tares (as was said) are spared for the wheats sake.

Fourthly, Good men are studious and active for the public Good, 4. They are
active for the public Good
(as we shall hear anon) as well as for their own, yea above, and with
neglect of their own Good. They employ all their parts, wisdom, strength,
riches, interests, for the Public Good; all their prayers and power with God
to the Good of others. Now it is a wonderful wel-pleasing thing to God to see
men of his own disposition, to neglect themselves for Gods glory and his
peoples Good, that he will, even for their sakes, stay or remove a judgment,
and drop down blessings upon others, and they perhaps wicked. As when Moses
desired to be blotted out of Gods Book, rather then Gods glory should suffer,
or his people be destroyed; God takes it so well, that he spares a rebellious
people for his sake. These reasons may serve for the confirmation: 5. The
Applition, then.
We now come to the application of it, before we proceed to the next.

1. Then on the contrary; wicked evil men, 1. Wicked men are public evils.
are public evils; they are not hurtful only to themselves, that is the
least part of their Illness, but to the Places, Families, Towns, Cities,
Countries, the whole Island or Kingdom where they live. One sinner destroys
much good. Eccles. 9. last. and hinders much good, and brings much evil;
brings an house, or City into a Snare, or sets them all on fire. One spark has
been the cause of the burning of a whole town: One Achan troubled and had like
to have ruined a whole Army. One and every wicked man is a curse, a pest, a
viper to the place where he lives. A fruitful land, he makes barren for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psalm. 107.34. These, these are the men
that violate the peace and happiness of a Nation, that withold Good things
from it: The Prophet Zach. 5. saw in a vision a flying roll, written full of
curses, without and within: And it shall enter (says the Lord) into the house
of the thief, and of him that swears falsely, etc. It is a wonder to me,
that many families and towns, are not ruined and destroyed, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein, so full of curses, and oaths, and
blasphemies. No wonder there is so much trouble and perplexity in our Cities
and Countries, and whole Kingdom, seeing wickedness so much abounds n every
place: But especially considering, that our land is so full of scornful men,
Especially scornful men.
both secret and open. Secret scorners, that in their hearts, deride and
despise, not only Goodmen, but Goodness it self, and the power and practice
of Godliness. Many perhaps, that make a fair show of Religion, frequent the
Assemblies, observe Fasts and days of Humiliation, and yet in their hearts
despise and deride all such Devotions, as either needless, or useless. Many
open scorners, that are professed mockers and flouters of Religion, and them
that desire to profess it, in the strictest and exactest way. Hypocritical
Mockers at Feasts, as David calls them, the drunkards that made songs of him,
and all that profess Godliness. Amongst these you may reckon your
Stage Players, who had skoffed Religion, out of countenance with many. You have
done well, to put them down, and shall do better if you keep them down. Add
to these, your profane soldiers, who undertaking to fight for Religion, do as
much scorn it and the professors of it, with names of reproach, as any of the
Cavaliers. Can we wonder to see our Cities and Countries so ensnared, and
enfired; when all places are full of such skorners, as our text mentions? When
one blesses and another curses, which will God hear? said a Wiseman. This
mixture of so many scorners with some few wise men, in our Cities, in our
Armies, makes things thus to hang in aequilibrio: Now we have a victory, then
by and by a loss and defeat: God himself seems to be doubtful whether he
should save us for some Good men's sake, or destroy us for these many scorners
sake. Salvian complained of his times, and it is our case at this time. Si quis
ex Nobilibus, etc. If any of the Nobility or Gentry begin to be Religious, he
presently looses the Honor of his Nobility: Oh (says he) what honor is
there among Christian people, when Religion makes men vile? Oh shameful and
unsufferable wickedness! It is not so with any Religion as it is with ours. In
any Religion of Jews, Turks, Papists, the more strict and exact, the more
Honored and esteemed: Only in the Protestant Religion, the stricter and
preciser, the more scorned and despised. It was a very noble act, that of
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.29. I make a decree, that every people, nation and
language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dunghill, etc. I could wish, that our Lawmakers, would provide a Statute, that
it might be lawful for no man, with impunity, to deride and scorn Religion, or
the strict profession of it: And there is good reason for it; For 1. Scornful
men bring a City into a snare, or set a City on fire. 2. Their punishment would
be exemplary to others: Smite a Scorner and the simple will beware. Prove.
19.25. When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise. Prove. 21.11. And
once more (as if it were a matter of great observance, and greater
consequence:) Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea strife
and reproach shall cease. Prove. 22.10. Thirdly, and lastly, Though every Good
man be a public Good and blessing to the place, yet especially the heirs of
restraint, (as a Magistrate is described, Judge. 18.27.) That is, public
persons if they be Good, are double blessings, as Good men, as Good
Magistrates; such wise men especially turn away wrath: Review but those places
before alleged, Jer. 5.10. Run too and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, -- and see if you can find a man, if there be any (one) that
executes judgment, and I will pardon it. And so of another, it is said, Then
stood up Phineas and executed judgment, and so the plague was stayed, Psalm.
106.30. I speak unto wise men, judge ye what I say. A word to the wise is
enough.

2. It shows the blessedness of that Family, Town, City, 2. The blessedness
of places where any Good men.
etc. that has these Good and Righteous men amongst them, if they knew their
happiness. Many a judgment is prevented, many a blessing is procured, or
continued for their sakes, when wicked men know not to whom they are beholding.
These are the Towers and Castles: These are Walls and Bulwarks: These are the
Forts and Ammunition: These are the Horsemen and Chariots of a Kingdom; and
for their sakes, Towns and Cities are preserved. The Sodomites were beholding
to Lot for the welfare of their City, so long as he was in it, though they
acknowledged it not. You know what was said of those two great and holy
Prophets, Elija and Elisha; when Elijah was taken away in a fiery chariot, his
servant and successor Elisha saw his strength and safety, and therefore cried
out, My Father, my Father, the horsemen of Israel, and the chariots thereof.
And a King wicked enough, said as much of Elisha, My Father, my Father, the
horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof, when he lay a dying. But Elisha's
servant saw the reason of it, when an army of Soldiers beset the Town of
D^than, and thought to have taken Elisha, and plundered the town; the servant
cries out, alas Master, we are undone: Elisha prays, Lord open his eyes; and
presently he saw the Mountain full of horses and Chariots of fire, round about
Elisha. 2. Kings 6.17. One Elisha was a better guard then all the hosts of
Israel. But I let that pass.

3. The folly and madness of the world, in 1. Imputing all evils to them.
3. It shows the foolish unthankfulness, and indeed the folly and madness of
the wicked men of the world.

1. In imputing all their evils and miseries to Good men, as if they were the
causes of all the troubles and calamities, that befall them. So they said of
Paul and his companions, Act. 16.20. These men which are Jews, trouble our
City. So Tertullus the Orator, elegantly and learnedly charges Paul, Act.
24.5. Certainly we have found this man, a pestilent fellow, (a pestilence, in
the Original) a mover of sedition, among all the Jews, throughout the world,
etc. So Ahab, not only accounts Elijah his own enemy; but also charges him,
with the miseries of the times; Art thou he that troubles Israel? No says he,
It is thou and thy fathers house, in that you have forsaken the commandments
of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. 1. King. 18.18. So it was in the
primitive times, the Christians were charged with all the calamities that fell
upon them: So it is now; All these troubles and wars are caused by the
Puritanes, etc. No, no, it is you that trouble England; your drunkenness and
whoredoms, and blasphemies, etc. these are the troublers of England; you that
are scornful men, that scoff and deride Godliness, and God himself; That
despise his Ministers and mock at his Messengers, till there be no remedy. 2.
Chr. 36.16. It was an hard case that Solomon tells of; Eccles. 9.14 15.16. A
little City and few men in it, and a great King came against it, and compassed
it about, and builded forts against it; And there was found therein a poor and
wise man, and he delivered the City by his wisdom; but none remembered this
poor man: Then said I, better is wisdom then strength; yet the wisdom of
the poor is despised, and his words are not heard. That Good men should deliver
the Island, and be forgotten or despised, is a sad condition; but that they
should be charged with the troubles and desolations of a Kingdom, who are the
preservers of it; this is most unreasonable.

2. But the madness and unthankfulness of the world appears more yet in
persecuting and banishing Good men out of their houses, Towns, Countries, even
out of the world, 2. Persecuting the Good
if they could. Foolish men and unthankful: They are beholding to them for all
the Good they have; and do they requite them thus? Is this your kindness to
your friends? As was said to one, many good works have they done for you, for
which of them do you persecute and banish them? Yea, but what madness is this
to stop up the fountains, at least the pipes, through which all the streams
of blessings come? To pull away the props that uphold a Nation, the pillars
that uphold the house from falling upon the heads of the owners: To drive the
City of all the guards, and pull down the Forts and Bulwarks of defense, when
an Enemy comes to besiege it, this is little less then frenzy. The Sodomites
did what they could to drive Lot out of their City, who alone kept off that
shower of fire and brimstone from them. As Sampson pulling down the pillars,
pulled the house upon his own head: so do these hasten their own
destruction. If all the Elect were once but gathered out of the world, it would
soon be all on a flaming fire about their ears. Banish but all godly men out
of a City, Country, etc. and desolation will soon follow. And therefore it is
noted as a prognosticke and forerunner of ruin, to a place of Kingdom, when
righteous men are taken away from the evil to come, Esaias 57.1.

4. This is a ground of strong encouragement, 4. Encouragement and comfort.
and consolation, both in special to Good men, and generally to this Nation.

First, To Good and Godly men in special, 1. To Good men themselves.
that they are thus highly favored and graced by God, as to make them public
Goods, and Blessings to the places where they live. Joab took it as a great
favor, that King David would condescend to gratify him in a request for his
own son Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.22. By this I know that thy servant has found
favor in thy sight, in that the King has fulfilled the request of his
servant. What an honor then is it for a poor sinful man to have this favor
with the King of Heaven, not only to grant the requests of his servants for
themselves, but when they say nothing, even for their sakes to show mercy unto
others? What a strange piece of complement, or rather real honor was it for
God to say to Moses, as a man to his friend, Let me alone that I may destroy
them, when Moses said nothing that we hear of? What an honor was it to Saint
Paul, that without asking, God should give him the life of all the souls that
sailed with him? If a man had but so much favor with a King, it would make him
proud, and scarce to know the ground he goes on: Why, such honor have all Gods
Saints, even to the least of all Saints (as Paul of himself) is this honor
given that God can deny them nothing. Mark how Eliphaz applies it to Job in
particular, Job 22.30. The innocent shall deliver the Island. True, might he
say, but what is that to me? Therefore he adds, And it is delivered by the
pureness of thy hands. As if he should say, thou being innocent and pure,
shall have the same Favor, thou shall deliver not thy self only, but the
Island. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Secondly, To this Land and Nation 2. To this Land and Nation.
of ours in general, it is no less encouragement; That it shall not yet be
totally destroyed, though the sins and sinners be many, though there be many
scornful men, that bring the Land and City into many snares, and have
enkindled many fires; yet there are many wise men (blessed be the Grace of our
God) that is many Good men, that do help to turn away wrath: many faithful
Abraham's, many righteous Lots, many meek Moses's, many holy Paul's, that
intercede with God for the Land: If there were any sweet of comfort to be
sucked out of the gall of bitterness. I mean the wickedness of an Enemy,
that their destruction hastens a pace, our Enemies are as desperately wicked,
as we could desire them: But our comfort lies not in their wickedness so much
as in the Goodness of some of our own, or rather in the Goodness and Grace
of our God; who for their sakes uses to show favor to the places where they
live. It is known well enough, what God would have done to a desperately
wicked City, as any was at that time, yet if there had been but fifty, nay but
ten righteous men in Sodom, for their sakes all had been spared. We trust we
may safely say, and without any arrogance, there are many fifties, many ten
thousands in this our Land, that never bowed the knee to Baal, that cry night
and day to God that the Island may be delivered. Suffer us, O Father of
mercies, to plead an argument of thine own framing, as Abraham did for Sodom,
we are bad enough, perhaps as bad or worse then Sodom, yet suffer us holy
God, to speak but this once; Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked?
Be it far from thee from doing this thing, to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be even as the wicked, be it far from
thee: Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18.23.25. Upon this
ground we believe, though we may have a sharp storm, yet it will blow over
again. God never yet (and will he begin now?) destroyed an humbling,
fasting, praying, reforming Nation. Those Innocents, righteous men, we hope,
shall deliver the Island: Even so, Amen.

5. This may serve for a ground of Exhortation, 5. Exhortation.
and that branches it self two ways, to the wicked, and to the Good:

1. To the wicked world, and that in a double respect: 1. To wicked men.

1. To the Good.


First, to cease from evil, and to learn to do well, to labor to become Good
and righteous men, even for this reason, that as now they are curses and
mischiefs to the places where they live, as well as to themselves, and are
branded with this ignominious title of Incendiaries of the Kingdom; so being
Good, they may be honored as blessings and public Goods. This argument
Eliphaz presses Job withal, Job 22.30. after many other encouragements;
Acquaint thy self now with the Lord, etc. why? because then, thou shall pray
unto him and he shall hear thee, verse. 27. And last of all, thou shall be
honored as the Deliverer of the Island: The innocent shall deliver the Island,
and it is delivered by the pureness of (thy) hands. The like argument the Lord
himself urges upon a formal faster, Esaias 58. that he would fast to purpose,
by fasting from sin and wickedness, and begin to be righteous and
merciful, Is not this the Fast that I have chosen to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, etc.
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring
forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of
the Lord shall be thy reward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer,
etc. And after all, thus he concludes to our present purpose, verse. 12. And
they that shall be of thee, shall build the old waste places; thou shall raise
up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called the repairer
of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in. That is, thou shall be
honored and renowned in present and future times, as a man that has been a
public Good and a blessing to the places where thou livedst: That's the first.

2 To love and make much of those that are Good.
2. If we cannot persuade scornful men to be Good themselves, yet let them be
persuaded for their own sakes, to make much of those that are Good and
righteous: love them and honor them, if not for Goodness sake, yet for your
own Goods sake; you are beholding to them for all the Good you have and do
enjoy next under God. The Prophet advises the people going into Captivity, that
they would seek the peace of that wicked City (Babylon) and pray unto the Lord
for it, for (says he) in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jer. 29.7. And
you make much of a bad servant, because he is profitable and beneficial to
you; how much more of those that never did you hurt, that constantly do you
Good; preventing judgments and procuring mercies, your very life and
livelihood, and all your welfare depends upon it. I leave it to your
consideration; and come,

2. To Good men.
Secondly, to speak a word of exhortation to Good men that they would be Good
still, and improve all their interest in God in these troublesome and
calamitous times for the public Good: First, to be Good still, 1 To b^e Good,
and better still.
and more Good as there is more need and use for the public Good: He that is
holy, let him be holy still, and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still. The better man the greater Good. As we see it is the policy of
children, when they have any suit or request to promote, they are commonly
double diligent to insinuate themselves into our affections and favor. It was
Esthers wisdom to ingratiate herself with King Abashuerosh, when she had a very
great request to make unto him; she first invites him to a banquet to sweeten
his affections to her, insomuch that he asks her that intended to ask him,
What will thou Queen Esther, what is thy request, and it shall be granted thee
to the half of the Kingdom, Esth. 5.3. But she has not yet enough hold of
his affections, therefore she desires only that the King would come to the
banquet which she had prepared for him; at which time the King makes the same
demand, What is thy petition, etc. but yet she forbeares, as intending to
ingratiate herself more with him; thereupon she renewes her former request,
that he would come next day to another banquet, and then supposing herself
endeered to him, out comes her great request, Chap. 7.3. If I have found favor
in thy sight, O King, and if it please thee King, let my life be given me at my
petition, and my people at my request. It is worth our imitation in such times
of distress, when our lives and lands lie at stake, to make our way with God,
by more exact observance of him, to indeere our selves unto him, that so for
our sakes, not only our own lives, but our Island may be granted at our
requests. Secondly, to improve all the interests they have in God, 2. To
improve their interest in God.
and all their grace and favor with him (which we have heard is much) for the
public Good: The King of Heaven can deny you nothing: To what purpose is this
Grace and Privilege with God, if we make not use of it as Abraham did? The
whole Kingdom and Church of God cries to you as to our Savior, If thou can
do any thing, come and help us? Ply God with prayers and tears, and be
importunate, yea in a holy manner impudent, till he make this our Land the
praise and glory of all the earth. In a word, employ your parts and abilities
for the public Good, which is done by getting public Spirits: But that leads
me to the second branch of my general Observation, to that I now come: And
that is this, Good men are public Goods actively: That is, they are men of
public Spirits, 2. Branch: Good men are public Goods actively. This is
preferring the Public before their own private Good. That this is rightly
collected, I refer to the explication of the words, and proceed to the
confirmation.

1. Commanded.
1. This is Commanded in the Scriptures, as the duty of every Christian: Let us
do good to all, especially to the household of faith. Gal. 6.10. By love serve
one another, Gal. 5.13. Let no man seek his own things, but every man
another wealth, or welfare. 1. Cor. 10.24.

2. This is Commended 2. Commended by instances.
by the Spirit of God in Scripture, to have been the practice of all Good men:
we observe some memorable instances. And we begin with Moses, 1. Of Moses.
who spent himself in the public affairs of the people, in judgeing all
causes brought before him, till Jethro his Father in law gave him wise
counsel. Exodus 18.17.18. The things which thou do is not well, thou will
surely wear away, (thou will faint and fall) and all this people with thee,
for the thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to do it thy self
alone. And when God offered him one of the greatest offers that ever was made
to a mortal man, to bribe him (that I may so say) and to take him off from
seeking and entreating for the Good of his people, he utterly refused it, Exodus
32.9, 10, 11, etc. The Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and
behold it is a stiffenecked people. Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath
may wax hot against them, and consume them, and I will make of thee a mighty
people. But Moses prayed unto the Lord his God, etc. And another time, when the
Lord seemed resolved to destroy that people, he ventures not only his life but
his soul between them and the wrath of God: If thou will pardon this people,
well; if not, blot me out of thy Book, etc. The like we may observe in David,
2. Of David.
He fed the people with a true heart, and ruled them prudently with all his
power, Psalm. 7, 72. And as if the spirit of Moses had been upon him, he exposes
himself to the sword of the destroying Angel to stay it from the people, 2 Samuel 24.17, Behold I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly, (takes all the
fault upon himself, and all the punishment too) but these sheep what have they
done? Let thine hand I pray thee be against me and my fathers house. This is
the commendation of that Good man Jehojada 3. Of Jehojada.

2 Chronicles. 24.16.


the high Priest, and the Epitaph upon his grave, made by the Spirit of God,
They buried him in the City of David amongst the Kings, because he had done
good in Israel both toward God, and toward his house. Mordecai also was a
man of the like spirit, whose life and story is concluded with this Elegy, He
was next unto the King, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the
multitude of his brethren. There is his Greatness, his Goodness follows,
Seeking the wealth of the people, and speaking peace to all his people, Esth.
10.3. But most memorable is the instance of that Good and Great man Nehemiah, 4
Of Nehemiah.
who living in the favor of a King, and in all pleasures of a Court, yet
enjoyed not himself, whilst he understood the miseries of his people, and the
Desolations of the house of God, and of his City, as in Nehem. 1. and 2.
Chapters, may easily appear. But the discovery of his public spirit, with
neglect of all private interests, is most remarkable, Nehem. 5.14. Twelve
years together; from the twentieth year, even unto the two and thirtieth of
King Artaxerxes, that is, twelve years. I and my brethren have not eaten the
bread of the Governor. For the former Governors that were before me, had been
chargeable to the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, besides forty
shekels of silver, yea, and their servants bare rule over the people, (as great
men's servants use to do) but so did not I, because of the fear of God. But
then, it may be, as he had nothing, so he did nothing, but only oversee the
people: For that, see what follows, verse 16. Yet also I continued in the work
of this wall, -- and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work. That
is, though neither I nor my servants had any allowance, yet we were as active
and diligent in the maine work, as they that took wages for their work. But
perhaps he had a great estate or revenue of his own, and improved that to his
own best advantage: There were many poor Jews that were glad for necessity, to
sell their inheritances, and so he made good bargains for himself by buying
land at the cheapest rate: No, says he, We bought no land, as some others did:
And lest any man should think, though he did not get by the public
calamities, yet he might save his own estate, by living privately, and below
his estate, and the dignity of a Governor; he adds, Moreover there were at my
table an hundred and fifty of the (poor) Jews and Rulers, besides those that
came unto us from among the Heathen that are about us, verse 17. His charge and
expenses is set down in the 18. verse to be very great; Yet for all this
required not I the bread of the Governor, because the bondage was great upon
this people. All these considered, you will hardly find a man of so public a
spirit in all the Scripture. Only one we find in the new Testament, that comes
something near him in spiritual respects, and that is Saint Paul, 5. Of Paul.
first he says, he had upon him the care of all the Churches. Secondly, he
labored more then all the Apostles, spared no pains, feared no dangers, ran
through many perplexities and hazards, by sea and land, by brethren and
strangers, etc. Thirdly, though he might have been chargeable as an Apostle of
Christ, and had power to eat and drink, and to carry about a sister, a wife,
as other Apostles did; yet he used not this power, but preached the Gospel
freely; and lest he might be chargeable, he wrought with his own hands to
supply his necessities; and as he sought not his own profit, but the profit of
many, that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 10. last; so spent himself in the
public service, venturing his own life for the Good of the Church: I count
not my life dear to me, so that I may finish my course with joy, Act. 20.24.
Yea (says he) and if I be offered (powered forth as a drink offering (...))
upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with you all,
Phil. 2.17. And (to omit many things of like kind) that there might be an
example and instance of one under the New Testament, not inferior to the
highest in the Old, hear what he says like another Moses, if not beyond him)
I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart; For I could wish
that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according
to the flesh, Romans 9.2, 3. We need say no more, we have given instances of all
sorts, Kings, Priests, Magistrates, Ministers, of eminently public spirits,
to make good our assertion, That Good men are public Goods Actively, as well
as Passively: That is, men of public spirits, active for the public Good,
though passive in neglect of themselves. Do but take the Reasons 3. Grounded
on Good Reasons.
of it, and we shall hasten to the Application.

1. Good men are made partakers of the divine Nature, 1. They partake of the
divine Nature.
2 Pet. 1.4. and so made conformable to God, their heavenly Father, and to
Christ their Head. The Proverb is, A Good the more common it is, the better it
is: we may invert it, The better any thing is, the more communicative it is of
it self; God himself, the best and greatest Good, communicates himself to
all his creatures, with no respect of any profit to himself. The eyes of all
things wait upon thee, O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due season,
Psalm. 145.15. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every living
thing. Thou art Good, and do Good, Psalm. 119.68. The Lord is Good to all,
and his mercy is over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. He makes his Sun to shine
upon the Good and the bad, and his rain to fall upon the just and unjust. The
Lord Jesus also is called the common Salvation, Jude verse 3. He went about
doing Good, and healing every disease. He gave himself for all his sheep and
wholly for every one: Who loved me and gave himself for me, says Paul, as if
he had loved and dyed for none but him: O bone Jesu, etc. as that Father in a
sweet meditation, and Soliloquie of his, O sweet Savior Jesus, who take care
for all of us, as if we were but one man, and so for every one, as for all?
Christ pleased not himself, sought not his own profit, his own glory, but
the salvation of his people. Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 2.5. And so it is in some proportion; the same nature, the same
mind, and so followers of God as dear children, and of Christ their Head, and
so communicative of their Goodness to others: The ground of this in God, is
his Al-sufficiency partly, he needs not the Good of any creature, and partly
his Great Goodness, whereof he is so full, that as the Sea empties it self
into the springs and rivers, so does he communicate his Goodness to the
creatures. Good men then being made partakers of the All-sufficient and Good
God, are like him in this, to seek the public Good, with neglect of
themselves: and that's the first.

2. Grace enlarges the heart.
2. Grace and Goodness enlarges the heart, and hand, and all: So the Apostle, 2
Cor. 6.11, 12, 13. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is opened to you, our heart is
enlarged; ye are not straightened in us, but ye are straightened in your own bowels:
Be ye also enlarged. As if he should say, it is your fault that you have no
more benefit by us; you are not capable of what we are able and willing to
give: And so to his Thessalonians, 1. These. 2.8. Being affectionately desirous
of you, we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us. It is observable, that
is noted of those first converts, who were before strait-hearted and
strait-handed, but when once made partakers of the Grace of God, how much they
were enlarged, Neither was there any among them that lacked; for as many as
were possessours of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold: And laid them down at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made to every man, according as he had need, Act. 4.34, 35.
And before that, Act. 2.44. All that believed were together, and had all things
common. Omnia indiscreta apud nos praeter uxores, said Tertullian of his times,
All things with us, are common, except wives.

3. Grace sets up another end.
3. Grace alters and sets up another End in a man, that is Gods Glory in the
public Good, for therein is Gods Glory most conspicuous. Our ends are private
in Nature, we are our own Alpha and Omega; our selves are beginning and ending
to our own selves, our own god, selfish in all, as they say; Self Ends,
Self-profit, Self-honour, etc. Now the first Lesson in the School of Christ
is, Self-denial, let him deny himself, his own reason, his own will, his
own affections, his own ends. Mark what a new End the Apostle sets up, 1
Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all
to the glory of God: And then, that you may see he means the Glory of God in
the public Good; he adds in the last verse, Even as I please all men in all
things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be
saved. A natural man called out to public services, is ready to plead his
own private interests: as the trees did in Jothams parable, Judge. 9.9. Should
I leave my fatness says the Olive tree: Should I leave my sweetness, says
the Fig tree, or I leave my wine says the Vine, to be promoted over the trees.
The words rendered to be promoted over the trees, are significant in the
Hebrew, to go up and down for (other) trees? That is, Shall I neglect my
self, my own profit, my own honor, my own pleasure, to run up and down
(as a Magistrate or a public person must) to do others service? It is a
common and received Proverb in nature, proximus egomet mihi, I am my own next
neighbor: and that is another much alike, Charity begins at home. And a third
is as common, Every man for himself, and God (only) for all. Thus indeed
speaks nature, but Grace clean otherwise, as you have heard; we are Selfe-ends,
and Selfe-gods, in nature; In Grace, Homo homini Deus, every man is a God to
another: that is a third.

4. A Good man is made a member of the body mystical: 4. They are members of
the body mystical.
Now as it is in nature, every member of the body natural, serves not it self
alone, but is a servant to the whole body; The eye sees, not for it self (sees
not it self) but for the whole body, the hand works not, the foot moves not
for it self, but for the whole body: So it should be in the body political,
so it is in the body mystical, every member is serviceable to the community:
More might be added, but these shall suffice for the present, and so we come to
Application. 4. Applied.


1. The first Use shall be for Discovery (and this is a time of great
Discoveries) of bad and naughty hearts. 1. For discovery of bad hearts.
Before we come to particulars, we may justly take up the complaint of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord, for there is not a Godly man left, the
faithful are minished from among the sons of men. That is, if we look upon
the generality of men, there will be but a few Good men be found: we may make
the Discovery by these two things: 1. That many have public spirits indeed
but for public mischiefs: 2. That many have private spirits in public
causes: we will note some particu^ars briefly.

1. Public mischiefs, as
1. There are many, that have Public Spirits, not for the public Good, but for
public evil, to the places where they live, just like the bramble in Jothams
parable, Judge. 9.14.15. chosen to reign over the trees, who did scratch and
catch all for it self. Publico malo nati: as if they were borne for public
mischief; like Paris, whose mother Hecuba dreamed, when she was with child of
him, that she was delivered of a burning firebrand; and so he proved to his
Country, if stories say true; For through his means, the City Troy, was set on
fire, and the Country ruined. Such firebrands, there are many now to be found,
who have set this (as well as other) Kingdoms on fire, or brought Towns,
Cities, Countries, into a snare, as our text speaks: we note some.

1. Papists and Jesuits.
1. As first, Papists, home-borne Papists, who are the vipers that most
unnaturally have endeavored to eat through their mothers bowels. Not their
nature only, but their Religion also, teaches and allows them for the Good of
the Catholic cause, falsely so called, not to spare their own native Country,
their own kindred, Brothers, Fathers, no not of their own Religion, if it be
for the public Good, of their false Religion. To blow up Parliaments, to ruin
Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, is their ordinary work. Especially of those,
whom they call Jesuits, the Bellows of Hell, the Incendiaries of
Christendom, at this day. The Curse of God is upon them fearfully for
arrogating their Name from Jesus, which signifies a Savior, and is
impropriated to the Son of God: Thou shall call his name Jesus. These men,
that call themselves Jesuits, are, by the just judgment of God upon them, the
Destroyers of Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and might far better take their
name from him, who is called in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greek Apolluon, but
signifying a Destroyer. Revel. 9.11.

2. Next to these, are those, (prophesied to fall into these last and worst
times: 2. Tim. 3.) whom the Apostle calls Traitors. 2. Traitors to their
Country.
In the last days shall come perilous times, for men shall be lovers of
themselves, Proud, boasters, Traitors: Not only betraying the public trust,
but even their own Countries and Kingdoms. Woeful experience have these our
sad times, of these public mischiefs: who have forsaken their faith, betrai^d
the charges wherewith they were entrusted, and with them, as much as in them
lay, betrayed their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and which is most unnatural,
themselves, and their Posterities to perpetual misery.

3. Add to these, those of our text, proud, scornful men, 3. Seditious ^piri
s.
who by stirring up Seditions, and strife, in Towns and Cities, have set all
places almost on fire: Only by pride men make contention: Prove. 13.10. Cast
out the scorner, and contention shall go out: Prove. 22.10. Yea strife and
reproach shall cease. Such an one was that Silver-smith Demetrius, Acts 19. who
under a pretense of defense of religion, (but indeed for his own gain) set all
the City of Ephesus on an uproare. Such another was Achitophel, who adoring the
rising Sun, fomented that Sedition and Rebellion of Absalom, out of his own
Ambition, to ingratiate, and advance himself, with that young Prince. All
times, and especially these of ours, have exemplified these Incendiaries; the
pride and scorn of some, have stirred up so much contention, and kindled so
great a flame, that all the Wise men; of the Kingdom know not well how to
quench it.

4. Amongst these may be reckoned, a multitude of men who are Public enemies
to the State and Kingdom: As first, Oppressors, and Depopulators, 4.
Oppressors, Depopulators, etc.
who do not, as they of old, in the Prophet, add house to house, or town to
town, but pull down house after house, and town after town, till there be no
place, for a poor man to dwell near them, till at last they pull down their
own houses, and destroy their own families, that their place cannot be found.
So that the prophetical curse is now made good upon many of them; Therefore
thus says the Lord, many houses great and fair shall be left desolate without
an inhabitant, Isay. 5.9. Such are the Projectors, the Monopolists of later
times, who under pretense of Public Good, have enriched themselves, with the
spoils of the Commonwealth: These and such like, are the Catterpillers and
locusts of the places and Countries where they live; and as the Father said of
Ingrossers of corn that made a famine in plenty, mercatores humanarum
calamitatum, the Merchants of humane miseries and calamities. In a word, all
Politicians that drive their own designs, at the public charges in public
places of employment; Men, like that unjust Steward in the Gospel, who being
entrusted with the public Treasure, for an hundred write down fourscore,
perhaps but fifty; diverting the public stock into their own purses, to make
themselves rich, in the public poverty of the State. This is, as if a man in a
ship, in a storm, when all is like to be cast away, should gather all the
wealth of the ship into his own cabine; or as if the stomach a public officer
in the body natural, should keep all the meat to it self, and starve the whole
body. Well fare yet that Noble spirited Nehemiah, we spoke of before, that was
so far from eating the bread of the people, That he did not eat the bread of
the Governor; because the bondage was great upon the people. Nehem. 5.17.18.
Well fare also those just Stewards, those faithful and honest Treasurers,
entrusted with the public stock; 2. King. 12.15. and 22.7. They reckoned not
with the men, into whose hands they delivered the money, to be bestowed on
workmen, for they dealt faithfully.

2. Private* Spirits.
2. As there are many evil public spirits; so also many private evil spirits,
in the public causes of God and the State: (Not to speak of Idle persons, our
lazy Gallants, in times of peace, that confer nothing to the public Good,
by any public useful employment, as all creatures in the world do, besides
themselves,) We may take up the complaint of the Apostle, Phil. 2.21. All seek
their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ: And we may see his prophecy
fulfilled. 2 Timothy 3.1.2. In the last days shall come perilous times, For men
shall be lovers of their own selves: why were not men ever Lovers of
themselves? Is it any such great fault or dangerous for men to love themselves?
Is it not natural for charity to begin at home? True, but the Apostle means,
that in the last times, men shall be Lovers of themselves, so that they shall
Love no body else, not their own posterity, not their own Country; and
therefore it follows in a few words after, men shall be Lovers of themselves
-- (...), without natural affection: So they may but save themselves and
sleep in a whole skin, let posterity take care for it self, let the community
sink or swim, they care not. Of this sort are all Newters, and at best
unwilling contributers, to the public causes of God and his people, either
with their estates or persons. First, for estates, men of a covetous churlish
disposition like Nabal, who when David sent messengers to him for some relief
and refreshment of himself and his soldiers, who were a protection to his
cattle and servants, returned this dogged answer, Shall I take my bread and my
water and my flesh, provided for the shearers of my sheep, and give it to men I
know not from whence they are? There be many servants now adays, that break
away from their masters, etc. 1 Samuel 25. Shall I leave my fatness says the
Olive? my sweetness, says the Figtree, etc. to go to be promoted over the
trees? Shall I leave my profit, my honor, my pleasure, for other men's sakes?
Mark (I pray) what a scornful answer the men of Succoth and Penuel gave to
Gideon that fought for them, when he spoke to them for some relief for his
fainting followers, Judge. 8.5, 6.
Give I pray you loves of bread unto the people that are faint. They answer him
with a flout and a jeer, Are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna, now in thine
hands, that thou say, Give bread, etc. How many are there that in this great
and public Cause now in agitation, have never yet contributed any thing,
(willingly) but ill words, mocks and jeers, though they have enjoyed the
benefit of public safety, they and theirs? To whom it may be said, as David
of Nabal, In vain have I kept all that this fellow had in the wilderness,
etc. 1 Samuel 25.21. These men perhaps, some of them, wish all were well, but
lend not the least assistance that all may be well: Sit still, and live to
themselves, and enjoy their own estates; even this discovers men to be Naught,
because they have such narrow, such private spirits in public Causes. Let
Laws and Liberties and Religion stand or fall, so they may but have peace upon
any conditions, so it cost them nothing. And so for their persons to be engaged
in the public service, how few are there that offer themselves willingly to
the work? Men strive not who shall go, but who shall not go to the wars;
what shuffling to avoid it when called forth? what starting back, what running
away, when any danger appears? what Apologies and excuses for themselves. It
has it seems been the fashion of former times as well as this? See but an
Instance in Judge. 5 14, 15, 16. where Deborah first discovers the Volunteers,
Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee Benjamin
among thy people out of Machir came down Governors, out of Zebulon they that
handle the pen of the writer. And the Princes of Issachar were with Deborah:
even Issachar and also Barak, he was sent on foot into the valley: But then
there were many Newters of other Tribes, For the divisions of Ruben were great
searchings of heart. Great searchings of heart? for what? to find excuses and
pretenses for their Newtrality and Cowardlynesse: So it follows, verse 16. Why
abodest thou (Ruben) amongst the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the
flocks? for the divisions of Ruben, there were great searchings of heart.
Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and why did Dan abide in ships? Asher continued on
the sea shore, and abode in his breaches. The meaning (as I conceive) may be
this, when these tribes should have gone freely to the wars, after Deborah
and Barac, they tarried all at home, and had great searchings of heart how to
answer it, if objected against them: Some, they had flocks of sheep to look to;
some could not get over Jordan; some were in their ships of merchandise; some
repairing their breaches, etc. thus they framed their excuses, some had one
impediment, some another. Just the case of these times, in the public cause
of Religion, etc. some have land to plow; some have harvest to get home; some
have a wife to please; some have houses and flocks to guard or secure, which
will be plunde^ed if they appear in the quarrel; some are poor, and have
wife and children to maintain: For the divisions of England, there are great
searchings of heart. These all discover their private spirits, and little Good
hearts. But mark what follows, Zebulon and Naphtali were a people that
jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field, verse 18.
and so showed themselves, both Good men and Good patriots. And this may serve
for the first Use of Discovery.

2. The second is for direction, in our choice of fit Instruments for public
places and employments. 2. Use: For direction in choice of public Instruments.
Choose a man of a Public spirit; that is to say, choose a Good man, and one
that is truly Religious, for such only are men of public spirits, for the
public Good. For example, First, in choice of a Minister, a public person;
(a business of great and common concernment in these times) If you would choose
one that shall be faithful and constant to you, choose not a man of a narrow or
private spirit: one that is either covetous, or ambitious, or voluptuous, that
seeks himself and his own ends, and not the things of Jesus Christ: such an
one will seek yours, not you; and when he has found what he seeks, will but a
little care for the flock. Amongst other qualifications of a Minister, the
Apostle requires, that he be not Covetous given to filthy lucre, not given to
wine, not voluptuous: A Good man only will make a Good Minister: as it is said
of Barnabas, He was a Good man, and full of the holy Ghost and of faith, and
much people was added to the Lord, Act. 11.24. A Good Minister is a good light,
a lamp, a candle that spends himself in giving light to others, whereas a
snuff burns and lights only within its own socket, but is dark and stinking
to others round about him. In a word, a Good Minister is like that Good
Shepherd that lays down his life for his sheep. Secondly, it may give us
direction also in choice of public Officers, Magistrates, Commanders, Knights
of the Shire, and Burgesses of Parliament, if ever we live to another election,
to seek out and choose men of public spirits; who are they? you will say: why
(say the world what they please) they are Good men, truly Godly men; they will
be constant and faithful in their entrustments, they will live and dye for
you, and with you: All other men will warpe and start aside like a deceitful
bow, will be corrupted or wrought like wax to take any impression of his own
or others designs. Experience has taught us something in this particular: In
these great divisions of this state, what discoveries have been made of false
and faithless hearts? In our great Senate, in our Armies, in all public
services: what strange discoveries have been made of those perhaps, whom we
little suspected. They say in politics, A man may be an ill man, yet a Good
Citizen. I am sure it is false in Divinity. He that is an ill man, can no more
be a Good patriot, a Good Commonwealths man, then evil can be Good. He may
perhaps be seemingly Good in times of peace, when no divisions, no temptations:
but no man will be constantly faithful, but he that is a man of a public
spirit, and no man but a Good man has a public spirit. Let it be a warning
to us for the present, and for the future, in choice of any public
Instruments; if we be again deceived, we may thank our selves. All, or a
great part of these present distractions of our state arise from hence, that
men in public places have private spirits, private ends and aims with
neglect of the public.

3. Uset double honor due to men of public spirits.
3. This may inform us, what Honor and estimation is due to Good men, men of
public spirits, that neglect themselves for the public Good, their own
profit, pleasure, Honor. Truly, what the Apostle speaks of laborious and
painful Ministers, That the Elders that rule well, are worthy or to be
accounted worthy of double Honor, especially they that labor in the word and
doctrine, is fairly by proportion, to be applied to all public Instruments of
public spirits. Men of private places, with public spirits, are worthy of
double honor, especially those who being employed in public services, do
labor, and even spend themselves, and what they have for the Good and welfare
of the Community. And what is that double honor? Countenance and maintenance,
say some: A lamp or candle that consumes it self to give others light (as
every faithful Minister does) deserves to be set, not under a bed or a
bushel, but upon a Table, as our Savior speaks; there is his Honor of
Countenance, and to be plentifully supplied with oil, to preserve it self for
the common Good, there is the Honor of Maintenance. The like is due to the
Magistrate, that is employed in the public services of the State; and to the
Soldier that jeopards his life in the high places of the field, to preserve
the lives of thousands. It is an odious and ignominious shame, that we should
choose men to employ in our public and common Concernments, spiritual or
temporal, (who must leave their fatness and their sweetness, and their wine,
(as the trees speak in the parable) which they might privately, and with ease
enjoy as well as we) and then when we have so done, desert them, both in regard
of Countenance and Maintenance, or assistance: This has been the case of many
Ministers in times past, and at the present, the condition of our Honorable
Patriots in Parliament: How shamefully have they been deserted (I wish that
were all, yea maligned, scoffed at by Scornful men, hated, opposed) even by
them that chose, and employed them. If men go on thus to forsake them, and let
them fall, for want of Assistance, it is just with God, they should never choose
more, or never live to partake of that common Good, which they desire and
endeavor to do for them. As therefore the Apostle spoke in a case of a
faithful Minister, so I of all of a public spirit, Receive them therefore in
the Lord, with all gladness, and hold such in reputation, because for the
work of Christ, they were near unto death, not regarding their own life, to
supply your lack of service, Phil. 2.29.30. And as Deborah gave her Volunteers
their due and double Honor, so let us do also; Hear what she says, My heart
is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among
the people; Bless ye the Lord, Judge. 5.9. and so she goes on to name the
tribes and persons, casting a secret reproach upon the Newters; and at last
come to it again: Zebulon and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their
lives unto the death in the high places of the field, verse 18. So say I, my
heart is toward the Governors of England, our Parliament Patriots, that
offered themselves willingly among the people: Bless ye the Lord. Bless ye
the Lord that raised up their persons, and their spirits, to stand for the
public Good of Religion, Laws and Liberties; and to spend their time, their
strength, their estates, their credits and honor, and lives for the same: And
blessed be they of the Lord, and their posterities after them for ever. My
heart is also toward those Noble Commanders and common Soldiers, that have
offered themselves willingly among the people, and have jeoparded their lives
in the high places of the field, bless ye the Lord that raised up their
spirits to such a pitch of Magnanimity and Resolution, and blessed be they of
the Lord; let their lives and names be precious with the Lord, and with the
generations to come. Lastly, my heart is toward the Honorable City and
Citizens, that offered themselves and their estates willingly among and above
all the Cities of the Kingdom, to the almost exhausting of their wealth and
treasure, to the public Good of the whole Land: Bless ye the Lord, that
stirred them up; and blessed be they of the Lord for ever: the Lord recompense
it upon them and theirs sevenfold. This is the least we can do for them, that
have bn Instruments of the public Good: Render to every one their due Honor
to whom Honor belongs, etc.

4. It may be a ground of Exhortation to all, especially to those who are
public persons, 4 Use: Exh^rt^tion to get pu^licke sp^rits.
to study and endeavor the public Good, above their own, with neglect of
their own sometimes; and to this end, to labor for public spirits: every
man to contribute his abilities of what kind soever, to be serviceable to the
Community. As above in the heavens, every Star, even the least contributes
its light and influence to the world, especially those of greater magnitude: So
let it be on earth, in a Church, in a State, every one cast in something to the
public Treasury: Some their wisdom and parts: Some their estates: Some their
strength: Some their persons and lives; all their prayers. 1. Persuaded.
For the persuading of this, consider these things:

1. We cannot (as has been said) otherwise approve our selves to God, to men,
or to our own consciences, 1. This an evidence of Goodness.
that we are Good men, have any true Goodness, true Grace, true Religion. A
Good man is a public Good, both Passively and Actively; is Good, and does
Good: A private spirit is an evidence of a natural heart. It was not a good
speech of the trees in the parable; Shall I leave my fatness or my sweetness,
etc. to be promoted over the trees, to go up and down for other trees? we
must, if we be trees of Gods Paradise, of Gods planting. He shall be like a
tree planted by the waters side, that brings forth his fruit in his season,
Psalm. 1. All times a reseasonable for a Christians fruit, and so are all
places: He has his fruit in private, but most in public.

2. This is the end of all our Abilities; 2. It is the end of all abilities.
Non nobis solum nati, etc. is a Proverbiall speech amongst the very Heathens:
we were not borne for our selves, nor live for our selves; our parents
challenge a part, our kindred and friends a part, our Country, our Religion,
all: We are but Stewards entrusted with our Masters Treasure, to be distributed
and laid out for the Good of the family: We are but Servants or Apprentices,
that have nothing properly our own; we come into the world to serve our
generation: It is the Scripture phrase, spoken of a King, King David, (...).
Acts 13.36. When he had served his generation, he fell asleep. In the great
world, all creatures contribute their share to the maintenance of the
Community: No creature is made for it self, none acts for it self, none
lives to it self but an idle person, and a Newter. The sheep, and bees, and
the rest, pay their tribute to Man, Sic vos non vobis, etc. and the bees in the
hives do not fill their cells with honey for their own private use, but every
own brings in, and lays up, as in a common treasury; and drones are either
killed, or banished from that little Commonwealth: In the body natural, every
member is a public servant, to the whole Corporation. And shall Christians in
the body mystical, or Citizens in the body political, vary from all the rest,
and live only to themselves.

3. This is very reasonable: 3. It is very Reasonable.
There Is none but lives upon the common stock, none but desires to partake,
and share, in the Public Good, of peace, plenty, liberty, laws, religion:
what reason or equity, they should expect it, if they contribute nothing to
it. Shall all other men, all other creaturs be made serviceable to them, and
they to no body? How can men desire of God with the Psalmist? That they may see
the Good of his chosen, that they may rejoice in the gladness of his nation,
that they may glory with his inheritance, Psalm. 106.5. if they have not some
way or other lent their assistance to the procuring of it. If they will not
suffer with Gods people, is it reason they should reign, or rejoice with them?
Such men may justly fear, that they shall be blasted by death, or otherwise,
that they shall never see the Good of Gods chosen, or not have any comfort in
it, though they see it. As the Prophet said to that unbeleeving Prince, that
doubted the plenty prophesied, as a thing impossible, though God should open
the windows of heaven; Behold (says he) thou shall see it with thine eyes,
but thou shall not eat thereof: 2. Ki. 7.2. And it was made good upon him,
verse 20. For the people trod upon him in the gate and he died. Let that be
considered.

4. It is very dangerous to have private Spirits, 4. A private Spirit is very
danger^us. In respect
in the public causes of God, and his people, both, in respect of men, and
God: Newters commonly fare worst. First in regard of men, 1. Of men.
they at least fall foul upon such, both sides sometimes. Experience tells us
of some, that for their Neutralitie have been plundered by both sides. See but
an instance of this in Scripture, Judge. 8.15.16.17. How sharply did Gideon
revenge himself upon the men of Succoth and Penuel: for what? for complying
with his enemies? no, but for their Neutralitie, and not affoording him a small
assistance. He took the Princes of Succoth, and the Elders thereof, even
threescore and seventeene men, and thorns of the wilderness, and briars, and
with them he taught the men of Succoth: And he beat down the tower of Penuel,
and slew the men of the City. And I have heard a French story, of a certain
Prince that in a war between the Emperor, and the French King, complied
secretly with both sides, which being discovered to both, by letters
intercepted, they both agreed to fall upon and break him, before they fell
upon one another.

But Secondly, if they escape with men, God 2. Of God.
will be sure to meet with them worse. That bitter execration of Meroz, is
well enough known, Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord,
curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not up to help
the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. And Mordecais message is also
well known: If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, deliverance shall
come, but thou and thy Fathers house shall perish.

5. This is very profitable 5. This is very profitable.
for a man's self; For what ever any man ventures in the public causes of God
and Religion, etc. this is the best way, 1. to Secure it, 2. to Repair it, 3.
to Improve it. First, to secure it, 1. To Secure.
be it credit, estate, life, any thing: we have a promise for this, He that
will save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his life for my sake
and the Gospels, shall save it. Say the same of estate, of credit, etc. The way
to save it, is to lose it, and the way to lose it, is to save it. Men think,
now in these troublesome times, to save their own stake, by sparing from the
public cause: if things fall out ill, they will have something to live on. No,
this is the way to lose all, in the loss of the public. For in reason we see,
the safety of every man's cabin in a ship, consists in the safety of the ship,
not the safety of the ship in the safety of the cabine; if the ship sink, what
will become of his cabine? Secondly, Suppose a man should lose what he ventures
for the public Good, yet God can easily repair 2. To Repare.
it. Be it estate, or credit, or life it self: Our Savior in the former
speech supposes a man may lose his life, for his sake and the Gospels; how then
can he save it? He means he shall not finally lose it, but have it again
repaired and restored. Sometimes a man does but resolve to venture it, or lose
it, and God will not let him lose it, but saves it for him. As when Abraham had
brought of his heart to offer up his son, God would not let him: So here many
times, when a man is resolved to venture all he has, God is pleased to accept
of the will for the deed, and to continue it to him; and this is a kind of
Reparation: But if he do actually lose any thing. God is able to make it good
to him again, which men cannot always do, especially not in matter of life.
Thirdly, this is very good policy to improve 3. To Improve.
our estates, etc. and the readiest way to advance them: We have a promise also
for this, if we durst believe it; He that shall forsake heuse, or land, or
life, etc. shall receive an hundred fold in this life, and in the world to
come, life everlasting. Men trade for a great deal less profit; eight or ten,
or twenty in the hundred, is thought good gain: but here is a hundred for one;
who would not, who should not venture here, if he did believe this promise to
be true?

6. It is most Comfortable. Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori.
6. Lastly, as it is very Honorable, as we say, in those Instances before
mentioned, of Moses, David, Jehojada, Mordecai, Nehemiah, Paul, who stand
Renowned upon Record; so it is most Comfortable, in life, in death, when a man
can look back upon that practick Good which he has done, and hence collect an
evidence of his true Grace and real Goodness, he may say with that holy
Apostle; This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
all godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. 2. Cor. 1.12.
And as this is the comfort of his life; so when a man shall come to lie upon
his sick bed, or death bed, he may comfortably plead it with God, as Hezekiah
(one of the great Reformers of Religion) did in a like case, Lord remember how
I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight, Jsai. 38.3. Or as Nehemiah, after all his great
undertakings for the public Good, Think upon me, my God, for good,
according to all that I have done for this people: Nehe. 5.19. and 13.22.

2. Directed.
More might be added, but these may suffice, in way of Motive: I shall only add
a few directions, as means to procure a public Spirit, and then conclude.
Take these,

1. The prime and principal is, to be Good men, 1. Be Good m^n.
Religious, not only in show, but in truth. Get from God a new heart and a new
spirit; the old is a narrow, private, selfish spirit: They that are men of
public spirits, must be spiritually wise men (as the text calls them:) The
wisdom of the world is to be wise to a man's self, Nemo sapit, qui sibi non
sapit, is a proverb of Nature, he is not wise, that is not wise to himself:
But only the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then gentle, etc. full
of mercy and good fruits, as it is described, Jam. 3.17. Wise men turn away
wrath.

2. The next is to be meek and humble men: 2. Be me^ke men.
Wise men in the text are opposed to Scornful men, who are ever proud men; and
we hear of the meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3.13. as we noted at the beginning.
Now Meekness fits a man for doing of public Good, and that two ways: First,
it has a winning and insinuating Nature, to allay wrath and fury, and
consequently tumults, contentions, seditions, and the like, which bring a City
into a snare, or set it on fire, according as it is in the Text. For this,
Solomon tells us, Prove. 15.1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous
words (of proud and scornful men) stir up anger. And Prove. 29.15. By long
forbearing is a Prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaks the bone. We have
an Instance in Gideon, Judge. 8.2, 3. and in the Town-clarke of Ephesus, Act.
19.35. in laying that storm and tumult raised by Demetrius. Secondly,
meekness makes a man stoop and condescend from his own Greatness, to the
meanest service and employment for the public Good. A proud heart as it ever
envyes those that are honored for their public service, so he scorns to work
for the public Good, unless in some high and honorable way: shall such a man
as I, so parted, so gifted, so advanced, so enriched, stoop to such and such
mean and low employments? shall I, that am a learned Rabbi of the times,
condescend to teach the ignorant, simple, poor people? leave that to the poor
Curate. Shall I that am by birth a merit, ennobled, shall I leave my fatness,
my sweetness to go up and down for other trees? Now a meek spirit, will be
content to be any thing, Judge. 9.9.
to do any thing, so he may but advance the common Good.

3. Another direction is, to learn well the first Lesson in Christ's School,
Self-denial: 3. Learn self-denial.
This Self is it that hinders all public Good. Men are naturally lovers of
themselves, (...); but in these last and worst times more then before, as it is
prophesied 1 Timothy 3.2. Lovers of their own selves, as it is well rendered by
our Translators, that is, so lovers of themselves, that they scarce love any
body else, not their own flesh and blood, their posterity (which yet in some
cases they love too well:) As the parents of the blind man, when there was
hazard to acknowledge Christ, fairly gave him leave to answer for himself, He
is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself. These words spoke his
parents, because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had agreed already, that
if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the
Synagogue, John 9.21, 22, 23. Therefore said his parents, he is of age, ask
him. Never was there more of this Self-love seen, then in these times; when we
see, not only brothers unnaturally to fight against brothers, but even children
against parents, and which is most of all unnatural, even parents against
children: The Apostle joins those two together, (...); Lovers of themselves
without natural affection, in the place before mentioned. Till this Self, this
Self-love be denied, men cannot go, or look beyond themselves.

4. Lastly, to add no more, get your hearts filled with the love of God, and
of his people: 4. L^ve God and his people
Love is liberal and bountiful, Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity
envyeth not; charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it
self unseemly, seeks not her own (mark that) is not easily provoked,
endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6. Yea Love will make a man not to think
his life dear for the public Good: Greater love than this has no man, than
to lay down his life for his friend, John 15.13. And therefore the Apostle
having said, If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John.
4.11. he shows how far this love will carry us, cap. 3.16. Hereby perceive we
the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren. We are now at the highest degree of Love, and
the greatest act of a public spirit, to venture his life for the public
Good; Greater love then this has no man, no man can show greater Goodness
then this: Here therefore I stay. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give
you understanding and practice in all things. Amen.

FINIS.
Vltimo Ianuar. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament; That Sir
Christopher Yelverton, shall from this House give thanks unto Mr. Daniel
Cawdrey for the great pains he took in the Sermon he this day preached (at
the entreaty of this House) at St. Margarets in the City of Westminster, it
being the day of public Humiliation, and to desire him to Print his Sermon.
It is also Ordered, that no body shall Print his said Sermon, but he whom shall
be authorized by the said Mr. Cawdrey, under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Con^.

I Do appoint Charles Green and P. W. to Print my Sermon.

DANIEL CAVVDREY.


