Certain Propositions, Whereby The distressed PROTESTANTS OF IRELAND, Who have
lost their goods, and personal Estates there, by means of the present
REBELLION, May be relieved, if His MAJESTY and both Houses of Parliament shall
so think fit.

AND, Those that shall be employed as Officers, or common Soldiers in this
present War, after the War shall be ended, may have Lands and Tenements allotted
unto them there also, for their future settlements: Whereby His Majesty's
Revenue also in that Realm will be much advanced, and the said Kingdom, the
better and more speedier peopled, secured, and civillized.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. April 19. 1642.

Certain Propositions, whereby the distressed Protestants of Ireland, who have
lost their goods, and personal estates there, by means of the present
Rebell^on, may be relieved.
1. THat such distressed Protestants, their losses may be first Examined by
Commission, and ascertained and returned to the Parliament.

2. That every one, who upon such Certificate, shall appear to have lost, in
Gold, Money, Plate, Jewels, Housholdstuff, Rents, Debts, Cattle, Corn, Hay,
and other like Goods, and personal Estate, to the value of 1000 l. The person
and persons which have thus suffered, paying 200 l in money more, toward the
maintenance of this present War, may have a proportion of Lands to be
allotted unto him out of the Rebels Lands in Leinster, the first Propositions
of the Undertakers being first satisfied 2000 Acres, paying to His Majesty, 6d
per Acre yearly Rent, and to hold as the said Undertakers shall hold, their
Lands in free and common Soccage, as of His Majesty's Castle of Dublin and this
to be regulated for the manner of the proceedings, in all things, as in those
Acts of Parliament already passed for those Undertakers, saving in the matter
of time, for proof of their losses and payment of their moneys, to be set down
by the Parliament.

3. That he that has been such a loser, and shall pay 50 l may have 2000 Acres
in Munster, at (...) Acre Rent.

4. And he that has been such a loser, and shall pay 100 l. may have 2000
Acres in Connaght, at (...) Acre Rent.

5. And he that has been such a loser, and shall pay 100 Marks, may have 2000
Acres in (...)

And the same proportion of money to be paid, and Rents to be re^erved in all
cases, where the said distressed Protestants shall have their losses, to be
above or under 1000 l.

And he that has lost 1000 l. and upwards, to have a Manor, and the same
privileges and proceedings to be therein also, as for the Under-writers in the
first Propositions.

That every Officer and common soldier, employed, and which shall be employed
in this War in Ireland, against the Rebels, and is desirous to have any
Lands to be assigned unto him for his pay or entertainment, or any part of it,
may have for every 20 s. he shall give an Acquittance to the Treasurer at War
there, for the time being, of such moneys so due, or which shall grow due unto
him, and shall receive an Attestation thereof under the hand of the said
Treasurer, an Acre of Land in Leinster, paying 8d per Acre yearly Rent unto His
Majesty.

And for every 18 s. an Acre of Land in Munster, at 6d per annum Rent:

And for every 16 s. an Acre of Land in Connaght, at 4d per Acre Rent:

And for every 15 s. an Acre of Land in Vlster, at 3d per Acre Rent;

To be holden as the other Lands: And he that shall have 1000 Acres or more
thus to be assigned unto him, in any of the Provinces aforesaid, may have a
Manor to be regulated for the proceedings therein, in all things as the former
Under-writers of the propositions formerly settled by Act of Parliament, shall
have theirs: And after these Under-writers shall be first satisfied, as the
distressed Protestants shall have theirs. And the said Officers or Soldiers to
elect and choose in which of the said four Provinces he will have his Lands to
lie, and to declare himself therein to the said Treasurer at the time of his
receiving the said Artestation, and to have his said election and choice to be
intimated therein, together with the sum and sums of money so discharged to the
Treasurer at Wars aforesaid, and others that shall also be appointed to pay the
Officers may be appointed as the Treasurer in the several Provinces, to
receive Releases, and to give Attestations.

That this be declared, That it shall not hinder any of the said Officers or
Soldiers in the Army for such rewards, to be given them out of the residue of
the Rebels lands; for their good service in this Expedition of War to be done,
as they shall merit, but be interpreted as an act of their more forwardness,
and good affections to the better proceeding of the work in hand.

That there is land enough forfeited, as well to satisfy the first
Propositions, as the Underwriters; and these Propositions now moved, and
restitution to be made to the Protestants of Ireland of all their lands
besides, may readily be conceived, when as the whole Kingdom is computed to
consist of Twenty Millions of Acres English measure, at the least, and but Two
Millions and an half thereof are designed for the Undertakers. The Papists of
Ireland, as is conceived, have much above half of the lands of that Kingdom,
and all, or the greatest part of them are well known to be in action, or
Confederates together in the plot; so that their estates are forfeited, out of
which, there is sufficient to satisfy all these, and the former Propositions,
and to reward Servitours, and otherwise to dispose of as shall be thought fit.

Reasons to move this Proposition, are;
1. It is but Charity, and not against common Equity, that these distressed
Protestants should receive some satisfaction of their losses, out of those
Rebels estates, who by their robbery, and stealth of theirs, have thus lived
upon their goods and cattels, the rather, when thus they shall in some measure
contribute to the reducing of those Rebels, whose M^te considered, will be much
more then the abundance put into this Treasury by the Adventurers.

2. They shall not much come short herein of the Adventurers themselves, (all
things considered;) For if the moneys to be put in, over and above their
losses, and the further increase of rents yearly to be paid unto the Crown,
more then the Adventurers, be thought upon, it will (tant amount) or very near,
to the moneys by them to be disbursed, for their lands they are to have in the
present Undertaking, besides the priority of the Underwriters satisfaction
herein, and their expectation only, after they shall be so first satisfied.

3. The distressed Protestants, all of them are such, as from their infancies
have been bred, and lived Protestants; well affected in Religion, and very many
of them having served in places and Offices of eminency and trust in that
Kingdom, and done good service in the Commonwealth there, and may be again of
good use in the present Expedition of War in hand, against those Rebels, and
service of the Commonwealth, as better knowing the state of that Kingdom, the
manners, and conditions of those people, their alliances, dependances, places
of residence, strengths, subterfuges, and places of retirement, and best how to
find out, and discover their proceedings, practices, and confederacies, and
otherwise ready to advance and forward whatsoever undertakings shall be
designed by the Parliament, for the good and welfare of that Republique.

4. It will be a great furtherance to the Design in hand, to bring this War to
a more speedy Conclusion, and a thing very considerable, to make these Nations
the more happy: when thus some thousands of Acres more of those Rebels lands
shall be thus peopled; for the better civillizing of the Kingdom, and setting a
plantation of Religion there, most principally intended.

5. It will give encouragement, not only to the said distressed Protestants,
with all possible diligence, and endeavor to further the said intended
Plantation and Reformation there; but will animate and encourage their friends
and Allies here, upon whose Bounty and Charity they are now relieved, the more
cheerfully to contribute to their assistance herein, rather then to maintain
them still, as a continued burden, and draw many of them to join with them in
the work, rather then to have it left undone, by which means, this whole Realm
upon the matter, will be engaged in the business.

6. Thus the Kingdom will be also settled with Freeholders, enabled to serve in
all Juries for trials of matters in the Common wealth; which being heretofore
performed performed by those who are now in Rebellion, and were and are
Papists, or Popishly affected, brought such a prejudice to the Government of
that Common wealth, that nothing of that nature could there proceed with that
evennesse and regularity, as the Laws of the land required, especially in
matters that concerned the better welfare and propagation of Religion, and
suppressing of Popery there.

7. It may be no little encouragement to others also, with more cheerfulness
to underwrite in the first Propositions, when thus they shall perceive, those
being thus necessitate, forward to adventure all they have, and more, to bring
this great Design about.

8. It will leave all pretenders without excuse, that after the time limited,
for such proofs of their losses to be made, shall afterward press upon the
charity of the Parliament, for any relief of their sufferings, and will take
off many thousands more, which now under a color of such damages, by them
supposed, sustained, do with much carnestnesse folicite for a consideration of
their distresses, out of the Contribution-money, who peradventure will so be
found to have lost nothing at all.

9. It will draw down from Heaven a better blessing upon the proceedings, as so
many prayers will be more daily added, for its prosperous and good success.

FINIS.

