DAPHNIS. A Pastoral ELEGY on the Death of that hopeful Young Gentleman MR.
FRANCIS WOLLASTON.
Humbly Dedicated to his sorrowful Parents.
Audiet extinctus post se sua nomina Daphnis, Audiet, and priscos animo
revocabit amores.
I.
BEneath a Cypress gloomy shade,
(By Nature for that purpose made)
The Melancholy Damon lay,
And thus his Griefs invited him to say:
O Cruel Fate! Hard Destiny!
Must I alone, unhappy I,
When all my dear loved Swains are gone,
Be doomed to tarry here alone?
The noble Strephon went before,
But not content with that rich store,
Little Alexis was your prize,
And pretty Mycon Idol of my Eyes:
These (unkind Fates) you took away,
And could not these your fury stay?
Ah no! you have took my Daphnis too,
Took the loved Swain for ever from my View.
II.
Him (ye hard Fates) I now bemoan,
The Great, the God-like Daphnis dead and gone;
Daphnis, the Glory of our Plain,
Courted by every Nymph, and loved by every Swain:
Beauty and Goodness both in him did join,
His every part was charming, every part Divine.
Often have I seen the lovely Boy,
Adorned like some Bright Deity,
Above his fellow Shepherds sit,
While all paid Homage at his Feet.
The Brighter Nymphs would Garlands bring,
Crown him with them, and call him King;
Then every Vale with Daphnis Praises rung,
Daphnis the Brave, the Good, the Lovely, Gay and Young.
III.
But now (poor Swains) alas! he is gone,
Daphnis has left you all alone,
And to the distant Region's fled,
The Godlike Youth is dead.
Him the relentless Fates will never restore,
And you will never see him more,
Till you are carried to those Fields,
Where Nature all Contentment yields.
There Is purer Springs, and sweeter Flowers,
More pleasant Groves, and more delightful Bowers:
There those who have lived well, enjoy,
An undisturbed Felicity.
Pure are their Pleasures, and their Bliss entire,
Beyond what silly we, can fancy or desire.
Thither did your loved Daphnis early come,
His pure refined Soul longed for it is Home;
Your dull Enjoyments he could never Esteem,
All was but noise, and Vanity to him;
'Twas this alone (ye poor Forsaken Swains,)
Made the loved Youth, for ever leave your Plains.
IV.
And now, methinks I see,
The Glorious Deity
Look down from his Bright Seat above,
(His Face all Sweetness and all Love)
And Hark I hear him say,
Shepherds for Daphnis cease to mourn,
Your sighs and tears to Joyful Music turn:
For the Blessed Swain does now possess,
(What Life could not afford him) Happiness;
Delights, which all desire, but few enjoy,
Unless they live like Daphnis and like Daphnis dye.
JOHN CAVE A. B. Line. Coll.

FINIS.
OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, for the
Author. 1685.


