CERTAIN QVAERES Humbly presented In way of PETITION, By many Christian People,
dispersed abroad throughout the County of Norfolk and City of Norwich, To the
serious and grave Consideration and Debate Of His EXCELLENCY The LORD GENERAL
AND Of the General Council of War.

The resolution of which may tend much to the discovery of the great work of
God in hand, The Union of the godly, and the Direction of those worthy
Instruments employed in the Work.

Together with an humble Advice For the settling of the Kingdom, according to
such a Model hinted therein, offered as the sense of many Christians, who
conceive themselves engaged (as by their Prayers, so) by their Councels, to
help on the present work of God; desiring it may be examined with all candor,
and according as it is found agreeable to the Word of God, may be accepted; or
if otherwise, rejected.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West End
of Paul's. 1648.

To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General of the Army, and to the
General Council of War: The Petition of many Christian People, dispersed abroad
throughout the County of Norfolk, and City of Norwich,
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners acknowledge themselves unspeakably engaged to the God of
Heaven and Earth, for his great mercy to us, in giving you hearts to offer your
selves so willingly among the People, in the late great undertakings of this
Nation, against the Enemies of the Peace thereof, and blessing your faithful
endeavors with such glorious and wonderful successes: Whereby, as the Lord has
put great Honor upon you, crowning your valor with Victory, and making you the
Warlike Glory of the world; so he has no less put great Obligations upon you
all, to exalt him that has exalted you, and to lift up his glory in the world,
where he has given you a Name so great and glorious.

And because the great design of God in the falls and overthrows of worldly
powers, that have opposed the Kingdom of his Son, is (by making Christ's foes
his footstool) To lift up him on high, far above all Principality, and Power,
and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named in this world, that he
may be PRINCE of the Kings of the Earth, and all Nations may serve and obey
him, as you shall quickly see, if you make the Scriptures your Counselors; for
which cause we take the boldness to tender these, in stead of many, Psalm. 2.9,
10, 11, 12. and 72. and 93. and 110.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Isa. 2.11, 12. and 11.4,
5. and 32.1, 2. and 53.12. and 52.13, 14, 15. Jer. 33.15, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 34.22,
23, 24. Dan. 2.34, 35, 44, 45. and 7.26, 27. Mic. 5.4, 5, 6. Zech. 9.10. Luke
1.32, 33. Rev. 1.5, etc. and 17.14. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.

Therefore our daily prayer shall be for your selves and your Noble Army, That
you may never stumble at the stumbling stone, nor take that Honor to your
selves, that is due to Christ, nor be instrumental for the setting up of a mere
natural and worldly Government, like that of Heathen Rome and Athens (as too
many late overtures have caused us to fear) whereby the public interest of
Jesus Christ will be utterly banished the Kingdom in the conclusion: But that
you (whom God has Honored so highly, as to begin the great work of smiting the
Image on the feet) may show your selves thankful to him, that has given you
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, may honor his Son, and comfort his
Saints, in whom he raigns Spiritually, and by whom he will reign visibly over
all the Nations of the world, as these Scriptures declare, with others, Dan.
2.44, 55. and 7.22, 27. Mic. 5.4, 5.6. Rev. 2.26, 27. and 5.9, 10. and 12.9,
10, 11.

To which end we humbly crave, That your selves would take into your serious
and grave consideration and debate, the particulars in the Papers herewith
humbly offered to you, and also present them to the Honorable Parliament, that
they may be improved so far, as found agreeable to the will and word of God;
which done, we doubt not but God shall have much glory, the godly party shall
be comforted, natural men (enjoying their Estates) will be at rest also, and
much satisfied; and this Commonwealth will be exalted to be both an habitation
of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness, even such a People as God will bless,
Jer. 31.23.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray.
1. Quaere. Whether there is not a Kingdom and Dominion of the Church, or of
Christ and the Saints, to be expected upon Earth? Dan. 7.27. and 2.44. Isa.
2.2, 3. and 60.12, etc. Rev. 11.15. Rev. 5.10.

2. Q. Whether this Kingdom (though more Spiritual in the Administration
thereof, yet) be not external and visible in the world, yea, extend not to all
persons and things universally? Isa. 60.12, 14. Zech. 14.16, 17. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

For this end, consider,

1. How this fifth kingdom or Monarchy, comes in the place of the fourth,
visibly succeeding it.

2. by Antichrist and the ten horns, and then how the Church comes to have the
outward and visible Government of the world, see Daniel and Revelations.

3. Q. Whether this Kingdom is not proper to Christ as Mediator, spicifically
distinct from the Essential Kingdom of God, and from all worldly Kingdoms, and
so to be administered by such Laws and Officers, as Christ (as Mediator) has
appointed in his Kingdom, and therefore not set up, when Magistrates become
Christian, seeing they rule not then as Christian, nor as Christ's Officers, nor
by his Law, but as worldly Governors; the Magistrates being Officers set up by
God in that Essential Kingdom, not in this Mediatory Kingdom of Christ?

4 Q. Whether the Kingdoms of the world and Powers thereof, as Kings, yea
Parliaments also, and Magistrates (so far as appertains to the present worldly
constitution of them) must not be put down, before this Kingdom can be erected?
1 Cor. 15.24, 25. Dan. 2.35, 44, 45.

1 Object. But these Powers are not inconsistent with the Kingdom of Christ,
both may stand together: Kings shall be thy nursing fathers.

R. The persons betrusted with these powers may befriend it; such as rule in
the Kingdoms of the world, may be subjects of Christ, but the question here, is
of the Government it self, which relates to the great Image, Dan. 2. and so
must be broken down.

2 Obj. But worldly Government, as worldly or Civil, appertains not to the
fourth Monarchy, nor to the Image, but as opposing Christ's Kingdom.

1 R. The ten Toes, Horns or Kingdoms, are parts of the Image.

2. They oppose Christ's Kingdom as worldly or civil, because they let it (not
to speak now of other opposition) as the Roman Heathen Empire let
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.

5 Q. Whether this be not the time (or near upon it) of putting down that
worldly Government, and erecting this new Kingdom?

For this end consider,

This kingdom is to succeed the fourth Monarchy immediately, the first part
whereof, the Heathenish Empire, is long since expired, and the second part, the
Antichristian Empire, is about the expiration, the time allotted (1260 years)
being about to finish.

Obj. But Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this world, how then can it now be
expected?

R. But he does not say, It shall not be upon the earth, nor while the earth
remains (see the contrary Rev. 5.10.) but world is taken for the time of
continuance of that worldly Government; The world is put for the Roman
Monarchy, Luke 2.1. When the fifth Monarchy begins, shall be those new Heavens
and new Earth spoken of Heb. 2.5. The Church is called the world to come, as
some expound that place, 2 Esdras 6.9. Esau is the ending of the old world, and
Jacob the beginning of the new, that is, The reign of the wicked; Esau's
progeny terminates the old world, and the reign of Jacob, of the Saints (to
whom the promise of Dominion is made) begins the new world.

6 Q. Whether this Kingdom is not to be set up without hands, Dan. 2.45.
without Humane Power and Authority, Zech. 4.6. but by the Spirit of Christ,
calling and gathering People into less Families, Churches and Corporations,
till they thus multiply exceedingly?

Thus all worldly Political kingdoms arise and grow; and thus the Spiritual
kingdom of the Church.

7 Q. Whether these Churches and Corporations thus gathered and multiplied
exceedingly, shall not join together in General Assemblies and
Church-Parliaments, choosing and delegating such Officers of Christ, and
Representatives of the Churches, as may rule Nations and Kingdoms, and so the
Kingdoms of the world be the Churches?

This kingdom must either be Monarchical, as when Christ the Head and King
appears visibly; or Parliamentary, as in the mean time, when Christ's Officers
and the Churches Representatives rule.

The brief Resolution of the Quaeres.
1. THere is a kingdom and Dominion, which the Church is to exercise on the
Earth, 2. That extends to all persons and things universally, which is to be
externally and visibly administered, 3. By such Laws and Officers, as Jesus
Christ our Mediator has appointed in his kingdom. 4. It shall put down all
worldly Rule and Authority (so far as relates to the worldly constitution
thereof) though in the hands of Christians: 5. And is to be expected about this
time we live in. 6. This kingdom shall not be erected by humane Power and
Authority, but Christ by his Spirit shall call and gather a people, and form
them into several less Families, Churches and Corporations; and when they are
multiplied, 7. They shall rule the world by General Assemblies, or
Church-Parliaments, of such Officers of Christ, and Representatives of the
Churches, as they shall choose and delegate, which they shall do, till Christ
come in Person.

Q. What then is the present interest of the Saints and People of God?

R. To associate together into several Church-Societies and Corporations
(according to the Congregational way) till being increased and multiplied, they
may combine into General Assemblies or Church-Parliaments (according to the
Presbyterian way) and then shall God give them Authority and Rule over the
Nations and kingdoms of the world.

For the present to lay aside all differences and divisions amongst themselves,
and combine together against the Antichristian powers of the world, Rev. 15.2,
etc. whom they may expect to combine against them universally, Rev. 17.13, 14.

An humble Advice, concerning the Government of the Kingdom, according to the
former Platform or Model.
1. THat you would stir up godly Ministers and People throughout the kingdom,
to associate or incorporate into Church-Societies (as is before expressed) and
grant them your special favor, provision and protection; so shall you be the
Saints nursing fathers.

2. That you would please to satisfy the godly dissenting Brethren, both of
Presbytery and Independency (by such ways and means as your wisdoms shall find
out) how both their interests may meet herein, that so they may concur with one
heart in the work.

3. That Sister-Churches oversee such incorporations and imbodyings, that only
such as be of approved godliness, may have the righthand of fellowship given to
them.

4. That such Churches where more of them are thus collected and imbodyed in
any division, circuit, province, etc. may choose and send out some delegates,
members, officers, to meet in one Session, lesser Parliament, Presbytery or
Assembly, for ordering all such affairs as there occur, according to the word,
if appertaining alone to that division.

5. That all such Churches, and the Members thereof, have voices in Elections
of such as are to sit in General Assemblies or Church-Parliaments (so often as
occasion is) and those elected to sit there as Christ's Officers, and the
Churches Representatives, and to determine all things by the Word, as that Law
that God will exalt alone, and make honorable.

6. That you take special care to send out and encourage godly Preachers, that
may go into the rest of the Kingdom to preach the Gospel, that so when others
are converted, and the Son of God makes them free, they may enjoy the former
freedom with the rest of the Saints.

Additional Considerations for the improvement of the former Model.
1. COnsider, whether it be not a far greater honor for Parliaments,
Magistrates, etc. to rule as Christ's Officers, and the Churches
Representatives, then as Officers of a worldly kingdom, and Representatives of
a mere natural and worldly people?

2. What right or claim mere natural and worldly men have to Rule and
Government, that want a sanctified claim to the least outward blessings?

3. How can the kingdom be the Saints, when the ungodly are electors, and
elected to Govern?

4. Whether it be not a straitning of the Churches power, to limit it only to
Spiritual matters?

5. We expect new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his promise, how then
can it be lawful to patch up the old worldly Government, especially being
lapsed (for its Maladministration) according to its own natural principles?

6. Whether to repair the broken Image, that the stone has smitten upon the
feet, be not to fall upon the stone?

7. Whether all powers falling upon that stone, have not deserved to be broken
in pieces?

8. What a sin it would be to set up the dim light of nature for our Law, when
God has given the light of the Scriptures, a better Law?

9. How unbeseeming it were for the followers of the Lamb, to comply in the
least with the powers of the world, in setting up their worldly kingdoms?

10. How dangerous it is to keep out Christ from his throne, when he has
exalted you, and given you an opportunity to exalt him.

11. What facility appears in settling the kingdom in the hands of the Saints,
and difficulty to settle it any other way, As subscriptions, etc.
and not destroy the interest of the Saints.

12. What advantage of reconciling the godly this way, and suppressing the
Enemies of godliness for ever.

These and many other Considerations of like nature hereby hinted, we humbly
offer to your wisdoms, desiring the assistance of Gods Spirit in all your
Councels, for the improvement of them.

FINIS.

