A more Full RELATION OF THE CONTINVED SVCCESSES of His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, At, and since the Routing of the Enemies Forces at Torrington.

With a punctual and perfect List of the Names of the chief Commanders,
Officers and common Soldiers, killed, wounded, and taken in the fight and
pursuit.

The taking of two ships, 10 pieces of Ordnance, 500 Tun of Salt, and other
provisions, bound for Barnstable and intended for the Relief of Exeter: with
the Resolution and proceedings of our Army, for a present assault against
BARNSTABLE.

Also intercepted Letters from France, giving intelligence of 8000 Foot, 1000
Horse, three months pay, 10000 l. in Bullion in readiness to send over to
assist the King against the Parliament.

And the surprisall of Cardiffe by treachery of the Townsmen, and beleaguring
of our forces in the Castle.

CErtified by Letters to several Members of the Honorable House of Commons on
Monday, Feb. 23. 1645. And Commandedto be forthwith Printed and Published.

Feb: 24. LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals in the old Baily, 1645.

SIR,
YEsterday I sent you an express of the success which it pleased the Almighty
to give our forces at Torrington against the strength of the Lord Hoptons, so
that of 3000 foot or thereabouts which its credibly informed he brought
thither, he has not above 400 in a Body, Colonel Hamond and diverse Officers
with him showed much valor in that service, for (having the command of the
Generals Regiment his own and Col. Harlowes) when the foot were beaten out
of the Town twice by the enemies horse, he brought them back, and repulsed the
enemies. The providence of God in that passage of the blowing up of the Church
is very remarkable, for although the Lead, Timber and Stones of the Church were
cast several ways for half a mile from the Town, yet not any Man, Woman or
Child was hurt, besides those blown up in the Church, which now upon credibly
information were certified to be near 200 of the enemies which were prisoners
there, every house in the Town was shaken and shattered with the blow, and
falling of the Lead and Timber; The Lead fell thick in the street when the
General and Lieutenant General intered, and an horse near the General was
knocked on the head with a sheet of Lead, but through Gods mercies he nor any
of his attendants had any hurt. This was the Lords doing, and it is mervelous
in our eyes, And truly Sir, I never saw more of God in any part of my life
then I have since I came into this employment, an Almighty hand still ordering
all things to an unexpected advantage to this Army as it did, the weather and
drawing the enemies outgards to set forth this service, the particulars whereof
I gave you in my former, and shall for further satisfaction refer you to the
List enclosed.

Out of Cornwall we have intelligence from the e^em^^ (...) to this effect,
t^^^ on Tu^s^^^ last the ^emai^in^ (...) of the en^my took up guides to
Holsworth^, (...) ended (...) and Lutcombe, and Putford, and to drive their
Cattle into Cornwall. Hopton was then with them, but none of the foot then
come up to them, they then resolved to stay at Holsworth to gather as many foot
as they could, and the better to hinder our pursuit to pull down Woodford
Bridge over Touridge, between Newton and Milton where many of their horse
were, many straggling parties went toward Biddiford and Barnstable in great
have, and affrightment; The 400 foot which are all they have left (as before
with Arms,) Tuesday by break of day passed, over Beddiford bridge in the way
to Kilhampton and Stratten another party of their horse, with whom the Lord
Capell was (...) in the head, passed over at a Ford and went a blind way for
Stratton with his company, there were two considerable persons carried in
horse-litters growning and crying out for pain but not knowing, who they were:
Those which came that day from Hetherley say, that they met many straggling foot
by two or three in a company, who said they were going to their own homes, they
likewise met many straglers of their horse which posted up and down in great
haste and fear; But the chief body of their horse are gone for Launceston,
where the Lord Hopton is to meet them. They generally blame the Cornish foot,
saying, that if they had stood to it, it had been a more bloody bout, and that
the Cornish were glad we came against that Town, that they might have an
occasion to go into their own Country. Hopton is certainly wounded and had
his horse shot under him, staying with the last to bring up the Reere. He was
extremely enraged at the Cornish men, though he had little reason for it, for
they maintained the Barracadoes, Lines and Hedges at Torrington with as much
resolution as could be expected, and had not our men gone one with
extraordinary courage they had bin repulsed, our horse daily take some of
theirs, and bring in Prisoners and others with horses and arms come in daily,
and yelld themselves to the General. This defeat has so discipated the
enemies Army in these parts, that it is not probable they will stand to another
engagement if they can avoid it, and I hope through God^ blessing the cloud of
fear, in regard of foreign forces will (...) this means be dispersed and
their landing here, or elsewhere prevented. The God of Peace at last restore
such a Peace to our Borders that after all these conclusions, and confusions
amongst us, the desire of all Nations may come and establish his Kingdom of
Truth, and Peace, amongst us, so prays and rests

Sir Your most humble servant. W.C.
18 Feb. 1645.
Postscript.
This evening Letters are come to the General of the surprisall of Cardiffe
Town by the treacherous Townsmen and Country, and the beleaguring of our
Forces in the Castle, which I doubt not you have already. Col. Cooks brigade is
come near Barnstable, and keeps guard within a mile on the East side. I could
wish they would behave themselves better in these parts then they have done in
others, where they have done as much mischief to the County, as the enemy, by
robbing any of our soldiers they met with upon all advantages, crying, you are
New model men, that have money. It were well that they either had pay, were
regulated, or many of them dismounted for the service they do. Col. Fortescues
Regiment is in the Earl of Bathes house at N. Tunston in the West, and other
guards of horse are kept near the Town. Major Genesis Skippons Regiment is near
us. The General after some short refreshment of the Army, after their readious
marches, respecting the weather, miserable quarters, and hard service, will
make some attempt upon Barnstable; in the mean time our horse are advanced in
parties within a mile of Cornwall, to drive the enemy as close as may be.
Captain Keyman has bourded two ships with Ten pieces of Ordnance, that were
coming with 500 tun of Salt to Barnstable, between Apledore and Bidiford. We
find by some of the L. Hoptons Letters it was in part for the supply of the
Army, and much of it, if possible to be sent for Exceter, As also the Powder
and Ammunition they had in their Magazine in Torington Church. One of the
prisoners that was taken in the Church with a Match in his hand, almost dead
with the falling of the stones, though he had an hole or vault to run into
after he had laid the train, upon examination confesses, he was to have had
30 li. for doing it; his name is Robert Wats a North-countrey-man, he died
this day. The General is this afternoon returned to Mr. Rolls his house. Col.
Ingelsbies Regiment of foot is at Toringtor. The enemies forces are now wholly
gone into Cornwall. Sir John Greenvile was coming up thence with 500 foot to
the L. Hopton, and 40 horse laden with Ammunition, but hearing of the defeat
stayed his journey, and came no further then Launceston.

This day there came one from Truro, who certifies the General that Sir Walter
Dudley came lately from France, to enform: those about the Prince, that in case
of eminent necessity they can upon a fair wind send over their men by the
middle of the next month, they have near 8000 foot, and 1000 horse in
readiness, and three months pay providing, besides 10000 li. in Bullion daily
expected, a Mint ready to coin the same; only they desire if possibly a larger
time to bring them over. Sir John Culpepper was to go over into France on
Friday last to hasten them. This will cause his Excellency to expedite his
intentions for Cornwall, and prevent their design through Gods blessing,

A List of the Prisoners taken at Torrington, Monday February 16. 1645.
LIeut. Col. Wood Cap. Prideaux Cap. Cowley Cap. Bowne of horse Cap. Minn Cap.
Naunt Cap. Bennit Cap. Moulins Cap. Weeks Comissary Bovey Lieutenant Stoakes
Lieut. Kirton Lieut. Morris Lieut. Green Lieut. Mason of horse Lieut. Goring
Coronet Wells Ensign Feilding Ensign Huggins Ensign Williams Allen
Mack-Mulen Chirurg. Sergeant Boswell Sergeant Trevor Sergeant Peuwelly Sergeant
Sheffeild Thomas Cook Servant to the L. Hopton. Total 26
Troopers
of the L. Gorings Lifeguard 21 Of Culpeppers 7 Of Col. Stukeleys 3 Of Col.
Webbs 2 Of Col. Huninghams 2 Of Col. Slingsbies 2 Of Col. Hoptons 2 Of Col.
Hoopers 3 Of L. Clevelands 2 Of Col. Crispes 1 Of Col. Gettings 2 L. Capels
Servants 5 Total 52
Gentlemen.
Of the Princes Lifeguard 68 Col. Arundels 5 Col. Trevanians 5 Col.
Champernoons 1 Col. Collers 8 Col. Wises Welsh 10 Col. Shelleys 9 Col.
Tremaynes 14 Col. Slaug^^^^ Horse drivels 33 Total 126
ABout 200 which are not set down. In all 433 Whereof 200 have taken up Arms,
being (as they said) forced in by the Enemy. Near 3000 Arms, broken and
whole, most of their Ammunition blown up in the Church. Besides these 200
blown up in the Church, in all 600 Eight Colors already brought in whereof
one the Lord Hoptons own, with this Motto, I will strive to serve my
Sovereign King. Slain Major Threaue, Cap. Frye, and diverse Officers and
Soldiers, the certain number not known, supposed to be about 100 The Lord
Hopton, and L. Capell wounded; besides drivers others of quality. The Lord
Hoptons Commission to be General under the Prince; Sir John Digbies Commission
to be Governor of the Forces before Plymouth, and other papers of consequence
taken. The L. Hoptons Fur-coat, and about 400 or 500 h^ money left behind at
his quarters, with much plunder left in Portmantles, and in other places behind
them.
FINIS.

