Certain Quaeres, which are desired may be speedily Answered by the
Common Council, and Militia of London; for the satisfaction of the Citizens
and other Jnhabitants of the said City, concerning their own, and the Cities
safety, against all Opposers of the Public Peace and Happiness of the King
and Kingdom.
1. TO What end so many Soldiers have been privately Lifted by Major-Generall
Skippon, before he had Authority for it? And why the City should not have a
Major-Generall who has a visible estate within the City, that will be
cordially faithful in defense thereof upon all of occasions? And act nothing
in Military-matters, without approbation of the Common Council and Militia.

2. In case an enemy without or within the City should Act in a hostile way,
against it: what Arms or Ammunition are in readiness, to make resistance?

3. Whether the City be in a sufficient posture of defense to withstand any
such Enemy; and whether there be faithful and valiant Commanders, and
Officers, elected in all the Regiments of the, Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries,
whom the Soldiers will willingly adhere to, upon all occasions.

4. How the City is furnished with victuals, to hold out, if it should be
Besieged: And what Provision is made to quench sudden Fires, if any attempt
should be made in that kind?

5. Why those Aldermen, and Common Council men, should not be made incapable
of Communicating with any Council of the City; and that such Commanders should
not be displaced, who either hold Intelligence with the Army; or have been in
the Leaguer before Colchester, not being sent by the Common Council, or
Militia, or that have been Actors in, or abettors of the last petition; which
was not sent from the Common Council; seeing there was an Order of both Houses
of Parliament, That no Petition should be presented unto them, without consent
of the Common Council; or any such as either have been, are, or shall be
known to frequent either or both houses of Parliament, or Darby House to
discover the secrets of the Common Council, or the Militia of London?

6. Why the Personal Treaty with his Majesty in London, should not be pressed
speedily to go on seeing the Committee of the City have given satisfactory
Answers to the objections made by the Committee of Parliament against their
last Petition, concerning the said Treaty; which are confirmed by the
Common Council, and approved of by the subscriptions of so many thousands? Or
whether the Tenet of Darby house shall be verified, viz. That the City and
Common Council of London, are hot in their propositions at first: but if they
be let alone they will cool by degrees. Which if they do in this case of the
Treaty; another Quaere will necessarily follow.

7. Whether the City will not be the object of scorn to the whole Kingdom,
and the Nations round about, and incur the farther just displeasure of his
Majesty, and his Posterity, and consequently be the Cause of their own ruin
and destruction, without the Aid or Pity of any?

8. Why those Common-Councell-men and Commanders should not be questioned and
displaced; who have not either called the Inhabitants within their respective
Precincts and Commands, or have not gone from house to house, to receive their
Concurrence to the late engagement, by subscription of their names, according
to the Order of Common Council: Dated July 12. 1648.

It is desired, again and again, That these Quaeres be taken into speedy
and serious consideration: For, it is to be feared that if our Savior Christ
were conversant on earth; at this time, he would weep and say to this City, as
once he did to Jerusalem.

If Thou had known, even Thou, at least in this thy Day, the things which
belong unto thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes. (Luc. 19. ver.
42.) For the Days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench
about thee, and compass the round, and Keep thee in on every side. (ver. 43.)
And shall lay thee even with the Ground, and thy Children within thee, and they
shall not leave thee one Stone upon another, because thou knew not the time
of thy Visitation. (ver. 44.) FINIS.

