THE CAVALIERS JUBILEE: OR, Long looked for come at last: viz. THE GENERAL
PARDON.

In a pleasant DIALOGUE BETWEEN Sir Timothy Turn-coat, and Sir Rowland
Resolute, two Cavaliers that met accidentally, and were lately come over from
beyond Sea, upon the noise of the General Pardon, and their Resolution to
leave the service of the young Charles Stuart, and embrace the Parliaments
protection in their gracious Act of Oblivion.

Together with the condolement of the late made Lords and Knights for the loss
of their Honors which they received from the late King and his Son, for their
rebellion against the Parliament, and acting against their Country, by that
late just Act of Parliament for the disanulment of them.

March.8. 1651 London: Printed for William Ley at PAUL'S Chain. 1652.

The Cavaliers Jubilee.
Timothy. HOnest Rowland, well met in England once again; I doubted much we
should never have had this happiness to tread upon English ground, for I gave
my self for lost, as many others have been already.


Rowland. Well Noble heart, and fellow Cavalier, as I am glad to see thee, so
my heart leaps for joy that I have this liberty to live at home again; but
since we are met, let us not part with dry lips, 'twas our custom (thou
know) to take off our taplash, though we have been lashed for it, and I have
half a Crown left still in my pocket; let us not part without further discourse,
since we are met so happily.


Tim. With all my heart, for my Cash is not yet all gone; only let us put into
some house, that we may speak our minds freely, in some that favors the Cause
of C. R. thou know what I mean Blade.


Row. We Will take a house as it falls out, let us to this next, the sign of the
Black Boy, is it agreed?


Tim. I am at your dispose; now being here, from whence came you last, from
France, or Flanders, I pray tell.


Row. Ha! I have been wandering up and down, tossed from Post to Pillar ever
since Colchester was given up; I went into Ireland amongst the bogs, and woods,
and wild Irish; and when we were soundly beaten there, I made a hard shift and
got into Scotland, just out of the frying pan into the fire, amongst the Crags
and Rocks, with a great deal of hunger, cold, and lice, (where I found more
cold then gold;) and when we were routed there, I made for the Low Countries,
where I found but small hopes to do any thing to advance my fortunes: words
went high, and promises, but there were no performances, and so I got into
France, to Paris, but there I perceived was no stay without pay, many things
were in agitation, but all failed in the execution; the old Stallion decayed
Courtiers looked like old rotten Mountebanks, or Quacksalvers, or Rat-catchers,
and findling that I should starve if I stayed, I resolved to submit to a
Composition at home, rather than lose all for I know not what purpose; home is
home, though it be never so homely, and so got over into England, and have
finished my Composition pretty easily; which had I been as wise then, as I am
since, I might have kept my state and my skin both sound, but it is too late to
call again yesterday, but assure thy self, for time to come, they shall not
find me at Dunbar or Worcester for their young bonny Scotch King; if he be so
mad after a Crown, let him take heed of a cracked crown, for I Will tell thee,
here are Lads that will not spare to strike home, and to lay on, take it off
who will, or dare.


Tim. I perceive then that you are resolved to fight no more for that cause:
well, should I tell you my sufferings, and travells and marchings, and journeys
from Country to Country, and what miseries of hunger and cold, with wounds
and imprisonment I have undergone, 'twould be past belief, I was so hasty, that
I morgaged most of my estate to be furnished with moneys: Oh how I bestirred my
self, to undo my self, my wife, and children, to procure horses, and Arms, and
Ammunition, for those which never gave me thanks, but helped to devour that
which was left, in drunkenness, whoredom, and rioting, (the common use and
custom of our Cavaliers:) I tell thee that I made more have then good speed,
and traversed from one Garrison to another, and rode from one fight to another,
and was wounded, and hacked, and hued, and cut, and flashed, and yet for all
this J never could be looked upon, nor Knighted, but rather slighted, which
though if I had been, a Knight of Post had been almost as good as my self, but
I thought over shoes, over boots, and at last I was after the battle at York
resolved to steal out of the Land, and so I went with other Widgeons as wise as
Woodcocks to cry up the Cause in Denmark, and to solicit for relief; but
finding their spirits dull and flegmatique, and not apt to take fire, I went
with that money which I could procure, too too much to be spent in such an
unjust design, to Sweden, where I met with some of the old Stamp, but they all
looked as though they had suffered shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience,
for a dozen of them could scarce furnish a man with sixpence, they appeared
like birds that had been pulled out of their feathers, or like bald Coots, or
new shorn sheep; it made me begin to shrink in my shoulders, and to think with
my self, that if I followed them, I should expect the like preferment, to wear
rags and rottenness, instead of robes or riches; J began to suspect the
justnes of the cause, which produced none but beggars and bankerupts, if it
found them not so, it made them so, if not worse; yet I was got in, and so must
for Scotland with the crowd of Desperadoes and Renegadoes, where when we had
done what we could to set up a King of beggars; we were all-well pelted and
pillaged, and scattered like Jews into all quarters (as we deserved) but 'twas
my shift to come to Worcester, from whence J made a poor shift to escape, and
so am here in this condition as thou see, it is a poor Hare has but one Muse.

Well, let us not be tedious in telling our own miseries, what good news is now
stirring?


Row. All that is on foot now is of the General pardon, it is extant for
certain.

May one rely upon it think you; well it is come out in as good a season as
could be, it is wonderful that they should be so gracious to us, who have been
so bitter against them; I Will lay hold on it I promise you, and if ever they
catch me a fighting for C. S. or C. R. again, let them hang me outright in the
Isle of Dogs, or at Cuckolds Haven.


Tim. I am glad to hear your disposition so altered, for I did at first intend
to do what I could to dissuade you from that service and company, and learn
to be wise e're it be too late. I my self was stiff for the Cause, and was
conceited that it was just, and as too many others, who had more wealth then
wit, and were richer in Coin then in Conscience, did neither spare life or
limb, nor gold and silver to advance it; but now let them fight for it; who
list, they shall not find me there I Will warrant thee, for no wise man will make
have to that Market where there is nothing to be had but blows; of any that
ever fought for it, none that came off, but with disgrace, and ruin to their
whole Families, such only excepted, whom it has pleased the Parliament to
pardon and forgive.


Row. You have said what is truth, and I am sufficiently convinced in that
particular, and shall draw off as far as I can from their bloody employment,
for I persuade my self, there is many of them do what they do in ignorance,
some out of hopes of preferment, and others of gains (though most of malice)
and desire of revenge: for a Gentleman without means, is like a bag-pudding
without suet; but their honors are most laid in the dust, and themselves in the
dirt; and for their preferments, they are like those the Popes were wont to
bestow great Titleson, but no Revenues, for a Feather is enough for a fool,
and for their gains they have got them over the left shoulders, the clean
contrary way; pounds laid out, and wounds brought home, tattered rags, and a
torn skin; they may truly say, most of them have come home by weeping cross,
if they came home at all.


Tim. I deal plainly with thee, that I am sorry for what I have done upon that
account; and I advise thee, since we are met, to let us resolve to accept of
mercy, while it is so graciously and freely offered, be sure to add no new
trespasses against our Magistrates, and to be so far from fighting against
them, that we will be ready to venture our lives for them; and if C. S. be so
mad for a Crown, let him if he can get thither, go to the Rocks and Mountains
in Highland, and not skip to Worcester again, where he durst not stay, because
of the fray, and where he trusted more to his heels, then his hands. Row. You
say right, where he left all there, his Earls and new Knights to be spitlers,
and Goal-birds; as once Queen Elizabeth told the Earl of Essex, when he had
made so many Knights at Cadize, that he should have done well first to have
built Hospitalls for them, for most of them came to beggary; and though I
escaped there, yet now I dare not own, nor do I care for his pretended
preferments and promises made to me, and to others, for I Will trust to them no
more then to the man in the Moon, one Parliament pardon is worth all his
promised Pensions, for words are but wind, it is money that buys Lands, and I
hope to get my Lands again before he gets his longed for Crown; he may look
after it, and yet never find it.


Tim. Pray what is become of all those great Earls and Nobles which were made
by Charles Stuart since the war?


Row. I tell thee, the most of them would be glad of a three penny Ordinary,
they are not laden so much with Jewels, and Chains of Gold, as with Irons,
and we say to them, as once 'twas said to those Dutch Lords and Here Is, who left
the State and followed the King of Spain, farewell ye great Lords without Lands
or Heads; and so as it befell, it has come to pass to many of his upstart
Favorites.


Tim. I Will assure thee we have been misled long enough, but to our comfort,
long looked for is come at last, the General pardon; large enough if we
embrace it, an ounce of peace is worth a pound of war: I intend to come in,
and once in again, never out: I have hitherto fought for a thing called his
Standard, til I could not stand my self, and defended his Lions till I have
made my self an Ass, and if I had followed them should have made my self a
beggar, but actum est, let him and his look to themselves, for I Will go buy the
General Pardon, and look to my self, and thank my betteas for granting it to
me.


Row. Well, let us pay our reckoning and depart, and freely submit our selves to
this Government, that God may bless our Parliament who established it, and all
those who will live under it.


Tim. Honest heart adieu; if you fight against the Parliament thou will perish,
live under it, and prosper.


Row. It Is resolved, I Will go home and hang up my sword and my self too, if ever
I draw it against the Parliament any more while I live.


FINIS.

