CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING THE PRESENT FACTIONS IN The KINGS Dominions.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

Certain Considerations touching the present Factions in the KING'S DOMINIONS.
THe Dominions belonging to the Crown of England are divided into three
Kingdoms. Every Kingdom is divided into three Factions: 1. Royalists. 2.
Presbyterians. 3. Independents. I rank them according to seniority, not form:
for every one knows that Loyalty was before Presbytery in time, and
Presbytery before Independencie: though now, according to the good pleasure of
God, the last is become first, and the first last.

Of ENGLAND.
ENgland is divided into 1. Independents. 2. Presbyterians. 3. Royalists. The
Independents, make the Army, the Committee of Safety at Derbyhouse, the
Committees in the Countries, have all the Garrisons and Castles in the Kingdom
in their hands; and are a great part of the House of Commons: who being
countenanced with power without, do by their unity, assiduity, and resolution
within, either intimidate or insidiate the judgments and affections of other
men; and so carry on all their designs with the form of Supreme Authority:
Which was first wrested from the KING by the Presbyterians, and now cheated and
wrested from them by the Independents; who like cunning Masters of their Art
open not all the boxes of their Principles at once.

The Presbyterians make a great part in the House of Lords clearly: And so they
do in the House of Commons (notwithstanding many of them have turned
Renegado's, and gone over to the Independents) when they dare meet, and stick
to one another: which is accidental, they being dis-united by fear, interest,
discorrespondency, indifference of affection, and instability of judgment. For
I esteem all the remnant of Royalists who remained in the House of Commons
when the KING went away, to be of the Presbyterian persuasion, as it is most
favorable to Monarchy: though, as I said, for the causes before, they give way
to the Independents by their absence, or servility of nature; as at first they
did to the Presbyterians. How the rest of the Kingdom are affected this way,
appears first in the City of London: Where, without question, much the
supernumerary part are Presbyters, and are awed only by the activity of the
Independent Faction; who working by Authority of Parliament, with whom they
correspond daily, are made to serve them, though not to love them. The rest of
the Kingdom are generally Presbyterian; not so much, I suppose, because their
names are upon the Covenant Roll, (which however ought to be regarded) as
because they find the oppression of War, and a headless Government: And that
Monarchy is more favored by the Covenant; which they remember to have been
less grievous, and not so perpetual, as the Government on foot is like to
prove: For Kings may die, or their humors change. As for the Towns and
Corporations, many of them have nests of Sectaries, yet they are not all
Independents: though they all hope for Liberty from them; and so by fighting
with them against all others, they suppose they fight for themselves. But from
these, there is no fear of great dangers, were one Army of them broken; for
they are not a considerable part of the Inhabitants; and all that can run to
defend the common Cause (as they call it) in the Armies; leaving no propagation
of their Sect, but what is between man and wife, which must have some years to
grow up. For it may be confidently averred, there has been no considerable
increase of these parties, ever since they had power to persuade and terrify;
both which they have done: which shows they are no growing Faction, and being
at their height, are endangered by one considerable check. For fear will then
drive many off, whom interest or affection now makes to adhere; and confidence
and courage restrain others, whom force at present has enslaved to their
designs.

The Royalists make a distressed company of Noblemen, Gentlemen and others,
who having engaged their Estates and Credits to compound with the Parliament,
are all retired to a private life, to eat the bread of carfulness; expecting
Gods good hour for their restoration: who are beaten out of all their
defenses, but that of a good Conscience, which remains impregnable. These, it
did import the Parliament, whose power could not compel the judgment and
reason, to have allured by soft and amicable entreaties, to a good assurance of
peace and quietness; which after the rough and destructive variations of an
unfortunate War, might perhaps have made impression. But the contrary being
put in practice, and proceeding from those whose principles have cried up
Liberty of Conscience, and Christian Charity so much, and yet in their actions
are the most sanguinary and inflexible persons in the world; it begat only an
indignation against the hypocrisy of proud Conquerors; and left them fitted
with vindicative resolutions, to engage with the next party should appear;
which has caused the late emergent troubles, and may cause more, upon the like
probable overtures, if God prevent it not.

Of SCOTLAND.
SCotland is divided into 1. Presbyterians. 2. Royalists. 3. Independents; not
purely and properly so, but corruptly, and upon design.

The Presbyterians, make up all the Parliament, the Army, the Committee of
Estates at Edinburgh, and all the whole Kingdom: who are thereto engaged by
the Covenant, universally taken there; and as really adhered to in terminis;
except by some late discontents, who would advance their humors and passions
above it, and contrary to it.

The Royalists are made up of those who were so before the Covenant, and such
as were so by virtue of the Covenant. Of the later fort I may call all
Scotland, now, but Argyles faction. For it is by obligation of the Covenant they
come now to fight for the King against the Parliament, as by the same
obligation they came before to fight for the Parliament against the King: The
difference only is, that then they broke it, and now they keep it: though God
seems to punish them now, for breaking of it then. But the Royal part I
mean, are such, of whom the famous Marquess of Montrosse was Head, and by
whose courage he was the scourge of all Scotland, when they were assisting
their false brethren in England; And such others, as now are incorporated,
without doubt, into that number, who have resolved to rescue their King from
base imprisonment. There wants only the presence of that incomparable and
gallant Person, the Marquess of Montrosse, and then the undertaking is
complete: For it were a strange improvidence, to let so much honor and virtue,
as is experimentally known to be in that Marquess, fall to the ground: who
being both a Presbyterian, and a Royalist, is the only fit instrument to
correct the turbulencie of Argyle, and infelicity of Hamilton, and perhaps not
overmuch integrity of Both. I write not this partially, or as a suborned
person; for, God knows, I am equally unknown to them all.

The Independents, as I said, are such as are so, not because they have not
taken the Covenant, but upon personal and private respects: and it may be too,
from an habitual inclination, made up of pride and envy, to cross any action
may end with honor and happiness, to the maligned undertakers. These consist
of Argyle, and his party; who being a coward, is disposed to the more
mischief; for nothing is so much to be feared, as a coward not altogether
deprived of power. It Is not the principles of Cromwell, etc. but his hatred to
Hamilton, makes him correspond with the Independents in England. His Nature is
more to be suspected then his Reason: and though that be not so great, but that
many men are wiser; yet his qualities are so bad, that few men are worse. And
without goodness of nature, and a gracious improvement thereof, what are
riches, wit, understanding, honor, and power, but so many fignall abilities to
do evil?

Of IRELAND.
IReland is divided into 1. Papists. 2. Presbyterians. 3. Independents.

The Papists make the greater power in that Kingdom: which I suppose is
granted by all. And it is almost incredible there should be any power there but
theirs: considering the season they have had to do any business that
concerned them. How they are now disabled, and made informidable, by their own
divisions, the catching disease at this time of the whole world, most men know.

The Presbyterians consist of the Lord Inchequin, and his Forces in Munster: to
whom if you add his confederates, they must be rather considered as Royalists
then Presbyterians. To whom also must be joined all the Scots Forces in Vlster;
with other dispersed well-wishers, who live in a Country, where it is victory
enough to defend that little is remaining from the usurpation of a common enemy.

The Independents have their head-quarter at Dublin; where Col: Jones has the
whole Military Force: Being a qualified Emissarie from the Faction in England
to secure that City: though his power tend rather to preserve then augment. So
that the Fate of this Kingdom in matters of Religion and Gods Worship, depends
on the mastery of one of the other two.

Of the two Parliaments of England and Scotland.
THe Parliament of England taken vulgarly, is only the House of Commons; for
in that notion do the common people generally receive it: because when they
speak of a Parliament man or a Member of the House, it agrees only with that
House. Though it may be taken really too; for who knows not, how the Faction
in that House has imposed for these last years, upon the King and the Lords,
with this difference only, that the King went away because He was not able to
endure it, but the Lords stayed, and did. But here is the great riddle of all,
(say they in their own defense;) How a Faction, a prevailing Party, a minor
part can overruled the greater? To this I can quickly Answer: It Is casie for a
few knaves to cozen a great many honest men. Was not the Pope, and a few
Cardinals, by this means too hard for all the world in the Council of Trent?
The Artifice of designing, which is the study of suspicious natures, is too
often known to have the better of innocence and right. But yet those ends only
God will bless, which are wrought out upon the solid principles of integrity
and virtue. How the first Faction has prospered, that said a Minor part could
not overruled the Major; let them now speak, that being become a Major of their
own contriving, are now over-awed and terrified by a Minor. For so I esteem
the Independent party within the House to be; as all men know their Army
without also, is a Minor part of the Kingdom: and yet because they Act by
unity and design, are able to give Laws to all others, who live at large, out
of the strength of confederacy and compact.

The Parliament of Scotland is wholly Presbyterian, and would be Loyal if the
Clergy would suffer them. They have now the third time sent an Army into
England. The first was for themselves. The second for the Parliament here. And
the third for the KING. Their first expedition was with Honor and Success;
Their second with Success and Profit; Their third, neither with Success,
Honor, nor Profit. Yet I do not take the reason to be in the fulminations of
the Clergy, nor want of sincerity in the undertakers; but of resolution, good
conduct and discipline in the General: who ought to have had exact care that
Deeds and Declarations had been Uniforme. For the Scots at this time (above any
other) had need to sweeten their coming into England with actions, as well as
words: being their own friends are now against them, and the rest of the people
never yet were for them. The enmity of so many Ages, is not swallowed up with a
few Years; nor their Ancient invasions skinned over with other words of a
Declaration, Engagement for Religion or Union of the Kingdom. For so long as
the depredations of the Soldier upon the Countries accompanies the
undertaking, as is used in all hostile invasions, it will be esteemed no better
by the sufferers; especially if the Parliament vote it so. And let what will be
told them, the people will never be persuaded into the patience of being
undone. But the great Question now on foot is, who breaks the Covenant, the
Treaties, the Brotherhood of both Nations? The Independents charge the Scots
with it, and the Scots them. In what particulars the Scots charge the
Independents, is made public and needs no repetition. But wherein the
Independents charge the Scots is yet to do. And yet (perhaps) in point of
fact, it is not hard for either side to say something: there having been for
two years last past and more, a jealousy raised between them, which must of
necessity have brought forth some traverses of distemper and discontent. But
not to derive from matter of fact the insincerity of either part, I shall fetch
the Errors of the Independents from a higher fountain, and lay down this
position, That all the transactions of the Independents with the Scots, in
their own desperate necessities and hazards, were laid in fraud, treachery,
self-interest, and deep dissimulation from the beginning: and it plainly now
appears, that they never meant to uphold the Fraternity of the Scots, no
longer then the Fraternity of the Scots should be necessary to uphold them. For
when the King, and His Party were all subdued, and no imaginable force likely
to trouble them in the Kingdom; they presently fell to expostulating with the
Scots about their departure, and were drawing down all their Armies into the
North, to be ready to force them out, in case they should be remiss: after
they had (not long since) with Prayers and Tears brought them in. Of which
action, and many others, their consciences and understandings accusing them;
and how much they had disobliged their late confederate friends and brethren,
it was not possible they should consent to such an imprudent act of disbanding;
when they knew, if they did, Presbytery would presently be settled; or if it
were not, the Scots would be ready to see it done by power. Now these people,
who cordially and heartily never entered into, nor since adhered to a real
fraternall union and interest with the Scots; yet pretended nothing less, and
at this time are become the most ungrateful Enemies both of Covenant and
Covenanters, will I suppose by all the world, be esteemed the true Fomenters
and Authors of this second War, which themselves, conscious of their own
provocations and hypocrisy, did look for, and expect with Arms in their
hands. For it is not the first act of force, but of injustice, fraud, or
dishonesty, that legitimates the commencement of a National War: being a
Trial wherein God himself is made the Judge: And will in the end, I doubt,
though for the present through his secret appointment the face of things look
otherwise, have worser effects in this Nation then we now think of: which God
divert.

Of the two Synods of England and Scotland.
THe Synod of England I take to be a company of men, set apart by the House of
Commons, to make all Divinity give obedience to the resolutions of Parliament;
and to consult of nothing but proponente Senatu; as in the Council of Trent,
the Pope got the reins of that Council into his hand, by procuring all things
to be treated, proponentibus Legatis. What they have been about these many
years is kept secret: but when the business of the Treaty came into
discourse, they quickly resolved, all of them but four, to be against it. And
the House of Commons made it one of their reasons, for offering the three Bills
before a Treaty; because (otherwise) such godly Divines, who are placed by the
Parliament, shall be put out, and scandalous Ministers restored to their
places. By this, we know what Trade they are of, and how they get their living.
But in the mean while they are but viatores; having not arrived to their end of
power, nor it may be to their end of profit.

The Synod of Scotland, otherwise by a more majesticall name, called the
General Assembly, are Comprehensores: being arrived to the very (...) of
Presbytery; and something too high for the Civil State. They enjoy by a
strange surreptitious usurpation, a power equal to the Pope, and exercised
only by more persons. They indict themselves, take cognizance of the Orders in
Parliament, and Committes of Estates: admonish and censure the Magistrate: And
indeed do every thing but what they should do, Preach the Gospel of Peace.

Both Synods agree to disturb the Peace of both Kingdoms, and blow the people
into Rebellions and Tumults; for which they are notable Instruments. Which the
Parliament well knew, when they set their Synod at Westminster, to write a
Letter to the General Assembly in Scotland, that they might thereby lay an
ambush at the back of the Scots Armies which were entered into England. But
whether either of these Synods would ever agree, except in this one thing of
troubling the Kingdoms, if they might be suffered to confer Notes, is a great
question: though at this present, upon concurring principles of worldly power
and profit, they care not how they engage all the world beside in the highest
guilt, and extremest miseries. Therefore, though there was not much Religion,
yet these was not much impertinency in his speech, that said, There was no way
to end the divisions in England; but to forbid all Preaching for one whole year.

For I may, with the sighs and groans of a Christian heart speak it; That let
us look back upon all Ages since Christianity began to enlarge it self upon the
world, and we shall find, that most of the Wars therein, have been raised by
the professors of it; and are owing to those that call themselves the Clergy
and Ministers of Christ, which agrees with his own prophecy in Mat. 30.34.
discoursing upon the Commission he had then given his Apostles. I came not
(says he) to send Peace on earth, but a Sword. And is verified from the
perverseness and instability of our natures, not in the quality of his most
holy and peaceable Gospel.

What a tragical audit would it be, to hear summed up all the lives of those
Christian people that perished in the zealous Wars of the Holy Land? and yet
that holy Father, the Pope, had designs of his own in the business; the
reducing of the Grecian Church into his subjection, with the three Patriarchs
of Jerusalem, Antioch, and Constantinople, and making the Eastern Church a
Chapel of ease to the Western of Rome; and besides Spiritual jurisdiction,
had an eye also on Temporal profits: for while the Emperor was doing his
errand, and waging War in the Holy Land, he encroached on the Emperors
Temporalties in Italy. Neither were the rest of the holy Clergy idle; for
having kindled in others the fire of Zeal, they presently fell to warm
themselves at it, and to buy the Estates of such Noblemen and others, as sold
them to set themselves forward into the Holy Land. Godfrey sold the Dukedom of
Bovillon to the Bishop of Liege, and the Castle of Sartonsi and Monsa to the
Bishop of Vendune. And when the success of the Christian Arms had reduced
Jerusalem, and Patriarchs were set up, they fell presently to claiming of the
Cities and Lands, and terrifying the Princes with Sacrilege; saying, those
voyages were undertaken not only for restoring the Churches Liberties, but her
Lands. After these things, the Popes found out other arts, to divert the Crusa
does for the Holy Land upon Christians themselves: as upon Greece; and against
the Albigenses in France; upon the same Indulgences and Pardons, he did those
to the Holy Land. And this also he called the holy War, the war of Crucifix,
the Army of the Church. What other wars, enmities, and civil discords have
been stirred up in several Nations by the instigation of the Church of Rome,
to support her ambition or avarice, let Histories declare at large. How they
have agreed since among themselves, that broke away from the Church of Rome,
because they could not agree with her, I could wish were blotted out of the
Histories of latter Ages. We see Obedience to Princes is no better taught then
it was before. All Kingdoms are set on fire by the same Principles, and differ
only in the delivery, by other Persons. The Doctors of Rome, Wittenberg,
Geneva, Euric, can sit in their Studies, if the good Spirit of God prevent them
not, and Slay more men then ever Alexander or Caesar did. And if any one should
ask me, why Prayers and Tears were thought in the primitive times, the Arms
of the Church, and only lawful Weapons against unbelieving Princes, enemies to
God and Christ, and now Pistols and Swords, when we live under Christian Kings
and Governors? I can only say, that this is a secret wrapped up in the Cabinet
of the Divine Council, whereby God has appointed for the disciplining of the
world, that one Age should bring forth good fruit, and another evil.

But when these things will have a remedy, if any enquire, it may as soon be
answered, when the Magistrate shall be invested with what properly belongs to
him, the Right of Dominion; Christ would not have his Disciples as Lords, if
Kings would not have them so neither; what do they but will the same things our
Savior Christ willed before? There is no Argument to be used against them, no
more then there can be against Scripture; and yet as much labor has been
taken to expound the one, and oppose the other, as in any two things in the
world.

In a word, we are come to that pass, that to lay a foundation of a durable
Government, and provide for the peoples Safety, nothing is more necessary, then
to take away the power of the Clergy, and their liberty of prevaricating in
the Pulpits: for by this means we shall prevent as much as in us lies, the
heavy judgments of God upon us, then which none are greater, no not plague,
famine, or the sword, then when he suffers a lying spirit to fill the mouths
of the Prophets: which were the words of Sir Robert Spotswood at his death.

And since every one can reform another better then himself, it is fittest for
the Magistrate to reform the Clergy, [especially now we live in an Age, when
the Laity and Secular men in moral virtue, Learning, and Piety, not only
equal, but exceed them;] that they being the best of men, may mend others by
their example, as well as precept.

Of the whole Controversy between KING and PARLIAMENT in a brief Conclusion.
TO conclude, It has appeared to me, in the general discourses of the times;
that the question never was amongst any men, whether obedience should be given
to the supreme Magistrate? but, who that Supreme Magistrate was? or where it
resided? As if we could not tell, after so many Ages, and Successions of Kings
and Princes, what the form of our Government yet was; and that all this while,
we should (as it were) be Governed by chance. But where the reason of all this
is, and how the matter comes to be ventilated with no other success then the
increase of animosities and heats among men, must be imputed to Gods Judgments
on the Nation. For it is certain, that all truths whatsoever, receive not
their Quietus est from any Arguments of men, or power of reason alone, without
a concurrent temper in the affections which God gives to embrace them. It could
not otherwise be, that what has been received for so many Ages for an
universal truth, by wiser men perhaps, then any now alive, should come now to
be disputed anew, canvass'd and condemned perhaps. And several other opinions
dogmatically obtruded upon the world, as the rules of the faith, good life, and
obedience of all men, never heard of before.

The two Houses, and their well well-affected Party say; The King being wanting
to his duty, in them is supplementally all Supreme power: and they being only
Judges when he is wanting, may when they will invest themselves with this
power. For if to be wanting to them, is to be wanting to his duty, how many
occasions may they take to make him wanting to his duty, when their passions
shall put them upon demands not fit for his reason to grant them?

John Liburne, and his well-affected Party, [and thus there can be no
Malignants, for every one is well affected to his own party] say, The Supreme
power is in the Right Honorable the House of Commons; which is a position,
till this year of deliration never heard of; and yet perhaps, John Lilburne,
and some of his, would seal this truth with their Blood, and call it Martyrdom
to suffer for it. So that, call in Divines, Politicians, Lawyers, Logicians,
and all the wit and understanding of the world to help us; I cannot see what
end they can give to our distractions: For Divines, Politicians, Lawyers, and
Logicians are all divided: and the disease lies more in our will and
affections, and about the heart, then in the brain. Men will not yield,
because they will not. We have more need of Charity to prepare and soften, then
of Council to inform. For all reason being inflamed with passion, God must
allay it with his good spirit of Grace and Truth, or we must still remain the
spectacle of madness and fury to all the world, which He in mercy prevent, who
is only able to lay the storms, and rebuke the wind of worldly commotions,
and particularly this in England causing his spirit to move upon the hearts of
all persons now engaged in this present Treaty. Amen.

THE END.

