THE CAVALIERS Letanie.

Lately composed by a vvell-willer to his Majesty's Person, and all his most
Loyal Subjects.

Very fitting to be observed, and made use of, by all who desire Deliverance
FROM, The damnable, execrable, unparalleled, and not before heard of,
Detestable Actions, Proceedings, Designs, Humors, Conditions, Votes and
Ordinances.

Now fully, and most exactly practiced, delivered, and divulged, by the only,
(yet illegal) Governors, of these our sad, desperate, distracted TIMES.

Qui legit, intelligat.

(Seu)

Qui habit aures ad audiendum, audiat.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Caviliers LETANIE.
FRom the envious spiteful Critic that reads.
My ignorant Verses: from al sort of beads,
From putrified Such as the house of Commons.
Members without any heads.
Libra nos.
From Hags, Hobgoblins, and divelish Witches,
From damnable Usurers with all their riches.
From Alderman Atkins beshiting his breeches,
Libra nos.
From the sort of Rogues which are in White Hall,
From As Crumwell does.
soaring too high, and then for to fall,
From the hands of Mol-cutpurse; the Devil and all
Libra nos.
From being whipped on lasht in Bridewell,
From vaulting or leaping in Dungeon or Cel,
From singing and roaring and such like in Hell,
Libra nos.
From riding and sitting the great wooden Horse
From cruel Tyrants 'thout any remorse
From too much adhering with 'th Parliaments force,
Libra nos.
From brawling and fighting, and drawing of swords,
From being pressed to death between Boards,
From the house of perjured detestable Lords,
Libra nos.
From the fury of a Lion, the paw of a Bare,
From a drunken-fellow that naught does but swear,
From the merciless The Army.
Tigers that lie every where
Libra nos.
From the Laws of the Land or ought else to defile,
From the Parliaments base and fraudulent guile,
From the words you have staid a terrible while,
Libra nos.
From saying the Pox or the Devil take you,
From being commanded by the words i will make you,
From all execrations but evil forsake you,
Libra nos.
From an Irish crag, and a faint-hearted Scot,
From being backed or stewed in a pot,
From the term and acts of a drunken sot,
Libra nos.
From barbarous Rebels without any pity,
From the crafty and subtle larg-conscienc'd Of Haberdashers and Goldsmiths
Hall.
Committee
From the grand incomparable The Como^n-Counsell men.
Fools of the City,
Libra nos.
From being by our The Parliament our supposed friends.
friends supposed betrayed,
From the sin performing the acts by them made,
From being entrap'd by the snares of a Maid,
Libra nos.
From riding up Holborn hill in a boat,
From beggarly He that caused a Counsel to sit about his couckold-ship.
Fenton that vapouring Goat,
From the senseless style of a Parliament Vote,
Libra nos.
From being any more thrust out of the lines,
From the noise of a Dog that continually whines,
From spoiling the King, and such fearful designs.
Libra nos.
From walking within the compass of Traitors,
From Levellers and Adjutators,
From being under the Parliament The house of Commons.
praters,
Libra nos.
From too much keeping an evil decorum
From the manyfold Treasons Parliamentorum,
From Oliver Crumwell Chief of all mischief.
Dux omnis malorum,
Libra nos.
From all pretended Reformation,
Such as we see in this our Nation,
From plundering, robbing, and such tolleration,
Libra nos.
From superstitious Rosemary, and Bays,
From the Fairy Nymphs, when dancing their Hayes,
From the Both houses of Parliament.
Counsel that naught but wickedness says,
Liba nos.
From my Lord Mayors horse that valiant beast,
From his desperate rider, that My Lord Mayers.
Ass at least,
From commitring the sin of keeping the The Nativity of our Savior
Feast,
Libra nos.
From the Parliaments fierce Ordinances,
From Tom of Bedlams frantic dances
From ruinning the kingdom, and such like As the soldiers make of it.
fancies,
Libra nos.
From being like the Army hated,
From the The Prison.
Throne in which Charles they have reinstated,
From by the O! that Committee.
Committee to be sequestrated,
Libra nos.
From the inhumane barbarous crimes
Committed these reformed times,
From a As Harry Walker.
man whose pates repleat with rimes,
Libra nos.
From the treacherous Against the King.
Votes of the house of Comm.
From the Parliaments accursed or Composition.
summons,
From every ones ire, especially a woman's,
Libra nos.
From running into a Lions den,
From a villain that takes in the hundred ten,
From the turbulent rout of Parliament men,
Libra nos.
From The Parliaments.
that vile companies resolutions,
From their wicked acts, words and pollutions,
From their unheard of persecutions,
Libra nos.
From their many idle Declarations,
From their several Oaths and protestations,
From doing as they have done by three England, Scotland, and Ireand.
Nations,
Libra nos.
From being a prisoner in the Tower,
From living under this tirannous power,
From the hands of the Army that al would devour,
Libra nos.
From the Parliaments newly invented delusions,
That have hatched in the land so many confusions,
I say from their subtle disembling intrusions,
Libra nos.
From the house of Parliaments defendants,
From Ireton and his vile attendants,
From the false-hearted troop of base Independents,
Libra nos.
From the mighty They are now raisi^g new breast works or forts upon Tower hill
against the Seamen.
fort which they have begun,
From falling into deep love with a Nun,
From them that have parted the father and son;
Libera nos.
From the As Sir Tho. against the K.
foot against the head that kicks,
From my Lord otherwise L. Mayor.
Fool and his Christmas tricks,
From all sorts of prattling profane Scismaticks,
Libera nos
From Cornhill Conduit and Cheapside Pumpe,
From General Cromwell that natural That Log of wood.
Lump,
From the company of those that drink or the rump,
Libera nos.
From the Common Parliament men's p^^rwasions.
From domestic foes, and foreign invasions,
From having a hand in these In undoing the King and Kingdom.
matchless occasions,
Libera nos.
From the many perfidious late inventions.
From Sir Thomas his manifold known intentions
From these evident nurtured vile dissension,
Libera nos.
From being tossed in Cupids, blanket,
From abusing the word of God be thanked,
From the inviting unto Grand- Pluto's Bauquer,
Libera nos.
From hearing the Widows and Orphans cries,
From answering them just Parliament-wise,
From prisoning a King, and such As they esteem
petty like toys,
Libera nos.
From being clapped one the back with a writ,
From burthening our selves with the Citizens wit,
From running headlong into the pit,
Libera nos.
From the General Army their wicked intents,
To ruin the Kingdom unless God prevents,
From such evil, profane, unjust As our Engl. Parliament.
Parliaments,
Libera nos.
From the lower House and the House of Peers.
From our continual caused fears,
From generally all Parliamenteers,
Libera nos.
From very Rogues, and the ragged The common Soldiers.
Rout,
From The total Commanders.
surly Slaves, and Beggars stout,
From the base enterprise Tom, Cromwell, and the rest.
they go about,
Libera nos.
From the seldom heard of innumerable curses,
The Parliament have for filling their purses,
From the Spoilers of Learning that should be it Nurses
Libera nos.
From Ludgate. Newgate, and Tower Hill,
From both the Compters, or what you will
From being At the Sessions Bar.
arraigned my prayers be still,
Libera nos.
From the Sovereign, Sacred, three legged Tree,
From Black Tom, and his posterity,
From th'Arch Executioner Gregory,
Libera nos omnes.
That it may please thee, to re-inthrone
Our gracious King into his own,
And keep him not In prison.
thus as never was known,
Quaesumus te.
That thy total Army may disband,
That they no more oppress the Land:
That thou may Our Sove.
honor, and not command,
Quaesumus te.
That all good things may settled be,
As before to posterity;
That every one may live in's degree,
Quaesumus te.
That the very scum of this our nation
Abas'd be from their ostentation:
That they may be turned to their pristine fashion,
Quaesumus te.
That the monstrous noise and rumors of War,
Be from poor England removed far;
That this word of command be pronouc'd, as you were,
Quaesumus te.
That this our Godly Parliament
Dissolved be incontinent,
That thou would make them honest against their intent^,
Quaesumus te.
That the Common house of puny Brats,
Pe culled, be picked and washed like Sprats,
That some of them suffer as often do The (...)
Rats,
Quaesumus te.
That every one his own may enjoy,
That thy men the people no more may annoy,
That thy self and the rest might say vive le Roy,
Quaesumus te.
That our Lord the King may wear his Crown;
That Faction and Heresies quite be put down.
That to whom it belongs may have the The clergy.
Gown,
Quaesumus te.
That the Kingdom, the City, Militia, Tower
Be yielded to The King.
him that ought to have the power,
That those Vagabond slaves may not England devour,
Quaesumus te.
That the manifest traitors which have been the cause,
Of disturbing the peace, and infringing the Laws.
May instead of the neck, be hanged by the jaws,
Quaesumus te.
That my good Lord Mayor for his valiant act,
In charging the conduit, himself being backed,
May for his fierce valor A whip and lash.
receive what he lackt,
Quaesumus te.
That all our turbulent times may cease
That our honored King may have a release,
Without which it is in vain to expect any peace,
Quaesumus te.
That of poor Widows you would hear the sad ditties,
That you would banish extirpate all sorts of Committees.
That peace may proclaimed be through Country and City
Quaesumus te.
That thou thy self would deliver up all
The forts and forces great and small,
That thou would descend, least you catch a fall,
Quaesumus te.
That last this visible distraction
Be suddenly cured: that good satisfaction
Be given for the Kings and Kingdoms exactions,
Quaesumus te.
FINIS.

