A CAVEATE FOR SHERRIFFS: OR, A Whip for corrupt Officers.

Whether BAILIFFS of FRANCHISES, or Liberties, Bumms, Bumms Fellows, Bumm
Setters, Setters Mates, Scumms and Varlotts.

Discovering Their unjust Exactions, and cruel Oppressions of the People; And
the good Provision made by the Law (now in force) to curb their Exorbitancy,
and the Forfeitures and Damages from them that do contrary.

With PROPOSALLS to prevent this horrid Charge and Exaction for the time to
come, which may be done with great safety and ease to the People.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1655.

A CAVEATE for Sheriffs, or a Whip for corrupt OFFICERS.
WHat cruel Exactions, and heavy Oppressions the good People of England have
sustained by corrupt Officers and other Varlotts, by forcing from them unjust
sums, as also by uncivil usage of their Persons, and abufing their Goods,
Without all doubt, there are few or none but are senfible hereof; and many by
sad Experience have felt the same, to the utter ruin both of them and their
Families, many People so wronged, being ignorant of the Laws and Statutes made
to curb their Insolence and Oppression, suffer merely for want of knowledge
thereof; Therefore for the better Discovery of the unjust and cruel
oppressions of these Vermin, and for giving some light to the abused People,
as well as for prevention of these groaning Evils, it will be very requisite
to insert here what good and wholesome Laws are now in force against these
Catterpillars, and what Damages are given to the Party grieved for evey
offince committed contrary to the Law.

In the 29th Year of Queen Elizabeth, amongst other Laws, it was Enacted.

THat it shall not be lawful for any Sheriff, Bayliffe of any Franchise or
Liberty, nor for any of their Min^^^^rs, Servants or Deputies, nor for any of
them, by reason or color of their or any of their Places or Employments, to
receive or take of any Person or Persons whatsoever, DIRECTLY or INDIRECTLY for
the serving and executing any Extent or Execution upon the Body, Lands, Goods
and Chattells of any Person or Persons whatsoever, more or other Consideration
or recompense then xii. d. of and for every xx. s. where the Sum exceeds not
100. l. and vi. d. of and for every xx. s. being over and above the Sum of a
100. l. that sha^ so levied and Extended, or delivered in Execution, or by
taking the body in Execution for, by virtue and force of any Extent or
Execution whatsoever, Upon pain and penalty, That for every Person aforesaid,
or any of their Deputies or Servants, as aforesaid, or any of them, that shall
do contrary, to loose and forfeit to the party grieved trebble Damages, and
forfeit the Sum of 40. l. for every time they or any of them so offend, the one
Moity is to His Highness the Lord Protector, and the other Moity to him that
will sue for the same by Action, Bill or Information; wherein no Essoine, wager
of Law, or Protection shall be allowed. In the 23 Year of Henry the Sixth, and
the tenth CHAPTER.
IT was also provided for prevention of Extortion, Oppression and other Crimes
notorious, by Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, and their Clerks. Coroners, Stewards of
Franchisees, Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, and other Officers in several
Counties;

That no Sheriff take for any Arrest or Attachment, above xx. d. The Bailiffe
that makes the Arrest, to take but iiii. d. The Jailer, if the Prisoner be
committed to his Ward, iiii. d. The Bayl Bond upon the Arrest iiii. d.

And if any Sherriff, Vndersheriff, Clerk, Bailiffe, Jailer, Coroner, Steward,
Bayliffe of Franchise or LIBERTY, or any other Officer or Minister, which shall
do contrary to the same, shall loose to the Party in this behalf grieved,
trebble Damages, and shall forfeit the Sum of 40. l. for every time they, or
and of them shall so offend; The one Moity is to His Highness the Lord
Protector, and the other Moity to him that will sue for the same.

HEre you see what limmits former Ages have put, to restrain these Officers
from Exaction; now if any Person (as I think few or none but have been bitten
by these Serpents) will seek after a Cure for his wound, the Law is his best
Phifition.

But though the prevention of this horrid Charge and Exaction may seem very
difficult; Yet this may be offered by way of Caution.
IF any Man borrow money, or buy any Merchandise or other Commodities
whatsoever upon specialty, when he seals, or upon Contract, when he so
Contracts, to leave with the Party to whom he is engaged, a Warrant to some
Attorney to appear for him in any of the Courts at Westminster, where such
Plainte may propperly lie, in case of Failer, which Warrant to be Irrevocable,
and the Attorney to whom such Warrant is granted, not to refuse the same, but
to file his Bail in the Term he is required, after the time limmitted to the
Party for Payment or performance, and to take a Declaration with an Imparlance,
the Plaintiff or Defendant paying unto him the due Fees for the same.

That in Case the Plaintiff in all such Cases, or in any other Case
whatsoever, where Bail is requirable, shall doubt of the parties payment or
performance, after this mild way, and will have Bail to his plainte, It is
offered that the Plaintiff would be so Christian like, before the day of
payment or performance of whatsoever it may be; to admonish the party to keep
his time, or provide reasonable Bail.

This Christian Course would keep Goals empty, and make the Varlotts return to
their Vomitts, and not to bury men alive as they now do, and swim to the chin
in the ruin of whole Families.

This way will make People buy and deal safe in respect the Law looks upon
them the first day of their commerce and Engagement.

The Warrant of Appearance to be thus.
To A. B. Gent. one of the Attorneys of the UPPER BENCH.

If in the Common Pleas, Then thus.
To A. B. Gent, one of the Attorneys of the Court of Common Pleas.

WHereas J. M. C. of D. in the County of N. give him his Adition am Bound unto
R. F. of O. in the County of L give him his Adition, in o^^ Bond or Writing
obligatory, of the penalty of (...) Conditioned to pay the Sum (...) of lawfu^
English Money at or upon the (...) day of (...) next ensuing the Date of these
Presents. If therefore I the said M. C. shall fail in payment thereof at the
time aforesaid, Then upon sight hereof you are hereby Authorized to appear for
me, in the said Court as my lawful Attrney, and to take a Declaration, with an
Imparlance of the said R.F. Attorney the next Term following the said (...) day
of (...) Or in any other Term following, if you shall be thereunto required.
And for your so doing, this shall be unto you a sufficient Warrant; and what
Fees shall be due to you for the same, I will pay you, or allow the same to R.
F. if he shall pay the same.

Witness my hand and seal this (...) day of (...) 1654. Sealed and delivered to
the use of A. B. In the presence of (...)
And so for all other Warrants of Appearance, according to the quallity of the
thing done between party and party, which may be very easily recited.

This is a sure way that the Plaintiff may proceed when he please, let the
Defendant be where he will.

This is a great ease to the Defendants, in all first Process, and sometimes to
the Plaintiffs, for it so falls out sometimes, that they loose the thing sued
for.

And if no necessity of Bail in the Case, then an Appearance is sure.

This will prevent Utlawryes ad respondendum.

The Charges of Arrests are infinite great, Oppressive and delitory many times
to the loss of the thing sued for, together with the Charges of suit.

This Warrant may lie Dormant at the Plaintiffs pleasure, and to be in force in
any Term; the Parties being living; which will be of very great use, and
induce much to payment or satisfaction, at the Case shall require.

For he that will not give an Appearance in this nature, or Bail upon notice,
as is before expressed, if required, cannot expect any thing of favor from his
friend to whom the Demand belongs.

This way will probably secure men's Rights and Dues, and preserve many an idle
Person out of the Jaws of the Goalor, who would (if not so near the Goal) be
careless, and run away from it; the sooner to fall into it, being negligent of
payment, because not in present danger of prosecution.

It Is true, Creditors ought to be paid, and it is as true, Debtors onght to
pay; But you know the old Proverb, Where nothing is to be had, the Chief must
loose his Right.

Can a Man make Brick without Straw? Can a man pay before he has it?

Put not your Christian Brother upon Impossibilities.

Measure as you would have measured unto you; This is the whole Sum of the Law.

FINIS.

