CERTAIN MATERIAL CONSIDERATIONS Touching the differences of the present
times, collected by a faithful pursuer of Peace and Truth.

1 COR. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 1 THESE.
5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. JAM. 3.17. The wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated. London, Printed 1642.

Right Honorable,
THese Collections which I herewith send, having passed the censure of some
learned Friends with good approbation, I presume to commend to your Honors
perusal and final disposing: If I be out in any thing I shall accept it as a
great favor if your Honor will stoop to advertise me of it. The notes upon the
Observations I have not yet fairly copied out, being a weak scribe, in regard
of my continuing infirmities: otherwise I had adventured them with these, (as I
had a good while since designed them) to your Honors hands: glad would my
heart have been (as I presume many more) if the pen or tongue might rather have
arbitrated these differences then the sword, which puts no difference between
good and evil; The good God look down in mercy upon the Land, and put an
happy end to these miseries which otherwise are like to put a miserable end to
all our happiness. This is the constant prayer of*

Late at night and in haste

Your Honors humbly devoted and (in these times) namelesse servant in Christ
Jesus.

To his Friend.
SIR,
HAving been much troubled (even to restlesness) in my thoughts, about the
tender and dangerous distractions of these times, I have often and earnestly
besought Almighty God in my prayers, that he would so assist me with his
spirit, that I might honestly set my self to seek the truth, so seeking might
find it, and finding it might cheerfully embrace it, and constantly cleave unto
it, in what case or danger soever I should find it. To this end I tasked my
self to the saddest and severest Meditations my weak body and Intellectuals
could undergo: which being (I trust by the guidance of GOD) resolved into these
ensuing Hypotheses, I commit to your judicious and most impartial censure;
being not so fond of my own fancies, but that I can endure to see them stripped
naked, and if they prove not the issues of Truth, to disinherit them from ever
having further possession of my thoughts. I see not many things, and hear not
all; living so remote from any Town where the Tide of Books and reports flows
in. Some Pamphlets there are walking about with as much confidence (and finding
as good entertainment) as Truth it self needs, and with a great deal less
modesty then that uses to do: Pleas, Appeals, Reasons, etc. which beg the
questions I looked they should prove, and left me more unsatisfied (rather)
then they found me. I have hitherto (perhaps through fondness) more
contentment from these conceptions of my own, which I entreat you to examine
with all faithfulness and severity: as knowing that you cannot do your self or
me any greater injury, then to flatter me in falsehood; who am come (praised be
God) so far toward wisdom, as heartily to thank him who rebukes me in love,
and lovingly to honor him who refutes me with reason.

Homo sum, errare possum: Christianus sum, Haereticus esse nolo. PHILALETHES.

THe Book of Observations upon His Majesty's Answers and Expresses did most of
all stumble me, but it was more by confounding then convincing my reason: upon
a due examination it seemed to me but a solid piece of Sophistry, or learned
Imposture, I have made some strictures throughout upon him, you shall see and
censure them if I may receive any intimation that you guess them worth the
looking on.

Conscientiae laboro, non famae, non vitae.
Whilst I was musing the fire kindled, and at the last I spoke with my pen;
writing but what I believe, and believing what I write to be the very truth, my
conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.

ALthough the King and Parliament assembled together, are the most honorable
and supreme Court of the Kingdom, from whom there is no humane Appeal; yet
they are still to be looked on but as a company of men subject to infirmities,
passions, and errors as others are: and therefore may determine (even where
they concur) things evil in themselves: or else we must grant that no
Parliamentary Acts were ever evil in themselves (and so needed no abrogation)
but only inconvenient for time and occasions, and so needed but suspensions,
till fit seasons of re-inforcing them might return. And if the whole may err
in their determinations, much more may the parts severally and alone.

2. In so great a number it is probable there still will be, (as it is certain
now there are) some of green years, slender parts, small experience, little, or
no learning either in Arts, or Law: and I may add (from the censures of some
part of that Court upon the other) of (at least) suspected integrity: who as
they are chosen by popular voices (wherein sinister References of times bear
no small sway) so are they (probably) lead in Voting by Popular Arguments
tending most to liberty: being incompetent Judges of the Method's and Mysteries
of State-government. Whence it will follow, that since number of Voices, and
not depth of Argument carries it; the fittest and justest Propositions, may be
often overborn by number, which cannot be confuted by reason.

3 As it is true, that no evil ought to be imagined of the Parliament, so is
it as true that No evil ought to be imagined of the King; and yet it is not
untrue, that where there is none, the Greatest evil may be suspected, and the
Greatest evil may be where None is imagined.

4 Though no Evil ought to be imagined of the Parliament, conjunctim and in
the lump: viz. That what the King and Both Houses shall faitly and freely
conclude upon and enact, will prejudice no man; yet in regard of particular
Members, when I know evil by them, I may suspect evil from them. Else why
does one part of the Parliament not only suspect, but say so much, and so great
evil of the other? Whilst they mutually repute each other enemies to the
State, which of all Civil evils is the greatest.

5 When there is a noise of extreme danger (which all men fear) and then
earnest undertaking for prevention, (which all men desire) it is easy to
conceive, how readily men will assent, without a due examination either of the
imminence of the danger, or lawfulness of the prevention: especially men of
the weaker sort, not well able to judge of either.

6 When it is possible that no one in either house of Parliament may be
learned in the Laws, since Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens and Townsmen
(of which they consist) are not necessarily so to be, nor one more then
Another: I see not how the judgment of the Law can fully and properly reside in
them; especially when the King consents not. And so much seems employed by the
sitting of the Judges in the house; who (for ought I hear) have no other
office there, but to advise or advertise in point of Law.

7 When it is said, that the judgment of the major part of both houses is the
judgment of the Parliament, and consequently of the Kingdom; I conceive it is
not rightly affirmed. For (besides that the judgment of the Clergy is not (so
much as in a shadow) there represented, who are a considerable part of the
Kingdom, and should be presumed to have as good judgment, and be as good men
as others:) I resign not my judgment but obedience to the Parliament: and not
barely to the Burgesses of my own Town (whom perhaps I think very unfit, and
who were chosen against my will,) but to the result determinations of both
houses; and not to them only neither, but as all are allowed, confirmed, and
perfected by the Kings assent. For I am represented in the Commons but as
subordinate to the King, and to join with the King and the Lords (not without,
or against both, or either of them) to make Laws for the good of the Kingdom.
So that when the Act is made by the concurrence of all three States; then, and
(I suppose) not till then, it becomes obligatory, and as a peaceable Subject I
must obey, if it be lawful before God; though my judgment be still free, and
at home, and I do think it inexpedient, as the Negative part of Votes do. For
it is impossible, and against Reason and Nature, that an understanding Man's
judgment, backed with strength of Argument should be led captive merely by the
ods of two or three voices.

8 The major part of the houses being that part, which exceeds the other though
but by three or four voices: shall not that Law which is concluded only by the
advantage of those voices, without the Kings consent, be a Lesbian Rule, or a
Nose of wax; which upon a second Vote may pass the contrary way, upon a
casual absence or presence of so small a number? The Law is a strait Rule, and
always like it self. If such or such a thing be Law after it was so voted by
the major part of the houses, it was Law before it was so voted; unless an
absolute power of New-law-making be in such a Vote) and so might be put in
execution without a new voting: only the Law ought to be produced. If the major
part of the Votes of both Houses be only Declarative of the Law, then in reason
the first Voting should stand, or else this will be a very uncertain rule:
And so the case of ordering the Militia should not be according to Law, because
it was first, and twice countervoted by the House of Lords. Such broad and
obvious exceptions ought in matters of so high concernment, to be fully cleared
and removed.

9. When the question is, Who shall be Judge of Law? I conceive it must be
meant, either of the sense of particular Laws, or of the latitude and scope of
the Law in general. If of the first, I suppose the sense will appear, either
first, By the clear light it has in it self, (as the Sun shows its own
light) or secondly, By references to other Laws or clauses touching the same
argument which are more perspicuous. Or thirdly, By the usance and practice,
which is the life of Laws. If none of these can make it plain, in my judgment
it becomes no Law, but is obsolete, until a full sense be agreed on again by
that full Authority which first made the Law. Otherwise I see not how any rule
for declaring of Law can be always absolutely determinative. For (besides that
the same thing is at diverse votings, diversely voted) If the Votes of either
House should chance (as possibly they may) to be equally divided, and the major
part of both Houses severally, be necessarily required to determine; where
shall the determination be, when the Votes of one (at least) are equally
balanced? Unless we fly to a third way, viz. the major part of both Houses in
gross, where the exception lies as full, because even then also they may
chance to be equal. If it be understood of the Second, then that Latitude or
Scope ought to be evinced from some Terms in the Law expressed, (which terms
are to be produced) and not from the pleasure of any who shall say that is
lawful which seems so to them: especially when they make themselves the sole
Judges of Law and Equity. For whither will not such a liberty reach? A
Transition is so made, a genere ad genus, from positive law to the law of
reason; and that, being various according to diversity of apprehensions, cannot
be imposed upon all, where the full Legislative power is not concurrent. And I
conceive it is no^ properly said, That in extreme danger, I may by Law do
that which otherwise I may not do: but that in such a case, I may do that and
be excused, which by Law I cannot do. As in an assault (I think) the Law does
not say, you may kill a man, or take away his weapon, but if you do it, The
Law will not punish you, because it is against all reason, that where the Law
affords me no help, it should not hold me excused for helping my self, when
Necessity (which has no law) is so pressing, that otherwise I must perish.

10 When necessity and extreme danger are made the grounds, for (otherwise)
doubtful and dangerous undertakings, it were meet those Terms were rightly
defined, that so we might clearly see the foundnesse of our warrant. I conceive
it to be, when a man is so presently distressed, that he can make no possible
use of any positive law to help him, and so becomes in a sort disobliged from
it, and left free to the law of Nature, which prompts every thing to seek the
preservation of it self. This necessity dispenceth with ordinary duties both
to God and man. But we must be sure of the necessity before we assume the
liberty. If a man steal, and plead necessity, he shall not be excused because
the Law has not left him remediless in his want. I may not take another
sword from him, because I have cause to fear he will hurt me; nor the sword
that I have lent one, though he has threatened to kill me, so long as he draws
it not upon me, nor offers force unto me: Because I have yet a remedy by law,
and may bind him to the Peace, etc. And then much less may I wrest his away
that has sworn to defend me. When necessity is but supposed, no Simple and
absolute necessity is confessed, and so no law under pretense of necessity is
yet to be violated. The Kingdom may be in danger and yet the danger not
extreme; nor any necessity such, but that it may be preserved by ordinary
defense: or if the danger be urgent, we may not seek to prevent that without
Law, which by law is well provided for already. In great dangers (such as now
are supposed) the Kingdom is to be put into a posture of defense against
Foreign Invasion, or Domestic Tumult and Rebellion. By Law and Custom the
King is to order it. [And so much is acknowledged by the present Parliament in
their Reply to the Kings Answer of the 29. of January: where (speaking of the
Forts and Castles of the Kingdom) they have these words. viz. We confess the
nomination of any person to those places, being so principal and inseparable a
Flower of your Crown vested in you, and derived to you from your Ancestors,
by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, you may reserve to your self. And
anon after speaking of the Militia, They say, Which Militia ^e likewise
acknowledge by the Law is subject to no command but of your Majesty, and of
Authority lawfully derived from you*] Now the King carefully applying himself
to it; I see not what necessity, or disobliging extremity can justly be
alleged to dispossess him of it, when he is not convinced to have failed in
his duty. To doubt that he will fail, is not to prove that he has, but rather
that yet he has not done it. If the Enemy were landed, or the Subjects
assaulted (which are degrees beyond our dangers, (at least) when this fell
first into debate) the ordering of defense would be still in the King; (unless
where particular outrages, enforced particular places to the defense of
themselves by the law of Necessity, which awaiteth no Laws.) But if the King
be regardlesse of his Trust and his peoples safety, and let the Enemy graze
along his Kingdom; or any of his Ministers prove false to the State, and
either take with a Foreign, or become themselves a home Enemy, and the King
strive not to suppress them, or (all which far be it to imagine) do animate
and incite them to despoyle his good Subjects; Then (and I suppose not till
then) is the danger in extremity, and then is the plea just for the Laws of
necessity* which do not only enable the State in common, but every man in
particular to seek the preservation of himself and of his Country, by all
such ways as stand not in opposition to the Law of God.

11 When I protest to defend the power and privileges of Parliament; It is but
so far as lawfully I may, and so far as I know them, or ought to know them
being easy to be known, viz. such as by Custom and unanimous Consent have
obtained as unquestionable, not such as are quarrelled among themselves, some
claiming, and others gainsaying: nor such as are challenged, without, or
against the King; who being part of the Parliament, ought to have Consent in
the concluding of Privileges; at least ought not to be unpriviledged without
his consent whose privileges are protested for, as well as (and with) the
rest, and the defense of them sworn to in the oath of Supremacy: Where we
swear (to our power) to assist and defend all Jurisdiction, privilege,
pre-eminence and Authority granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs etc. If the disposing of the Navy, Forts, Magazines, and Militia be (as
it is confessed they are) by the Law of the Land the Privilege of the King,
there can be no distinction (to my apprehension) imagined, upon any fears, or
iealousies whatsoever, (where no evil is by him actually practiced, and all
intentions of evil are absolutely abjured) to warrant any men, (few or more, in
Parliament, or out of Parliament, who have taken that Oath) to dispossess him
of them, or detain them from him, in what manner soever he shall come to
demand them. For the Oath is peremptory and unlimited, and non est
distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit. To say they are detained for him, (not
from him) might have some color if the King were either a child, distracted,
or Weak minded: But to an adult and understanding Prince, such a pretense is a
higher derogation, by disparaging his wisdom or fidelity.

12 Where power is invested in any; and by custom, and free consent of all is
made hereditary: I conc^ave it cannot afterward be limited with other
conditions then at first were agreed on, without the consent of him that has
it.

13 That which is certainly lawful, and but doubtfully dangerous, is to be
chosen rather then that which is not certainly lawful, and but doubtfully
safe, When A man offers no violence, (though upon good reason I fear he will
hurt me) to let his sword alone is certainly lawful, and but doubtfully
dangerous: To wrest it from him when he makes no assault, is not certainly
lawful, (but rather certainly unlawful) and but doubtfully safe: (or rather
undoubtedly dangerous) for by that occasion a quarrel may be made, and blood
shed, which might otherwise possibly (at least) have bin saved. I would the
application were not easy.

14 If a man being illegally dispossessed of his right, do (in heat of
contention) use some illegal means for the recovery of it, that is not to be
drawn into argument to justify the illegallity of the first usurpation. If a
man unassaulted wrest my sword from me, and I afterward beat him, he may not
draw my afterbeating into argument, to justify his taking my sword from me.

15 When the envy of not yiedling to the advice of his great Council, is cast
upon his Majesty; It is fit to set the case upon its own legs. It seems by
many passages in the observations, and other books and by more then
Booke-passages, that the King is esteemed a Tyrant over his people. For what
else is employed in the distrusting and Vilepending of his Oaths, Obtestations,
Imprecations, Execrations? In reputing the Attendance and Company about him
(whom he ownes and protects) Enemies to the State in raising at least defensive
Arms? in seizing his Navy, Shutting the Town Gates against him, and
possessing his Forts and Magazines against his Command? For will a man wrest
another sword from him, if he do not presume he will draw it upon him? Nay,
is it lawful to take any man's sword (if any man's then) till it be drawn upon
him, or some violence offered him, or threats given him? [If it be said then it
is too late, it may as well be said, till Then it is too soone] Now then, When
they are so opinioned, and jealous of the Kings love and fidelity; how can it
be imagined that he should look on them as Ingenuous and Equal Counselors,
and not be as distrustful of the sincerity of their advise? For how shall I
persuade another to be directed by me as his friend, when I give him to
understand that I take him for mine Enemy, that intends mischeife against me?
especially when the matter is not of ordinary concernment, wherein each ones
Rights are left free and untouched; but such as trencheth deep into his
Majesty's Prerogative, and tends not only to the spanning of his power, but
mainly also to the quenching of his honor; whilst by yiedling to such advise,
he must tacitly confess that he is not worthy to be trusted, and by
consequence openly proclaim that he is unworthy to be King.

16 If the (so called Malignant party should chance to be the prevailing part
in the houses, The King puts the case in his Answer to the Declaration of the
26 of May, page 8. and should allege that through the precipitancy of some
men's pretended zeal, the Kingdom were like to run into confusion, (for such a
case may be, and [Conspiracy for pretended Reformation] was the Title and
Argument of a Book many years since) and therefore must be safely secured: and
presuming the King favors that side, and not liking the course that he will
take to secure the Kingdom, they should vote it lawful for them to do it
themselves without him: must this presently be concluded to be the judgment of
the whole Kingdom, and to be according to Law, when no law can be produced?
and the King to be ill-affected to his best Subjects, or to be misled by evil
Counselors to undo himself and all his Kingdom, by not yielding to the advice of his great Counsel? or will the Adverse part take it well to be
reputed Enemies to the State, a malignant Party, evil Counselors etc? If not,
It were but meet that the substantial differences of the case were so well
opened, that they that desire to know what is just and right might tell where
to find it; and that all men of moderate Capacity and Ingenuity, might clearly
see the Infallibility of the one party, and the Hypocrify of the other.

17 When the Forts, Magazines, Navy, Offices, etc. are said to be entrusted to
the King, or the King entrusted with them for the good of the Kingdom; The
fence of the word Entrusted, in this place would be cleared. Not to question
whether the King have these things by way of Trust from the people; it will be
of all granted, (as it is by the King himself) that God and the Law have
trusted him with them, and that for the good of the Kingdom: and so to employ
them he is further tied by his Oath. But there is a twofold trust, one that is
Absolute and unlimited, otherwise then that the end is specified, supposed, or
presumed: end not so much limiting the Trust, as the Trust denoting and
implying the end. And there is a Trust conditionate and circumscribed in such
sort, that to fail in the performance is to forfeit the Trust. The first gives
a man a right to the thing entrusted; The second gives him only a right to the
trust of the thing. I conceive the Kings Trust is of the first kind, who being
presumed to mean All good to his people, (according to the Maxim in Politics,
No evil ought to be imagined of the King) has these things frankly and
absolutely committed to his Governance and disposing: And however he shall
order them, I suppose he is accountable to no man, nor questionable by any,
unless he clearly, publicly, and undoubtedly dispose of them to the ruin of
his Kingdom; and so puts the people to an evident extremity or lawless
necessity. If there be any limits the Law should express them, For he being
Supreme, there is no other power to impose them. Neither are the actions of his
Ministers to be censured, unless by them the known Laws have bin violated. If
this Trust must be managed or regulated by both Houses of Parliament; First
that Power should be made appear to the King and the People, and then there
must either be a standing Court of Parliament, or else one must be called so
often as the King shall have occasion to send out Ships, take out, or put in
powder or Ammunition into his Magazines, choose any Officers, etc. which is
uncouth to co^ceive. If a man having confidence of his Friend, shall say to
him, Sir, I will freely give up my whole estate into your hands, only you shall
swear you will be a Father to my Children, here is implication of a Trust, and
yet a clean right in the thing* so that he may set or sell, build or pull down,
give or lend, and yet be accountable to none, nor falsify his Trust, so long
as the Children want nothing (yea, and if he fail^ of the trust, perhaps some
Court of Conscience may relieve them but I believe no positive Law can
control him. The case is otherwise with Feoffees, or Executors in Trust, who
have a right only to the Trust, and none to the thing entrusted, which is
wholly the Heirs, the poor's or Legatiries to whom it was bequeathed.

18 The Kings and Subjects interests are mutual He refers to every subject,
and every subject unto him, as the Lines from the Center to the Circle: And
what interest he has in one, he has in another, and in all as well as in any:
And his interest in them is of an higher Alloy, and more noble. As command i^,
then subjection. The interest of protection is motuall. The (...) is, that all
the people are more worth then the King, but King and people and more worth
then either.

19 Personal differences of wisdom of folly, weakness or strength, courage
or cowardice, meanness or excellency of parts or arts, make no difference in
the Right of the King; though they show a great difference in Gods dealing with
the Kingdom.

20 When a King plays the Tyrant, or usurps upon his peoples just Liberties, I
conceive it must be either first by a violent suppression of old Laws and
Customs yet in force, or se^ondly by a wilful obtrusion of new Laws by force,
or thirdly by a wicked oppression by force without Law. When therefore Tyranny
is imputed to, or employed in a prince, (of or against: whom, we ought not
lightly to think any evil, or receive any accusation) it will become
Christians thoroughly to examine upon what points he is convinced, and not to
take up such reports by whole sale and in gros^^.

21 If the King have not a Negative, he seems not to have so much power in
Parliamentary Acts as one common Burgess: For if the Voice be even before,
that Burgesses may be the casting voice of the House, and I see not so much as
a vote allowed his Majesty.

22 When the King shall think it not fit to give his consent to what the major
part of Parliament shall agree upon, He is not barely to be considered, as one
single man: against so many: For besides his Privy Counsel at hand, men
accustomed to, and experienced in matters of State: and besides that possibly a
very great number of both Houses are also of the Kings mind; we are to consider
the King as one best acquainted with the Rules and Mysteries of Government,
being (as it were) the Trade to, and is which he has bin born, bred, and
brought up: And therefore is presumed alone to see further into it, then many
others together. For (besides that God has a special way of communicating
wisdom to Kings, in which regard A mise sentence is said to be in the lips of
the King. Prove. 16.10. And the heart of Kings is unsearchable, Prove. 25.3.)
Hystories make it plain, that there are Ar^dya Imperij and Militi^, which the
King and Captains apprehend when a thousand do not and which perhaps may not
be fit for all men, (nay not for any man else) to know.

23 When an Adult and Prudent Prince shall own, approve of, and protect such
and such Persons as his tried and known Friends or Counselors: If Any (under
what pretense soever of their suggesting evil Counsel, when no evil
practices are apparent, yea when such Councels and Practices are utterly
disavowed and abjured by the King) shall presume, not only without the Kings
consent, but against his express Command, to take up Arms to destroy and take
off such Persons: though no Evil (quod absit) be intended against his Person;
And yet who can tell what is in his heart that comes toward a man with a drawn
sword in his hand ^) I see not what Distinction can help, but that such Arms
are taken (not for, but,) against the King. Otherwise how can any thing be said
to be done against God; who being inviolable in his Person, cannot otherwise be
resisted, then by the blaspheming of his Name, breaking his Commands, rejecting
his. Motions prosecuting, and perfecuting his Servants, etc.

24 When it is said, The King was made for the people, and not the people for
the King; (besides, that the Comparison is as idle as that of the Members
against the Belly in the Apologue, and the Apostle has met with it, 1 Cor.
12.) it is (also) not absolutely true. For the King was no more made a man for
others the^ they were for him, nor made a King more for the good and safety of
the People then the people were put into such a posture of order and
obedienche, that e might be safe as well as They: yea rather He, then Any (if
not then many) of them, as being supposed the chiefest among them. The sense
wherein it seems best to hold is; That The King was made for the need or
necessity of the people, and not They for his: Viz. He can more securely be no
King, then the People can be without a King. And He takes the surrender of
their Power with the Dependances, and Consequences, not as a kindness from
Them, but as doing a kindness to Them; (as is employed in the refusal of the
Vine, Fig Tree, and Olive Tree to rule over the rest, in Jotham's Parable,
Judge. 9.7. etc. and in the History of Jepthah, Judges 11.4. etc.) For on him*
They unload their Cares and Fears, who forgoes his Own private Ease and Quiet,
that He may procure it to his People: Himself taking care that all men else
may live without Care. Now on whom the Necessity lies most, on Them lies the
greatest Obligation to respect. Therefore Saint Paul requires giving of thanks:
for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2. So may we say a Captain, a Pilot, a Physician, a
Schoolmaster were made for the need of their Correlates, which should render
Them more honorable, and rather draw respects to Them, then challenge greater
observance from Them.

Judge Righteous Judgment.
FINIS.

