THE CAVALIERS NEW COMMON PRAYER BOOK Vnclasp't.

It being a Collection of Prayers and Thanksgivings, used in His Majesty's
Chapel, and in his Armies.

Upon occasion of the late (supposed) Victories against the Parliaments forces,
and for the future success of the Cavalier Forces.

Published By his Majesty's Command, to be duly read in all other Churches and
Chappells within this his Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales.

Printed at York, by Stephen Buckley, 1644. AND Reprinted at London, by G. B.
with some brief and necessary Observations, to refute the Lies and Scandalls
that are contained in it. 1644.

Benevolent Reader,
YOU have often heard heretofore of the Cavaliers Thanksgivings in Oxford, and
other places, for their pretended Conquests, but you may remember, that they
were first well cudgelled into them, as Britanicus long since wittily observed.
And if you have had a longing desire to see the tenor and Contents of their
gratefulness, behold here a Hotch-potch of Episcopal and Cavalier
mock-Prayers, and Thanksgivings, for their No-Victories, but sound beatings at
Edgehill, in the West, and in the North, which being brought from York, since
the Reddition thereof to the obedience of the King and Parliament, I thought it
unfit to conceal it from you, in regard of the transcendent lying,
dissimulation, and mocking of God, with complementall Prayers, and delusive
Thanksgivings contained in it. Most miserable must those men be, whose very
Devotions are simulated and hypocritical and a greater sin for them to pray
in the manner they do, then not to pray, But read Prayers, or say Prayers they
do, and it is a question, whether with greater impudence, or ignorance: but no
matter for that with them, as long as they can thereby work so great an
advantage in the credulous peoples minds, as when they say, or pipe out their
Prayers for the King, against his best Subjects, they make silly people
believe, that they are the only men which, love and honor the King, and all
else Rebels, and such as seek to destroy him.

Moreover, if at any time they are soundly banged, presently they mock God and
the people with a Thanksgiving, according to the Spanish Jesuited custom:
only here is the difference, the Almighty lothes and abhorres such simulated
sanctity for their defeates and overthrowes, and the seduced people believe,
and admire it.

Thus they ensnare the Kings Subjects, and lead them with a show of devotion
into destruction, to make them adventure their lives and Estates against God,
the true Protestant Religion, and the Parliament, the sole upholder of Liberty
and Property, which, had it not to this day stood firm against all storms and
tempests, our Religion, Liberty and Property, had long since been trampled upon
by Popery and Tyranny.

Prayer and Thanksgiving, which are the Preservatives, they make the very bane
of their souls, and all by the powerful influence of the Prelatical Priests,
who draw the ignorant people to their desires, as will appear by these ensuing
Responds (according to the old Popish Order) between Priest and People. But not
to detain: you with any longer Prologue from this new Parcel of Mockery, and
Jesuited Popery, as bad as any in the Masse-book, see here their Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, in the same Ord^r they were printed at York, in this very year.
1644.

A Prayer for the preservation of His Majesty's Person, and for the Peace of
the Kingdom.
PRIEST. O Lord guard the Person of thy servant the King.


RIGHT RESPONDS. Prom Jesuits, Papists, Irish Rebels, and evil Counselors
about him.


People. Who puts his trust in thee.


Resp. Not we hope, in the arm of Flesh, as Cavaliers, Delinquents, and such
enemies to the Kingdom.


PRIEST. Send him and his Armies help from thy holy Place.


Resp. Not from Denmark, Belgia, France, Spain, and Ireland.


People. And evermore mightily defend them.


Resp. From the insinuations of Incendiaries, and other promoters of this War.


PRIEST. Confound the designs of all those that are risen up against him.


Resp. To withdraw him from his Parliament, and the protection of his best
Subjects.


People. And let not their Rebellious wickedness approach near to hurt him.


Resp. Nor any more to rob spoil, and kill the poor People of this Nation.


PRIEST. O Lord hear our Prayer.


Resp. That our King may speedily return home from destructive misleaders.


People. And let our cry come unto thee.


Resp. And the Cry of thy Peoples blood in Ireland, and England.


O LORD God of Hosts, who give Victory unto Kings, and did deliver David
thy servant from the peril of the sword, hear us, we beseech thee most
miserable sinners, [in making all the havoc and spoil in this Kingdom,] who
do here pour out our souls before thee, [to be enabled to do more
mischief] entirely desiring the Protection of thine hand upon thy Servant the
King: let him find safety under the shadow of thy wings, and preserve his
Person as the apple of thine eye. [and defend him from adhering any longer to
your pernicious ways and devices.] Suffer not that sword, which thou have put
into his hands, to be wrested out by the hands of Man: [the gathering of a
Guard in Yorkshire, and the Welchmens compliance at Shrewsbury, put that sword
into his hands, and not God, who never intended the destruction of his true
People. [ but bless his Counsels with success, [let them be never so bad,
you will tie God by this Prayer, to bless them.] and his enterprises with
victory, [you mean to the destruction of the Parliament, and all the true
Protestants in the three Kingdoms.] that he may go on to be a terror to all
them that oppose him [against the Papists Popery and Tyranny.] and to be as the
dew of the latter rain, upon the hearts of all those who do still remain
Loyal to him. [though they be Papists, bloody Irish Rebels, swearing
debauched Cavaliers, and the pests of his Kingdoms.] And O thou that take no
delight in the misery of one single sinner, spare merciful Lord, spare a
great, though most sinful Nation, pity a despised Church, [you mean the
Prelates and their Hierarchy,] and a distracted State [made so by your wicked
party, that have set it on fire by an unnatural War, begun by them.] heal
up those wounds which our sins have made so wide, that none but thine own
hands can close them. ['tis most true, you have made numbers of Women
husbandlesse, and children fatherless, your confession and prayer is good, if
they be sincere, which cannot be known to be so, unless you speedily desist
from making more such wounds.] And in the tenderness of thine unspeakable
compassion, hasten to put so happy an end unto these wasting divisions [why do
you then strive to continue, foment, and increase them ^^ill? lay down your
Arms, if you mean good sooth and they will suddenly cease.] that thy service
may be the more duly celebrated [with Copes, Organs, outward pomp and Popish
vainglory.] thine Anointed conscientiously obeyed, [you mean, in whatsoever he
shall Will and Command.] that the Church may be restored to a true Christian
Unity, [the Prelates, Deanes, and Prebends, being resetled again, they only
make the Church in your sence] and the Kingdom to her former Peace [why do
you not quickly return to your homes then? you that first began, must first
end: but you intend to exclude Peace from Scotland and Ireland.] and that for
his sake, who is the Prince of Peace, and that shed his precious blood, to
purchase our peace, [mel in ore, fell in cord.] even JESUS CHRIST our Lord, to
whom with thee, o Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be, etc.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving for His Majesty's victory over the Rebels at
Edgehill.
O Thou God of Hosts, who go forth with our Armies. [To their destruction,
for he pleased to leave them to themselves, and to give them up to the
slaughter of the Parliaments forces in that Battle.] and pleadest the cause of
thine Anointed against them that strive with him, [if the King had continued
with his Parliament, he had been there in no danger, nor striving; but self
do, self have.] We acknowledge with all lowliness of mind, [if your lofty
spirits stood not on points of worldly honor to be so averse to peace:] that
it is not our Sword, nor the multitude of our Host that has saved us, [but
your running away in the night after that Battle:] but it is thy hand alone
that has disposed of victory to thy servant the King [and Parliament, for it
is most certain that their Forces gained the day there,] that has covered his
head in the day of Battle, [the Parliament desired him before the fight, that
he would not mix the danger of his person with those whom they had declared
Rebels and Traitors,] and has kept his Crown from being thrown down to the
ground: [was it worn there, as Richard the third did his at Bosworth-field?]
Not unto us therefore, not unto us, but unto thee, O God, do we give the
praise, beseeching thee to accomplish the great work thou have begun for us,
[assuredly God has taken special notice of this abominable mock-prayer, for
he has granted their request, in giving them continual memorable Routs, and
Defeats ever since; they prayed for vengeance upon themselves. and have
constantly received it to the full, as at Newbery, Alrezford, York, etc.] to
continue the blessing of good success on the head of our Sovereign, and his
Army, [never may that Army have better success than it had then, according to
their prayers.] that the happiness thereof may flow from thence, to the every
skirts of his people, [judge what happiness, you that have been plundered,
fired, and wasted by that Army, have received from it.] to continue the fear
and consternation, which thou have already cast upon the hearts of those, who
have Rebelliously risen up against him, to enfeeble their strength, to
infatuate their Councels, [well prayed, for the Lord God has sent
consternation, enfeebling, and infatuation upon those that have rebelliously
risen up against him, to carry him from his Parliament, and leave the
protecting of his true Protestant subjects.] to undeceive, and disabuse the
seduced part of them, [whom you labor the more to blind and hoodwink] that
they may know and feel, that to take up Arms against thy Vicegerent, [you are
deceived, it is against those that have seduced him by evil Counsel, and
against you that mock God and the people by these scandalously lying Prayers]
is to fight against Heaven, [you mean the Heaven under Westminster Hall, for
God by his continual good success given to the Parliaments Forces against
you, has declared, that they fight not against his Throne.] that so by a
timely and conscientious submission, to the just Authority of him whom thou
have set over them, [Submission to the Kings just Authority was never yet
denied him.] the effusion of more blood may be prevented, [which you have shed,
up to the horse bridles since.] the Peace of this distracted Kingdom settled,
[Peace is in your mouths, but War is in your hearts] Faction may be cast out
of the State, [we should soon enjoy quiet, if the Spanish Faction, were once
expelled.] and Schism out of the Church, [away then with all Papists,
Prelates, and their Hierarchy.] to the advancement of thy glory, the Kings
Honor, and the Peoples good. [good words break not the bones.] Grant this O
God, for thy old Mercies sake which thou were wont to show unto this Nation,
that both Prince and People may join in giving praise to thee, who live and
raignest world without end, Amen.

Reader, observe by this mock-prayer, how senseless these men are, that could
be so woefully beaten at Edgehill, and never feel it; that they should lose
their General in the heaps of some thousands of their slain, and be forced
to leave the Field to the Parliaments Forces, and run away in the night, and
never know it, but remain in an abusive opinion of Victory, and Celebrate a
Festival in stead of a Funeral, and labor to hea^ themselves and the world
with a mock-Thanks-giving. But you must understand, that their policy was, to
uphold the drooping and fainting spirits of their beaten party, by this subtle
Spanish trick

A Thanksgiving for his Majesty's late great Victory over the Rebels in the
North.
O Most mighty God, whose dwelling is above the Heavens, yet humblest thy
self to dispose of all things done either in Heaven or Earth, who in thy
unsearchable Judgments, have suffered the Sheba's of these times to blow the
Trumpet of Rebellion in every corner of this Land; but withal have justly
turned this sufferance of thine into their Ruin; [True Sirs, Your Rebellious
Cavaliers, like so many treacherous Sheba's, partly by allurements of honor
and reward, and partly by force, have provoked every County in this Kingdom to
rise in Rebellion against the King and Parliament, for which as you say also,
they have been utterly ruined, and must expect no other either from God or
men.] We praise and magnify thy great and glorious Name, that having given of
late to thine Anointed so many pledges of thy favor, [leave your base
flattery, and tell us what favors they were, that we may be thankful for them
also.] thou have yet added to that heap of blessings, a new and notable Victory
over the Rebels in the North; [whereabouts was this your notable Victory in
the North? at Hull you had two several repulses with loss and shame, defeats
you had at Bradforth, Halifax, Leeds, and Wakefield, and a conspicuous
overthrow at Selby, and God to Crown the Parliament with a Blessing, gave your
Rupert and his Associates such a blow at York, as never was the like in
England. But Reader, you must understand the Cavaliers were those Rebels, as in
all reason and law they are, and then it is most true, that the King and
Parliament had a late, great, new, and notable Victory over the Rebels in the
North.] Go on, O thou God of our Salvation, go on as thou have begun; [these
wretches deserve the severest vengeance, because they pray so earnestly for it,
for rather then they will confess an overthrow, they heartily beg for more of
the same sauce.] leave us not we beseech thee, till thou have accomplished the
great work thou have so apparently taken into thine own hands; [to extirpate
you all both root and branch, Amen.] Pass by our personal sins, [of murder
and robbery you mean.] O Lord, though they cry loud, [louder then all your
Drums and Canons.] hear them not, but look to the righteousness of our Cause;
[as app^ares by the ill prospering of it, which is confusion and destruction.]
See the seamlesse coat of thy Son torn, [by the Prelates, scandalous Priests
and Papists.] the Throne of thine Anointed trampled on, [it stands yet firm
and untouched in the House of Parliament.] thy Church invaded by Sacrilege,
[as you think in the removing of Popish Jmages, Pictures, Coapes, Organs, and
Surplices.] and thy people miserably deceived with lies, [by Aulicus, Naworth,
Digbies, and Nicholas letters, and the abominable untruths in this book of
Mock-Prayers and Thanksgivings.] See it O God, as see it thou do, [to your
shame and confusion.] and Vindicate what thou see upon the heads of those,
who lead these wretches to destruction, [that is your selves, in seducing and
forcing silly and ignorant people, to fight for your unrighteous cause and
Popery,] till by their frequent overthrowes, [which you have had above fifty
times.] if nothing else can possibly reduce them, [which will not reduce you,
until you be totally wasted and consumed, and scarce a man of your party be
left alive.] thou have scourged them into obedience, [so inflexible is your
obstinacy, that a whip of Scorpions will not bring you to it.] and tamed these
enemies of thine and ours into a desire of Peace, [which hitherto you have
repudiated, unless it be upon your own terms, to command all as madly and
illegally, as you did before this Parliament began.] that so having at last
subdued their hearts, which is the best of Victories, [your proud and lofty
spirits must be tamed, else there is no good to be done.] thy David may return
to Jerusalem in Peace, [let it be without his Army, and evil Counselors,
which you would bring along with him.] and thy people once more joy under his
Government, [which God grant may be according to his word, and the laws of
this land.] blessing thy goodness which has wrought this for us, [no victory
for you there I am sure.] through the Mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, be all praise and glory world without
end. Amen.

Reader, observe well these shameless Prelaticall prayers, which are stuffed
with such abominable lies, that even stink in the nostrils of God and man, and
you may have cause to wonder, how these men dare bring such sordid trash before
the presence of Almighty God, and the face of a Christian Congregation, and to
profane Churches and Chapels therewith, which they account holy and sanctified
places. This is Sacrilege in the highest degree, and yet their zeal can
brook it better, then to have those places cleansed from the rags and
trumpery of Popery and Idolatry.

A Thanksgiving for his Majesty's late great Victory over the Rebels in the
West.
O Most glorious and powerful Lord God, without whose aid and influence all
our strength is weakness, and our counsel folly [that influence is taken from
you* and so by your own confessions, your counsel is folly, witness your many
plots and stratagems against the Parliament, and City of London, which by Gods
mercy and goodness, have been still discovered and prevented.] We thy unworthy
servants, [your wicked actions have always showed you to be such] in a
grateful commemoration of thy frequent and often repeated blessings, [God
suffers his Sun and rain, to shine and fall, on the evil and unjust, Mat.
5.45.] with humble and unfeigned hearts, offer up to thee the Sacrifice of
praise, [the Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he
brings it with a wicked mind? Pro. 21.27,] calling Heaven and Earth to
witness with us, that it is thy power alone by which we stand, ['till the
appointed time of your downfall,] thy strength by which we prosper. [so it
seems by the multitudes of ill successes you have constantly had.]
Particularly we magnify thy holy Name O God, for that late great Victory,
wherewith thou have graciously blessed our Sovereigns Forces in the West,
[witnesse the notable Overthrowes they had at Newbery, and Alrezford, etc.]
where thou gave not the day to the strong, nor measured'st out success
according to the numbers; but made the weak chase the mighty, and an handful
overthrow an Host; [most true, for how many repulses, had your great and
strong Armies, by the small and weak Garrisons of Lyme and Plymouth?] showing
by an evident testimony of thy presence, [in those two aforesaid towns,] that
the Arm of flesh strives in vain, when the Arm of God does fight the
battle. [that made you run away, and leave your sieges of those places.] In
pursuance of this thy unspeakable goodness; we humbly beg of thee O Lord, to
continue in all our dangers the like special assistance to us, [as you prayed
for more vengeance after those overthrowes and repulses; so you have received
it to purpose since near York] to break the Spear of the disobedient, [there
you lost 5000. men, and 10000. Arms.] and melt the hearts of the Rebellious
into water, [the rest of that Rebellious crew had such watery hearts, that they
ran away, some by land, and some by sea to Hamburgh, and left York to be taken
by the Parliaments Armies.] to strike the minds of the perverse, [as that Army
of Ruperts was stricken with such fear, that they ran out of that City by
night to shift for themselves] with a true touch of that Conscience, which they
go about to stifle, [your Consciences are seared, they need no stifling.] and a
true sense of that duty to thine Anointed, [if you had that sense, you would
not strive to undo him, and his Posterity and Kingdoms.] which they labor
to forget, [you have gotten it indeed else you would not do so,] that we thy
miserable and distressed people, may no longer groan under those heavy
Judgments, [you have violently drawn them down upon your selves, and this
miserable distressed Nation,] which our sins have pulled down upon us. [a
full confession; but where is your repentance and amendment since?] but may at
last be reunited and knit in the happiness of a long wished for Peace, [which
you reject by further contumacy and rebellion.] and with one mind, in the same
true Religion, worship thee the only God, [you mean with your Ceremonies of
cringings, Altars, and Will Worship.) and obey our King whom thou have set over
us: [in what he shall command, in Justice, Equity, and Righteousness,] grant
this O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake, who reigns with thee, and
thy holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.

Observe Reader, That these Prelaticall Prayer-mongers and their adherents are
true Adamites, for though they have wrought worlds of mischief in beginning,
and somenting this unnatural War amongst us, yet they would make the stupid
people believe, that they are innocent and clear from those heinous
exorbitances, and like Adam, transfer their sins from themselves, upon the
backs and consciences of those, that only take up defensive Arms against them:
but that will not serve their turns, for though they strive to palliate their
subtle crimes, yet God has, and will every day more and more detect and
discover them, and will without question turn their wickednesses upon their
own heads.

A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe return.
O Most merciful Lord God, we farther render thee all praise and thanks, for
that thou have been pleased to extend thy hand of deliverance unto the person
of our gracious Queen, [are they Protestant or Popish graces?] that thou have
made her an instrument of so much good to this Kingdom, [this is a French
Ironie, for you speak contrary to your meaning and knowledge. I know not to
give flattering titles, said Job 32.22.] and brought her safely hither, through
so many dangers both by sea and land, [she came with a great Convoy of Dutch
Ships by Sea, and passed through no places by land, but the Kings Garrisons,
guarded with a strong Army, where was the danger you speak of?] Lord make the
King and his People daily more and more happy in her, [this is a prayer for the
future, what past, or present happiness have we enjoyed?] that as by thine
especial favor she is already become the mother of so many hopeful Princes,
[if two of them were not now nurtured amongst Prelates, Papists, and debauched
soldiers.] so she may be daily fruitful in the addition of more blessings to
us, [I pray let them be better then those we have hitherto received], through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, world without end, Amen. [I was horribly afraid these Prayer-mongers
would have given the Queen thanks in this Prayer also.]

Reader, few words are best, because the Queen is not here now, and cannot
answer for her self, and therefore I can lay nothing to her present charge, but
consider the good she has done to this Kingdom; ( I will except her good to
Ireland and Scotland) she carried her daughter from hence to her husband in
Holland, and because she had not ready money to defray her charges there, she
carried with her a few trifling Jewels, and the Cubbord of gold Plate, which
the Law says, belonged to the Kingdom, and hearing the distractions amongst us
to increase, and the Cavaliers and Papists to grow numerous, she made bold
(with a good meaning no doubt) to pawn, or sell those Jewels and Plate, and
with the moneys arising from them, bought Arms, Ammunition, and Ordnance, and
kindly sent them to us, to beat the Prelates, Papists, Cavaliers, and Irish
Rebels out of England. And was she not herein an Instrument of much good to
this Kingdom? As for those Rivers of Protestants blood that has been shed by
this means, you must think it is a toy to a Catholic Queen, and not to be
esteemed, so she gain her ends, and advance that Cause and Faction. Here is the
happiness, here are the blessings this Nation has reaped by such an
Instrument of good. More may be said, but I leave all true Protestants to their
own Meditations.

A Hymn or General Thanksgiving.
GLory be to God on high, [your Mock-prayers defraud him of his glory.] and in
earth Peace, [ not in England, Scotland, and Ireland, by your consents.] good
will toward men. [to what men, Papists or Protestants, Cavaliers or Round
heads, to him that swears, or to him that fears an Oath?] We praise thee,
We bless thee, We worship thee, We glorify thee; [Softly, lest you want
breath, and thank the old Common prayer book for this.] and at this time, in a
more special manner, with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts,
[true devotion and your mockery are incompatible.] We most humbly give thanks
unto thee, for that thou have bin pleased out of thine infinite goodness
mercifully to look down upon the late low estate of our gracious Sovereign; [
Your brethren in London, have always told us that the Cavaliers Armies were
Potent and Numerous.] That have brought him from so much scornful neglect, [
of his Nephew Rupert, and other of his Soldiers, that would plunder and commit
outrages, notwithstanding his Inhibition.] to appear so terrible unto those
desperate Rebels, who dare yet stand in Arms against him; [ridiculous
Thunderclap, will you turn the Kings countenance into a hideous form?] That
thou have blessed him with many, and those eminent victories, and particularly,
for those great defeats which by his Armies thou have given unto his enemies in
the North, and in the West. [Rupert, Maurice, Newcastle, and Hopton will tell
the truth and shame the devil.] O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father
Almighty, O Lord, the only begotten Son Jesus Christ, continue these thy
favors to us, [of continual losses and defeats, as hitherto you have had, O
obdurate hearts, that pray for wrath and judgment upon themselves.] and
perfect we beseech thee, that glorious work, the happy peace of this land,
which none but thine own strength can finish, [you plead guilty and confess
your war inglorious, and yet shun that happy Peace.] And to that end, Thou that
take away the sins of the world, take this foul sin of Rebellion from us, [a
plain confession, but it is not ingenious, because you continue still
Rebellious.] Thou that sit at the right hand of God the Father, smite
through the loins of those Sacrilegious men, who have not spared at all to
profane thy House and thy Service; [with Atars and Idols, Pictures and Images,
duckings, and too much courtesy, too much craft.] So shall we still bless thy
Name in the midst of the great Congregation; [you mean of Bishops, Deanes,
etc. clad in rich Coapes, and their Pontificalibus, with loud and high sounding
music.] So shall we thy servants never cease to be still praising thee and
saying, Thou only art Holy, Thou only art the Lord, Thou only O Christ, with
the holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father. To thee be all
praise and honor and glory ascribed world without end. Amen. [Smooth as Butter
or Oil. Thou shall not take Gods Name in vain. Exodus 20.]

Reader, observe how fitly the latter part of the 50. Psalm may be applied to
these Prelaticall prayer-mongers and their abbettors, from the 16. verse to the
end, in these words: But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to declare
my Sta^^tes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou
hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. When thou saw a
chi^fe, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partak^r with Adulterers.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and
speak against thy brother: thou slanderest thine own mothers son. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Whosoever offers [true] praise,
glorifieth me: and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show
the Salvation of God.

A Prayer to be said during these times of trouble.
O Lord our God, Merciful and Gracious, and abundant in goodness and truth,
who do according to thy will in the Armies of heaven, and rulest over all
the Kingdoms of the earth; in whose hand is power and might, and none is able
to withstand thy Arm; [which, though you have sorely felt since your
Rebellion, yet you would never acknowledge it against you.] We most vile
sinners approach before thy Throne of Grace, bewailing those manifold
transgressions that have provoked thy wrath and indignation against us. [ here
are more of their Confessions, but still without amendment; whosoever confesses
and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy, Pro. 28.13] We know, O Lord, that
affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, but it is thou that with rebukes do chasten man for sin. We
confess that we were a wealthy and a careless Nation [vntill you by your
plundering and robbery impovereshed it,] and our land was as the garden of
Eden; [untill you wasted it, by making havoc both of man and beast, that
should have manured it.] our deliverances were great, and thy blessings were
multiplied, [and yet you never take them to heart, to be truly thankful for
them.] We dwelt alone without fear of evil, [that was your security and
carelessness,] and were become the Envy of those that were round about us. [and
now you have made us the scorn and derision of all Nations.] Peace was within
our walls, [ why did you break it? First in Scotland, next in Ireland, and now
in England?] and plenteousnesse within our Palaces. [ the too great plenty in
the Bishops Palaces, made them begin their Bellum Episcopale.] But when we had
eaten and were full, and had waxen fat, we kicked against thee our Maker, who
had done such great things for us, [you were always like the Rebellious
Jews.] our heart was lifted up, [and in that loftiness your hearts remain
still.] and forget thee our God, [when did you ever remember him?] and lightly
esteemed the Rock of our salvation. [so it seems by your forsaking of him,
and turning to Idolatry.] We loathed the Manna that reigned down upon us; [
you indeed ever loathed the Manna of sincere Praying, and sound Preaching,] our
Peace became a weariness, [that made you run out into a bloody war.] and
we snuffed at our happiness, [the more to blame you that could not see when
you were well.] we murmured against Moses in our tents, [and put honest Rulers,
Privy Councellers, Magistrates, and Justices of Peace out of their places.] and
made light of thy Anointed whom thou had set over us. [unlesse he would
bestow honor and wealth upon you.] Therefore has thou recompensed our ways
upon our own heads, [very just.] and suffered our destruction to proceed from
our selves: [you never judged right for your selves till now.] our wickedness
does correct us, our backsliding does reprove us, and our iniquity is become
our ruin. [can you see all this and not leave your sinful courses? let ruin
then consume you.] Thou have broken upon us with a grievous breach; [in the
slaughter of thousands of your Partisans.] thy anger has divided us, [as it
will be at the end of the world, the Sheep from you the Goats.] and thy fury
has dashed us one against another. [so that your brains fall out.] Thou have
mingled a Spirit of perverseness in the midst of us; [which makes you so
refractory.] and made us a Nation void of Council and understanding: [that's
false, for you have Council and understanding enough to contrive Plots,
Conspiracies, and Treacheries; but to good they are totally infatuated.] in
stad of Peace, thou have sent bitterness, it is you that have changed a Calm
into a Storm, and turned Wormwood into Gaul.] and have sent a fire into our
bowels, and it is kindled round about us.] remember which of your party has
fired Towns and houses.] And now, O'Lord, behold the Sword is drunk with our
blood, [of the Protestants in England and Ireland.] and we are numbered to the
slaughter; [a just rcompencee for your shedding it.] the high ways are
unoccupied, because you hinder Commerce and trading.] and the travelers go
through bypath: [lest they should fall into your hands.] our fields are
divided, our inheritance is for a spoil, [because you have shared the
Protestants lands amongst you.] and our substance to the Robbers, [ such as
Rupert, Capell, Hastings, etc.] We are become a reproach to the foolish people,
[because you delude them with lies, and Mock-victories.] and servants bear rule
over us, [such as Endymion Porter, Davis the Barber, etc.] The mean man is
risen against the Honorable, [that is, the poor ragged Welsh men against the
Parliament.] and the fire out of the Bramble devoureth the lofty Cedars, [the
fire out of the Parliaments Guns has abated the pride of some of your Nobles.]
our women are cast out of their pleasant places, [by your Deflouring and
Ravishing them.] and the robe is pulled off from the aged; [witnesse your
robbing of old Master Dod of his gown in Northamptonshire.] there is no
respect had to the Prieast, [of Baall you mean.] nor favor to the Elders.
[the Bishops and Deanes you conceive.] Thy Sanctuaries, the excellency of thy
strength, are profaned; [by the saying of your Mock prayers, and Thanksgiving
in them.] and they have defiled the places where thine Honor dwells, [which
the Cavaliers did at Kingston upon Thames, and Plympton, by making them a
jakes, and stables for their Horses.] and yet still the seat of wickedness
frames mischief by a Law, [true, you have done all your villainies by the known
Laws of the land.] and it turns judgment backward, [when the runawayes voted
in their Anti-Parliament at Oxford.] and bids Justice stand a far off; [as
the Cavalier Governors over Cities and Corporations doc.] and devises
deceitful matters against those that are quiet in the land. for which
devisings both Tompkins and Challoner were hanged at quiet London.] Nay, there
is a lying spirit gone out into the mouths of the Prophets; [witnesse the
Prelaticall Prayer-mongers, that made this lying book for their no victories.]
they prophecy falsely, and the people delight to have it so, and they
strengthen the hands of evil doers, that they turn not back from their
wickedness. [your Cavaliers and Grandees delight in such falsities, whereby
you strengthen the hands of your evil party, and keep them in their
wickedness, by upholding them with these lies,] Thus are we covered with a
cloud in thine anger, [a cloud of lies and impieties to seduce the ignorant
people.] and our beauty is cast down to the ground. [ever since the Lady
Thynne was disgraced at Oxford.] But O Lord, shall thine indignation be powered
out for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? ['tis but according to your
deserts, but especially for these abrupt and shameless expostulations.] O
pass by the transgressions of the remnant of thine heritage, [which you are
not, though you have lost many thousands of your party.] and take away the
rebuke of thy people, [that they may be no more over-topped by the Prelates and
Cavaliers.] O remove from us reproach and contempt; [respect belongs only to
the worthy.] and strengthen the spoiled against the destroyers. [that is, the
spoiled true Protestants, against the destroying Atheists, Cavaliers, Papists,
and Irish Rebells] Bow down thine ear, and consider the oppression of the
poor, and the sighing of the needy, [whom you have robbed of all their goods
and substance.] the groaning of the Prisoners, that are fast bound in misery
and iron. [ in Oxford, and and in your other Garrisons.] Lift up thy self,
because of the rage of thine Adversaries: consider the desolation they have
made in thy Courts, and all that the enemy has done wickedly in thy Sanctuary.
[in your defiling them with Altars, Images, Pictures, and with Horse and men's
dung.] And yet still they are compassed with pride, and clothe themselves with
violence as with a garment. [you have violently robbed Clothiers of their
cloth to make you garments.] How long, O Lord, shall they boast themselves in
mischief? how long shall they decree unrighteous Decrees, and write
grievousnesse, which they have prescribed? [you have done it too long, in
forcing poor people to serve you, and laying heavy Taxes upon the Counties
under your power.] O make not a full end with us, ['tis pity to spare one man
of you.] but correct us in mercy, [the merciful shall have mercy, but your
cruelty cries for vengeance.] though thou leave us not altogether unpunished.
[you desire then a little scourging, for your abominations.] Help us O Lord our
God, for we res on thee, [that's false, for had you not solely relied upon your
own strength, you durst not have acted such iniquities.] and under the shadow
of thy wings shall be our refuge, until this Tyranny be over-past. [tell us
when you mean to cease it.] Disappoint therefore the devices of the crafty;
[you have been sufficiently caught in your own snares.] Let not the Rebellious
exalt themselves any more, [you have shrewdly gone down the wind of late,] and
suffer not the Tabernacles of the Robbers to prosper. [ what then will become
of Rupert's Dukedom of Cumberland, and Hastings Barony of Loughborough?] And
as thou have begun to show thy servants thy greatness, and thy mighty hand:
[in consounding and destroying your Armies.] so continue thy mavelous loving
kindness to those that put their trust in thee. [in the same manner and
measure of ruin, as you received it before.] The batell is thine, O Lord, thou
have preserved us from the arm of flesh; the Parliaments Armies found this
most true on their sides, at Edgehill, Newbery, Alresford, and lately near
York.] Yea, it is thou that have wrought all our works in us, even when there
was no might against that great company that came egainst us. [the Parliaments
Armies never sought yours, but yours always came to surprise theirs.] When we
were few in number, and there was none to help us, then thine own Arm brought
salvation, and thy Righteousness sustained us. [Set the Saddle on the right
horse, and apply this to the Parliaments Forces, whom Gods Arm and
Righteousness saved and sustained.] O perfect therefore thy handiwork. [upon
the Parliament, and those that truly love and adhere to them, you should say,
unless you pray for more vengeance upon your selves.] Give salvation to our
King, and deliver CHARLES thy servant from the peril of the sword; bind up
his soul in the bundle of life, [we wish this more sinceerely then you do,
because you lead him into danger, which we desire him to avoid.] gird him with
strength to the Battle, [against seducing Papists, and evil Counselors.]
contend with those who contend with him; [ to bereave him of bis Crown in
Ireland] subdue thou the People under him, [no true Protestant stirs against
him.] and suffer no weapon formed against him to prosper, [that which is done
ogainst you, you make him believe, is done against him.] O deliver him at
length from the strivings of the People, and lift up his head above his enemies
round about him; [that are you, and your Assistants.] give him the shield of
thy salvation, and let thy gentleness make him great; [and famous against
foreign Enemies.] put a stop at last to the madness of the people, [that they
may no more run a whoring after your Ceremonies, and superstitions.] say to the
destroying sword, it is now enough: I wish you would say so also.] send us a
seasonable and blessed calm [upon your own Terms, or else you will not care
for it.] Visit us with the joy of thy Countenance, and make us glad according
to the days wherein thou have afflicted us. [You have made many weeping eyes,
and must expect Retalation.] O restore to us our Solemn Assemblies [in
Cathedralls you mean, with pomp and vanity.] bring us back into thy Courts, to
praise thee, [with as little sincerity, and as much dissembling, as you do in
this Mock-prayer-book.] and let us once more worship thee in the beauty of thy
holiness. [ You have too much liberty yet to do that after your manner, in
the Ministers of Bristoll, Chester, Excester, Lychfeild, Oxford, and
Worcester.] Save us O Lord from our Enemies, and from the hands of all that
hate us. [your crying and enormous sins are hated, not your Persons.] That so
we may serve thee, without fear, [of disturbance in your Formalities, you
mean.] living a quiet and peaceable life, [why did you then raise cumbustions
in the three Kingdoms, to disquiet that Peace?] looking for the blessed
appearance of the great God, and our Savior JESUS CHRIST [had you been truly
prepared for his coming, you would have feared to break out into these
distempers.] To whom with Thee and thy Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Praise,
world without end. AMEN.

Much may be said, but briefly to conclude,
They much have said, but only to delude.

God hears no Dissemblers.
Witness the Cavaliers many Overthrows, Defeats, total Routs, less of
Towns, Castles, Houses, loss of Men, Horse, Ordinance, Arms, Ammunition, and
Baggage. viz. AT

Hull, twice. Portsmouth. Chichester. Edgehill. Saltheath. Redding. Caversh^m
bridge. Gloucester siege. Alborne Chase. Newbery. Modbery. Nottingham.
Christ-Church. Barnstaple. Taunton Castle. Newport Pagnel. Horne-Castle.
Manchester. Thurland Castle. Burton upon Trent. Arundell Castle. Aulton.
Alresford. Namptwich. Elsmere. Lyn. Lincoln close. Col. Masseys 8. garrisons.
Oswelstrey. Tewksbury. Sunderland. South Wales. Kings Mills. VVilne Ferry.
Dudley Castle. Egginton heath. Russhel Hall. The bridges near Oxford Edgcot.
Grafton house. Sir Alexander Dentons house. Greenland house. Plymouth. Lyme.
Weymouth. Selby. York. Wakefield. Tavestok. Tickhill Castle, Welsh poole.
Sheffeld Castle. VVareham. Bolsover castle. VVelbeck house. Staley Garrison.
Hartlepoole. Stockton castle. Barnstable. Malmsbury. Saltashe. Greenvilhouse.
Foy-harbour. VVinfield Manor. Cum multie alijs, que nuuc prescribire (...)
gun^ est.
NOw Reader, considering the premises, you find, what a Mess of Prelaticall
Mock-prayers and Thanks-givings are included in this book, to del^^^ man. They
may, and do dissemble with God, deceive him they cannot, (...) therefore they
have bin rewarded for their dissimulation with God, and che^^ing of simple and
ignorant people, as appears by all their before recited defeat^^ (...) losses;
bcause I found in these Cavalier Mock devotions many lies, slanders, (...)
reproaches against the Parliament, I have according to my duty vindicated th^^
and all that truly love, honor, and fight for them, and set the sad^^^ on the
Cavaliers right horse, applying their own words and prayers to themselves, to
whom the most of them properly and pertinently belong (...) suits so well, that
(in truth) they fit none so well as themselves. If any shall object, as I
expect many on their side will, that I too sharply nippe their Prayers and
Thanks-givings, let them understand, that Delusions, Lies, Mockeries,
Defamations, and Slanders, especially in Prayers and Thanks-givings, a^ most
odious to God, and all good men, and indeed are no Prayers nor Thanks, but mere
Farragoes of hellish malice and virulency. To conclude, I desire the Reader to
take special notice of the desperatenes, of these men, who rather then they
will confess a loss or defeat, and suffer the people to know the truth, they
call and (...) for continuance and increase of direful vengeance upon their
own heads. Let (...) pray, that God would, if he see good, open their eyes,
and turn their hearts, that they may repent and amend.

Amen.
FINIS.

