THE CENSURES of the CHURCH REVIVED.

In the defense of a short Paper published by the first Classis within the
Province of Lancaster, in the several Congregations belonging to their own
Association, but since Printed without their privity or consent, after it had
been assaulted by some Gentlemen and others within their bounds, in certain
Papers presented by them unto the said Classis, and since also Printed together
with an Answer of that Classis unto the first of their Papers, without their
knowledge also and consent, under the Title of Excommunicatio excommunicata, or
a Censure of the Presbyterian censures and proceedings, in the Classis at
Manchester.

WHEREIN 1. The dangerousness of admitting moderate Episcopacy is showed. 2.
The Jus divinum of the Ruling Elders Office is asserted and cleared. 3. The
aspersions of Schism and Perjury are wiped off from those that disown
Episcopacy. 4. The being of a Church and lawfully Ordained Ministry, are
evidenced and secured sufficiently in the want of Episcopacy. 5. The Scriptures
asserted and proved to be the sole supreme Judge of all controversies in
matters of Religion, and the only sure interpreter of themselves, not Councils,
or Fathers, or the universal practice of the Primitive Churches. 6. The
Presbyterian Government vindicated from several aspersions cast upon it, and
also the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster and their actings
justified, in their making out their claim to the civil sanction, for the
establishment of that Church Government and power which they exercise; and
likewise a clear manifestation, that their proceedings have been regular and
orderly, according to the form of Church Government established by Ordinance
of Parliament.

In three full Answers, given to any thing objected, against their proceedings,
by the aforesaid Gentlemen and others, in any of their Papers.

Together with a full Narrative, of the occasion and grounds, of publishing in
the Congregations, the above mentioned short Paper, and of the whole
proceedings since, from first to last.

LONDON, Printed for George Eversden, at the Sign of the Maidenhead in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

TO THE Reverend and Beloved, the Ministers and Elders meeting in the
Provincial Assembly of the Province of London; the Ministers and Elders of the
first Classis of the Province of Lancaster, meeting at Manchester, do heartily
wish the Crown of perseverance in a judicious and zealous defense, of the
Doctrine, Government and Discipline of the Lord Jesus, both theirs, and ours.
Reverend and beloved Brethren:
WHen the Sun of Righteousness had first favorably risen to them that fear the
Name of God in this Land, after a dark and stormy night of corruption and
persecution; then, even then were the quickening beams of the sun of civil
Authority in this inferionr world caused first to light upon you, to form your
renowned City into several Classes, and afterward into a Provincial
Assembly: not only that you might have the birthright of Honor (which we
cheerfully remember) but also, that being invested with Authority from Jesus
Christ, and the civil Magistrate, you might be prepared to stand in the front
of opposition, the powers of Hell being startled and enraged at the unexpected
reviving of Gospel Government and Discipline, which seemed so long to lie for
dead; and, that having your strength united, you might be enabled and
encouraged to plead the cause of God against the Divine right of Episcopacy,
and for the Divine right of the Ruling-Elder, that the one might not be shut
out of the Church, and the other might not recover in the Church; both which
have been, and still are under design. What you have already done this way, as
a thankful improvement of Divine favor, and with special reference to the
respective Classes and Congregations within your Province, does evidently
appear in your Vindication of Presbyterian Government, and your Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelici: which choice fruits of your Provincial Assembly, are
not only refreshing and satisfying for the present, but do promise fair for
time to come; such clusters do show there is a blessing in the Vine, which the
Lord of the Vineyard continue and increase.

When you, our Reverend Brethren, had first been shined upon, and made so
fruitful, the Divine grace caused a second enlivening beam of civil Authority
to fall upon this remote and despised County, to constitute in it also,
several Classes, and afterward a Provincial Assembly; since which time such
heavenly influence has been stayed. As our Lot has happily fallen to follow
you in the favor of God, and civil Authority, so we have unhappily fallen
into your Lot, (especially this Classis) to be followed with the anger,
opposition, reproaches and contradiction of men of contrary minds: which
though hid in the ashes in great measure formerly, and but sparkling now and
then, here and there in a private house or Congregation, yet when we would
conscientiously and tenderly have improved the Government, for the instruction
of the ignorant, and reformation of the profane, it brake out into a flame;
and no way, but that flame must be hasted to such a Beacon, that it might not
be quenched, till the Nation had seen and taken notice, especially the whole
opposite party awakened, a very design. You have pleaded the civil Authority
for your acting in the Government, but have settled the Government it self (for
the satisfaction of your own consciences, and the consciences of the people of
God) upon the firm basis of divine Scripture authority, and so have we: thence
you have been authorized to bring into the Church, and keep in it (by the
merciful intervention of civil Authority) the despised governing Elders; and
so shut out of the Church, and keep out of it, that Lordly and self-murthering
Episcopacy; and so have we. You have been forced to fly to the testimony of
your consciences, concerning your aims, and ends in your public undertakings,
in the cause of God, and so have we. It was scarce possible for you to wipe off
the dirt cast upon you, but some of it would unavoidably fall upon them that
cast it; nor can we. Upon these, and other considerations, we knew not in what
Name of right, to publish our enforced Vindication in the same common cause,
but in your Name, who have gone before us in the work, and have afforded us
light and encouragement, whose seasonable and solid Labors, have already found
acceptance in the Church, and blessing from God. And we pray that your Bow may
abide in strength, and the arms of your hands may be made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob, that though the Archers have sorely grieved you,
and shot at you, and hated you, yet you may still possess the rich blessing of
truth in Doctrine, Government and Discipline, and may foyl the adversaries
thereof, till the renewed, and enlarged favor of God has overspread this
Nation with the Reformation, so happily begun; and till that, so much desired,
prayed for, and endeavored accommodation of dissenting Brethren (alas, alas!
too hardly attained) may sincerely, edifyingly, and lastingly be effected; that
when all our undermining, scorning and opposing enemies, do hear, and see these
things, they may be much cast down in their own eyes, perceiving that this work
has been wrought of our God, in whose arms of mercy and truth we leave you,
and the Cause we manage.

Manchester Jan. 11. 1658. Signed in the Name and by the appointment of the
Class, by John Harrison Moderator.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
IT is no new thing, that such works as have been most eminently conducing to
the glory of God and the Churches greatest welfare, have met with strong
oppositions. When the Ezra Chap. 4. throughout. Neh. 4. 7, 8.
Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard, that the Children of the captivity
builded the Temple unto the Lord God of Israel, they set themselves diverse
ways to hinder and obstruct the work. When Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the
Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of
Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they
were very wroth, and conspired all of them together, to come and to fight
against Jerusalem and to hinder it. When Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God,
the brightness of his Fathers glory, and express Image of his Person, appeared
in the world clothed with our nature, though he came about a work of greatest
consequence that ever was, yet his enemies withstood and opposed his Kingdom.
Of this the Psalmist prophesied before it came to pass, Psalm. 2. 1, 2. Why did
the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth
set themselves, and the people take counsel together, against the Lord, and
against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away
their cords from us. And this the Church saw fulfilled, who in their Prayer
unto God, applied unto the times, wherein they lived, what he, by the mouth of
his Servant Act. 4. 27.
David had foretold so long before, saying, For of a truth against thy holy
Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together for to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. It would be here too
long to go through the Books of the N. T. and tell what persecutions were
raised against the Apostles of our Lord and Savior for executing that
Commission which he had given them, when he commanded them to go teach all
Nations; or to go through the story of the Church, and speak of Mar. 28. 19.
the diverse kinds of tortures and torments, which thousands of all ranks
endured in the times of the ten Primitive persecutions under the Heathen
Emperors; to tell of the Martyrdom of Ignatius, Polycarpus, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Cyprian, and many others, glorious lights, and worthy Confessors of
the truth, for no other reason but because they studied to advance Christ's
Gospel. We will instance something in latter times. When the Romish Synagogue
having most abominably apostatized both in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government; Luther and other faithful Servants of Christ did earnestly bend
themselves to endeavor a reformation in Religion, the Antichristian world was
mad with fury. To come yet a little nearer home. When Religion was reformed in
Scotland in Doctrine and Worship, the Church of Christ there had many
conflicts, and the work was long obstructed, before the Government and
Discipline of Christ could be fully established amongst them; as it is in fresh
remembrance, what troubles they passed through more lately, in their contending
against Episcopacy, and the Ceremonies which had been introduced amongst them,
to the great prejudice of their Ancient Church government and Discipline. But
here it may not be forgotten, how, when the Parliament of famous memory that
was convened eighteen years ago, having taken into their pious consideration
the condition of our own Church at home, and judging that a further reformation
in matters of Religion, then had been made in the days of Queen Elizabeth, was
necessary, and setting upon that work, as also the vindication of the liberties
of this English Nation, were forced to take up Arms for their own defense
against that Party, that could not brook the Reformation, which they
intended. And to what an height that opposition grew in after time, and with
what difficulties they conflicted for many years together, because they would
not give up that cause, they had undertaken to defend, is so well known to even
such as may be but strangers in our Israel, that we may spare the pains of a
full recital. But yet nothing of all this is to be wondered at; Satan must
needs Rev. 12. 12.
be like himself, and stir the more when he sees his Kingdom begin to shake:
And corruption will rage when it is crossed. God also has a wise hand in these
oppositions, not only thereby the more inflaming the zeal and brightning up
other graces in his faithful servants, trying and exercising Dan. 11. 35. Jam.
1. 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. and 4. 12. Rev. 13. 10.
their faith and patience, the purging and purifying and making them white; but
also getting himself the greater glory, when his work is carried on,
notwithstanding the greatest opposition of his and his Churches enemies. And
here we cannot but with all thankfullness to Almighty God, take notice of this
hand, that was most eminently lifted up in the work of Reformation begun by
that late forementioned Parliament, as there is cause, why also we should to
the honor and glory of his great Name, and the praise of that Parliament, unto
the generations that may come hereafter, acknowledge their unwearied pains,
courage, and constancy in that work. Much was done, yea very much by that
illustrious and worthy Parliament. By them the foundation of reformation was
laid in the solemn League and Covenant, which they not only took themselves,
but ordained should be solemnly taken in all places throughout the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales. And for the better and more orderly taking
thereof appointed and enjoined certain directions to be strictly followed. And
in pursuance of this League and Covenant (engageing See the Ordinance of Lords
and Commons Assembled in Parliament, with instructions for the taking the
League and Covenant in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
every one that took it, in their several places to endeavor the refomation
of Religion in England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches, and to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest conjunction and uniformity of Religion, Confession of Faith, form of
Church Government, Directory for worship and Catechizing.) After consultation
had with the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Assembly of Divines called together
to that purpose, they judged it necessary that the Book of Common Prayer should
be abolished, and the Directory for the public worship of God, and in their
Ordinance mentioned, should be established and observed in all the Churches
within this Land, as appears by their Ordinance of January the 3. 1644. for
that purpose. By them Prelacy, that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy, was extirpated according to that Covenant, as appears by the
Ordinance they passed October the 9. 1646. for the abolishing Archbishops and
Bishops within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, By them also
after the passing of several Ordinances for the settling of the Presbyterian
Governments by parts before, at length that progress was by them made in that
work, that they passed the Ordinance of 1648. establishing the form of Church
Government to be used in the Church of England after advice had with the
Assembly of Divines. By their authority, and according to the rules and
directions by them given for that purpose, they settled the Presbyterian
Government in the Province of London, and in this Province of Lancaster, and in
some other parts of the Land, whereby they sufficiently awarranted those, that
should act therein according to their Ordinances, that they are secured against
that danger of a Praemunire, with which some (as will appear from the following
Papers) has been threatened. What obstructions this work of reformation so
happily begun, did after meet with from several Parties, or how it came to
pass, that this Government was settled throughout the Land, we are not willing
here so much as to mention, desiring rather in silence to acknowledge the
righteous Hand of God, in bringing us back again into the wilderness of
confusion, to wander there for several years together, when we had been upon
the borders of a just settlement, and thereby correcting an unthankful people,
and unwilling to be reformed according to their Covenant, then by making
complaints against any, to seem to murmur at his just dispensation; especially
considering, that we are not without hope, but that the wise and merciful God
may have reserved the honor of finishing this work and building upon that
foundation, which was by them laid in troublous times for a fitter season, when
the people of this Nation, having been convinced of the mischiefs and miseries
of an ungoverned Church by the long want of Church Government in it, may be the
more ready to give the more cheerful entertainmant to what may be established
by some after -Parliament. And who can tell, but the hands of sundry of the
same Zerubbabels, that laid the foundation of this work, their hands may Zach
4. 9.
also finish it? But however thus we see, that the work of reformation, and
particularly of Churches and Nations, is not a work that goes on easily, it
meets with opposition, not only often from enemies, but sometimes even from
professed friends. And if that Parliament that cast out Episcopacy, and
established the Presbyterian Government in the room thereof, did not carry on
that work so far, but through much difficulty; it is not to be thought
strange, if the same spirit of opposition, that they wrestled with, should
after they were risen, discover it self to the interrupting and hindering of
those that acted upon their Ordinances, in the exercise of that Government and
Discipline, which they so established. We cannot but imagine, that sundry
throughout the Land have reason to complain of the like, if not far worse,
then we have met with. But as touching our selves it was our publishing a short
Paper in our several Congregations, and herewith Printed, that was the
occasion of those contests betwixt us and the Gentlemen we have to deal with,
that are now made public to the world. What the design of that Paper was, we
leave it to all indifferent persons to consider, nothing doubting but that all
equal judges will conclude, it was very honest, and did not merit such
unhandsome handling, as it after met with. But how matters after proceeded
betwixt us and the Gentlemen that assaulted it, until without our privity and
consent both that and other Papers, that after passed on both sides, were by
them Printed, our Narrative following will give a full account; whereby also it
will be evident, that we are forced into the field for our own defense, as it
will be further manifest to every Reader from the Papers themselves, which we
here publish, we are merely on the defensive part. And if the Reader be pleased
to take notice from our Narrative, that it was in July last that we first met
with all the Papers in Print; and further observe thence, that we had been
before that time in a treaty with them, touching a meeting in order to an
accommodation, during which time, we had not any thoughts of returning any
Answer in writing to their last Papers; and that notwithstanding our several
other employments in the mean season, our Answer to those Papers had fully
passed the Class November the 23. of this same Year, as appears by the date
they bear, according to the subscription of them by the Moderator; we cannot
conceive that he will judge, we have neglected any time that could with
convenience have been redeemed for the hastening our Answer abroad in the
world. And now until they see the light, the transcribing them fair for the
Press, and the Printing of them, drinks up the remainder of the time. All that
we have now further to acquaint the Reader with; is to give him an account of
some things in reference to what we here publish. We have Printed over again
all the Papers that formerly passed betwixt them and us, because we could not
answer several things in theirs, without some special reference to both their
Papers and ours; and we judged it to be the fairest way to present all entirely
to the Readers view, that thereby he might be able the better to judge
concerning the whole, especially considering what we now publish, might perhaps
come into the hands of sundry, that had never seen what had been before by them
Printed. We have not omitted to Print the Title given by them to the Papers, as
they were by them published, that by comparing their Papers with their Title,
and our examination of them, together with that taste we give in the close, of
that spirit they discover in them, the Reader may the better judge, how their
discourse does suit with the Title given to it. We have also therewith again
Printed their Preface, that they might not have any occasion to say of us, that
we had a mind to suppress any thing of theirs, which they perhaps might judge
material; though from our Narrative and Animadversions on this their Preface
in the close of that our Narrative, the weight that is in it will be tried. The
Paper which we published in our Congregations, and that follows our Narrative,
though approved by the Provincial, yet being directed only to the
Congregations of our own Association, was drawn up short, being for the use of
those that were not altogether strangers to the Discipline, it having been
practiced amongst them for several years before; and the rules whereof, as
they are more fully and particularly held forth in the form of Church
Government established by the Parliament, so had been more fully expounded to
them in our public Ministry, as there has been occasion. But here we must
further acquaint the Reader, that the errors and depravations of this Paper,
which we found in it, as it had been by them Printed, we have rectified (as we
well might) according to the Original, and now exhibit it to the Readers view,
as it was when it passed from us. We have Printed their first Paper, as we
found it Printed by themselves, only we have added the rest of the Names that
were subscribed to it, when it was presented unto us, that so those that were
represented to us as the subscribers of it, may own it or disown it as they see
cause. We have divided our Answer to their first Paper into eleaven Sections,
as also the last Paper of theirs (on which we Animadvert) into the like number,
that so by comparing all together, it may be the better discerned, how they
have dealt with us, what they reply to and what they omit; and we leave the
whole, together with our Animadversions on the several Sections of theirs, to
be judged of by the Reader. We have also Printed their two last Papers, as we
found them Printed by themselves, and have noted in the Margents of them both
the variations (which yet are not great) from the Copies, that were presented
unto us, and whereof the letters Cl. and Cop. prefixed to those variations (and
intimating how it was in those Copies, that were exhibited to the Class) are an
indicium or the sign. We confess our Answers to their two last Papers are now
grown to a greater bulk then we first intended, or then what some perhaps may
judge necessary; but we wish it might be considered, that if some things that
fall into debate betwixt them and us, be not of general concernement, yet the
discussion of them being of use for our vindication, and the discovering unto
them their errors and faults, we conceive that in those respects it was
requisite; although the Reader may find several things spoken to, that be of
common use, and whereof we give him some account at the end of this Epistle, as
also where they may be found; that such as have not either leisure or will to
peruse the whole, may take a view more speedily, of what they may chiefly
desire to read. When we were to give our reasons, why we could not consent to
admit of Episcopacy moderated, we considered that the point touching Episcopacy
having been so fully discussed by far abler Pens, we thought it might be the
fittest for us to insist chiefly upon the inconveniency and dangerousnesse of
that Government, and what we in this Land and the Neighbor Nation had
experienced in those respects. In another place we urge some Arguments to prove
a Bishop and a Presbyter to be, in a Scripture sense of those words, all one.
What is spoken touching the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office was
occasioned from the Texts we had urged (though it was but by the way) in our
Answer to their first Paper, and their excepting in their second, against our
alleging those Texts for that purpose. But we do here profess, that we do not
discuss that point our selves; we only transcribe what is solidly and fully
done concerning it to our hands, by other Reverend and Learned Brethren; and
therefore when in our Title we mention the clearing up of the Jus divinum of
the ruling Elders Office, the Reader is so to understand that branch of it, as
when we come to speak of that point particularly, we there give him our reasons
of that transcription. We have now no more to acquaint the Reader with, and
therefore shall leave the whole to his perusal, not much mattering the
censures of loose and profane spirits; though we hope with such as are
unprejudiced and zealous for reformation, our endeavors shall find some
acceptance. And having the Testimony of our consciences that in the
uprightness of our hearts, we have aimed at the Glory of God and the good of
his Church, in what we now send abroad into the world, we do not question, but
that God, who is the trier of the hearts and reins, and the God of truth, will
not only own that good old cause of his, in the defense whereof so many of his
faithful Servants have suffered in former times, but us also the meanest and
unworthiest of his Servants, in this our standing up for it, and so bless our
labors herein, that they may be of some use for the public good. The Father
of Lights, and God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace give unto us
all, and to all His, the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of
his Will, guide our feet in the ways of Peace, and after our manifold and
great shakings, settle the Affairs both of Church and State upon some sure
foundations, to the Glory of his own great Name, and the everlasting Comfort,
Peace, and Welfare of all his People. Amen.

AN ACCOUNT Of some of the principal things in the ensuing Discourses.
1. THe dangerousness of admitting moderate Episcopacy showed. page 85. 2. The
Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office is cleared. page 103. 3. The nature of
Schism opened, and the imputation thereof, taken off those that disown
Episcopacy. page 121. 4. The being of a Church and lawfully Ordained Ministry,
secured in the want of Episcopacy. page 130. 5. The imputation of Perjury taken
off from such, as do not again admit of Episcopacy. page 204. 6. The claim of
the Presbyterian Government to the civil Sanction made good in the fourth
Section of our Answer to the Gentlemen's first Paper, and further in our
Animadversions on their last, page 219. 7. The Scriptures proved to be the sole
supreme Judge in all matters of Religion. page 255. 8. Councils and the
unanimous consent of Fathers not to the rule of the interpretation of the
Scriptures. page 260. 9. Civil penalties not freeing from Ecclesiastical
censures cleared. page 290.
The Title of the Papers, as they were Printed by the Gentlemen, together with
their PREFACE.
Excommunicatio Excommunicata. OR A CENSURE OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CENSURES. And
proceedings of the Classis at Manchester. Wherein is modestly examined what
Ecclesiastical or Civil Sanction they pretend for their new usurped power: In
a discourse betwixt the Ministers of that Classis, and some dissenting
Christians.

THE PREFACE.
IN such an age as this, when the heat of vain and unprofitable controversies
has bred more Scriblers, than a hot Summer (in the Comedians simile) does
Flies, it might seem more Plautus.
rational, according to Solomon's rule, for prudent men to keep silence, then
to vex themselves and disquiet others with such empty discourses, as rather
enlarge then compose the differences of Gods People. It was a sad age, that of
Domitian; of which the Historian affirms, that then Inertia pro sapientia
erat, Ignorance Tacitus.
was the best knowledge, laziness and servility was the best diligence; and we
could wish this age did not too much resemble that. But when we see every
Marsyas with an old Pipe of Minerva's, dares contend with Apollo; that men of
low and cheap abilities, are too loud and too hard for men of the choicest and
best design, certainly Inertia pro sapientia erit. He Is the best Orator that
dwells in silence, and he is the wisest man, that keeps the privacy and
recluseness of his own ville. Hannibal once told Scipio, that it had Appion.
been better both for Rome and Carthage, if both of them had been contented
within their own bounds; and possibly it had been more honorable both for our
Brethren of the Presbytery, and our selves, had we made our lists more private,
and played our prizes only behind the Curtains: for so we had confined and
determined our ignorance to our own sphere, and our defects had been visible to
no eyes but our own. But as Antalcidas objected to Agesilaus, The Spartans have
made the Thebanes fight whether they Plutarch.
would or no; the exasperations and bitterness of our Brethren, have lent
cowards courage, and provoked us to combat whether we would or no. Miserum est
pati, nec licere queri; It Is a hard case to be hurt, and to have our Pliny.
mouths stopped; to suffer, and to be obleiged not to complain, Qui unam patitur
injuriam, invitat aliam; It Is a certain Seneca.
rule with the men of this persuasion, if you take a blow from them on one
cheek, you cannot be Christians in their Calender, unless you turn the other
also. We had well hoped, that what Tully notes to be the eloquence of Atticus,
Respondere sciat me sibi, dum taceo; our silence and our patience might have
been good Orators for us, to have Answered the pretensions of their power, the
disguises of their popular discourses, and their harsh proceedings toward us:
but the more we suffered, they triumphed the more; and because it was our
judgment and choice to dwell in silence, they thought we either could not, or
durst not speak. But nemo nobis amicis uti potest and Adulatoribus. They shall
find we are their Friends, but not their Parafites; we will speak that truth
which we understand; beseech the good spirit to lead them and us into all
truth; and in this mean and inconsiderable service, we appeal to the 1000
witnesses within us, that we speak nothing out of pride or envy, or with
unchristian reflections upon our sufferings, but with a hearty desire of peace;
that they or we may be convinced, and at last meet by a unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

We shall not present the Rooms and model of the whole house in the Porch, yet
we shall preface a recital of those grievances, which made us open our mouths
in this discourse, Ne extorqueretur nobis causa Lucii Cottae patrocinio; lest
we Tacitus.
might seem to fear the Giant of Presbytery, and to think it were only that
Palladium that would preserve the City of God.

About seavenmonths since, the Classis of Manchester published their Breviats or
censures, against all that came not in to them for trial and examination;
wherein they go to the high ways, and compel all to come in and give
submission to their Government, by subjecting themselves to examination by the
Ministers and Elders; not only such as may be suspected to be ignorant or
scandalous, but all of all elevations, of all judgments, must come under the
Inquisition; not so much (we fear) to fit them for the Sacrament, as to teach
them obedience, that they may know themselves, as Tiberius said of the Senate,
that they are homines ad servitutem nati; to owe an obedience to their new
Masters, which they must pay under the grand penalties of suspension and
excommunication.

In answer to these, Bruta fulmina, we with all meekness and humility sent
them one single sheet of Paper, desiring satisfaction in some things wherein
our reason and Religion obliged us to be of a different judgment from them.
This one sheet they returned in seven, an answer long enough, if it be sound
enough.

To satisfy us in our scruples, and in their proceedings, they pretend for
what they do, both an Ecclesiastical and civil sanction; a Commission from
Christ and the State also. But that maxim of the ancient will here be found
true, (...), Our own Laws built upon passion and interest, are commonly
lawless. It is apparent to us, that their new Lights have no light from
Antiquity or Primitive forms; that their new Rules have no establishment,
either by the Laws of the Christian Church, or the Laws of this Land. St.
Jerome said of Origin, That ingenii sui acumina putat ecclesiae esse
Sacramenta; an imagination sure of our Presbyters, that the placita of their
own wills must pass for civil and divine constitutions. We wonder that men
pretending to Learning and Religion, should not only call in the Lord of truth
to abett the the phansies of men, but should also pretend to encouragement and
Commissions from the State, to second their prevarications.

It has pleased his Highness in his wisdom and clemency, to secure all godly
and peaceable men professing Jesus Christ, from those Ordinances which the
rigor of Presbytery had mounted against them; but where he gives the least
encouragement for this power usurped by them, we find not; and therefore we
think it is friendly advice that they take heed least their unguided zeal, or
interest precipitate them into a Praemunire, since under color of authority,
they have made Laws and Canons, and published them openly in the Church, for
all to obey, upon pain of excommunication; not only against all the ancient
known Laws of elder date, but also contrary to the present establishment and
the Magistracy under which we now live.

It Is a trouble to us, to hear them cry out against Prelacy and Episcopacy, as
only an artificial and political device to Lord it over Gods inheritance,
whereas indeed their little fingers are heavier then the Prelates loins;
though they tell us their way is friendly, meek, and a sociall way, we find it
not; they make us only as Publicans and Heathens; it should seem that all that
they intended in the change of Church Government, was only to slice the
Diocesan into Parochial Bishops; and with him in Lucian, To cut out the old
useless Moons into fine new Stars, every one of which claim the same influence
and dominion over the people which the Prelates did.

It Is a trouble to us, to hear them inveigh against Heretics, and
Schismatics, against the Novatian and Donatists of old, when they walk in
their steps, maintain their principles, and espouse their quarrels. We are told
by the Church Historians, That the Doctrine against mixt-communion, was a Brat
gotten by Novatus, nursed up by Lucifer and Audius, but it grew not till Donatus
became its foster Father: then indeed it flourisht and spread amain, till St.
Austin by his judicious and clear opposition did banish it, that, and the
subfequent ages; the Anabaptists of the last age called it back into Germany,
Quod aruit in se refloruit in ill is; they grafted upon the old stock, and
wanted nothing of the Donasticks, but to be called so. Now amongst other of
their dangerous and erroneous principles, Bullinger notes this for one of the
chief, De Doctrina caenae scrupulose quaerunt Anabaptistae, quorum causa caena
dominica sit instituta? They were nice and scrupulous, and inquisitive
concerning the Lords Supper, concluding it was only to be given to the Saints,
and concluding the Saints to their own folds.

This is the direct practice of the Scottish and English Presbyteries; bytery;
because the Parliament formerly, and now his Highness, in their wisdom and
prudence have so blunted the edge of their secular power, that they cannot hurt
us with that, they fly to their religious shifts, and what David said of
Goliah's Sword, surely they say of the holy Sacrament, There Is none like unto
that; no Engine so likely to teach us obedience, and to give them the
sovereignty, as that. They impale the Supper of Christ to their own Enclosures,
and as absolute Judges of all Communicants, keep back all persons that have not
their Shibboleth ready, that will not fall down and worship that Idol which
they have set up. The Egyptians were hard Taskmasters, to expect the Children
of Israel should make Bricks, and make Straw too, to require the same number of
Bricks without Materials to make them of: this is something like the severity
of our new Masters, they censure for not doing that which they render to us
impossible. If we come not to the Lords Supper, we must be excommunicate; and
they will not permit us to come, because we are ignorant, or scandalous, or
profane; and it is proof enough we are so, because we are too stout to fall
down and worship their imaginations.

It Is a trouble to us, that men who impropriate to themselves the name of
Saints, and would have the world to think them the only Christians, should be
so far from that (...), that meekness and sweetness of the Gospel, that
they are still of the old Legal spirit, to eradicate and destroy all that are
not of their way: Instead of sweetning and indearing the spirits of men, that
they may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, they irritate and
imbitter them by their two bold judging in private, and by their fierce and
severe censures in public, as if indeed it were their work to deliver them up
unto Satan.

These things have forced us contrary to our own dispositions and inclinations,
to appear in public, not only for our own vindication, but in defense of
Ecclesiastical and civil constitutions, well hoping that these mean
endeavors will encourage some worthy and learned Champions to take up Arms for
the defense of that cause which we love: what we have done, quale quale sit,
what ever it be, inasmuch as in the sincerity of our hearts we profess it is
done, sine ullo studio contentionis, without any pleasure or delight in
contention, but only for the love of truth, we hope our good God will give it a
more gracious success, and good men will give it a more charitable reception.

A True and Perfect NARRATIVE Of the whole proceedings between the Class and
the Gentlemen, with the Animadversions of the Class upon their Preface.
IT was a witty Etymology which the Ld. Chancellor St. Albane gave of a
Lybell, thatit was derived of a lie forged at home, and a Bell to ring it up
and down the Country, the Subscribers to those Papers make the lie, and some
private Friend makes the Bell, by commending it to the Press, and ringing it
abroad all over the Nation. The Alterig famam maledictis laedere.
blasphemies wherewith they have blasphemed the Presbyterian Government, the
Government practiced in the reformed Churches, and established by the
Parliament in this Nation, the reproaches wherewith they have reproached us,
that act Presbyterially, we know not what better to return upon them, then
what our Lord and Teacher, and the great pattern of patience and meekness did
to the Jews, that Crucified him, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do. Prove. 18. 17.
He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and
searches him. The Presbyteriall Government needs not any support, we can give
it, it is our honor we sit under the shadow of it: concerning our selves, the
presenting a true Narrative of the whole business will justify us to all men,
that would not have a tolleration for their sins as for their persons.

Of the occasion of this Paper with the Class first published, together with
all our proceedings upon it, you may receive this faithful account, which we
shall all along confirm by the Records of the Class; which we conceive of
better force to prove the truth of these matters of fact, at which the
publishers of the Papers have taken such occasion to quarrel. And for our
intentions in what we have done, that they should be otherwise then what became
us in our duty, or then we have declared by our words, Our record must remain
on high; though we hope we shall meet with more charity in the most of those
that shall read, and impartially consider this Narrative and these Papers, then
yet we have done with them.

At a Provincial meeting held at Preston May the 5. 1657. There was an Order
drawn up there, which we find recorded in our Book, Classical Records.

At Manchester June the 9th. 1657. from the Provincial Assembly. -- The sense
of this Assembly being, that there may be something of duty incumbent upon
Ministers, and also upon Congregationall Elderships, to be done in relation to
all the several persons of ripe years within their respective charges, (who do
either voluntarily and customarily refuse to communicate with them in the Lords
Supper, or to offer themselves to the Eldership or Minister of the place, to be
tried and admitted to it upon approvall, or upon trial or knowledge are judged
at present unfit for it; or with whose competency in knowledge, or the
conscientious walking os them, they are unacquainted or doubtful, for their
help in their spiritual state, and bringing them to a capacity of, and
willingness unto the public Communion, which they stand off from,) by way of
particular address to them, which yet is not ordinarily done: It is therefore
resolved, that the question what may be their duty in particular in the said
matter? and what the means of performing it? be referred to the serious
consideration of every Minister in this Province severally, and of every
Classical Presbytery jointly; and their judgment therein may be given by
themselves, or sent by their respective delegates to the next Provincial
meeting. Edw. Lee.


at our Classical meeting June 9. 1657. next following, which putting us upon
the considering of some more effectual means for the reforming of the
ignorant and scandalous that were in our Congregations Classical Records.

Aug. 11. 1657. the Order from the Provincial Assembly to be considered the
next Classieall meeting.


. Having had frequent discourses of the business amongst our selves, we
determined to draw up a Classical Records.

Sept. 8. 1657. A representation drawn up up by this Class, to be taken in
unto, and submitted to the judgment of the Provincial Synod (in order to the
matter commended by the former Synod, to the consideration of the several
Ministers within this Province) was read and agreed unto by this Class.


Representation of our desires and intentions herein, aiming chiefly at that
end proposed in the said Provincial Order, as also at taking of that reproach,
that is cast upon us from them of the Congregationall way, that members in our
Parishes are admitted to the privileges of members, to have their children
Baptized, etc. and yet neglect to carry themselves so, as to be capable of
communicating at the Lords Supper, and are otherwise some of them notoriously
scandalous, as Drunkards, unclean persons, etc. and yet are not dealt with
according to the rule of Christ, by way of admonition and Church censure, For
the destruction of the flesh, and saving the soul in the day of Christ: against
which sort of persons both the words of the Paper especially tend, and at our
publishing of them we manifestly professed our selves to intend. -- This Paper
thus drawn up; we presented it to the Provincial Assembly at Preston, which
was October. 6. 1657. where it was allowed and approved of, as appears under the
hands of the Moderator and Scribe of that Assembly.

Classical Records.

November. 10. 1657. The exhortation from this Class, approved on by the Assembly
at Preston, to be published in the several Congregations belonging to this
Class, the 22th of November. Instant.


Whereupon we forthwith agreed to publish the said Paper, on the 22. day of
November. on one and the same day in the several Congregations within our Class.
Designing thereby to give the people notice of our intentions for future
proceedings, that especially those that were most scandalous in their lives
might take warning, and if it were possible might reform, and prevent that
just severity, which otherwise we conceived our selves bound in faithfullness
to God and their souls to proceed in toward them; at which time also several
of the Ministers declared the said intentions in publishing the same Paper. And
did expressly manifest, how far it was from our thoughts hereby to impose upon
any men's consciences, what was against their judgments in respect of difference
about matters of Government, but that our intentions were to proceed in all
ways of condescension to those that were conscientious, though differing from
us, but that our aim was, the discouragement of open and known wickedness,
which was a disgrace to Christian Religion it self, and that which without
controversy, all good men of what judgment soever, should readily join with us
in. Classical Records.

Jan. 12. 1657. A Paper presented to the Class by Major Prestwich Esquire, Nicholas
Mosely Esquire, Francis Mosely, Thomas Holland, Thomas Simond, Captain John Byrom,
Gentlemen, Subscribed by them and many others, containing some exceptions
against the Representation, agreed on and published by this Class, to which an
Answer is promised the next Class.

Mr Harison desired to draw up the Answer, and some of the Ministers to meet a
week before, to consult about the same.


In January after, some Gentlemen came to our Class, by name, Major Prestwich,
Mr. Mosely, of the Ancoates and others, and presented the first Paper of theirs
to the Class, in way of exception to what we had published; which being
received and read in the Class, the Gentlemen had an acknowledgment returned to
them for their civility, to take that way to desire satisfaction from us
(though the Class was sensible of much harshness and bitterness in their Paper
toward us) and an Answer was promised to it at the next Class. About which
Answer there was no neglect of time, nor delay, that might savor of any
slighting of them or their Paper. The Ministers met before to consider of the
Answer that was prepared, but it being to pass the consent of the Class: when
they came for the foresaid Answer at the next Class.

Classical Records.

Feb. 9. 1657. Mr Harrison according to the request of the Class, had drawn up
an Answer to the Paper, which was presented to this Class, at their last
meeting by sundry Gentlemen, which Gentlemen waiting for the said Answer at
this time, it was ordered, that this Answer should be returned to them, viz.
That if they had directed their Paper to any one single person, the Answer
might have been prepared, and punctually delivered at the time: but since they
had directed it to the whole Association, there must be a time taken, that the
Answer may pass the consideration and approbation of the whole Class: for which
reason, and for the transcribing of Copies of it, as was necessary, at present
they could not deliver the said Answer, though it was in substance prepared.
But the Class promised that it should be sent in to some one of them (whom they
should fix on to receive it) sometime before the next Class, without any
further trouble to them. They nominated Nicholas Mosely Esquire to receive the
Paper from this Class.

The Class is appointed at Manchester, February 22. to conclude more speedily
about the Answer to be given to the foresaid Paper.


The Class did excuse it to them, that they could not just then deliver it,
because it was not yet read in the Class; and besides must be written over
again, in respect of alterations the Class might make in it, before it could be
delivered; yet that they should not be further troubled about it, it should be
sent in to them within a short time; for which purpose the Class met again
within one fortnight. Classical Records.

Feb. 22. 1657. The Answer was read and approved; Mr Buxton and Mr Byrom
desired to deliver it to Mr Mosely the day after.


viz. On Feb. 22. and the next day our Answer was sent in to Mr. Mosely the
Gentleman appointed by them to receive it. In which we showed them that
respect, which to ingenuous persons might have prevailed to have prevented
their uncivil complaints of our breach of promise with them, as also might
have procured a return of fairer carriage from them in ensuing passages.

Classical Records.

March 9. 1657. Nicholas Mosely Esquire with other Gentlemen brought another Paper
to the Class, subscribed by Mr Allen, the said Mr Mosely, etc. the which was
read; and because in the latter end of it they hinted their unsatisfiedness in
what was alleged in our Papers, in Answer to their first, for the proof of our
authority for the exercise of the present Government, from the Law of the Land
now in force, they having charged us before with the danger of a Praemunire:
The Class resolved to wave any other matter, tendered in this last Paper, till
they made out their exceptions in that thing. And this Answer was returned to
the foresaid Gentlemen, viz. That the Class did desire they would make out what
they seemed to assert, against the validity of our acting in the Presbyterian
Government, by virtue of civil Authority.


On March 9. some of the foresaid Gentlemen brought in their second Paper,
which was anoverture for an accommodation, though with an awful threat, what
they would do at our Paper, if that took not; especially in respect of the
civil Sanction for our Government; upon which the Class, because they had in
their Paper (which they still persist to do, as in their Printed Preface)
threatened us with the danger of a Praemunire, desired, that they would before
they went any further, let us understand what strength they had to bring in
against what we had alleged for the civil authority for our government. For
all rational men may easily conceive, that this thing was fit to be first
discussed. For if we had no more authority for our Government, then they had
for theirs, the terms of our accommodation might and ought to be much
otherwise, then when we conceived ours was settled by express auauthority, and
theirs under as express an inhibition and exception. This desire therefore was
tendered to them in fair language, and nothing further put upon them in Answer
to our Paper, then what they threatened us so much with, viz. that they would
impart unto us, what they had (in which they put so much confidence) against
what we had brought for our acting by the civil authority. This Answer of ours
was taken in great indignation by them; and though what they have said in their
largest Paper about this thing, might have been held in less then a single
Sheet, and for ought we can see in some few lines; yet upon this, they draw up
an Answer (such an one as they are willing the world should see what it is,) to
our whole Paper, as they say. And their spirit was so changed, because we did
not take their first motion, upon the very terms it was tendered by them, that
they bring in their third Paper, wherein for all their dear love professed in
the former Paper, they returned to them more natural strain of scorn,
bitterness, and derision of us, though they were so modest as to leave out
their laughing at us in the Copy they Printed. Classical Records.

April 13. 1658. Nicholas Mosely Esquire and several Gentlemen, as before,
attended the Class, with an Answer to the Classe's last Paper. The Class taking
into consideration the other contained weighty businesses that were upon them,
whereby they would not be free to continue this matter in debate by writing;
thought fit to refer it to a Committee, to meet a certain number of the
Subscribers of the foresaid Paper, to debate the matters further therein and in
the former Papers contained (if need required) for mutual satisfaction; which
being consented unto by such of the Gentlemen, as were present, the Class
appointed, Mr Heyrick, Mr Angier, Mr Harrison, Mr Newcome, Mr Constantine, and
the rest of the Ministers within this Class, as also Mr Hide, Captain Ashton,
Mr Vrigley, Mr Wickins, Mr Meare, Mr Lancashire, Mr Buxton, Mr Byrom, Mr
Woollen, or any six of them to be a Committee for this purpose, and the
Committee to meet the 28th of April instant, and after to meet the aforesaid
Gentlemen at such time and place, as may be agreed on by both Parties.


This third Paper of theirs was brought in by them Apr. 13. which was read in
the Class, and so the Class thought fit to return Answer to them, that they
did judge, this way of writing was not likely to attain the end, which we and
they seemed to aim at, viz. some peace and mutual satisfaction on both sides,
and whereas the Class considered the many other weighty businesses, that did
continually lie upon us, we did not think meet to return Answer to them at
present in writing, but if they pleased, we desired a personal meeting between
some of them, and some on our part, that might discourse on the matter of
accommodation, and might give and receive further satisfaction, for other
matters contained in the Papers, which motion was consented to by the Gentlemen
that were there, and a Committee was appointed by the Class to meet on the 28.
of April instant, to meet some of the Gentlemen to conclude on some way of
proceeding in this business. Classical Records.

May 12th 1658. The Committee appointed by the last Class gave in an account of
their proceedings, on the 28th of April the Committee met according to the
Order of the Class, at the time appointed, there appeared on the behalf of the
Gentlemen, Mr Nicholas Mosely only; the Committee understanding that he was at
the door, desired Mr Harrison and Mr Wickins to go forth to him, and to
acquaint him that the Committee was ready to nominate their men, that might
treat about their last Paper, and touching an accommodation according to their
former Paper, which they did accordingly. He replied, the last Paper was not
any thing to be discussed, etc. but only the accommodation. Mr Harrison who had
brought the Answer of the Class to the Gentlemen, that day they had presented
their Paper, Answered that he mentioned both unto them as matters to be
discoursed of. He said indeed, that before their Paper was read he was sent
forth unto them by the Class, to signify unto them, that the Class was willing
to entertain a treaty with them touching an accommodation, and that this was
the only thing, that at that time was mentioned; but when he was sent unto them
the second time, after that the Class was risen, and the Class had heard their
Paper read, he mentioned both their last Paper, and the accommodation, as the
Subject matter about which the persons to be nominated on both sides were to
treat however he or the rest might have forgotten the same. But Mr Harrison and
Mr Wickins told him, they would go in again, and further know the Committees
mind; the Committee hereupon insisted much on the last Paper, and conceived it
was necessary, before they proceeded to treat about an accommodation,
satisfaction should be given touching some things in it, and at which they
said, they had just reason to be offended; and therefore desired Mr Harrison
and Mr Wickins to go forth again and tell Mr Mosely so much; and that if he
pleased to nominate persons that might treat about this, as well as touching
the accommodation, they were ready to proceed. To which Mr Mosely replied, that
he was not authorized to meddle with any thing about the last Paper, and that
for his part he could wish all the Papers on both sides were burned; and that
if the Class was offended at any thing in their last Paper justly, he should be
ready, it being showed him, to make satisfaction at the Market Cross. They
returned Mr Mosely's Answer to the Committee; who taking the matter into
further consideration, resolved not to infist on the Method, but that they
would give way that the accommodation might be first treated on, provided that
at that time the Paper also might be discoursed on; and desired Mr Harrison and
Mr Wickins to go forth again, and to tell Mr Mosely what they had resolved on,
and to desire him to nominate persons within the bounds of the Class, (the
matter to be debated being before the Class only) that might treat with the
like number to be nominated by them, touching the matter above mentioned. To
this Mr Mosely replied, they had not Ministers within the Class to equallize
the number, that the Class might nominate: and that therefore he desired on the
behalf of the re^^, that they might take others, that were not within the
bounds of the Class. To which the Committee returned Answer, they might then
take Mr Allen and Mr Pollet, that were two Ministers, that had subscribed the
first Paper, and the Class would appoint two Ministers only on their behalf to
meet these, and some Elders to meet with the like number of Gentlemen to be by
them nominated. But this not being accepted of, and the Committee not being
authorized by the Class to appoint a meeting with those, that were out of
their bounds, it was concluded by the Committee, that they would make report to
the Class what was desired by Mr Mosely on the behalf of the Gentlemen, that so
the Class might take that proposal of theirs into their consideration. And Mr
Mosely said, that he would desire Mr Allen and some others to be at the next
Classical meeting, to receive the Answer of the Class touching the same. And
thus the matter betwixt Mr Mosely and the Committee was issued.


On which day the Committee meeting, none but Mr. Mosely came on the Gentlemen's
part. The full discourse between some employed from the Committee to him, and
him, you have at large in the other Column from the Records of the Class, Mr
Mosely would have the matter of the accommodation to be the only business of
the future meeting; we alleged that we should expect satisfaction in other
matters in the Papers, as well as that, because we conceived our selves much
injured in their last Paper. Mr. Mosely expressed himself very desirous of
peace; and if the matter of accommodation might take place, he could wish all
the Papers were burned, and that if any wrong was done, he would make
satisfaction at the Market Cross; the Committee then were willing to wave the
matter of the Papers to the second place, and if the accommodation did not take
place then, that the Paper should be discoursed on. But then we moving that the
persons to be nominated should be within the bounds of the Class, and we
should equalize the number that they could on their part procure Ministers and
others for that purpose; and Mr. Mosely moving for a further liberty in that
thing; it was referred by the Committee unto the next Class, and Mr Mosely
consented thereunto, promising that he would desire Mr. Allen and some others
of the Gentlemen to be at the next Class to conclude about the same.

Classical Records.

Mr Allen, Nicholas Mosely Esquire and other Gentlemen came again to the Class; the
matter of accommodation was proposed between them and the Class; they desired
liberty to choose some persons for their part, that were not within the Class,
which was consented unto by the Class; the persons nominated by them were, Mr
Allen, Mr Clayton, Mr Lightfoot, Ministers; Mr Nicholas Mosely, Mr Francis
Mosely, and Mr Nathaneell Robinson Gentlemen. By the Class were nominated Mr
Heyrick, Mr Angier, Mr Harrison, Ministers; Mr Hide, Captain Ashton, Mr
Wickins, Ruling Elders: and the time and place of meeting was by mutual
consent to be agreed on, when Mr Heyrich should (by the providence of God) be
returned from London.


May 11. 1658. Mr Allen, Mr. Mosely and others came according to their promise,
upon their motion, that they might have liberty to take some out of the bounds
of the Class, to treat on their part with us, the Class condescended thereunto;
and before they departed the men were nominated on both sides, that should
treat of the matters aforesaid; The time and place for the meeting was referred
by their consent, till Mr. Heyrick should return from London, he being one
nominated on our part, and they professing a desire that he should be one in
the business. If they had such a report to make of what concerned us, as we
have of them, they would not stick to say, that the words of our mouths were
peace, while war was in our hearts, but we leave God and the Reader to judge,
with what hearts they could agree upon an accommodation, and do as they
forthwith did. While matters stood just thus between us, the next Class, (Mr.
Heyricke not being returned before the Class after in July,) we found the
Papers in Print. Classical Records.

July 13. 1658. This Class having notice, that the Papers which have passed
between this Class and Mr Allen and others were Printed, with a Preface unto
them; it was agreed that Mr Heyricke, Mr Angier; Senior, Mr Harrison, Mr
Newcome, Mr Constantine, Mr Leigh, Mr Jones, Mr Walker, Ministers; Mr Robert
Hyde. Esquire Captain Ashton, Mr Strangways, Mr Wickins, Mr Meare, Mr Buxtons, Mr
Byrome, Ruling Elders, they or any five of them, three being Ministers, be a
Committee to take this matter into consideration, and to meet as they judge fit,
and see occasion to proceed in this business, and to make report of their
proceedings the next Class.


Upon this, we appointed a Committee that time to take the matter into
consideration; Classical Records.

Aug. 10. 1658. The Committee appointed by the last Class, to take into
consideration the business of the Papers lately Printed as beforesaid, gave an
account to this present Class of their proceedings, viz. That upon their
meeting they agreed to write a Letter to Mr Allen, which was in these words
directed.


and they sent a Letter to Mr. Allen, to desire to know of him under his hand,
whether he owned the Printing or no? The Letter you have in the other Column:
Classical Records.

To his Reverend Brother Mr Allen at Prestwich, These. Sir, At our Classical
meeting in May last, your self, and others with you did agree with us upon a
meeting in order to an accommodation. The time for it was referred by mutual
consent, till Mr Heyricks return from London; your selves promising, upon his
return the first Class after, to appoint some to attend the Class, for the
appointing the time and place for the said meeting, you were some of you
according to the said Agreement, expected this day; but instead of that, we
meet with all the Papers Printed, and a Preface annexed to them. This is to
desire you, that you would be pleased in the behalf of your self and the rest,
to certify us under your hands, whether your self and the rest do own the
Printing of the Papers with the Preface. This I was commanded by the Class to
send to you, and to desire your speedy Answer,

Your respective Brother W. Leigh, MODERATOR.




Be pleased to direct your Answer to Mr Heyricke.

This Letter was the next day delivered to Mr Allen; he promised to attend in
person on Mr Heyricke the next day after, which he accordingly did; the account
of which their further Answer to the Letter is thus given in under Mr Heyrickes
hand. Mr Allen came to Mr Heyricke, Mr Mosely of the Ancoats accompanying him;
he said concerning the Printing of the Papers and the Preface, he knew nothing
of them, and therefore he brought Mr Mosely, who could give the account, Mr
Heyricke desired the Answer in writing, they both promised they would speak
with the rest of the Subscribers, and they would within a Fortnight give their
Answer in writing; within the time prefixed. Mr Allen came to Mr Heyricke and
told him, he had met with them that had Subscribed the Paper, and they denied
that he should give any Answer in writing, saying the Class would but take
advantage by it; and that now he must own both the Papers and the Preface, that
there might be no breach amongst themselves.

RICHARD HEYRICKE.





Which Letter was taken to him forthwith. He told the Messenger he would wait
upon Mr. Heyricke (to whom the Answer was to be returned) the next day, which
he accordingly did, and brought Mr. Mosely with him. He said he knew not of the
Printing of the Papers, and therefore had brought Mr. Mosely, who could give
the account of this amicable Office of Printing all the Papers, whilst an
accommodation was on foot. Mr Mosely said something to Mr. Heyricke, that it
should be reported that he should say, that he could wish all the Papers were
burnt; and so to vindicate themselves, that they distrusted not their Papers,
they Printed them to the world. -- Which Answer of his, if it had come, or the
like from us, it should have been called silly and poor, if not worse. But for
those words which he spoke, we know none that ever repeated them, or that
commonly did it, or that ever took them in the sense he himself puts upon them.
We only took notice of them, as a zealous expression of his hearty forwardness
for peace (which it seems we wronged him in, and we must desire him to forgive
us this wrong) and not as in any distrust on their part of their Papers, for
they never wanted confidence and a conceit to the utmost, of the validity of
all they did, and do not yet; so that we could never, knowing their whole
carriage in the business, mistake their words so far, to favor of any
retraction on their part, of any thing they had written. But for this to be the
occasion of their Printing, we account it a poor shift to allege it; they
might sure have enquired of us, (when upon terms of Peace especially) whether
any of us would have owned any such words in such a sense, before they had
Printed the Papers upon them; and what was the occasion before these words were
spoken, that many of their Party did so frequently talk of Printing the
Papers, if they had not been Printed but for them? But the truth is, these men
(the only men acquainted with Religion, Learning, and Antiquity) conceit some
great advantage they have gotten by their Papers against the Government, and
nothing shall persuade them to keep that under though they accommodate never so
with the Congregations where it is practiced, or rather that it was a mere
pretense in them to an accommodation, when they deal thus underhand in open
hostility, is but too manifest.

But Mr Heyricke moved that he might have their Answer in writing, that he
might return it to the Class, as appointed by them to receive it. They promised
they would within a fortnight: Within that time Mr Allen came, and denied to
return any Answer in writing, though he had promised it, and though he did not
know of the Printing of the Papers (as he says) with the Preface: yet now it
is done, they must own it, to prevent a breach amongst themselves; resolved
they are to keep Peace amongst themselves, though with us they deal according
to the Tenent, of keeping no faith with Heretics, whilst they cry up
themselves as the only Patrons of the Protestant Cause: and all others but as
Punies to them.

What iniquity (humane infirmity set aside) can any find in this, or in our
actings? If in any thing we have transgressed, it is, that our actings did not
succeed our purposes; forgive us this wrong, and for the future we engage our
selves, (all Bugbeares set aside) to act according to our representation, not 2
Cor. 12. 13.
spending more time in persuading them, that will not be persuaded.

Having thus given a faithful account of the rise and manner of these
proceedings, which is all we shall say by way of Preface on our part; we shall
take leave, (after a word upon the Title under which they have Printed the
Papers) to make some brief Animadversions upon some passages in the Preface,
which they have prefixed.

For the Title they give to the Papers as Printed by them, and what they
further say in their Title Page.

1. First they call it Excommunicatio excommunieata; Here is flat Erastianisme
in the Front, though it is but a Mask to to cover Prelacy under. For though
they seem to be against all excommunication, unless it be the total
excommunication of that Ordinance out of the Church: yet after we find them
willing that the Diocesan Bishops should excommunicate. Besides this
contradiction, it is wonder how this comes to be the Title of the Book; for
unless they had done more in their Papers, which might appear to be of
unquestionable strength, and directly against that Ordinance (though as
Administered according to the Presbyterian Government) they do seem to set up
the Gates of Mindas in this great Title.

2. They say, Wherein is modestly examined. Let the Reader judge, whether what
they offer, be worthy to be called an examination of what we have at first
published, or since Answered to theirs, or to the matter in the whole. For
their modesty, sure they either have another notion of modesty, then is
ordinary; or else they soon forget what they here assert: if untruths,
reproaches, revilings, etc. savor of modesty, let the Reader judge to call
our's an usurped power, and to determine so peremptorily upon the matter of the
whole Controversy, savours not of over much modesty, in the very next Lines;
and if they have carried the matter like dissenting Christians, we desire the
Reader to believe, as he finds reason to judge upon the perusal of the whole.

For the Preface,
1. They do first insinuate to the Reader an Apology for their appearing in
Print, professiug 1. their own disposition to Peace, and 2. how much against
their wills they have been forced to this course. For the former of these,
while they talk of Solomon's rule; for prudent men to keep silence, they show
themselves in the Quotation unacquainted with Scripture, as in their practice,
with the rule here mentioned, they are afraid to deserve the Title of
Scripturists; yet sure it would not have been to their dishonor, if among
their flourishes with humane Authors, this our poor Text had been truly
quoted, when they call it Solomon's Rule, and it is written in the Prophets,
Amos 5. 13. But if they had been touched at all with any tenderness of vexing
themselves and disquieting others, with such empty discourses, as rather
enlarge then compose the differences of Gods People, would they ever (if they
think the matter of these Papers to be such) have been so eager for Printing?
when they might well have forborne and were, we think, by their pretensions of
Peace with us, in reason and ingenuity bound to have done. They pretend to be
about to be at Peace with us, and to what then, but the widening of Gods
Peoples differences, are the Papers Printed? And indeed we care not for any
thing more, (if we know our own hearts,) in this action of theirs, that
troubles us, then that the differences of the Church are hereby enlarged, and
the minds of Gods People diverted, by new controversies, and old ones almost
silenced, newly dressed up, from that study of their own hearts, and the power of
godliness, of which there is such a decay in the whole Land at this day.

And 2. In that they would have the World believe, that they were forced to
this course by the severe and injurious dealings they have met with from their
Brethren (as they are here pleased to style us) of the Presbytery: And whereas
they say, that in this age of Printing, wherein men of low and cheap abilities
take as much confidence as any to appear in public, and that it had been
more honorable for their Brethren and themselves, to have made their lists
more private; For so we had determined our ignorance to our own sphere, and
our defects had been visible to no eyes but our own. We must needs herein
profess our wonder at them. They might have saved themselves the trouble, and
so the need of the Apology, for their appearing in public, when they seemed
to embrace an accommodation between us; as when Aulus Albinus made an Apology
for writing the Roman History in Greek, because he was not so well versed in
^ that tongue. Cato told him he was in love with a fault that he had rather
ask pardon, then be innocent: We believe, as they, that it might have been
more honorable on both sides to have made our list more private, and we by our
Narrative would let the world know how we came in public: without question
they have no ignorance to be determined to their own sphere, nor defects, they
fear to be made visible to others eyes, (because not so to their own) or they
would never have run this hazard, when the power was wholly in their own
hands to have prevented it. But it is our ignorance and defects, which they are
loath to conceal, which makes a necessity of their Printing, the honor of
their Brethren being a matter, they are no ways tender of. But they go on to
insinuate, what necessity has begot this virtue in them; a necessity indeed,
as much from us to force them to do it, as it is virtue in them in what they
have done. Truly while they complain of exasperations and bitterness, etc.
That has begot in them this courage, and provoked them to combat whether they
will or no; we must needs profess our ignorance of what they mean, being
conscious to our selves of no such carriages toward them, their provocation to
combat is just, as he is provoked to set upon his Neighbor, toward whom he
pretends friendship, when he apprehends he has an advantage against him, to do
him a mischief; so they, when they had agreed upon a Treaty for accommodation,
Print our Papers, upon a conceit (no doubt) of an advantage they had gotten
against us, which yet we are not frighted with, and we leave the Reader to
discern of; and for the Papers, let the impartial Reader judge, whether they
have forborne us any thing in theirs, that may justly be termed bitterness and
exasperation; and whether in ours they have Printed, we have rendered railing
for railing, or no; what blow we ever gave them on the one cheek, or what we
had prepared for the other, we are yet ignorant in our selves of: But may
truly return their words upon themselves, for our appearing now in public:
It was a thing we intended not, and could for some reasons, have wished had not
been, but their exasperations and bitterness, not only privately vented toward
us, in their Papers tendered to us, but now published, has provoked us to this
public combat, whether we will or no. They expect not (we know) that we
should be silent, for we have our blow on both cheeks already; first in their
Papers, pretty well stuffed (for the bulk of them) with scoffs and bitter
revilings, and now again in their publishing, their affronting us to all the
world; and we wish that this carriage of theirs from first to last, had been
such as might have savoured of the Christian in any Calender. For what Answer
their silence might have been to the pretensions of our power, and disguises of
our popular discourses, and our harsh proceedings toward them, etc. We know
the charge herein against us, to be so unreasonasonably groundless, that we
think their silence might have been a sufficient Answer, and all they were
necessitated to make, by any provocation we ever gave them, and yet we crave
leave to tell them, for any alteration their confident writing (either since it
was first tendered to us, or after Printed) has begotten in our judgments,
for the way we have engaged in, their silence might have served the turn
still. For what we thought of their silence, that either it was because they
could not, or would not speak, they know (it seems) better then we. If they
will leave us our consciences to witness with us, we have our Thousands as well
as they, to witness for our thoughts in this thing against what they say of us;
unless we had known we had justly provoked them, or had at all entrencht upon
them, we need not spend our thoughts about their abilities or forwardness for
opposition. We have no cause to fear their flattery, unless it be when they
use us so injuriously, and yet call themselves our Friends; We think not much
that they speak the truth they understand, and we join in the Prayer, that
the good spirit would lead them and us into all truth; yet we question the
necessity and seasonablenesse of their profession; especially when the thing
they contend for, was not in the Paper we published, at all oppugned. What
their pride and envy, or hearty desire of Peace in this (as they call it)
inconsiderable service may be, when they Print to the world our difference so
surreptitiously, nay (as we may call it) perfidiously; when a meeting for an
accommodation was agreed upon, we leave it to God over their thousand witnesses
within them to judge.

2. They go on now to represent their grievances, which made them open their
mouths, and tell the world, they will not represent the Rooms and Model of
the whole House in the Porch; though we think, the Preface, for confident
presuming the ground of the controversies, censoriousnesse, bitterness, and
unfaithful representing matters of fact, may well be the Porch to this House;
and if not a model of the whole on their part, yet a convenient additionall
Room uniforme to the whole pile. They here speak out what made them open
their mouths, viz. that they should not seem to fear the Giant of Presbytery,
whereby they acquit us from acting any thing contrary to the Rules of
Presbytery, but it is the Government it self they quarrel at. If therefore
we have declared nothing but what is suitable to the persuasion of the Brethren
of the Presbyteriall way, Why should this be more complained of in us, then
they would think well we should complain of them, in what they have said (as
they say) according to their judgment in defense of Episcopacy? And what is
this, but a desire to revive the quarrel, when so much is said on both sides
already by abler hands? And they bring no new thing to light for their way, nor
put us to say any thing but what is said already. But for their manner of
expressing themselves, and dressing up the controversy, wherein indeed for
bitterness and uncivility, we find them singular; they are afraid the world
should think they did not enough undervalue Presbytery; and so they would have
it to know, that Presbytery in their thoughts is not the only Palladium to
preserve the City of God. We should think that men that had any real zeal
for the interest of Christ, should not wish him a King in his Church without a
Discipline and Government; and whether this hedge be not so necessary to the
preservation of the Vineyard, we would wish all sober persons to consider. The
City of God has not long stood in any place, where the Ark of God has been
taken, and the glory of Israel departed from it. A Government in the Church,
if they do not make it the Palladium to the City of God, we know not what is;
and for the Government they contend for, it being under an express
prohibition, by the form of Government and the humble Advice, so that to
strive for that, is to strive for none; if they had the judging of us by such a
circumstance, they would not stick to say, that we strove for Anarchy in the
Church, whilst we refused a Government settled, with which we might
accommodate, under pretense for one we more fancied, that was quite abolished,
and by the Law expressly excepted. And we take leave further to tell them, that
we know some godly Ministers in some other parts of this Nation, that are of
the Episcopal way, that notwithstanding their difference in judgment with us,
yet would heartily close with the Presbyterian Government, and would account
it a mercy to have it settled with them, as it is with us, and this, rather then
any other besides their own, rather then to have the Church of God lie in such
Anarchy, as in most part of the Nation it does at this day. And whether the
settlement of Government, and as matters now stand of this very Government, may
deservedly be looked upon, as the Palladium of the City of God, we wish the
sudden experience of the miseries from the want of it, may not turn their
scoff into a sad experiment.

3. In the Narrative they give of our proceedings as the great matter of their
grievance; We shall not say much to the scoffs and jeeres, they put upon the
thing published by us; whether under the notion of Breviat, or what term else
they please to give it; but that what we published should be chiefly against
them, that withdrew from the Sacrament, and that it should be intended against
them of their judgment especially, we leave the Paper to the impartial Reader
to speak for it self. Whether our Paper does not concern the ignorant, for
their instruction only, which to the Ministers is a matter of great pains, and
not for the censuring of them; and the scandalous for their reformation, by
admonition and (if need require) further just censure (both which sorts we hope
they would not render uncurable, let them be of what judgment they will) let
any one judge: And that the Rule that we declared to proceed in toward those
that did not come to the Sacrament, did neither principally much less only,
concern them of their way; we may truly profess they were least in our eye;
but the generality of our people, that are no more for their way of government,
then for ours, but in general for none at all; these we desired to exhort to
mind their duty about the Sacrament: and though we have met with unhandsome
usage from some of these men that have thus appeared against us, yet we have
seen some good fruits of our publication of our intentions, upon many others of
our Congregations, who have been kept off, upon their own acknowledgedment, by
fears of their own unfitness, without the least scruple at the Discipline, and
have by scores at a Sacrament come in since that time in some of our places,
and we hope to their own and the Congregations comfort. And for our parts we do
not think the ground sufficient, that any of their persuasion stands out upon,
to excuse the neglect of this Ordinance. And we must take leave to tell them,
that we have visited some on their death beds, that have stood out on their
grounds, that have been much troubled at their neglect herein; and if they had
recovered, have professed their resolution to have joined as not finding this
pretense of scruple at the government, a covering wide enough for the sin of
neglect of such a duty; we would wish men would pretend nothing, but what will
bear weight on their death bed. We believe, thoughts of death would tame the
height of some men's spirits, that either they would find reason to submit to
the Discipline, or at least to carry more peaceably toward it, then they do.
We cannot but look on it as a sad thing, that so many are so indifferent; that
carry the names of Christians, yet care not to be in an incapacity of partaking
in the Supper. If they make it a light matter, we do not; and if Christ send us
to the high ways and hedges to fetch in his guests, we will not refuse the
service, nor be ashamed to bear the reproach of more then that phrase
signifies, for his sake.

4. And what though we were to exhort persons to apply themselves to the
Eldership, for their coming to the Sacrament; does this follow, that all that
can not submit to Elders, shall be subject to excommunication, whether
scandalous or no? etc. We presume, if they had their Government on foot,
whatsoever they would allow to dissenting Brethren (which when time was, was
little enough, as some of us well remember) yet they would not betray their
Discipline to contempt, by making it indifferent, whether the people render any
submission to it, or no. If men have no scruples against the Government
practiced, who is so little a friend to peace, or satisfied in the grounds of
his own actings, as to cast needless scruples before them? It was time enough
for us to manifest, what we could condescend to, in respect of the manner of
admission, when there was occasion offered for any such need, which we have not
ordinarily met with, in those that have since tendered themselves to the
Ordinance. There was enough declared at the Publication of the Paper, to have
prevented any such construction, as they made of it in this thing; and
therefore we cannot but admire at what we find next, that our aim should be
to bring all sorts to subject themselves to Ministers and Elders for
examination; and that all persons must come under the inquisition, not so much
to fit them for the Sacrament, as to teach them Obedience, that they might know
themselves to be homines ad servitutem nati, etc. whenas the chief Acter in the
Printing of these Papers, could not but hear a solemn profession to the
contrary at our publishing of our Paper as aforesaid; which he cannot show to
be contradicted by any after practice; as also when by experience there are
several Communicants in our Congregations, that have scrupled being examined
before the Elders, whom yet we have not refused, but have found out expedients
for their admission, without any further trouble to them in the thing they have
scrupled; the Eldership consenting, that two Ministers might take an account of
their knowledge, and they after be admitted by the Eldership, and of this
practice of ours, both before and since upon occasion, there are several in
our Congregations able, and we believe, ready to testify.

5. Whether our Paper published, for the scope or matter, deserve to be called
brutum fulmen, or whether their Answer savoured of all, or any meekness and
humility, we shall not here speak further of; they best know, with what frame
of spirit they tendered it, though we could discern but little of such a temper
in it. For the grounds of their dissatisfaction but in one sheet; and that we
put our selves to the trouble of seven to return them an Answer in, and
whether it be longer then sound, we leave the Papers themselves to manifest of
which (being published by them) the Reader may supply himself with an account,
and freely making his own judgment.

6. For what Ecclesiastical or Civil Sanction we have for our Government, we
leave that to be judged by those, that shall peruse our following Papers. And
that they wonder that men pretending to Religion and Learning, etc. So we
wonder at them, how they dare pretend to Religion or Learning, and call them
men's own Laws, the Placita of our own wills, fancies of men, nay,
praevarications; before they had better made it to appear, that they were such.
That matter is foul indeed, and inconsistent with Religion and Learning, to
call in the God of truth to abett our own fancies, and to pretend to civil
authority to second our own prevarications. But we might return to the
Laconicke (...). If to this, If it be so; but that is the great Question. But
the Prefator here can dispute and moderate too, and very ingenuously determine
on his own side, without any respect at all to our Arguments for the contrary,
eg regiae scilieet artis est ridere, quod non potest solvere.

7. What unguided zeal or interest it is, that should precipitate us, we no
more are careful to clear our selves from, then to retort the like upon them
in their opposition of us, which we might as well do. But about this danger of
a Praemunire, we cannot think them cordial in their advice and caution to us,
because they would persuade us to return to Canonical obedience and
Episcopacy, etc. which we know is expressly excepted against in the late Laws of
the Land, and we foresee it to be a Praemunire to meddle with them; and
therefore we have cause to judge, that they would fancy us in a Praemunire in the
way against them, not careing to draw us into a real Praemunire in a way with
them.

8. That what we published is any thing against the Laws, it will speak for it
self; they have published it to the view of the world, and if, without their
Comment, any thing be justly culpable by the Law, we are not now likely to be
concealed.

9. But that what we published should be styled Laws and Canons, and that for
all men to obey upon pain of excommunication, we see no reason for any such
construction of our action. We presume our conclusions should not have been
styled Canons by them, unless thereby they intended to put some odium upon
them. And they know whose practice in Government made that word less pleasing
amongst us, which was well received and reverenced in the ancient Church, to
set forth the conclusions of Councils and Synods by.

10. They now to the end of their Preface, express their trouble at our
self-contradiction in several things; as first, that we should cry out against
the Prelates for Lordliness over Gods inheritance, and we our selves aspire at
the same and much more. If they find not our way more sociall, we are sure,
they have felt as little of the burden of our fingers. If the Prelates had
bent their endeavors and authority to inform the grossly ignorant, and to
reform the openly scandalous, it had never by us been cried out against for
Lordly Tyranny. And when we have principally in this cause so bent our selves,
we wonder with what face they can fancy us Prelaticall: we should never have
complained of the weight of their loins, if it had been only in these cases;
and if in these manifest entrustments of Christ's Government, viz. For the
information of the ignorant, and reformation of the scandalous, our fingers are
heavier then their loins, they say more to ours, and less to the Prelates
honor. The Prelates Lording it over the Lords heritage, we frequently declare
wherein it was, when we speak of it; and not as they charge us with the same,
and tell us not for what. When we enjoyne Ceremonies, bowing at the Name of
Jesus, Cross in Baptism, wearing the Surplice, etc. by any authority in our
Government, they bring in something Prelaticall to our charge, but not when we
only press to the utmost against ignorance and scandal, which was the least
thing, that Government was ordinarily known by. We take the Parochial Diocesan
as a mere scoff, the very Officer they strive against in our Congregations
make it apparent, how far our Government is from a Parochial Prelacy. If
they would be understood, besides this flourish, to mean our inforceing our
way upon men of other persuasions, we have manifested by what we have said
before, and by our frequent practice, how unjust this charge is.

13. The second thing is, That we contradict our selves to inveigh against the
Donatists and Schismatics; and yet espouse their quarrels. And here by the by,
the great Diana of this Party is brought in, viz. mixed Communion. A fearful
error we are guilty of in opposing this, etc. That this was the great error
of the Donatists the world must believe; and yet we Preach against them, and
this greatly troubles these Gentlemen. We have contended against the Donatists
of our times, that pretend to separate from true Churches, as many have done,
and we understand not that St Augustine ever strove against Donatus, or his
followers in any other sense. But that profane and scandalous persons should
not be debarred the Sacrament, sure is a thing, men so much for antiquity and
the Church of England, should never take as Donatisme. The separation which we
make, is no other then what Chrysostom, Cyprian, and Augustine himself, will
appear by their writings to have led us in; and what our Church of England in
the Rubric of the Common Prayer, did enjoin and should have practiced.

14. We know not any secular power we ever exercised, or desired to do, over
any, which any Parliament or his late Highness has blunted the edge of. If
they mean the civil Sanction for our Government, we constantly deny, that
either the Parliament or his late Highness has done any such thing, as by our
Papers may appear.

15. And for the hurt they speak of by our secular power, or by the Goliah's
Sword, they jeere to have taken up, they might do well to consider that of Romans
13. 3. Ecclesiastical as well as civil Rulers, are not a terror to good
works, but to evil, will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which
is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. For our requiring a Sibboleth
for admission, it is none other then a blameless life and competent knowledge,
and this, we are able to show it, one of the chief of these Subscribers has
consented to under his hand in his own case; we hope they will none of them own
it, that they have not this Shibboleth ready. And for our requiring all Men to
fall down and worship the Idol we have set up; we might as well call their
endeavoring to set up Episcopacy, to be the fond attempt of rearing of Dagon
to his place again, when he fallen and broken before the Ark of God. It is a
small matter to make us like the Egyptians, when a little before as bad as
Nebuchadnezzar: For the Taskmasters dilemma we urge them with; sure it wight
have sufficed what was said in our Answer, which they have Printed, to have
cleared out Text from that gloss they put upon it; that the matter of
excommunication was to be understood in case of scandal and obstinacy only; If
the first construction would not have born it (which that it would and does, we
must, with men that stand upon nicities, endeavor to prove) yet they having
our express meaning declared, we vvonder how yet to fasten an aspersion upon
us, they dare in this place take the thing for granted in their own sense: We
desire to put men in no other straits, then God himself declares them to be
in, and yet has left a sufficient way-out: Men that are scandalous sin if
they come to the Sacrament, and sin if they come not, in the one for a
mission of known duty, in the other, for an undue and sinful performance of
it, men may eat and drink unworthily, and abstain from eating and drinking
unworthily too, but they are under a necessity of mending, that they may both
come and come worthily.

16. For the third contradiction they are grieved with, it is, that men that
impropriate the name of Saints, etc. should not carry more tenderly then we do;
truly to this we may Answer, that they may charge that on us in malice, which
we cannot make it our business to vindicate our selves from with modesty; we
know neither when we impropriated the names of Saints, or Christians to our
selves; nor yet wherein, in the particular they mention, we have walked
contrary; we presume the thing they charge us with, they acquit themselves
from; we will go no further for appeal, then the Papers in hand; let the
impartial Reader view, what he can find savouring of so much sweetness and
candor in their first and last Papers, and what there is of provocation in
ours, and by that let the matter be judged (wherever the profession of
Saintship is) where the contrary practice is most apparent. We think it not
strange to be counted legal and bitter for speaking against sin, when the
Apostle was counted an enemy for telling the truth. It is sadly suspiscious the
controversy lies on another principle, then yet is in view. We know not any
thing we are guilty of, like censoriousnesse; unless it be free speaking upon
all occasions against gross wickedness; we would hope those men would not
patronize that cause, which we profess our selves only against. If this be it,
that makes us so censorious in private, and severe in public, we must
profess, we dare not be Ministers, to sooth up men in their sins, unless they
can find us a Christ, that will save them in their sins; yet we hope that
such of our people, as have had occasion to be conversant with us even in this
business of the Sacrament, do find some of that Gospel tenderness, which
these men would persuade the world we are so utterly destitute of, and will
Answer more for us herein, then we think fit to say for our selves.

17. They now conclude their Preface, which ushers these Papers into the world,
and declare how much they were forced against their dispositions to Print; we
hope they will not say, we forced them, for they know we knew nothing of it.
They protest it is sine ullo studio contentionis, without any pleasure, or
delight in contention; whenas they were upon terms of accommodation with us,
according to our Narrative and the truth, and yet Print the Papers; and they
professedly hereby fire their Beacons, to raise up others to the like
opposition, or a stronger, where there is ability and occasion. For the success
of their cause, we know not what God in his wise judgment may permit it to be;
the reception of what they have done, or we may now do amongst men, we know
not; but pro captu lectoris, etc. we are well aware of a spirit of
profaneness and indifferency in the things of God that prevails sadly in
this Nation: and with men of loose lives, it is enough that some have spoken
against the Government, quale quale sit, whatever it is they say, and
whatever we may say to the contrary in our Answer, theirs shall go for an
unanswerable Piece, (because it is of a Subject so dear to too many) though
ours to the contrary be never read by them. For those that are sober and
moderate, we question not but they have seen something in ours already, that is
in a good part unanswered, and much vvronged in theirs, which would in some
measure satisfy them, if we should have said no more; however stay their
appetites till this our further Answer comes.

It may not seem altogether impertinent to the sober and unprejudiced Reader,
if in this place we subjoyne, only a brief Note in way of vindication, of
the same so much opposed, and despised Presbyterian Government, from an injury
(as we conceive) offered to it by another hand. And though we reverence the
Learned Author of the Book wherein it is done, viz. Dr. Sanderson, a man
eminent for his Learning and labors in the Church of God; yet we conceive the
worthy Doctor will hold us excused, if we take notice of the vvrong he has
done us, since he has (as we judge) causelessly aspersed us in Print. And we
rather shall do this little in this place (confining our selves to what (as we
judge) does more particularly concern us) that we may hereby invite some worthy
Author, that may have time, and a more convenient occasion of doing it more
largely, to take up some other passages in the same Book; which we think
might easily be cleared, and the Doctors want of moderation (which yet he so
much professes) be much evidenced in those many charges he casts upon the
Presbyterians, his Anticeremoniall Brethren. But this passage is in his Preface
to his fourteen Sermons Printed Ano. 1657. In his eighteenth Paragraph, where
he would persuade the world much, that the Presbyterians (though not
purposely, yet) eventually, should be the great promoters of the Roman interest
amongst us, and that more ways then one; as by putting to their hands to pull
down Episcopacy, etc. but upon his second thing he says, they promote the
Roman interest, by opposing it with more violence then reason, etc. And so, as
the common fault of all Presbyterians so to do (they being men it seems not
dealing with learning and reason in the Doctor's esteem) he confirms this by an
observation of some, (which he makes most his own, in that he only publishes
it to the world and subscribes unto it) with a particular reference to our
County, in these words: It has been observed by some (and I know no reason to
question the truth of the observation) that in those Counties (Lancashire for
one) where there are the most, and the most rigid Presbyterians, there are also
the most, and the most zealous Roman Catholics. To which we say, that though
we shall not stand upon what he asserteth, that either there are most, or
most rigid Presbyterians in this County, the truth of which, in any sense, but
what is truly an honor to us, in which we think he would be very sparing,
we might question; as also what he means by Papists, and those most, and
most zealous; and that in this County they should be such, we shall not now
dispute; but that Presbytery should be the eventuall cause of this, we do much
admite at the Doctors Aslertion. For if it were so, that where rigid
Presbyterians are, there should be rigid Papists; does it therefore follow that
the one is the cause of the other? We should to such a consequence return the
Answer, which Bp. La^imer made to the Objection against Preaching, that
Preaching was the cause of Rebellion; for before Preaching was, there was not
such Rebellion; which was, that this was, as Temderton steeple was the cause
of the stoppage of Sandwich haven; but that we judge the consequents of the
Doctors observation more absurd. For it does not so well follow, that
Presbytery should occasion stifness in Popery, because it cannot be said of the
Papists in this County, that they were not here, before Presbytery came in. If
this be the eventuall cause what was it then, before this Government was
established, that was the cause, there was so many rigid Papists in
Lancashire? If their very rise and breeding had been contemporary with this
Government, there had been more reason for the observation, (though not much in
it at the best) but that the prevalency of a more ridgid Popery in this County,
which was so evident in the time of Episcopacy, as is notorious to all that are
acquainted with these parts, that this should be ascribed to Presbytery so long
before it was born here, we admire at the oversight of this learned man herein.
But its ordinary with many men of this way (and we are sorry to see any of
this spirit in so Reverend a man) that what is found amiss amongst us, which
was truly the fault of the Prelaticall Clergy, or at least much more theirs, is
ordinarily laid upon the Presbyteriall Ministers, for but coming in their
places after them. We desire to be sensible of what is amiss in our
Congregations, and to take to, what we can be truly charged with, in defect of
not endeavoring to reform, as we could desire: yet we think it strange to be
reproached for these things by the Episcopal men, who led us the way (we may
speak without partiality) in greater neglects, in respect of their ordinary
personal care of their places, and laid the foundation of those abuses in our
members by their negligence, which we are yet little able to remove. And for
men of this persuasion to come and view our Congregations and Counties, and to
find these faults, to reflect upon this Government thereby, we think it ill
chid of them of any. This holds true in this of the Doctors, as of our
Gentlemen in their charge of our peoples ignorance to be for want of
catechizing and the like. We shall not say much about the number of Papists at
present in this County, but this we are confident, they have gotten no ground
upon us since Presbytery was settled here. The furthest part of the County has
many in it, as it had ever since Queens Mari's time, the reformation never yet
prevailing in those parts, especially for want of a settled Ministry there; and
where most Papists are, there the Government is least settled, so that if we
were directly chargeable with this thing, it might the more truly be said to
those that know this country, the want of Church Government should rather be
the eventuall cause of Popery to them. And whether it may not be trulier said,
that Popery gets more advantage from the want of Government in the Church, then
from the Presbyterian Government, which was never so effectually settled, we
leave all unprejudiced persons to judge: and if eventuall causes be talked of,
whether several of the Episcopal men, that bend their strength so against
Presbytery, and whilst they contend for a Government excepted against, thereby
endeavoring anarchy in the Church, do not herein gratify the Papists, time
will show. We might further say, that in these parts we have had none (that we
know of) revolted to Popery since Presbytery was settled. And for some we know
very eminent, that turned Papists in the height of Prelacy, and upon some
offenses and sad accidents that befell some in the Clergy then, which we
forbear particularly to instance; and they do but continue under us as they
were before: so that Episcopacy sure was the eventuall cause of their apostasy,
by the Argument of this observation of the Doctors. May we add an observation
of a worthy Divine, which we have heard from him, and let it stand by this of
the Doctors, and for the truth of it abide the test and strictest examination,
and it may be still in pursuance of this vindication of our Government. It was
this, that of the three forms in Church Government that are spoken of amongst
us, (viz. Presbytery, Episcopacy, and Independency) of all three, the first
where it has prevailed, has been followed with least errors in Doctrine. For
Episcopacy, it is well known, how many of the Divines under that Government
were infected with Arminianism, Socinianism, and Popery it self. (* some chief
Ceremonial Dr Goffe, Dr Vane, Dr Bailey, etc. See Legenda lignea.
men turning Papists, which the Doctor cannot observe of any Presbyterians,)
For the Independants, how many of their way turn into Antinomians, Anabaptists,
Seekers, Familists, Quakers, Ranters, etc. And for Presbytery, it has not yet
been observed to have bred any such noisome Weeds, where it has been
established. And how far it is eventually the nourisher of Popery, as far as
concerns this instance in our County, we leave the Reader to judge.

Distance of place in regard of the Author has hindered so strict a revisall of
the Sheets in Printing as was needful, these faults since Collected by him,
besides diverse literal ones not so material, thou art desired thus to mend.
ERRATA.
IN Epist. to the Reader, page 3. l. 29. for this, read his. In their Preface,
p. 5. l. 26. for Donasticks, r. Donatists. In the Narrative, p. 1. l 27. for
with, r. which. p 9. l. 4. for to them, r. to their. p. 13. l. 9. these words
are to be read as in a Parenthesis (the next Class Mr Heyrick not being
returned) l. 24. after Printing, these words are left out, of the Papers with
the Preface. from p. 17. to the end, instead of Narrative, the Title should
have been The Animadversions upon their Preface. Classical Records, 1. Col. l.
32. for Edw. Gee, r. Edw. Lee, 8. Col. l. 5. for contained, r. continued. l. 7.
for would. r. could. In the Answer to the Preface, p. 1. l. 15. note 1. for our
poor Text, r. one poor Text. p. 9. l. 3. note 5. for freely making, r. freely
make. l. 16. note 6. dele to. r. return the Laconick, p. 11. l. 23. note 13. r.
tax as Donatism. l. ^lt. r. they jeer us. p. 12. l. 15 r. when he is fallen. l.
34. r. omission. In the Gentlemen's first Paper, p. 11, 12. the Names from Isa.
Allen to Nie. Mosely, are transposed and should have been in the front of all
the Names. In the Book p. 89. l. 9. for unconformists, r. nonconformists. l 22.
for not more, r. no more. p. 95. l. 36. protest against him, r. against it. p.
99. l. 28. for sober ground, r. other ground. p. 100. l. 7. for seasonable, r.
seaseable. l. 18. for offored, r. affoarded. p. 106. l. 30. for (...), r.
(...), p. 139. l. 22. for civil sunction, r. civil sanction. p. 179. l. 1.
dele the Interrogation after what. p. 224 l. 12. for concluding r. excluding.
p. 247. l. 28. the word assure is left out. read it thus, yet that could not be
a rule to assure us. p. 291. l. 30. r. is not against the Rules. p. 301. l. 36.
r. normam. p. 322. l. 32. dele the, r. not to the last. p. 324. l. 23. for
dissavoured, r. dissavowed. p. 338. l. 17. for admit, r. omit it. l. 33. for
presumptuously used, r. promiscuously used. p. 339. l. 6. dele not. l. 27. for
giving. r. give your censure. p. 340. l. 2. dele it. p. 341. l. 7, and 22. r.
Magistraliter. l. 8. for ours fit, r. was fit. l. 15. for nearest Antecedent.
p. 342. the sentence in the Margin should be inserted into the matter at the
letter (a.) without which the sense is incomplete. l. 5. for and us that, r.
and is that. p. 344. l. 16. r. competent knowledge. l. 36. r. tell us. p. 345.
l. 8. dele to. p. 352. l. 26. r. Apage! Sect. 11.

The paper that was published by the first Classis within the Province of
Lancaster, in the several Congregations belonging to their association.
November: 22. 1657.
At the first Class at Manchester, Septem: 8th 1657.
IN pursuance of an Order of the last Provincial, the first Class does humbly
represent to this Assembly, their apprehensions in the case to them propounded,
in a draught prepared for the several Congregations belonging to their own
Association, if it shall be approved of by this Assembly, and which they do
wholely submit to their Judgments.

It being represented to this Class, and much complained of, and offense being
taken, That in the several Congregations, (if not in all) belonging to this
Association, there are many persons of all sorts, that are members of
Congregations, and publicly enjoy several privileges; as, hearing of the
Word, prayers of the Church, and baptizing of their children, and satisfaction
for injuries done unto them, That yet live in a total and sinful neglect of
the Lords Supper, that are scandalous and offensive in their lives, drunkards,
unclean persons, swearers, Sabbath* breakers, neglecters of Family Duties, that
will not subject themselves to the present government of the Church, but live
as lawless persons out of their rank and order, and that there are sundry that
are grossly ignorant in the main points of Christian Religion; These are to give
notice, that this Class, laying these things to heart, and much grieved for
them, do publish and make known;

1. That every Minister belonging to this Association, shall set apa^t one or
two, or more of the week days, in every month, for the catechizing of the
several familyes belonging to their respective Congregations; and for the
information of the ignorant in those families, and that the families to be
catechized on each of such days, set apart for that purpose, have notice the
Lords day before, to meet the Minister either at the Church, or Chapel, or the
Ministers house, or some other house within the Congregation, that may be
convenient for the neighboring families to meet at, that shall be appointed for
such a day, as may be judged meetest by the several Ministers.

2. That notice shall be taken of all persons that forsake the public
Assemblies of the Saints, and constantly turn their backs of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

3. That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous persons.

4. That they shall be privately admonished, according to the order prescribed
by Christ, Mat. 18. once or twice, to see if they will reform, and that the
Minister, when he catechizeth the several families, shall exhort such persons
in them, as he finds to be of competent knowledge, and are blameless in life,
that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

5. That if they will neither hearken to private admonition, nor the admonition
of the Eldership, their names shall be published openly in the several
Congregations, and they warned before all to reform.

6. That if after all this they shall continue obstinate, they shall be cast
out and excommunicated.

These things this Class thought fit to give public notice of, being very
sensible, that, for the want of the vigorous exercise of Church discipline,
ignorance, Atheism, and licentiousness grows upon us, to the great dishonor
of God, scandal of Religion, hazard and undoing of many precious souls, and
the laying a blot on our several Congregations; and therefore they are now
resolved (seeing themselves necessitated, to this severity of discipline, for
the freeing themselves from the great guilt of neglect of their own duty, that
otherwise they shall be under) to make use of that power that Christ has
committed to them, for edification, and not for destruction; although it would
be their far greater joy, that there might not be occasion of using sharpness;
and therefore they do earnestly in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech all
those that are ignorant, that they would apply themselves diligently to the use
of all public and private means for their information, submitting themselves
with all readiness to be instructed, and to consider, that without knowledge
the mind cannot be good: and they do also in the name of Jesus Christ, exhort
and warn all such as live scandalously, and in the practice of open sins, that
they break off their iniquities by repentance, and turn unto God speedily with
their whole heart, that they neither incur the censure of being cast out of the
Church here, nor by continuing in their sinful course be kept from ever
entering into the kingdom of Heaven hereafter.

And as touching such as turn their backs constantly on the Lords Supper, this
Class does wish them in seriousnes to consider, what an account they will be
able one day to give unto Jesus Christ, for their living in the daily neglect
of an ordinance that is so exceeding necessary for their own comfort and growth
in grace; and that they would lay aside all prejudice, or whatever it is that
hinders, and submit themselves unto wholesome order for their own good, as this
Class has been ready on their part, to express all tenderness toward the
weak, and a willingness to condescend to the meanest, for the removing all
occasions of stumbling, so far as lies in their power. And yet, considering the
fearful danger that all such do lay themselves open unto, that shall eat and
drink the Body and Blood of the Lord unworthily, they do warn whosoever comes
to the Lords Table, to take special care so often as they come to examine
themselves, lest they eat and drink their own damnation.

But because the exercise of Church discipline must begin at private persons,
and that if they neglect their duty of watching over, and admonishing one
another, and bringing complaints to the Eldership as there is occasion, little
or nothing can be done for the through reformation of the several Congregations;
this Class does therefore warn all and every of the Members belonging unto
them, to consider the great guilt they will lie under, if they through their
neglect, obstruct so necessary a work, and does exhort that therefore they
would in all faithfulness, laying aside all partiality, slavishnesse and
self-respects, address themselves to the discharge of their duty, that if any
walk disorderly, and will not be reclaimed by private admonition, they making
complaint thereof to the Eldership, course may be taken for excommunicating of
the obstinate, and thereby purging out the old leaven, to the glory of God, the
delivering their own souls from that guilt they will otherwise lie under, the
preserving the Ordinances from profanation, and the rest of the lump from
being leavened, the stopping of the mouths of such as seek occasion against us,
and finally the everlasting welfare and salvation of the souls of those that go
astray.

By the Provincial Assembly at Preston, October: 6. 1657. RICHARD HEYRICKE
Moderator pro tempore.
This representation is approved by the Pro*vincial Assembly,

THOMAS JOHNSON, Moderator. EDWARD GEE, Scribe.




The Gentlemen's first Paper.
To the Eldership of the several Congregations belonging to the Association of
the first Class at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster; These.
Give us leave to salute you in your own Terms.
WE have seen and seriously weighed that paper draught, Entitled A
presentation of the first Class at Manchester, dated the 8. of Sept. 1657.
confirmed by the Provincial Assembly at Preston, October. 6. and published at
Manchester Church the 22. of Nov. in the aforesaid year: and do publish this
our sense, and Apprehension of it, as far as is plain to us, not resting in the
Judgment and determination of any General Council contrary thereunto (if any
such should be) much less to one of your Provincial Assemblies; Though you seem
to submit to your Provincial, what you will hardly grant to a General Council:
In which we dissent from you; Though in other things we shall join, as first.

1. We join with you, in a deep sense of the several gross sins and errors of
the times, desiring earnestly to mourn, first for our own, next for the sins of
others of our Christian Brethren, and fellow members of that Church, whereof
Christ is the Head: We are grieved together with you, for the Scandalous and
offensive lives of such as live in drunkenesse, uncleanesse, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, etc.

2. We are also sensible with you, that there are sundry persons, grossly
ignorant in the main points of Christian Religion.

3. You with us again (we hope) are sensible and grieved (though you do not at
all mention them) for the gross errors in judgment, and the damnable
Doctrine of many, who have rent themselves into as many several heresies, as
they have into Sects and Schisms.

Thus far we agree, nay more, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and
reforming the wicked and erroneous, we shall not much dissent.

1. And first for the information and instruction of the ignorant, by way of
Catechizing, before they be admitted to the Sacrament; The course by you
published (provided it be in public) little differs from the order
prescribed by the Church of England, and other reformed Churches abroad, before
any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

2. For those who err so grossly, whether in Doctrinals, or points of
discipline, thereby renting from a true constituted Church: Though you speak
nothing either of their sin or punishment, yet we hope, you with us do hold,
That the Churches lawful Pastors, have the power of the Keys committed to
them, to excommunicate such offenders.

3. For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives; Admonition, private
and public, is to be observed according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18 but if they
still continue and will not reform, the Churches lawful Pastors have power to
excommunicate such.

Thus far we accord in judgment, touching the way of informing the ignorant,
and reforming wicked persons, and schismatic; which course is so fully
warranted by the Word of God, and the constant practice of the Catholic
Church; that we are not so wavering, and unsettled in our apprehensions of the
case, as to submit either it or them, either wholly or in part, to the contrary
judgment and determination of a General Council of the Eastern or Western
Churches, much less, to a new termed Provincial Assembly at Preston, wherein
we not little differ from you.

Other parts of your Paper are full of darkness, to which we cannot so fully
assent, till further explicated and unfolded by you. For,

1. Whereas you say, That in the several congregations (if not in all)
belonging to this Association, there are many persons of all sorts that are
members of Congregations, etc. you seem to hint, that though your grief may be
general (as ours) for all offenders, yet your censures extend only to those
who have admitted themselves members of some Congregation within your
Association, and yet live inordinately, and will not be admonished: If so, then
we who never were any members or associates of yours, are not within the verge
and compass of your Presbyterian discipline; for what have you to do to judge
those that are without?

2. But whereas your complaint, and offense taken, is, That many there are of
all sorts, who will not submit themselves to the present Government of the
Church, but live like lawless persons out of their rank and order.

If by the present Government of the Church, you mean your own (as may strongly
be conjectured you do) then are we also comprehended therein, and must fall
within your censure, and not only we, but all Papists, Anabaptists, and all
other, of what Profession; and Religion soever, who live within the Parish,
must be taken for members of some one Congregation within your Association, and
so driven into the common fold of Presbytery, and be subject to your
Government: And this (as we suppose) is the chief design of you, in this, as in
other transactions of yours, to subject all to your Government, which you
garnish over with the specious title, of Christ's Government, Throne, and
Scepter. Presbytery is the main thing driven at here; and however she comes
ushered in with a Godly pretense of sorrow, for the sins and ignorance of the
times, and a duty incumbent upon you, to exercise the power which Christ has
committed to you, for edification, and not for destruction; yet these are but
as so many waste papers wherein Presbytery is wrapped, to make it look more
handsomely, and pass more currently; but beware we must, for latet anguis in
Herba.

Object. But you say, For want of the vigorous exercise of this Ecclesiastical
discipline, ignorance, Atheism, and Licentiousness grows upon us, and men live
as lawless persons, out of their rank and order, because not subject to your
present Government.

Sol. We pray for the establishment of such Church Government, throughout his
Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God; and Universal practice
of primitive Churches, that Ecclesiastical discipline may be exercised, in the
hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him, to be
transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World; and shall readily join
with you in humble addresses, to his Highness, and his great Council, for the
establishment of such a Church Government.

In the mean time though there may be such, who (as you say) live as lawless
persons, out of their rank and order, yet are they subject to law, and
therefore subject to punishment, for though your Ecclesiastical sword cannot
take hold on them, the civil sword does reach them.

Your Class may do well then not to contemn (as in charity we hope you do not)
the authority of the civil Magistrate, but in stead of warning all and every
member belonging to them, to complain to the Eldership, of those that walk
disorderly, and will not be reclaimed, to the end they may excommunicate them,
That they exhort them to complain to the civil Magistrate, whose sword of
Justice is sharper and longer, and likely to work a greater reformation in the
lives, and manners of men, by a corporal and pecuniary Mulct, then any sword of
excommunication or other Church censure your Eldership can any way pretend unto;

There are other parts of your paper do remain likewise dark, which we desire
may be made plain unto us; for whereas you say,

There are many persons of all sorts, etc. That will not submit themselves to
the present Government of the Church, but live as lawless persons, out of their
rank and order. Our Quaeres there upon are;

1. Why Government in singulari? is there no Ecclesiastical Government but
yours? may not another Church have its Government different from yours, yet not
different from that which Christ has prescribed in his Word? Calvin says,
yea; Scimus enim, unicuique Ecclesiae etc. And accordingly there are other
Churches in England different in Government from yours, and as good as yours.

But if you say yours is the Government, ((...)) by way of eminency, as Christ's
own Government more immediately, and jure divino, which you so much defend, then
why (the present) is there no present Government in any Church or Assembly of
Saints, but where your discipline is erected? Are all the rest at present
without Government? or where has yours been this 1500. years past till this
present? Has Antichristianism so overspread the face of the Church that
Christ's own Government could never get footing till this present? But now
subjection is required thereto of all, yet many of all sorts will not subject,
but live as lawless persons, out of their rank and order.

Our next Quaere is;

What? must all those that observe not your ranks and orders, subject not
themselves to your present Government, be taken for lawless persons, out of
their rank and order? Yea; for so this close connection of yours seems to
import, (viz.) many who do not subject but live, etc.

In your paper you further proceed, and make it an order, That notice shall be
taken of all persons, that forsake the public assembly of Saints.

We would gladly know how far you extend this Saintship. this Church and
assembly of Saints, if to your own Church only, and such as subject themselves
to your Government; then S. Augustines Answer against the Donatists, who would
not acknowledge a Church in the World but amongst themselves, may also be
yours, O Impudentem Vocem! (says he) Illa non est, Quia tu in illa non es:
Vide ne tu ideo non sis, nam illa erit etsi tu non sis.

But if your charity reach further then to your own assemblies, then you make
lawless persons, such as will not subject themselves to your Government,
Saints, and members at least of the invisible Triumphant Church, though none of
your present visible militant Church; and then your charity over-reacheth.

Again, we are unsatisfied in the Word (Public) the public assemblies of
the Saints, What? do not private assemblies please you? We presume you are not
against private meetings, your own practice speaks the contrary: But you will
bind all (notwithstanding your private Assemblies) to frequent your public
also, other ways they shall be taken notice of: What? though they cannot
submit to your Government? Leave you no room for tender consciences? The Laws
of the Land have otherwise provided: And if you, under color of authority,
will make Laws and Edicts, and publish them openly in the Church, for all to
obey, upon pain of excommunication, contrary to the Laws in force, whether you
do it in contempt of the civil power, or through ignorance of the Laws; which
later is rather to be supposed, in a charitable and favorable construction,
yet in what sense soever it be taken, we much question, and it concerns you to
look to it, whether you have not run your selves into a praemunire.

Again, whereas you say, That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous
persons. Our next Quaere is; Whether those that forsake the public Assemblies
of Saints in the second order, may not be taken for scandalous, and so
comprehended in this third. If so, Quare oneramini ritibus? why do you lengthen
out your paper, and burden us with traditions, in multiplying of orders sine
necessitate ad Arthritim usque?

After the second and third orders against those that forsake the public
Assemblies of Saints, and such as are scandalous, comes in a fourth, touching
the Catechumenists in the first order mentioned; (viz.) That the Minister when
he Cateobizeth the several Families, shall exhort such persons in them as he
finds, be of competent knowledge, and are blameless in life, that they present
themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper? But what if they will not present themselves before the
Eldership? The Minister must exhort and admonish them. What if still they
refuse? Their names shall be published openly in the several congregations, and
they warned before all to reform. That Is the fifth order. Mark! Men of
blameless life and knowledge must be warned before all to reform.

But what if after all this they will not reform, but continue obstinate! Then
no admission to the Sacrament; that is employed in the fourth order; There Is
their Excommunicatio minor: But that is not all, a higher censure yet; They
shall be cast out, and excommunicated; So faith the sixth and last order, the
great Excommunication, which casts out of the Church also, and judges them
no better, then Heathens, and Publicans, notwithstanding all their piety and
knowledge.

So that, in brief, all wilfully ignorant and scandalous are to be
excommunicated; and not only they, but the knowing, and blameless of life, if
they present not themselves to the Eldership. These things premised, lying
sadly on our spirits and consciences, as not sound and orthodox, for which we
cannot so readily join with you, till further satisfaction be given us, and
which the publisher of your Paper promised should be given to all that did
desire, We therefore thought fit to signify these our scruples to you, and
shall wait earnestly for a speedy satisfaction in the particulars, remaining

January the 12. 1657. Your Brethren desirous of Truth, Unity and Peace in the
Church. Joshuah Cudworth. John Ogden Sen. John Ogden Junior. Capt. James
Buckley. Israel Tailor. John Buckley. Nicholas Walker. Ralph Hall. Edward
Newton. Abraham Butterworth. Robert Twyford. William Radclyffe. Jo. Hartley.
Ra. Bradshaw. Edward Richardson. Tho. Holland. Fra. Mosley. John Byrom.
Alexand. Radclyffe. Robert Hey. Robert Ashton: William Heawood. Alexander
Green. James Marler. George Booth, Richard Symonds. Richard Wait. Richard
Halliwell. Isaac Allen. Jo. Pollett. Tho. Prestwich. Leonard Egerton.
Ferdinando Stanley. Humphrey Bulkly. Nichol. Moseley. William Hulme. William
Holland. Thomas Symonds. John Scholefield. Ja. Wolstenhulme. Jo. Crompton. John
Grover. Tho. Scoles. Theo. Anderson. Abdie Scholfield. Tho. Heap. Sen. William
Read. John Buckley. Richard Leach. James Stoales. Robert Wilson.


At Manchester, Feb. 23. 1657.
The Answer of the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster, unto the
first Paper presented unto them at their Classical meeting, Jan. 12. 1657. by
certain Gentlemen, subscribed by them and sundry others within the bounds of
this Association.
SECT. I.
Gentlemen,
WE have perused your Paper, and do find in it sundry mistakes, and some
manifest wrestings of our plain meaning, in that Paper of ours, which was
published in our several Congregations: And we are also sensible of the sharp
reflections in it, upon the Government, that is committed to our mannagement,
and on our selves. But we shall not go about to answer you in that kind: and
therefore laying aside animosities, and putting away gall and bitterness, in
the spirit of love and meekness, however in faithfulness and plainness, we
shall endeavor to show you your errors and rectify your mistakes. And we do
thus far acknowledge your fair dealing, (for which we give you hearty thanks)
that you address your selves unto us, giving us thereby the opportunity, both
to vindicate our selves, and give you a right understanding of the matters
wherein you are mistaken.

Our leisure will not permit us to spend time about impertinencies; but yet,
that you may not conceive we are destitute of civil Authority, (which you in
your Paper mind us not to contemn, and we our selves do professedly testify
all due respects unto, as in duty we are bound) we entreat you to take notice,
That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, having resolved to
establish the Presbyterian Government throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, did August 19. 1645. publish their directions, after advice
had with the Assembly of Divines, for the electing and choosing of ruling Elders
in all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies for the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom, for the speedy
settling of the Presbyterian Government. In these directions, (as may be seen
page 8.) they did ordain, That in the several Counties certain persons,
Ministers and others, should be appointed by authority of Parliament, who
should consider, how the several Counties respectively might be most
conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries; and what Ministers
and others were fit to be of each Classis. And that they should accordingly
make such division and nomination of persons for each Classical Presbytery.
Which divisions and persons so named for every division, the appointed should
be certified up to the Parliament. And they further appointed, That the said
several Classes respectively being approved by Parliament, within their several
precincts should have power to constitute Congregational Elderships.

According to these directions, the persons by them appointed for this County
met, and did consider, how it might be most conveniently divided into distinct
Classical Presbyteries, and what Ministers and others were fit to be of each
Classis: and also made such a division and nomination accordingly, and
certified the same up to the Parliament: All which being done, according to
their directions and appointment, It was resolved by the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, Oct. 2. 1646. That they did approve of the division of
the County of Lancaster into nine Classical Presbyteries represented from the
said County. And it was further resolved, That the said Houses did approve of
the Ministers and other persons represented from the County of Lancaster, as
fit to be of the several and respective Classes, into which the said County was
divided. Which division of this County into nine Classical Presbyteries, and
the approval thereof by the said Lords and Commons was forthwith printed and
published. In this division so made and approved, The first Classis is to
contain Manchester Parish, Prestwich Parish, Oldham Parish, Flixton Parish,
Eccles Parish, and Ashton under-line Parish, as by what was then printed, and
is yet extant, is to be seen. Further, we wish you to take notice, That in the
forementioned Directions page 3. Direction 6. it is there thus ordained, That
all Parishes and places whatsoever (as well privileged places and exempt
Jurisdictions, as others) be brought under the Government of Congregational,
Classical, and National Assemblies. Provided, that the Chapels or places in
the houses of the Peers of this Realm should continue free for the exercise of
Divine Duties, to be performed according to the Directory. And also, that it
was ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, December. 21. 1646.
That the several Classes in Lancashire should be one Province, as appears by
their Order to that purpose; As there is also another Order of theirs of October.
16. 1648. enabling the several Classes within this Province to send their
Delegates to meet in a Provincial Assembly in Preston, and appointing the time
of their first meeting, the number of the Delegates, that were to be sent to
the said Assembly, and the Quorum of the Assembly, according to the provision
that had been made before by the Parliament, before any Provincial Assembly
could by virtue of their Authority be enabled to act Provincially. By which
account thus given it is manifest, That the setting up the Presbyterian
Government in this County: The division of it into several Classes: The making
of those Classes into a Province, and their Acting Provincially: As also the
appointing this Classis to be the first, (that is, the first in regard of the
number only, the account beginning here) was all done by Authority of
Parliament. And that, when we call our selves the first Classis within the
Province of Lancaster, we are awarranted thereto by authority of Parliament.
And so your Saluting us in our own terms, (which we gave not to our selves,
till the Parliament had first given them to us) will not seem strange to them,
that then did, or now do, acknowledge that Authority and Power, which the
Parliament exercised in those times. Especially considering there was nothing
done since, either by that Parliament or any other, or by his Highness and the
late Parliament, that takes from us what was then granted, and as we shall
clear further anon.

SECT. II.
IN your Preface to what in your Paper you have to say unto us, there is in the
first place a mistake of that title, which was given by us unto ours; (which
you call a Paper draught) for it was not by us entitled a Presentation (as you
call it) but a Draught, that represented to the Provincial Assembly our
apprehensions in a case by them propounded unto us; And was approved by the
Provincial, under the Title of a Representation. But this perhaps was but the
mistake of the Scribe, and we insist not on it.

It is of greater weight and moment, to take notice of what you publish as your
sense and apprehensions of it, (not resting in the judgment or determination
of any general Council contrary thereunto) if any such should be, much less to
one of our Provincial Assemblies. Although you tell us, we seem to submit to
our Provincial, what we will hardly grant to a general Council; in which you
profess to differ from us.

We know very well, and have learned better from the Scriptures, then to
resolve our Faith into the determination of any company of men on Earth
whatsoever, or to build our Faith on the Judgment of Synods, Provincial or
National, or of General Councils, that have been heretofore, or that may be
hereafter. We are sure all men are fallible; and Faith, that is a sure and
certain Grace, must have a sure and certain foundation, which is only the
infallible and written Word of God. And if this only be your meaning, you have
not us differing from you. But yet when we consider, That Synods and Councils,
rightly constituted and regularly called, as they may be then of great use for
light and guidance, so also that they are the Ordinance of God, and by him
invested with authority, and so have an authoritative Judgment belonging to
them, and which is not in private persons, we dare not contemn them, nor speak
slightly of them. And seeing the higher Assemblies have greater Authority then
the lower, (as there is more power in the whole, then in the part; in the whole
body, then in any one, or some few members) and that, however we are well
enough satisfied, that we have the Authority of a Class, yet we are under the
Authority of the Provincial Assembly; We see not wherein we offended, that we
submitted our apprehensions, in the Case propounded by that Assembly unto us,
unto their Judgment. There is concerning matters of Religion Judicium Privatum,
or a Private Judgment; and this belongs to all Christians, who are to see with
their own eyes, and judge, concerning what is necessary for them to know and
believe in matters of this nature. This Judgment, as there is good reason why
we should allow it to our selves, so we should Lord it over men's consciences,
if we should deny it to any. There is also Judicium Publicum, and
Authoritativum, A Public and an Authoritative Judgment; and this is either
Concional, which belongs to every lawful Minister (to whom the Key of Doctrine
is committed) by himself singly: or else it is Juridical, and this belongs to
Synods and Councils, who having the Key of Discipline, are invested with
authority to inquire into, try, examine, censure and judge of matters of
Doctrine and Discipline authoritatively, (although they be tied to the rule of
Gods Word in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law) and likewise to censure
offenders according to their merit, when such cases are regularly and orderly
brought before them. And in this sense it was, that we submitted our
apprehensions in the Paper published, to the Judgment of the Provincial
Assembly. And we believe, when the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 14. 32. That the
spirits os the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: And our Savior
Christ-saith, Mat. 18. ^ell the Church; And when we consider what was practiced
by Paul and Barnabas, and certain others (who upon occasion of a contest that
arose in the Church at Antioch about a matter of Doctrine, were sent up from
that Church to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders about that question) from
these and other Scriptural grounds we had sufficient ground for so doing. We
are sure also, That Whitaker de Conciliis quaestione quinta, and Chamierus in
his Panstratia de oecumenico Pontifice, ubi de Authoritate Papae in Ecclesia,
cap. 13. and cap. 14. And generally all our Protestant Divines against the
Papists, alleging the Texts abovementioned and others, do prove abundantly,
that in the sense declared, the Pope is to be subject to a general Council,
wherein also sundry Papists do concur with them. And questionless, if in the
time of Augustine (who was no contemner of Synods and Councils) any in this
sense had declared, that they would not have submitted their apprehensions to
their judgment, he would have cried out against them as well as against the
Donatists, O impudentem vocem! And we hope, when you have weighed the matter
better, you will not in this sense see any reason to refuse to submit either
your sense and apprehensions of our Paper, or what you may publish as your own
private Judgments in other matters about Religion, to the Judgment of a
general Council, supposing it might be had.

SECT. III.
WE have now done with your Preface, and come to the matter it self, wherein
you profess,

(1.) To join with us in a deep sense of the several gross sins and errors of
the times, desiring earnestly to mourn first for your own sins, next for the
sixs of others, etc. And here we do heartily pray, that neither we nor you may
any of us condemn our selves, either by professing our sorrow, for what sins we
may practice, or by refusing to help forward the good that we profess to allow
of, but may testify the truth of our sorrow for our own and other men's sins,
by suitable endeavors to reform what is amiss in our selves, and helping
forward every one in his place the reformation of others.

(2-) In the next place, you say, You are also sensible with us that there are
sundry persons grossly ignorant in the mainpoints of Christian Religion. And if
so, we hope you will acknowledge, that where, after the enjoying of plenty of
Preaching and the public Catechizing, that has been used for many years
together, (and much more where there has been less of this means) many
continue grossly ignorant in the main points of Religion, it is at least not to
be condemned in such Ministers, as shall be willing to take the pains by
private Catechizing to instruct such persons: This course being to the
Ministers a matter of pains only; and that hereupon, where the public
Catechizing attaines not its desired end, the private may be good and useful,
that so poor souls perish not for lack of knowledge.

(3.) Lastly You hope, That we with you are sensible and greived, though, you
say, we do not mention them, for the gross errors in judgment and damnable
Doctrines of many, who have rent themselves into as many several Heresies, as
they have into Sects and Schisms.

You may perceive by the title of our Paper, that it was a representation of
our apprehensions to the Provincial Assembly, in the Case to us propounded by
the said Provincial, and what that was, we shall particularly declare anon,
(although by what we say had been complained of, and represented unto us, it
might be gathered) and therefore we were chiefly to apply our selves to that,
which was therein our main work and business. That the gross and damnable
errors, that the looseness of these times have brought forth, are to be bewailed
(if it were possible) with tears of blood, is most freely to be confessed. And
whether we lay them not to heart in some poor measure, God the searcher of all
hearts he knows; as what complaints have been made of these by the members of
this Classis, both in their prayers and preaching, men can witness; and
likewise what testimonies have been given to the truth of Jesus Christ, and
against the errors of the times, subscribed with their hands and published to
the world, though therein but concurring with the rest of their Reverend
Brethren in this Province, in the Province of London, and other Counties of the
Land, posterity may read, when we are in our graves. But as to the most of the
Congregations belonging to this Classis, the great business to be looked after
was the use of our best endeavors, for the informing of the ignorant, and the
reforming of the scandalous, the numbers of these being great, and of those
that are so grossly erroneous as to maintain damnable doctrines, and whereof you
profess your selves to be so sensible, very inconsiderable, in comparison of
the former: and in sundry of our Congregations, if not in most, (blessed be God
for it) not any at all, that we know of. And therefore there was not that
reason to make any such express mention of these as of the former, although in
our Paper we were not herein neither altogether silent, as will after appear.

Having professed your agreement with us thus far, you go on to declare your
selves, That, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and reforming the
wicked and erroneous, you shall not much dissent. And

(1.) You say, For the Information and instruction of the ignorant by way of
Catechizing before they be admitted to the Sacrament, the course by us
published (provided, you say, it be in public) little differs from the Order
prescribed by the Church of England, and other Reformed Churches abroad, before
any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Sapper.

That all Children and others, (so many as it is fit to instruct after that
manner) be publicly catechized, is that, which we heartily wish had been and
were more generally practiced in our own Church at home, as it is practiced by
the Reformed Churches abroad. And certainly, had the public catechizing of
Children and others been more generally and constantly practiced, there had not
been that cause to complain of the gross ignorance of sundry persons of ripe
years, and some of them Governors of Families, as now there is. We do also
understand you by what you do here express, that you judge it not meet, that
the grossly ignorant should be admitted to the Lords Supper, in that you seem to
approve of the practice of the Reformed Churches abroad, (as of our own at
home) in taking course to inform the ignorant, before they admit them to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; And therefore we see not how you can in reason
deny, but there ought to be an examination and trial of all persons, before
they be admitted to the Lords Supper, that so the grossly ignorant may not be
admitted, as they might be, if all promiscuously were admitted without any
trial at all.

But whereas, in this concession about catechizing, you have a Proviso, that it
be in public, we do not see, why you should so limit it, if it be confessed,
that it is necessary, that the ignorant should be informed, and that
catechizing is an useful means to attain that end. You know how it would dash
sundry knowing persons to be catechized publicly in the Congregation. But as
for those that are conscious to themselves, that they are very ignorant, if
these should be called forth to public Catechizing, it were more likely to
drive them from the public Assembly, and so from the use of all means for
their information, then beavailable to this end. As touching what was
propounded by us in our paper, as the way for their information (though it was
not intended for any such a purpose as to exclude public Catechizing) it was
done in way of condescension to the weakest, and to show our willingness to
apply our selves to any course, so we might be instrumental to bring poor dark
and blind Souls to the knowledge of Christ, and which in our Judgment is more
likely to be attained in many, as the case stands with them, in a more private
way of Catechizing in any of the ways propounded by us, then if we should
Catechize all the several Families publicly before the whole Congregation.

(2.) Touching those that err so grossly, whether in Doctrinals or points of
discipline, thereby renting from a true constituted Church, you say, we speak
nothing, either of their sin or punishment, yet you hope, we with you do hold,
that the Churches lawful Pastors have the power of the keys committed to them,
to excommunicate such offenders.

We have given you the reason already, why we made not such express mention of
these offenders, as of the former, although (as you will hereafter perceive) we
are not wholly silent touching either the sin or punishment of these. Only at
present, because you profess to allow of that previous course of admonition
prescribed by Christ, in reference to the scandalous Mat. 18. before they be
excommunicated, but here say nothing of any such course to be taken with the
heretical or schismatical; (though we hope also of you, that you disallow it
not) we shall briefly declare, what course is to be held by the rules of the
Presbyterian Government, before the sentence of excommunication pass against
these offenders, and whereof our paper was not silent. This Government, however
it gives no toleration to any such errors, as subvert the faith; or any other
errors, which overthrow the power of godliness; if the party, who holds them,
spreads them, seeking to draw others after him, or to any such practices, as in
their own nature manifestly subvert that order, Unity and Peace, which Christ
has established in his Church. These being offenses censured by this
Government, (and of which further afterward,) yet this Government prescribes
the exercise of patience and long-suffering (even toward those that do grossly
err in Doctrine as well as toward those that are scandalous in life) in the
use of all means for the convincing them of their errors; by reasoning with
them out of the Scriptures: as we see was practiced in the Synod, that was held
at Jerusalem; and as we see the Fathers of the Nicene Council, did not disdain
to reason and dispute with Arrius (though he denied the Deity of Christ) before
they condemned him: And as also other Fathers did with other Heretics in the
Synods, although oftentimes in vain. That so none might have any just cause to
complain, that they were condemned, before they fully heard. And as touching
such as run into such practices, as in their own nature tend manifestly to the
subverting of that order and unity which Christ has established in the Church,
it labors with these also in the use of all gentle means to reclaim them, and
bring them back again to the Church they have rent themselves from, before it
proceed to censure. As it does also put a difference between the seducers, and
ringleaders of a Sect, and those that are misled; having respect not only to
the nature of the offense, but also to the quality of the offender; and
exercises patience and forbearance toward all, so long as there is any hope
of reducing them by milder correction: Being ever more desirous to heal, then
cut off any member. And thus having declared our selves in this, we go on with
you.

(3.) For you say; For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives,
admonition private and public is to be observed, according to Christ's rule,
Mat. 18. But if they still continue, and will not reform, the Churches lawful
Pastors have power to excommunicate such.

In this you fully come up to what we hold, as to the means, that is to be
used for the reformation of these, and we are glad there is an agreement in
judgment betwixt you and us thus far. Neither can we see how, upon this
concession, you can in reason find fault with our proceedings, if there should
be occasion for our censuring any such persons, as for their notorious offenses
and their obstinacy therein, might justly merit the highest censure.

For however, perhaps you may say, you stumble chiefly at this, that our ruling
Elders (that in your judgment may be but mere Laymen) do join in the
Government with us; yet we see not how this can be any just ground of scruple
to any of you, who (if we mistake not) were all of you satisfied in your
consciences touching the lawfulness of the late Government of Episcopacy as it
was then exercised, at least as to submission to it; and wherein
High-Commissioners, Chancelors, and Commissaries (that were as much Laymen
then, as ruling Elders can be in your judgment now) had so great a share, as
to suspend Ministers from the exercise of their Ministry, upon such complaints
as, according to the orders, that were appointed in those days, they might
take cognizance of, and so far, as to decree the sentence of excommunication
against them and others, as there was occasion for it.

But here we must yet further profess, we do not know, whom you mean by lawful
Pastors, to whom you here grant the power of excommunication. Some we know,
there are, that would make the Diocesan Bishops the only Pastors of the
Church, Dr. Hamm.
and that other Ministers do but officiate by deputation from them and under
them. We hope you are not of the mind of these. For then, as the dissent in
judgment betwixt you and us would be far greater, than as yet we apprehend
it is; so hence it would follow, that, till Prelacy should be restored, there
must not (if you would provide for the safety of the persons and estates of
them that should manage the Government) be the dispensing of any Church
censures at all. For you may easily know, that not only by Acts and Ordinances
of Parliament before made for the abolishing of Archbishops and Bishops, etc.
(and which are confirmed by the late humble Advice assented unto by his
Highness sect. 12.) the office and jurisdiction of Diocesan Bishops is taken
away; But there is yet a further Bar put in against Prelacy in the 11. sect.
of the aforesaid humble Advice; where it is expressly cautioned, (and we judge
it was out of a conscientious mindfulness of what had been in those very terms
covenanted against) that the liberty, that is granted to some, be not extended
to Popery and Prelacy. And therefore if any Diocesan Bishop should exercise his
jurisdiction, and excommunicate any person within this Land, wherein by
Authority (as you may see afterward) there is also an appointment of another
Government, we leave it to those, that are learned in the Law to determine,
whether such Diocesan Bishops would not run themselves into a praemunire.

But if you do not restrain lawful Pastors to these only, out doubt yet is,
Whether you mean not only such Ministers, as were ordained by Diocesan
Bishops, excluding those out of the number, that, since their being taken away,
have been ordained by Presbyters only?

If this be your sense, we shall only at present mind you, of what is
published, to be the Judgment of Doctor Usher late Primate of Ireland, in a
Book lately put forth by Doctor Bernard, Preacher to the Honorable Society of
Grayes-Inne; and whom though a stranger to us, and one of a different judgment
from us in the point of Episcopacy, yet we reverence for his moderation and
profession of his desires for peace, wishing that such, as do consent in
substantials for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some conjunction in
point of Discipline. That private interests and circumstantials might (...)
keep them thus far asunder. See page 144. of his last Book.
In which wish as we do cordially join our selves, so we heartily desire, that
all godly and moderate spirited men throughout the Land would also close. But
the book, which the said Doctor has lately published, is entitled, The
Judgment of the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland etc. In this
Book this Doctor tells us, that the late Primate in Answer to a letter of his
(sent to him as it should seem for that purpose) declares his Judgment
touching the ordination of the Ministry in the Reformed Churches in France and
Holland. There he says, that Episcopus and Presbyter gradu tantum differunt,
non ordine. And consequently, that in places, where Bishops cannot be had, the
ordination by Presbyters stands valid. And in the close of his Answer about
this point he says; That for the testifying of his Communion with the Churches
(of the Low-Countryes) of whom he had spoken immediately before: and which he
there professes, He does love and bonour as true members of the Universal
Church: (notwithstanding the difference that was betwixt him and them about the
point of Episcopacy) he does profess That with like affection he should
receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if he were
in Holland, as he should do at the hands of the French Ministers, if he were in
Charenton. See page 125. and 126. Hence you may perceive, that the Judgment of
Dr. Usher was; That the Ordination of Presbyters, where Bishops cannot be had
stands valid. And consequently, if you be of his opinion, (and you must have
stronger reason, then ever yet we have seen, to bear you out there in if you
judge otherwise) they ought to be esteemed lawful Pastors, to whom you grant
the power of Excommunication, Bishops being now taken away, and may not
therefore ordain according to the present Laws of the Land. The said Doctor
Bernard has some animadvertisements upon this Leteer (in which Doctor Usher
does deliver his judgment as abovesaid) and there shows, that he was not in
this judgment of his singular. He alleges Doctor Davenant, that pious and
learned Bishop of Sarisbury, as consenting with him in it (in his
determinations quaest. 42.) and produces the principal of the Schoolmen,
Gulielmus Parisiensis, Gerson, Durand, etc. and declares it to be the General
opinion of the Schoolmen; Episcopatum ut distinguitur a simplie^ sacerdotio
non esse alium ordinem, etc. see page 130. of the aforenamed Book, as also page
131, 132. Where the concurrence of Doctor Davenant with Doctor Usher in his
judgment about this matter is declared more fully. He adds also others, as in
special, Doctor Richard Field in his learned Book of the Church, lib. 3. cap.
39. and lib. 5. cap. 27. And also that Book entitled, A defense of the
Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
maintained by Archdeacon Mason against the Romanists. And further he says; He
has been assured, it was not only the Judgment of Bishop Overal, but that he
had a principal hand in it. He tells us, that the forementioned Author
produces many testimonies; The Master of the Sentences, and most of the
Schoolmen, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Durand, Dominicus Soto, Richardus
Armachanus, Tostatus, Alphonsus a Castro, Gerson, Petrus Canisius, to have
affirmed the same; and at last quoteth Medina a principal Bishop of the Council
of Trent, who affirmed, That Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact were of the same judgment also. But you
may see these things your selves in Doctor Bernard, page 132, 133, 134. We have
been only at the pains to transcribe them.

We could allege many more Testimonies to prove this: But we count these
sufficient; and do allege these the rather, because brought by one that is of
the same Judgment with you, as we suppose.

But having declared how far you accord with us in Judgment, touching the
way of informing the ignorant, and reforming the wicked persons, and
schismatical, etc. you tell us; That you are not therein so wavering and
unsettled in your apprehensions of the Case, as to submit either it or them,
either wholly or in part, to the contrary Judgment and determination of a
general Council of the Eastern and Western Churches, much less to a new termed
Provincial Assembly at Preston; wherein you profess no little to differ from
us.

That, which we submitted wholly to the Judgment of the Provincial Assembly,
was not, whether Catechizing was a way appointed by God in his Word, for the
information of the ignorant; but in what way of Catechizing (as is expressed in
our Paper) the ignorant in our Congregations, who never offered themselves unto
the Sacrament, were most like to be brought to some measure of knowledge; and
which is not a matter of Doctrine but of Order only. Neither was it by us
submitted to that Assembly; whether the censures of the Church were the means
appointed by Christ for the reforming of the scandalous? But whether it might
not be meet pro hic and nunc, and as the present case stood, to apply the
censures? (and so put in practice at this time that, which in the General we
were sufficiently assured from the word of Truth, was the way for their
reformation) and with which we were both by God and Man entrusted to dispense,
unto those that were openly scandalous in our Congregations; However they
contented themselves to live in the want of the Lords Supper, nor ever
presented themselves to the Eldership to be admitted to it. And this (because
merely circumstantial, as to the dispensing of the Censures at this time and to
such Persons) we think herein we owed the Provincial Assembly (unto whose
Authority we profess our selves to be subject) so much respect and duty, as to
submit our apprehensions in a case of this nature (which they had propounded
unto us to be seriously weighed, as they had done to the rest of the Classes
within this Province) unto their Judgment, and to take their concurrent
approval along with us, before we proceeded to practice in a matter of this
weight. And yet we have declared before, That however we are not so wavering
and unsettled in matters of faith, as to resolve our belief into the
determination of Synods or Councils, believing no more, nor no otherwise, then
as they determine: Yet that it is not out of the compass of the authority of a
Synod to examine, try and authoritatively to censure Doctrines as well as
matters of Discipline. And we think (how confident soever you may be of the
soundness and orthodoxnesse of what in your Paper you propound in way of
exception against any thing in ours) you have not such clear and unquestionable
grounds from Scripture for the same, that you were to be accused of wavering or
unsettledness, if you had submitted the same to have been examined and tried by
a Provincial Assembly: and much less if you could have had the opportunity of
submitting it to the Censure of a General Council.

But whereas mentioning our Provincial Assembly at Preston, you call it a new
termed Provincial Assembly; If your meaning be, that the terming it a
Provincial Assembly instead of a Provincial Synod is a new term, then this is
but only a Logomachia, and not much to be insisted on. Although we frequently
call it a Provincial Synod as well as a Provincial Assembly. But if your
meaning be; That it is a new termed Provincial Assembly at Preston; Because
Provincial Synods or Assemblies have been held but lately at Preston, we see
not (if Provincial Assemblies be warrantable, and have been of ancient use in
the Church) that having been long in dis-use, they began of late to be held at
Preston, that can justly incur your censure. But if the Antiquity of such
Assemblies be that you question: Then we refer you to what Doctor Bernard in
the Book of his above quoted, shows was the Judgment of Doctor Usher (who is
acknowledged by all that knew him, or are acquainted with his works, to have
been a great Antiquary; however we allege him not, that you should build your
faith upon his Testimony) and which we think may be sufficient to vindicate
Provincial Assemblies in your thoughts from all suspicion of novelty. In that
Book you have in the close of it proposals touching the Reduction of Episcopacy
unto the form of Synodical Government received in the ancient Church. And it
thus begins. By the Order of the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the
Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received. And that they might the
better understand, what the Lord has commanded herein, The exhortation of Paul
to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20. 28. is appointed to be read unto them at the
time of their Ordination. A little after it is aknowledged, That Ignatius by
Presbytery mentioned by Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 14. did understand the Community of the
rest of the Presbyters or Elders, who then had a hand, not only in the
delivery of the Doctrine and Sacraments, but also in the administration of the
Discipline of Christ. And for further proof, Tertullian is alleged in his
General Apology for Christians. Where he says, that in the Church are used
exhortations, chastisements and divine censure; For Judgment is given with
great advice, as among those, who are certain, they are in the sight of God.
And it is the chiefest foreshewing of the Judgment to come, if any man have so
offended, that he be banished from the Communion of Prayer, and of the
Assembly, and of all holy Fellowship The Presidents, that bear rule therein,
are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this honor, not by reward, but
by good report. There also is further showed, That in matters of Ecclesiastical
judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used the received form of gathering
together the Presbytery. And that Cyprian sufficiently declares of what Persons
that consisted; When he wishes him to read his Letter to the flourishing
Clergy, which there did preside or rule with him. And further, That in the
fourth Council of Carthage it was concluded, That the Bishop might hear no man's
cause without the presence of the Clergy. And that otherwise the Bishops
sentence should be void, unless it were confirmed by the Clergy. And yet
further. That this is found inserted into the Canons of Egbert (who was
Archbishop of York in the Saxon times) and afterward into the body of the
Canon law it self. It is here also acknowledged, That in our Church this kind
of Presbyterian Government has been much disused. Yet that it did profess,
that every Pastor has a right to rule the Church (from whence also the name of
Rector was at first given to him) and administer the Discipline of Christ, as
well as to dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments, etc. By all which it is
acknowledged, and also proved; That the form of Government by the united
suffrages of the Clergy, is ancient: and which is there in express terms
asse^ted; as it might be demonstrated by many more Testimonies, but that we
conceive these already mentioned are sufficient, and being alleged by the
aforementioned Author, As also evidencing what his own Judgment was in this
point, may be more likely to sway with you (if in that there should be a
dissent betwixt you and us) then any thing, that we could our selves produce.
But in this reduction of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government
received in the ancient Church, there are proposals of Assemblies of Pastors
within certain limited bounds, which (saving that they are some of them
somewhat larger then ours, which is but a circumstantial difference) do hold
proportion with the Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies, mentioned
in the form of our Church Government; as also the times propounded there for
their meeting, the power of these Assemblies, and what they were to have
Cognizance of, and the subordination of the lesser to the greater, with liberty
of Appeal, if need should require, and are the same in substance as with us.
And all these were propounded, as the way of Government in the ancient Church,
and in the year 1641. (after the troubles, that had risen in Scotland about
Episcopacy and the Ceremonies, and before the setting up of the Presbyterian
Government in this Land, had so much as fallen under debate in the Parliament,
so far as ever we heard of) as an expedient to prevent the troubles, that did
after arise in this Land about the matter of Church Government, being for the
moderating of Episcopacy, that at that time was grown to that height, that it
had quite taken away from the Pastors that rule, that of right did belong unto
them; And for the Reduction of it to the ancient form of Synodical Government.
And therefore in the Judgment of this learned and reverend Antiquary, our
Provincial Assembly at Preston (where the Pastors of the Churches are members,
as he acknowledges of right they ought to be in such Assemblies) would not
have been accounted a new termed Provincial Assembly.

SECT. IV.
BUt you go on and tell us; That other parts of our Paper are full of
darkness, to which you say, you cannot so fully assent, till further
explicated and unfolded by us.

We cannot apprehend any such darkness in our Paper, as you speak of. But yet
because in yours, you question what authority we have from the civil
Magistrate, for what we do, and likewise the extent of it: and your mistakes
of our meaning may perhaps some of them arise from your unacquaintednesse with
the rule we walk by: although we were not to be blamed for any mistakes, that
might arise ab ignorantia juris (whether simple or affected, that we determine
not, but leave you to examine;) Before we come to make Answer more particularly
to what follows, we are willing to be at some pains, to give you some further
account of the power we are awarranted by the civil Authority, for to exercise;
to what persons within our bounds it extends it self: and what some of those
rules are, that are prescribed unto us by civil Authority, to walk by in the
exercise of that power we are betrusted with.

It is a general and common mistake amongst many, that the Presbyterian
Government, was established by the Parliament but for three years, and that
therefore it is now expired and our of date. But if you peruse all that passed
in Parliament touching it, no such matter will appear. The directions of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after advice had with the Assembly
of Divines, for the electing and choosing Ruling Elders in all the
Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies, for the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom, for the speedy settling
of the Presbyterian Government, bearing date August 19. 1645. Their Ordinance
together with Rules and Directions, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, in cases of Ignorance and scandal, dated October. 20. 1645: The
Votes also of the said Houses for the Choice of Elders throughout the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales in the respective Parish Churches and
Chapels, according to the directions before mentioned; And touching the power
granted to the Tryers of Elections of Elders, Of the date of Febr. 20. 1645.
and Febr. 26. 1645: Their Ordinance for keeping scandalous Persons from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the inabling of Congregations for the choice of
Elders, and supplying of defects in former Ordinances and Directions of
Parliament concerning Church Government, bearing date March 14. 1645: The
Remedies prescribed by them for removing some obstructions in Church
Government, dated April 22. 1647: And their Ordinance for the speedy dividing
and settling the several Counties of this Kingdom into distinct Classical
Presbyteries and Congregationall Elderships, dated Jan. 29. 1647; We say, all
these were passed absolutely without any proviso's at all, limiting the time of
their continuance, that is expressed in any of them. Indeed in the Ordinance of
Parliament giving power to all the Classical Presbyteries within their
respective bounds, to examine, approve and ordain Ministers for several
Congregations, dated Nov. 10. 1645; It is provided in the Close of it, That it
shall stand in force for twelve months, and no longer; As it is provided in
another Ordinance, for the Ordination of Ministers, by the Classical
Presbyters, within their respective bounds, for the several Congregations in
the Kingdom of England, bearing date August 28. 1646, that it shall stand in
force for three years, and no longer; Which latter might give to some (that
took but the matter upon report) an occasion to conceive, that the Presbyterian
Government was settled but for three years; although that was but ill applied
to all the several Ordinances that had passed before, which belonged only to
one. But the Ordinance especially, from which chiefly (as we conceive) the
mistake arose about settling the Presbyterian Government for three years only,
was the Ordinance that passed June 5. 1646; The title whereof is, An Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the present settling
(without further delay) of the Presbyterial Government in the Church of
England: In the Close whereof it is ordained; That this Ordinance shall
continue for the space of three years, and no longer, unless both Houses
think fit to continue it. But if the matter of this Ordinance be consulted, it
is manifest it was but touching a Committee of Lords and Commons to adjudge and
determine scandalous offenses not formerly enumerated, appointed by that
Ordinance, in stead and place of Commissioners mentioned in the Ordinance of
March 14. 1645; And also showing how the Elderships were to proceed in the
examination of such scandalous offenses; And touching what power was granted to
the said Committee, and in what sort they were to proceed, as is clear to any,
that shall but take the pains to peruse that Ordinance; The ground whereof in
the preface to it, is made to be this; The Lords and Commons in Parliament
holding their former resolution, that all notorious and scandalous offenders
shall be kept from the Sacrament, have thought fit to make a further addition
to the scandalous offenses formerly enumerated, for which men shall be kept
back from the Sacrament; And least the stay of the enumeration, and the not
naming of Commissioners to judge of Cases not enumerated, should hinder the
putting in execution the Presbyterian Government already established, They have
thought fit, etc. And do therefore-ordain a Committee (therein particularly
nominated) in stead and place of Commissioners.

The groundlesnesse of the mistake about settling the Presbyterial Government
for three years only (that might arise from the proviso in this Ordinance) is
so clear to any common understanding, that the bare recital of the sum of the
matter of this Ordinance, and the ground of making it, does make it so fully to
appear, that it were but lost labor to use any more words about it. But we
have particularly mentioned all that ever passed the Parliament (so far as we
have either seen or heard of) that hitherto concerned Church Government, until
the year 1648; When the form of Church Government to be used in the Church of
England and Ireland, was agreed upon by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, after Advice had with the Assembly of Divines, and was ordered by
them to be printed August 19. of the said year 1648. And this Ordinance
(wherein all that had passed the Parliament before in parts, and at several
times, and what ever was but temporary, by virtue of other Ordinances (so far
as was intended for continuance) are molded up into a complete body, with a
supply of sundry things that had been never mentioned nor published before in
other Ordinances) is without any limitation of time for its continuance, and
remains unrepealed to this day, for any thing we have seen or heard to the
contrary. Nay we think (as we shall touch upon anon) That by the humble Advice,
assented to by his Highness, this Ordinance (as well as others) receives
strength.

But by this full account given, we think we have made it sufficiently to
appear, that we have had the Authority of the civil Magistrate to bear us out,
in what we have acted since the first setting up of the Presbyterian Government
until this present; Except there be any, that can come forth, and charge us to
have transgressed the rules, appointed by the Parliament for us to observe in
our actings, against which our own innocence only shall be our defense.

It now remains, for your further satisfaction, and our own vindication, that
we recite some things particularly out of the form of Church Government, which
we conceive are thereunto subservient.

In the very first Words of the Ordinance (according to what we have before
recited in the directions for the electing and choosing of ruling Elders, and
is there also to be found) you may find it thus; Be it ordered and ordained by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same,
That all Parishes and Places whatsoever within the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, (as well Privileged Places and exempted jurisdictions as
others) be brought under the Government of Congregational, Classical,
Provincial and National Assemblies, etc. Whence it is to us unquestionable,
That by virtue of this appointment, such as live within the bounds of our
several Congregations and Parishes are under the power of some one or other of
the Congregational Elderships, constituted by Authority of Parliament within
our several Parishes; And that all those that live within the bounds of our
Classis (mentioned before) are under the power of our Classical Assembly,
constituted in like manner by the said Authority.

What power is given particularly to the congregational Elderships, you may
find in the aforesaid form of Church Government, and unto which we refer you;
only we shall mind you, That by virtue thereof, they have power, as they
shall see just occasion, to enquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of
any member of the Congregation, to admonish, and rebuke, to suspend from the
Lords Table, those who are found by them, to be ignorant and scandalous, and to
excommunicate according to the rules and directions after following. And it is
thereby ordained, That the Examination and Judgment of such Persons, as shall
for their ignorance in the points of Religion, mentioned in that Ordinance, not
be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the
Eldership of every Congregation. All which will appear by the express Letter
of the said Ordinance, to any, that will consult it, and which not only
justifies all that is practiced, in that case, by the several Elderships, but
also shows what grounds this Classis had for that which was mentioned in our
Paper, touching both what is therein appointed to the Minister about
Catechizing Families, and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such, as in
the several Families he should find to be of competent knowledge, and know to
be of blameless life, That they should present themselves to the Eldership;
The Trial and Judgment in this case not belonging to any one Minister alone,
but to the Eldership.

There are also rules and directions given in this Ordinance to be observed by
the several Elderships, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in cases of scandal, which may be seen there particularly. But there is
no rule given, that will allow either the Eldership or Classis, according to
the several powers to them therein granted, either to warn before all, or to
excommunicate knowing and blameless men for their mere not presenting
themselves before the Eldership.

The rules of this Government prescribe otherwise; as we our selves must also
needs profess, that we are not conscious to our selves, that we have given any
just occasion by our management thereof, That contrary to the express rules
appointed therein to be observed by us, and to the plain sense of the
expressions used in our Paper (of which afterward,) any such a thing, should
have been so much as supposed, to have been intended from any thing there
expressed.

Give us leave to proceed a little further, to lay open the order that is
prescribed in the above mentioned form of Church Government, touching the order
of proceeding to excommunication; which as it will awarrant the publishing of
men's names openly in the Congregation, and warning them before all to reform,
being such as are justly censurable by the rules thereof, and particularly
where it prescribes, that several public admonitions shall be given to the
offenders, etc. So it will awarrant us in any thing, that is made censurab^e by
that Paper of ours, that was published.

To make this to appear, as also to show what reason, we had to make known to
the several congregations within our bounds what our paper held forth. We shall
here declare, what offenses are censurable with this greatest and last censure
of Excommunication, according to the order, that is there prescribed, and
which, as it requires, that it be inflicted with great and mature deliberation,
and after all other good means have been essayed; so it appoints in these
express words.

That such Errors in practice as subvert the Faith, or any other Errors,
which overthrow the power of Godliness; if the party who holds them, spread
them, seeking to draw others after him; and such sins in practice, as cause the
Name and Truth of God to be blasphemed, cannot stand with the power of
godliness; and such practices, as in their own nature manifestly subvert that
order, unity and Peace, which Christ has established in his Church; and
particularly all those scandalous sins, for which any Person is to be suspended
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, obstinately persisted in; these being
publicly known, to the just scandal of the Church; The sentence of
Excommunication may and ought to proceed, according to the directions after
following.

But the Persons, that hold other Errors in Judgment, about which learned and
Godly men possibly may and do differ, and which subvert not the faith, nor are
destructive to godliness, or that be guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are
commonly found in the Children of God: or being otherwise sound in the faith,
and holy in life (and so not falling under censure by the former rules)
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; and do yet out
of conscience, not come up to the observation of all those rules, which are or
shall be established by Authority, for regulating the outward worship of God,
and Government of his Church; The sentence of excommunication for these causes
shall not be denounced against them.

These things this Classis taking into consideration, together with the power
they were betrusted with by God and Man, for the dispensing the censures of the
Church, in the cases censurable by the rules here laid down and elsewhere, in
the form of Church Government: And there having been in the Provincial
Assembly several debates touching such Persons as in the several Congregations
were ignorant and scandalous, who offered not themselves to the Sacrament, nor
to the Eldership in order to their admission to it: and they commending it to
the several Classical Presbyteries to be considered of, whether some further
course was not to be held, for the information of the one, and the reformation
of the other, then yet had been taken, notwithstanding their neglect; and what
they judged fittest to be done for the attaining those ends; and to represent
their thoughts therein to the next Assembly; This Classis upon the whole
concluded, to represent their apprehensions in the Case, as is expressed in the
Paper that was published, which was approved of before by the Provincial
Assembly, and which they judge is sufficiently awarranted, in regard of any
thing therein contained, by the rules expressed in the abovementioned form of
Church Government.

We having thus far showed what we have been, and are awarranted to practice,
by the several Ordinances above mentioned, shall now proceed further to
declare; That however we are no Lawyers, and therefore leave the determination
of the Case to the learned in the Law to judge of, to whom it belongs: yet if
it may be lawful for us to judge of a matter of this nature from the principles
of reason; It seems to us, that the above mentioned Ordinances about Church
Government, as well as other Ordinances of Parliament, are confirmed in the
humble Advice assented unto by his Highness in the 16. section thereof, where
we find these Words: And that nothing contained in this Petition and Advice,
nor your Highness consent rhereunto, shall be construed to extend to the
repealing or making void of any Act or Ordinance, which is not contrary
hereunto, or to the matters herein contained. But that the said Acts and
Ordinances, not contrary hereunto, shall continue and remain in force, in such
manner, as if this present Petition and Advice had not at all been had or made,
or your Highness consent thereunto given. Whence we gather, that if in the
several Ordinances for Church Government, there be nothing contrary to the
humble Advice, or to the matters therein contained, they are not thereby (any
more then any other Acts or Ordinances of Parliament) repealed, but left to
remain in force. At least, there seems to us to be a plain intimation, that
they have a force in them, which is not by this humble Advice repealed and made
void. For it does not appear to us, That there is any thing in the form of
Church Government, or any other Ordinances of Parliament about that matter;
that is contrary to the humble Advice or matters therein contained. And whereas
in the eleventh section, there is mention made of some, that differ in worship
and discipline, from the public profession of these Nations held forth, to
whom some indulgence is granted; It seems to us, there is an acknowledgement
and owning of what the late Parliament held forth, in regard of these, by the
Directory for worship and form of Church Government, which they passed, as the
public profession of these Nations in regard of worship and discipline. And
in these apprehensions we are the more confirmed, because here in this section,
mention is made of a confession of faith to be agreed on by his Highness and
the Parliament, there having nothing in that kind passed the late Parliament,
that established the Directory for worship and form of Church Government:
However there had been a Confession of faith drawn up by the late Assembly of
Divines; Whence it seems to us clear, that they own the Directory for worship,
and the form of Church Government, to be that which they hold forth, as the
public profession of the Nation for worship and Government. To the same
purpose we find in the Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, etc. As it was publicly declared at Westminster December. 16 1653.
page 43. Sect. 37. Where also they express a worship and Discipline publicly
held forth, which must needs refer to the Directory and form of Church
Government by us recited; There being no other worship or discipline, that then
had, or now has, the civil Sanction, in this Nation.

We have been large, in what we have here represented in the general, before we
come to speak more particularly to the rest, that now follows in your paper.
But our pains being the greater, to make this full representation unto you,
then it will be for you to read it, we must entreat you to excuse us;
considering it tends as well to rectify your mistakes, as to vindicate our
selves, being also desirous, not to be mistaken any more, as also because it
lays a foundation for our briefer and more particular Answer unto what
follows, and to which (these things being thus premised) we now come.

SECT. V.
IN the things, wherein you profess your selves to dissent, till further
explicated and unfolded by us.

(1) The first thing we meet with here is; That by the many Persons of all
sorts, that are members of Congregations, and mentioned in our Paper, in your
sense thereof we seem to hint, that thereby we mean only such, who have
admitted themselves members of some Congregation within your association, and
yet live inordinately, etc. And that therefore you, who never were any members
or associates of ours, are not within the verge and compass of our
Presbyterian discipline, etc. Unto which we say; That we have constantly
professed against those of the separation: That the several Assemblies or
Congregations within this Land, that make a profession of the true Christian
and Apostolic Faith, are true Churches of Jesus Christ.: That the several
members of these Congregations are by their birth, members, as those that were
born in the Jewish Church, are said to be, by the Apostle, Jews by nature:
Gal. 2. That this their membership was sealed to them in their Baptism, that
did solemnly admit them, as into the universal Church, so into the particular,
wherein they were born. We have also constantly maintained against the
aforementioned Persons; That the Ministers of these Churches are true
Ministers, notwithstanding that exception of theirs against them, that they
were ordained by Bishops, who also themselves were true Ministers in our
Judgment (though we cannot acknowledge, that by divine right they were
superior to their fellow brethren, either in regard of order or jurisdiction)
And that therefore the Word and Sacraments (the most essential marks of a true
visible Church, according to the professed Judgment of our Divines against the
Papists on the one hand, and those of the separation on the other) dispensed by
these Vinisters, were, and are the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ. And that
hereupon our work was not (when the Presbyterian Government was appointed) to
constitute Churches, but to reform them only. And that therefore none within
our bounds, except they shall renounce Christianity and their Baptism, can be
deemed by us to be without, in the Apostles sense; and so therefore not within
the compass and verge of our Presbyterian Government. Neither is it their not
associating with us in regard of Government, that does exempt them from censure
by it, if they should be such offenders, as by the rules thereof were justly
censurable. It not being a matter arbitrary, for private Persons at their own
will and pleasure to exempt themselves from under that Ecclesiastical
Government, that is settled by Authority: And as you know it would not have
been allowed of under the former Government.

(2) And therefore whether you, and all others within our bounds, be not
comprehended within our Government, according to the rules laid down in the
Ordinance of Parliament above mentioned, appointing the form of Church
Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, and therein
ordaining, as has been recited before in the first page thereof, and to which
we refer you; (Especially considering, that all within the bounds of our
several Parishes (that are no other now then formerly) even Papists, and
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, were under the late Prelatical Government) we
leave it to you to judge. Only if so, we wish you to consider, that then you
are brought under the Government of Presbytery, not so much by us, as by the
Parliament appointing this Government. And then we think you, who warn us not
to contemn civil power, might well (out of respect to the Authority ordaining
it, but especially considering the word Presbytery is a known Scripture
expression, 1 Timothy 4, and interpreted by sundry of the Fathers, as we do, as
has been declared before) have used a more civil expression, then to have
called it a common fold, into which (it should seem) your complains it, that
you should be driven. Although Presbytery lays restraint on none, but such as
being scandalous in their lives, and so contemning the Laws of God, are
therefore truly and indeed the lawless Persons, that we speak of. But whereas
(as you suppose?) This is our chief design in this, as in other transactions of
ours, to subject all to our Government:

We do refer our selves to our course of life past, and hope it will witness
with us, to all that will judge impartially, what our designs have been in our
other transactions. And as touching our design in the Paper published, whether
it has been ought but the information of the ignorant, and reformation of the
scandalous, to the Glory of God and their salvation, we leave it to be judged
by those, that will judge of men's intentions by what is expressed in their
words and actions.

We know very well, we are charged by some, that we affect Dominion, to Lord it
over the People, and to have all sorts of Persons, of what rank soever, to
stoop to us. But we do openly profess, that the Government of the Church, that
is committed unto men, is not Despotical, but Ministerial. That it is no
Dominion, but a Ministry only. And that the Officers, that are entrusted with
it, are themselves to be subject, both in regard of their bodies and estates,
to the Civil power; That by the Ordinance of God, they are appointed to be
under, and that in their Government they have nothing to do with the bodies and
estates of any Persons, but with their Souls only. Although here we desire to
enquire of you, whether, if you be indeed for the settling of any Government at
all in the Church (as you profess to be) you do not think, that all should be
subject to it? We cannot judge you to be so irrational, as to be for a
Government, and that yet subjection to it must be denied. And if the late
Government of the Prelacy was not blamed by you, because it required subjection
to it; we wish you to consider, whether upon this account you have reason to
censure us. But further, whereas you tell us; That we garnish over our
Government with the specious title of Christ's Government, Throne, and Scepter:
We wish you to consider, what in your Answer to an objection (that you frame
out of our Paper) your selves do say. You there tell us; You pray for the
establishment of such Church Government, as is consonant to the will of God,
and universal practice of primitive Churches: that Ecclesiastical Discipline
may be exercised in the hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and
left by him to be transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World. The
expressions, you here use, are as high touching that Government you would have
established, as any have been, that ever we have used of ours. For your prayer
is, That Ecclesiastical Discipline may be exercised in the hands of them, to
whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him to be transferred from hand to
hand to the end of the world. The Government then, that you are for, must be
with you, Christ's Government Throne and Scepter. And why do you then condemn
us, if we have used such expressions concerning our Government, till you have
convinced us, that it is not such? When yet you take to your selves the liberty
to use the like language, concerning the Government you pray may be established.

But where as you say, Presbytery is the main thing driven at here, and that
however she comes ushered in with a Godly pretense of sorrow for the sins and
the ignorance of the times, and the duty incumbent upon us, to exercise the
power that Christ has committed to us, for edification and not for
destruction, that these are but so many waste Papers, wherein Presbytery is
wrapped up to make it look more handsomely, and pass more currantly: We do
earnestly desire, That in the examination of your consciences, you would
seriously consider, whether you have not both transgressed the rules of Charity
in passing such hard censures upon us; and also usurped that, which belongs not
to you, in making your selves judges of what falls not under your cognizance:
The things you mention belonging only to be tried by your and our Master, to
whom we must all stand or fall. But we are heartily sorry, that Presbytery
(which stands in no need of any painting or cover to make it look more
handsomely and pass more currantly) should be accounted by you the anguis in
herba, whereof you had need to beware, it having never given that offense to
any, as to merit such language.

SECT. VI.
BUt now you frame an objection out of our Paper, and return your Answer,
professing, That you pray for the establishment of such Church Government
throughout his Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God, and
universal practice of primitive Churches, etc. In that you do here join the
will of God, and the universal practice of primitive Churches together, as you
joined the Word of God, and the constant practice of the Catholic Church
before; you seem to us, to make up the rule (whereby we must judge what
Government it is, that you pray might be established) of these two, viz. the
will of God and the universal practice of primitive Churches: Or that it is the
universal practice of primitive Churches, that must be our sure guide and
comment upon the Word of God, to tell us, what is his will revealed there
touching Church Government and discipline. If this be your sense (as we
apprehend it is) we must needs profess, that herein we greatly differ from
you, as not conceiving it to be sound and orthodox. It being the Word of God
alone, and the approved practice of the Church recorded there (whether it was
the universal and constant practice of the Church or no) that is to be the
only rule to judge by in this, or any other controversies in matters of
Religion. But yet admitting for the present the rule you seem to make, we
should desire to know from you, what that Church Government is, which is so
consonant to the will of God and universal practice of primitive Churches. For
our own parts, we think it will be very hard for you, or any others, to
demonstrate out of any Records of Antiquity, what was the universal practice of
primitive Churches for the whole space of the first 300. years after Christ,
or the greatest part thereof (excepting so much as is left upon record in the
Scriptures of the new Testament) the Monuments of Antiquity, that concern those
times (for the greatest part of them) being both imperfect, and far from
showing us, what was the universal practice of the Church then (though the
practices of some Churches may be mentioned,) and likewise very questionable.
At least it will not be easy to assure us, that some of those, that go under
the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are neither spurious nor
corrupted. And hereupon it will unavoidably follow, that we shall be left very
doubtful, what Government it is, that is most consonant to the universal and
constant practice of primitive Churches for that time. But as touching the rule
it self, which you seem here to lay down, we cannot close with it. We do much
honor and reverence the Primitive Churches; But yet we believe we owe more
reverence to the Scriptures, then to judge them either imperfect, or not to
have light enough in themselves, for the resolving all doubts touching matters
of faith or practice, except it be first resolved what was either the
concurrent interpretation of the Fathers, or the universal and constant
practice of the Churches of those times. Besides that admitting this for a
rule, that the universal and constant practice of the primitive Churches must
be that, which must assure us what is the will of God revealed in Scripture
concerning the Government which he has appointed in the Church, our faith is
hereupon resolved into a most uncertain ground, and so made fallible and turned
into opinion. For what monuments of Antiquity, besides the Scriptures, can
assure us touching the matters of fact therein contained, that they were such
indeed as they are there reported to be? the Authors of them themselves being
men that were not infallibly guided by the Spirit. But yet supposing we could
be infallibly assured (which yet never can be) what was the universal and
constant practice of the primitive Churches, how shall that be a rule to assure
us, what is most consonant to the will of God? When as we see not, especially
in such matters, as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, but that the
universal practice of the Churches might in some things be dissonant to the
will of God revealed Even as a General Council it self is subject to error.
in Scriptures. And so the universal practice of primitive Churches can be no
certain rule to judge by* what Church Government is most consonant to the will
of God revealed in his Word. We know there are corruptions in the best of men:
There was such hot contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas, as Gal. 2.
caused them to part asunder. Peter so failed in his practice, as that though
before some came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, yet when they were
come he withdrew himself, fearing them of the Circumcision. And hereupon not
only other Jews likewise dissembled with him, but Barnabas also was carried
away with their dissimulation. Whence it is clear, that the examples of the best
men even in those things, wherein they went contrary to the rule of Gods Word,
are of a spreading nature, and the better the Persons, that give the bad
examples, are, the greater the danger of the more universal leavening. Nay we
find, that not only some few Apostolical men had their failings, but even
Apostolical primitive Churches did, in the very face of the Apostles (they
being yet alive) make great defection, both in regard of opinions and
practices. As from the examples of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the
Churches of Asia is manifest. The Apostle also tells us, that even in his time,
the mystery of iniquity began to work: And in after times we know, how the
Doctrine was corrupted: what gross superstition crept into the Church: what
domination was striven for amongst the Pastors and Bishops of the Churches;
till at length Antichrist was got up into his seat, unto which height yet he
came not all at once, but by steps, and degrees. Besides it is of fresh
remembrance, that notwithstanding the reformation happily brought about in our
own Church in regard of Doctrine and worship, after those dismal Marian times,
yet the corruption, in regard of Government, continued such, during the time of
the late Prelacy (which yet was taken away in other reformed Churches) that the
Pastors were deprived of that power of rule, that our Church acknowledges did
belong to them of right; and which did anciently belong to them; however the
exercise thereof did after grow into a long disuse, as has been showed before.
And therefore when we consider on the one hand, that the superiority, which the
Bishop obtained at the first above the Presbyter in the ancient Church (and
which was rather obtained consue^udine Ecclesiae then by Divine right) did at
the length grow to that height, that the Pastors were spoiled of all power of
rule: so we cannot much wonder on the other hand, that the ruling Elder was
quite turned out of doors; For the proof of the being and exercise of whose
office in the purer times, there are notwithstanding produced testimonies of
the ancients, by Divines both at home and abroad, that have written about that
subject, and to which we do therein refer you: As there do remain some
footsteps and shadow of their office in the Churchwardens and Sides-men even
to this day. And so upon the whole, the premises considered, and that we are
commanded not to follow a multitude to do evil (though it were of the best of
men) and that therefore the examples and practices, though it were of whole
Churches, are to be no further a rule for us, then they follow Christ, and as
their examples be approved of in the Word of Christ, notwithstanding the
univerfality and long continuednesse of such practices; Whereas you say, that
you pray for the establishment of such Church Government, as is consonant to
the will of God and universal practice of primitive Churches; we believe you
might cut the matter a great deal shorter, and say, That you are for the
establishing of that Government, that is most consonant to the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures, and that the Word of God alone (and on which only
Faith must be built, and into which at last be resolved, when other records of
Antiquity, that yet are not so ancient, as it is, have been searched into never
so much) shall determine what that is, and so those wearisome and endless
disputes, about what is the universal and constant practice of primitive
Churches (and which if it could be found out in any good measure of probability
for the first 300. years after Christ, could never yet be so far issued, as
to be a sure bottom, whereon our faith may safely rest) may be cut off. It
being a most certain rule, and especially in matters of faith, that the Factum
is not to prescribe against the Jus; The Practice against the Right or what
ought to be done. And it being out of all question the safest course for all,
to bring all doctrines and practices to the sure and infallible Standard and
Touchstone, the Word of God alone. And after you have more seriously weighed
the matter, and remember how you profess, that in the matters you propose in
your P^per, You rest not in the Judgment or determination of any general
Council of the Eastern or Western Churches determining contrary, to what you
are persuaded is so fully warranted by the Word of God, as well as by the
constant practice of the Catholic Church; (although what that was, were more
likely to be resolved by a general Council then by your selves) the proposal of
having the Word of God alone to be the Judge of the Controversy about Church
Government, cannot (we think) in reason be denied by you.

And we with you shall heartily pray, That, that Church Government, which is
most consonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures, might be established
in these Lands. Although we must also profess, that we believe, that that
Government, which is established by Authority, and which we exercise, is, for
the substantials of it, this Government, and which we judge also to be most
consonant to the practice of the primitive Churches in the purest times. And
therefore as there was some entrance made by the late Parliament, in regard of
establishing this Government by ordinances, as the Church Government of these
Nations: And as to the putting those Ordinances in execution, there has been
some beginning in the Province of London, the Province of this County, and in
some other places throughout the Land: So when there shall be the opportunity
offered, we shall not be wanting by petitioning or otherwise to use our best
endeavors, that it may be fully settled throughout these Lands; that so we may
not, as to Government in the Church, any longer continue as a City without
walls, and a Vineyard without an hedge, and so (to the undoing of our posterity)
endanger Religion to be quite lost. And upon which consideration we do
earnestly desire, that all conscientious and moderate spirited men throughout
the Land, though of different principles, whether of the Episcopal or
Congregational way, would bend themselves so far as possibly they can to
accommodate with us in point of practice: In which there was so good a
progress made by the late Assembly, as to those that were for the
Congregational way: And, as we think, also all those that were for the
lawfulness of submission to the Government of the late Prelacy, as it was then
exercised, and that are of the Judgment of the late Primate of Ireland in his
reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government, (mentioned
before) might do, if they would come up toward us so far, as we judge their
principles would allow them, As we do also profess, that however we cannot
consent to part with the Ruling Elder, unless we should betray the truth of
Christ, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. (as we judge) and dare not give any like
consent to admit of a moderate Episcopacy, for fear of encroachments upon the
Pastors right, and whereof late sad experience lessons us to beware, as we
judge also, that the superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter in degree (which
some maintain) is no Apostolical institution, and so have the greater reason in
that respect to caution against it: Yet we do here profess, we should so
far, as will consist with our principles and the peace of our own
consciences, be ready to abate or tolerate much for peace sake. That so at the
length all parties throughout the Land, that have any soundness in them in
matters of faith, and that are sober and godly, though of different judgments
in lesser matters, being weary of their divisions, might fall in the necks one
of another with mutual embraces and kisses, and so at last (through the tender
mercy of our God) there might be an happy closure of breaches, and restoring of
peace and union in this poor, unsettled, rent, and distracted Church, to the
glory of God throughout all the Churches.

SECT. VII.
BUt now as to you, and what follows in your Paper, (and in the mean season,
till this can be accomplished, and for which we shall heartily pray) we cannot
but judge, that such as are within our bounds, and live as lawless persons
contemning the commands of God, and so out of their rank and order, (and of
which sort you deny not, but that there may be some among us, however they be
subject to Law, and the punishment of the Civil Sword, as needs they must be)
yet* being such as are justly censurable; according to the rules of our
Government, we do not think they are thereby exempted from being reached by
that Ecclesiastical Sword, as you phrase it, which both God and the Civil
Authority has entrusted us with.

And as we are far from contemning the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, and
shall therefore (out of due respect unto it, and that the lawless might be
curbed) be ready, not only our selves, as we have a call; but also warn
others, as there may be occasion, to make complaint to the Civil Power, that so
such offenders, may be punished by corporal and pecuniary mulcts, to the
suppression of wickedness and licentiousness, and the Reformation of men's
lives and manners; Yet we do not apprehend why this should hinder us from
warning the Members of our several Congregations to make complaint to the
Eldership of those, that walk disorderly and will not be reclaimed, to the end
they may be further dealt with, as the nature of their offense may deserve. We
being fully assured from the word of truth, That Excommunication is Gods
ordinance, appointed for the reformation of the scandalous, and as you your
selves acknowledged in the beginning of your Paper: and being a spiritual
punishment for the nature and kind of it, through the blessing of God, may be
more available for the destruction of the flesh, and the thorough humiliation
of the offender, then any corporal or pecuniary mulct (that reaches but the
outward man) can be; And as it was blessed with great success for this end for
many years together, whilst the Church was destitute of Christian Magistrates:
Although in a Christian State we see not, why we should divide what God has
joined together. We having not yet learned either from the Scriptures or sound
reason, that the conjunction of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Sword is not more
likely, through the same blessing of God, to work a greater reformation in men's
lives, then either of them alone, remembering that old Maxim, Vis unita
fortior. And as touching our selves, and the power we are entrusted to
exercise, we shall commit our endeavors unto his blessing, in the use of his
own appointed means, who is able, and we doubt not but he will, make the same
effectual for the ends for which he has appointed them,

SECT. VIII.
BUt you say, There are other parts of our Paper, that do likewise remain dark,
which you desire to be made plain. Although we conceive not so of them, yet we
shall as willingly go along with you, to give you further answer, as you to
desire the same of us.

And therefore whereas we having said in our Paper, That there are many persons
of all sorts, that will not submit themselves to the present Government of the
Church; Your first Quaere thereupon is, Why Government in singulari? We answer,
because it is the only Government, that at present is established in this
Church by Civil Authority; The Prelatical being put down, and cautioned against
in the humble Advice, in regard of any liberty to be extended to it for the
exercise thereof: And there being no other Government but the Presbyterian
(which is our Government) that is owned (as the Church Government for the whole
Nation) by the Civil Authority. And as it is that, which we judge to be most
agreeable to the will of God, so also we conceive, that whatever is of Christ's
prescribing in any other different Government (whether Episcopal or
Congregational) is to be found here: As we do apprehend the redundancies of
them both, to be taken away in this, and the defects of them both, to be here
supplied. And however there may be differences amongst godly men concerning
Church Government, which it is that Christ in particulari has prescribed in
his Word, yet we judge that the Government which Christ has prescribed in his
Word is but one; As all those must say so too, that not being Erastians do
hold, That one Church Government or other is of divine Right.

But whereas you bring in Calvin saying, Seimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae, etc.

To this we say; The circumstantials of Government, that are but matters of
order only, and which must be suited to the time, or place, or persons, for
whom they are made, and concerning which (if you had quoted the place where
Calvin uses these words) we believe it would appear he speaks; these being
variable, and so but the accidentals of Government, may not be one and the same
in all Churches. But if Christ have prescribed a Government in his word; for
the substantials of it, it must needs be de jure one and the same in every
Church. And that the Presbyterian Government is that in particular, which is
there prescribed, in Calvin's Judgment, is so manifest by his works to the
whole Christian world, that it needs no proof. But if the Government, which
Christ has prescribed, for the substantials of it be only one, then that
alone is good, and all other Governments differing substantially from it must
needs be bad; and this only jure divino, and Christ's own Government, and the
rest not.

And therefore, whereas in the next place you suppose, We may assert, that our
Government, is the Government by way of Eminency, as Christ's own Government,
more immediately, and jure divino. To this and to what you further hereupon do
inquire, we say, we have declared already: That we called it the present
Government, because it is the only Government settled in the Church by the
Civil Power. But whether it be the Government by way of Eminency and jure
divino, that was not the thing referred unto in the phrase we used. And as to
the resolving of your doubts and scruples, we conceive it is not here material
for us to go about the proving of the Jus divinum of it; we having proved, That
it is the Government that is established by the Civil Magisttate, and which
does lay as good a foundation to evidence the lawfulness of your submission to
it, as for the lawfulness of your submission to the former Government, (and
touching which we suppose you were satisfied) your exceptions lying as much
against the High-Commissioners, Chancellors, and Commissaries then, as they can
do now against the office of Ruling Elders, and which is the chief thing we
apprehend is stumbled at in our Government.

But yet if you desire to have satisfaction given you touching that which we
are not ashamed to profess, viz. the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian
Government, we referee you to what is so fully spoken touching this point, by
sundry learned Divines both of our own Church, and the reformed Churches
abroad, that we know not, what can be added more The Assemblies Prop^sitions
about Church Government. The Jus Divinum by London Ministers. The Provincial
Synod of London, their vindication of the Presbyterian Government. Rutherfords
due right of Presbyteries. Aarons Rod, by Gillaspie.
.

And yet we do not say, That there is no present Government in any Church or
Assembly of Saints, but where our Discipline and Government is erected entirely
in all the parts of it, no more then we should deny him to be a man, in whom
there were a defect of some integral parts, or in whom there were some
superfluous members. But as when Antichristianisme so overspead the face of the
Church in those dark times before the Reformation, God preserved a Church
Ministry and Ordinances, though not without the mixture of many corruptions in
doctrine and worship, even amongst the Papists themselves; So there was some of
Christ's Government and Discipline in the worst times, though not entirely, nor
without the mixture of much corruption in that Discipline and Government. And
yet if you consult Antiquity, you will not find, that the Presbyterian
Government has lain hid so long, as that for the space of 1500 years it could
never be found till this present. You have heard what rule did anciently belong
to Presbyters, notwithstanding that through the corruptions, that crept into
the Church in after times, the exercise of that power was long disused. And the
like may be said of Ruling Elders, and as has been showed by others. But it is
what de jure ought to be, and not what de facto is or has been, which is that,
which you and we are chiefly to attend, and concerning which the Scripture must
be the only Judge, as we have said before.

But you say, now subjection to our present Government is required by us; and
then demand, Whether all that observe not our rank and order, and subject not
themselves to our present Government, must be taken for lawless persons? for
so, say you, does this close connection of ours seem to import; viz Many who do
not subject, but live, etc.

But here you do reason fallaciously a been conjunctis ad male divisa: For in
our Paper we spoke of such, as did live in a sinful and total neglect of the
Lords Supper: That were scandalous and offensive in their lives, drunkards,
unclean persons, and that will no^ subject themselves to the present
Government, but live as lawless persons. And therefore the lawless persons we
meant (and as might plainly have been gathered from our words) were such; who
as they subjected not themselves to the present Government of the Church, so
they were also scandalous, and offensive in their lives, we joining these
together, whom you divide. And whether such as will neither submit themselves
to the Laws of God, nor the Government, that is settled in the Church by the
Civil Power, be not lawless persons, we leave it to you to judge.

But yet we do here also mind you, That however we do not judge all those to
be lawless persons, that do out of conscience not come up to the observation
of all those Rules, which are or shall be established by Authority for
regulating the outward worship of God, and Government of the Church (being
otherwise blameless) yet both you and we may well remember, that such as
should have refused to have subjected themselves to the late Prelatical
Government, would have been accounted in those times to have been lawless
persons.

SECT. IX.
BUt you say, When we make it an order that notice shall be taken of all
persons, that forsake the publik Assemblies of the Saints, you would gladly
know, how far we extend this Saintship, this Church, and Assembly of Saints?

To which we answer, as far as the Apostle did, when writing to the Church of
Corinth and the Churches of Galatia he calls them Saints and Churches;
notwithstanding there were some in those Churches that were leavened with
unsound doctrine and grossly erroneous: In Corinth, some that denied the
Resurrection, made rents and schisms and sundry grossly scandalous: In the
Churches of Galatia, such as mixed works with Faith in the point of
Justification, and of which the Apostle Paul would have those Churches to take
notice, even to the censuring of them, they being spots to those Assemblies;
and however Saints by profession, and in regard of outward calling, being in
Covenant with God, and having been baptized, yet answered not their profession
by suitable conversation. And therefore, however there be sundry of the like
stamp in our Assemblies, we do not therefore unchurch them, or make our
Assemblies not the Assemblies of the Saints, because of the corruption of such
members.

And seeing our principles and practices are manifestly known to be utterly
against the opinions and practices of the Donatists of old, and those that have
of late rent themselves from our Churches, because of the scandalousnesse of
the corrupt members, that are found in them, (though the sin of these in our
Churches is aggravated by giving that occasion) you might well have spared your
pains in transcribing out of Augustine, what he justly said unto those
schismatics, that he had to deal with. Nay, you might rather have gathered
from our Paper; That seeing we said, that notice should be taken of all those
that should forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints, our purpose was to
have censured such as the Donatists were; That we purposed to observe and
censure those that did maintain and hold up private meetings in opposition to
the public; That cry down our Churches and public Assemblies, Ministry and
Ordinances, (as you know several forts do) and who, as they hold sundry gross
errors, that subvert the faith, so in regard of those and other their
practices, that in their own nature do manifestly subvert the order, unity,
and peace, that Christ has established in his Church, do justly fall under
Church censure, according to the rules of our Government above mentioned. And
that therefore we were not altogether silent concerning either the sin or
punishment of such, as did err grossly in doctrinals or in discipline, so as to
make such dangerous rents from the Church, as the forenamed Sectaries do:
Contrary to what you say of us in your Paper. And further, by such as forsake
the public Assemblies of the Saints, of whom we said notice should be taken,
you might have gathered our meaning was, that such (of which sort there are but
too many amongst us) who out of a principle of carelessness, sloth, worldliness
or manifest profaneness, do on the Lords day either idle out the time, or else
are worse employed, when they should resort to the public Assemblies (and who,
as they are no friends to any private meetings for the good of their souls, in
the use of any private means of conference or prayer for that end; So they do
also Atheistically turn their backs on all the public Ordinances, forsaking
them and the Assemblies, where these are dispensed) should be taken notice of
in order to censure, if there was not reformation; and to neither of which sort
of persons any indulgence is granted by any Laws of the Land, that we know of.
And if you had gathered thus much from our Paper, as your mistake had been far
the less, so your Charity had been the more, then to have reckoned us in the
number of such Person, as the Donatists were. And yet we did not mean, That we
intended to take notice in order unto censure of such, who being sound in the
faith, and godly in life (though differing from us in point of Discipline and
Government) had their distinct Assemblies from ours, they endeavoring to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: They not being censurable by the
rules of our Government, as is manifest, by what we have declared before.
Although we remember, how all that submitted not to the former Government, were
counted schismatical. Neither did we reckon these in the number of the lawless
Persons, we speak of, who subjected not themselves to our Government, and whom
we account to be parts of the universal visible Church militant here on earth,
however they have also their public Assemblies distinct from ours, though
sundry of them, as there is occasion, resort to ours also. But how we should
hereupon make either these or the lawless Persons, that we speak of, members of
the invisible Triumphant Church (all which we have reckoned to belong to the
visible) they must have eyes quicker then Eagles, that can discern how this
follows, and therefore there is no fear our Charity should so far overreach, as
you supposed it might.

But still you are unsatisfied; For you know not, it seems, what we mean by the
word (Public) the public Assemblies of the Saints. By our professions and
practices in our owning the Public Assemblies, where the public Ordinances
of the word Sacraments, and Prayer are dispensed, which we our selves do
constantly frequent and stir up others to frequent also, it was plain enough,
what we meant by public Assemblies. And we are heartily sorry, that you
understanding our meaning, as is clear by what you say anon, should by this but
make your way to give a lash at our private meetings, which are none of them
such, as we need to be ashamed of. And which, when we meet, either for
conference about matters of Religion, or to pray together, and humble our
selves for our own sins and the sins of these times; when there is not the
opportunity of a public Assemby; or when personal or Family occasions call
for a private, is surely as commendable, at the least, as a private meeting
upon domestical, civil, or political occasions: and therefore not to be
secretly girded at: As on the other hand, we do not meddle with the censuring
of those who being godly and sound in the faith, in the main points of
Relegion, do yet differ from us in judgment, in matters of Discipline and
Government and have their Assemblies for Gods public worship distinct from
ours, as we are barred from it by the rules of our Government, as we have often
said before. And therefore we leave room enough for Consciences that are truly
tender. Though we cannot say so much for the Prelatical Government

Neither do we transgress any Laws of the Land, which have made no provision to
except any persons, that we meddle with, and are made censurable by the rules
laid down in the from of Church Government: nor have we under Color of
Authority made any Laws and Edicts; but according to that power, that the civil
Authority has committed to us, have only openly given notice in our several
Congregations, of what offenses are censurable by the rules of our Government,
that the offenders might take heed, they incur not that censure of
Excommunication which Authority has awarranted us to inflict upon the
obstinate and otherwise incorrigible. And therefore (except to execute what we
are appointed to do by the civil power be to contemn it) we cannot be thought
to have done any thing in contempt of the civil power, as it is not our
ignorance of the Laws in force (that, we are confident, being grounded in
reason, fight not one aganst another, and which is your more charitable and
favorable construction) that has led us into any practices, that are
transgressions of them. And therefore though you much question (upon what
account soever it be that we have been led into what we have acted) and think
it concerns us to look to it, whether we have not run our selves into a
praemunire: Yet we are assured, we are as sufficiently secured against that
danger, as all the Justices in the Land are, that have acted upon other
Ordinances of Parliament, which they have judged to be in force, as we do also
those to be, that have been the ground of our proceedings.

SECT. X.
BUt you have yet further to except, for whereas we said, That like notice
should be taken of all scandalous Persons. Your next Quaere is, Whether those,
that forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints in the second order; may not
be taken for scandalous Persons cemprehended in the third order;

Here we perceive you understood, who were meant by those, that did forsake the
public Assemblies of the Saints, viz. Those who forsaking the Assemblies,
where the public Ordinances were dispensed, were upon that account really and
indeed scandalous, and so being comprehended under the latitude of that
expression, might justly merit to be censured as scandalous Persons. And thus
conceiving* you were not mistaken; but yet we (who were to express our selves
popularly, and so as we might be understood) considering some of that stamp,
though they forsook the public Assemblies of the Saints, and coustantly
turned their backs, as on the Lords Supper, so on all other Ordinances, yet if
not drunkards and swearers, whoremasters, etc. did not take themselves to be
scandalous Persons; Do not think, that in this we are any more to be blamed by
you (we using variety of expressions only for this end, that we might be
better understood then we blame Lawyers and Attorneys, (and wherein we judge
them not tolbe blame worthy) for using variety of expressions and Multiplicity
of Synonymous Words to make the matter more clear and out of doubt, where yet
one and the same thing is understood by all.

But now hereupon your complaint is; That we burden you with Traditions in
multiplying of orders fine necessitate ad Arthritim usque; and you cry out,
Quare oneramini ritibus; And tell us of lengthning out our Paper; which yet is
not by these few words here used made very much longer.

But if you had remembered the multitude of Canons and burdensome Ceremonies,
that were rigorously pressed, even to the highest censure in Case of refusal
and under the burden whereof sundry truly conscientious Persons under the late
Prelacy did sigh and groan: When those, that were scandalous enough in their
lives, escaped censure (and which some have cause not so soon to forget) we
think you would have seen little reason to have complained of our burthening
you with traditions, in multiplying orders unnecessarily.

SECT. XI.
ANd now we come to your last charg, which as it is very high, so we judge it
has in it as little reason for the bearing it up.

You say; After the second and third Orders against those, that forsake the
public Assemblies of the Saints and such as are scandalous, comes in a fourth
touching the Catechumeni in the first Order mentioned, viz That the Minister,
when he Catechizeth the several Families, etc.

But here in the first place we observe, you omit to mention the first part of
this Order, and unto which, that which follows in the two next Orders, does
refer. And in the next place you descant upon this latter branch of it only.
For you say, But what if they will not present themselves before the Eldership;
The Minister must exhort and admonish them.

But that is wholly of your own adding. Yet you go on and say, But what if they
still refuse; their names shall be published openly in the several
Congregations, and they warned before all to reform. So you affirm that we say,
though you prove it not, as we shall show you anon. But here you call for
attention and say. Mark; Men of blameless life and knowledge must be warned
before all to reform. If we either had practiced any such thing, or any such
construction, either from the rules of Grammar or Logic, or common reason,
could have been put upon the words, we used in our Paper, you might have called
for this attention, that so such a Government as this, and the Persons
mannaging it, might have been cast out both together, and no where tolerated in
the Christian World. Although we have not forgotten the time, when under the
late Prelacy, many godly and orthodox Ministers, and sundry knowing and
conscientions Christians, were far worse used, then to have only their names
published in the Congregations, and they warned to conform to the orders then
appointed in the Church. The Ministers being suspended from their Ministry, to
the unspeakable loss of their congregations, and the undoing of themselves and
their Families. And they also oftentimes as well as private Christians (that
were none of the worst members of the Congregations) cast out as unsavory
salt: And the great Excommunication, which casts out of the Church, and
Judges them no better then Heathens and Publicans, notwithstanding all their
piety and knowledge (to use your own expressions and we may add,
notwithstanding the very great use-fullness of sundry of such for the Church of
God) was inflicted on them, and all because they could not in all points
comform themselves to the Government and orders then on foot, and which all
Godly, moderate, conformable men then thought might have been well spared, and
the Church in those times as well governed and ordered, without them, as by the
retaining of them If you had had to deal with those Persons, you might well
have called for that attention, which here you do.

But yet you go on further still and say. But what if after all this they will
not reform, but continue obstinate; Then, say you, no admission to the
Sacrament, for that, you say, is employed in the fourth order; and that here is
our Excommunicatio minor. But yet you drive on your charge higher still; for
you add. But that is not all, an higher censure yet, They shall be cast out
and excommunicate. For so, say you, says the sixth and last order, the great
Excommunication, which casts out of the Church also, and judges them no
better then Heathens and Publicans, notwithstanding all their piety and
knowledge. And when you have driven up your charge to the height, you conclude
and tell us, what the upshot of our resolves comes to, which is this, as you
say, viz. In brief all wilfully ignorant (though we speak not one tittle of
their censure at all) and scandalous are to be Excommunicate, and not only
they, but the knowing and blameless of life also, if they persent not
themselves to the Eldership.

But here we see, partly prejudice against the Eldership, and Persons
presenting themselves before it, in order to their Admission to the Sacrament;
and partly your unacquaintedness with the Rules of the Presbyterian Government,
has imposed upon you, thus far, as to force upon us, such a construction of
our words, as never came into our own thoughts. It was an exhortation only,
that was appointed to be given to the Persons Catechized to present themselves
to the Eldership, and no more. Not so much as an Admonition in order to any
further censure in case not hearkened unto. And here we observe that this is
one main ground of your mistake, that you do not distinguish betwixt an
Admonition that is in order to a further censure, if it prevail not (and which
was mentioned in the first part of the fourth Order, and which you wholly omit)
and an exhortation; but confound these together, taking them for one and the
same, and which is here a radical and grand mistake. For doubtless in a
thousand cases, that might be instanced in, there may be place for an
exhortation, when though ineffectual, there is no place, for an Admonition,
that is in order to a further Church censure in case of obstinacy, as it is
taken by us here. Men may be exhorted to examine and prove themselves, whether
they be in the faith: to self examination before they come to the Lords Table:
to grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to
keep their hearts with all diligence, and to infinite more things of the like
nature, and which are duties, they should apply themselves unto; When yet there
is no room for an admonition, in oder to any Church censure, in case it be not
obeyed. Nay, when men may perceive, there is not that care that should be in
Persons, in regard of some of their Words and carriages, there may be place for
an exhortation, and yet for no Admonition in order to any Church censure, in
case the exhortation be not hearkened unto: if there be not any further
scandalous out breakings of corruption, that may justly merit it. Church
censures are not to pass upon men for every fault; nor against such as be
guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are commonly found in the Children of God.
As in that case by the rules of our Government it is provided against. And yet
an exhortation to watchfullness and vigilance in such cases is not useless. And
so it may well be appointed by us, that the Minister should exhort such, as are
found by him to be Persons of knowledge, and are in conversation blameless, to
present themselves to the Eldership, that so they might be regularly and
orderly admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (an Ordinance that is not
to be slighted, as it is by many, but upon too slight grounds, as they will
be found to be, when they come to be tried in the day of account) and yet no
proceedings by Church censures against such Persons, in case such an
exhortation prevail not. And, but that we see you are possessed with too much
perjudice against the Eldership, we should much have wondered; that you, (who in
the beginning of your Paper tell us, you had seriously weighed ours) should
here in the close have run into such a great mistake, as not to have
distinguished betwixt the Persons, that were to be admonished in order to
further censure, if they hearkened not thereunto, and the Persons that were to
be exhorted only. If that, which led you into this mistake, was the
consideration, that they were both joined together in the same order, and
therefore were both to be dealt with after the same manner, your argument was
very weak, there being nothing more frequent in Scripture and all other
Authors, then to couple together in one and the same verse and sentence things
of a different nature. But if that had been your ground of doubting, yet if you
had attended to what presently followed, there had been no place for stumbling
in so plain a matter. For that which follows is so limited, that it could not
with any color be applied to those, that being exhorted by the Minister to
present themselves to the Eldership, should still refuse. For it speaks
expressly of such, that should neither hearken to pritate Admonition nor the
Admonition of the Eldership, that their names should be published openly in the
Congregation, and therefore of those only, who had been appointed to be
admonished according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18. in the fourth Order.

Now the Persons, that were to be admonished according to the rule of Christ,
Mat. 18. and spoken of in the fourth Order, were only such, as had been
mentioned immediately before, viz. Such as should forsake the public
Assemblies, and such as were scandalous Persons. But yet to make the matter
still more plain, let it be considered, that it could not with any show of
reason be construed to be our meaning; that such Persons, who were found to be
of competent knowledge and blameless in life, if not harkening to the Minister
exhorting them to present themselves before the Eldership, were to have their
names published; and if still refusing, then to be excommunicated. For the
Persons, that were to be thus dealt with, were to be admonished by the
Eldershid, and reject that admonition, before there were to be those further
proceedings. But how could such Persons, that being exhorted by the Minister to
present themselves to the Eldership and refused to come before them, be
admonished by them?

But if you say, the Persons, that the Minister is to exhort to present
themselves before the Eldership, are mentioned immediately before this order
made touching the publishing of men's names, and therefore must needs be
included in this order, and the relative (they) be referred to these, as well
as to the other. This Argument also is very weak. For those amongst you, that
are Scholars, do well know; That the Relative is often referred to the remoter
Antecedent, and must be so of necessity, when the subject matter spoken of does
necessarily require it, as in this case, it is clear it does. For the Relative
(They) in the fifth order is limited to such, as should neither hearken to
private Admonition, nor to the Admonition of the Eldership, and these were
only the scandalous and the forsakers of poblique Assemblies, that were to be
admonished according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18. and which was that, which was
appointed by the former branch of the fourth order.

But you will parhaps say, if this was our meaning, why is the Ministers
exhorting of knowing and blameless Persons to present themselves before the
Eldership, mentioned in the same order with those, that are to be admonished in
order to further censure, in case the Admonition be not hearkened to, if the
same rule be not to be held with them, as with the others in case of refusal?
To which we say; The Admonition spoken of in the fourth order (is said
expressly) should be according to the rule of Christ, Mat. 18. Now that
mentions not only an Admonition to be given by the Church, when the case is
brought thither, but also an Admonition once or twice by private Persons. And
therefore, as when the fittest opportunity is offered to private Persons to
perform this duty of Admonition toward an offending Brother, they are to lay
hold upon it and not let it slip; so we judged it a fit opportunity offered to
the Minister, when he Catechizeth the Families, to exhort such amongst them,
whom he found to be of competent knowledge, and were blamless in life, to
present themselves before the Eldership in order to their Admission to the
Sacrament. And the rather, because having the opportunity of conference with
them at this time, if they had any doubts about this matter, or he saw that it
was prejudice only in them against the Elders, that hindered them (and as it
is in most) he might endeavor to remove them. And this might have been easily
conceived was the reason thereof by any, that had but seriously weighed, what
we had expressed in our Paper, if there had been that candor, that we could
have desired. And therefore we cannot imagine, what there should be in our
Paper, that should give the least just occasion for such a strange sense as you
would herein put upon us. And we hope all indifferent and unprejudiced Persons
will say, we have given as little occasion by our Carriages, as there is given
by our words. We have studied all ways of condescension for the gaining of
all: That neither the weak might be discoraged, nor any that can with any
color pretend to tenderness of Conscience in the matter of presenting
themselves before the Eldership have any bar put in the way of their
Communicating with us at the Lords Table, in regard of that order, that is
observed for their Admission. But we find, that the Eldership is that great
stumbling block with many. And we are sorry, that we have reason to complain,
that; Let, us do what can, yet some will be satisfied with nothing, but pulling
down the hedge, and laying all common. But we dare not thus far seek to please
men, though we desire to please our neighbor for his good to edification.

We have thus far removed all imaginable grounds in our apprehensions for this
your groundless charge; That our purpose was to excommunicate all knowing and
blameless Persons, if they presented not themselves before the Eldership. We
shall now proceed to examine what you produce for the supporting of your selves
in it. And that, which we find in the first place, is (besides your omitting
to take any notice of the first branch of this fourth order) something in your
comment upon our words, which was not in our Text. For you say; What, if after
the Minister has exhorted them, they shall not present themselves before the
Eldership; The Minister, say you must exhort and admonish them. But this, as we
have told you, is wholly your own, and none of ours. For first, though we do
not deny, But that if upon the first exhortation they do not present themselves
to the Eldership (it being in order to their regular and orderly Admission to
the Lords Supper) the Minister may exhort, and exhort them again, because they
continue in the neglect of that, which is their duty, yet there was no such
thing said by us But then to make the ground of your charge something more
colorable, you added another word; which was not at all used by us. We said
the Minister was to exhort, and that was all. But you add and say, He shall
exhort and admonish. But we have told you before, to exhort and admonish are
different things. And we leave it to indifferent Judges to consider, whether
this be a candid and fair wa^ of arguing even in the Schools; much less should
it have been made use of, when it is brought in to bear up the weight of so
heavy a charge, as you here put up against us. And this is the main foundation,
whereupon all the rest is built. But your ground work being so unsure, what you
built thereon must needs fall. Yet you go on to make it good, as far as you
can, and therefore do further add and say. But what, if they still refuse?
Their names, say you, shall be published, etc. But what is your proof for this?
That Is, say you, the fifth Order. But here you quite mistake your mark, and
therefore when you have considered it, your selves will not wonder, you should
shoot so wide. For the fifth Order speaks only of Persons, that have been
privately admonished, and also admonished by the Eldership; Of which the former
branch of the fourth order speaks. And what sort of Persons that refers to, is
manifest from our Paper, and has been by us showed before, that it cannot by
any good Rules of construction be referred to the Persons, that the Minister is
to exhort, and which is the latter branch of the fourth Order. And this link of
your chain being thus broken, the rest of it, which follows, must needs of it
self fall in sunder. So that we need to add no more.

And so we have done with the examination of what you have presented to us in
your Paper.

But we do not find, that you have discovered to us any thing in ours, that is
not sound and orthodox; and for which therefore there is any just reason, why
any thing in it should lie sadly on your spirits and consciences. But do hope,
after you have seriously weighed, what is here presented, you may receive so
much satisfaction, as to see you have no just cause to forbear joining with us
upon any grounds you have here made known. We have been willing to put our
selves upon some pains in this our large Answer; And if it attain the desired
end, we shall not account it ill bestowed. If yet you should rest unsatisfied,
we desire you to let us know, what it is you stumble at; And though in regard
of sundry other employments, that lie upon us, it cannot be expected, that we,
who meet but once a month in ordinary, and about other matters, should hold on
a course of Answering you still by writing. Yet we shall be ready to appoint,
some other way (that may be far more speedy, and (we trust) as effectual) to
give you that further satisfaction, that is meet and just. And now we shall
entreat, that as our only aim in this Anser has not been victory, but the
clearing up of the Truth; the satisfying your scruples, and giving you a right
understanding, in what you were mistaken, and the vindication of the Government
and our selves, and hereby the settling of Peace and Unity in our Congregations,
to the glory of God and edification of the Church: So you would show forth that
Candor, as not to put any other construction upon what is here offered to you;
And as you subscribe your selves our brethren desirous of Truth, Unity and
Peace in the Church; So we shall heartily beg of the God of Truth and Peace,
that both you and we, may all of us, in all our transactions, make it to
appear, that we are cordial and real in our professions of such desires; and
that he would bless these and all other our sincere endeavors, that they may be
effectual for the attaining those ends.

Subscribed in the Name, and by the appointment of the Class, by John Angier,
Moderator.

THE GENTLEMEN'S Second Paper.
To the first Classis at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster, These.
Dear Friends, (nay more) Brethren, dearly beloved to us in the Lord;
WE return you hearty thanks, for your Answer, Cl. Cop. Full of civility toward
us, though not of brevity.
wherein, we find your much Civility toward us, but with too much prolixity.
We deny not but there may be some errors, and mistakes and some sharp
reflections upon you and your Government, in our Paper, which you charge upon
us: In yours also (and that not improbably in one of that bulk) might be
discovered so me Impertinencies, errors, and mistakes, which we forbear to
mind you of, but silently pass over, hoping all will be buried, or covered in
that true love and Charity of Brethren of one and the same Church and
fellowship; In that true love (we say) which covers a multitude of faults

We shall make no further Replication to the several particulars in your Paper,
at this time, but only to one Branch, wherein you refer us to Dr. Bernard. In
the close of whose Book, we meet with Cl. Cop. another.
one entitled, The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical
Government received in the Ancient Church, By the most Reverend and Learned
Father of our Church Dr. James Usher late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of
all Ireland proposed in the year 1641. as an expedient for the prevention of
those troubles, which afterward did arise, about the matter of Church
Government, which you say is the same in substance with yours.

Your words are these, But if the Antiquity of such Assemblies be that you
Question, Then we refer you to what Dr. Bernard in the Book of his above quoted
shows, was the judgment of Dr. Usher (who is acknowledged by all that knew
him, or are acquainted with his works to have been a great Antiquary (however
we allege him not, that you should build your faith on his Testimony) And
which we think, may be sufficient to vindicate Provincial Assemblies in your
thoughts from the Suspicion of Novelty; In that Book you have in the close of
it, proposals touching the Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical
Government received in the Ancient Church. And it thus begins, By the order of
the Church of England, etc. And so you go on quoting several Testimonies of
Fathers, and Councils there alleged, In which you further proceed, and say;
There are Proposals of Assemblies of Pastors within certain limited bounds
which saving that they are somewhat larger then ours, which is but a
circumstantial difference do hold proportion with the Classical, Provincial,
and National Assemblies mentioned in the form of our Church Government, As also
the times propounded there for their meetings the power of these Assemblies,
etc. and are the same in substance as with us. And all these were propounded as
the way of Government in the Ancient Church, and as an Expedient, etc. as
abovesad. And therefore (for so you conclude) in the Judgment of this learned,
and Reverend Antiquary, our Provincial Assembly at Preston (where the Pastors
of the Church are members, as he acknowledges of right they ought to be in
such Assemblies) would not have been accounted a new Termed Provincial Assembly.

Touching all which we shall close and join issue with you: we willingly submit
our selves to that order, and rule therein Expressed which being that which was
received in the Ancient Church, In the Judgment of that Reverend, and learned
Antiquary Dr. Usher (who was so acknowledged by all that knew him, or are
acquainted with his works) And also the Assemblies there expressed, holding
proportion with yours, set down in the form of your Church Government, and
being the same with yours in substance, and being proposed as an Expedient for
prevention of further troubles, etc. We fully expect you should also submit
your selves unto, for Peace and Unities sake, and so we close and meet together
as in the middle; And this the rather in regard of those full and free
expressions of yours to that purpose; saying, We reverence Dr. Bernard for his
moderation and profession of his desires for peace, wishing, That such as do
consent in Substantials, for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some
Conjunction in point of Discipline; That private Interests and Circumstantials
might not keep themselves so far asunder. In which wish, as we do cordially
join our selves, so we heartily desire that all godly and moderate spirited men
throughout the Land, would also close. And in another place you say, However we
dare not admit of a moderate Episcopacy for fear of encroachings upon the
Pastors right, etc. Yet we do here profess we should so far, as will consist
with our principles, and the peace of our own Consciences, be ready to abate or
tolerate much for peace sake; That so at the length, all parties throughout the
Land, that have any soundness in them, in matters of faith, and that are sober
and godly, though of different judgments in lesser matters, being weary of
their divisions, might fall into the necks of one another, with mutual embraces
and kisses, and so at last through the tender mercy of our God, there might be
an happy closure of breaches, and restoring of peace and union in this poor,
unsettled, rent, and distracted Church, to the glory of God throughout all
Churches.

Now who are they that disturb this our happy closure and conjunction? We wish
not (with the Apostle) that they were cut off, but that they were taken away
that trouble us, for only they let that will let until they be taken out of
the way, and Cl. Cop. taken away.
those are the Ruling Elders, as you call them; We suppofe you mean those whom
you have chosen out of the Laity, and admitted are those.
(without further entering into holy Orders) into the whole execise of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in equal right with the Ministers of the Gospel,
(in which respect your Assemblies, and any Minister.
so your Provincial at Preston would be accounted in the judgment of Dr. Usher
a new termed Provincial assembly, and stand yet uncleared of suspicion of
novelty) whom you say, You cannot consent to part with, unless you should
betray the Truth of Christ, (as you judge) quoting Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy
5. and for further Testimony refer us to some Modern Authors, all of yesterday.

Now whereas you say you cannot part with them unless you betray the Truth of
Christ (as you judge.) By this Parenthesis, we gather, that you are not so
wedded to that opinion but you can, and will submit to better reason, when
offered to you; And we do again profess to you, that we will not wilfully, and
pertinaciously, hold a contrary Tenent. And in this confidence we proceed to
show to you, that Lay Elders are not meant nor mentioned in those Texts by you
alleged; Briefly thus, but more largely hereafter, if what is comprehended in
this paper be not judged satisfactory.

Run over all the Expositers of holy writ, whether the Fathers in general, or
more particular Councils (And Calvin says there can be no better, nor surer
remedy for deciding ofcontroversies, no better sense, nor Interpretation of
Scripture, then what is given by them in such Councils) or whether the Fathers
apart. And first for that Text, Romans 12. here what Dr. Andrews says, Cl. Cop.
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 9. sect. 8. etc 15.
and at your leisure examine the Fathers; There is no Epistle (says he) on
which so many of the Fathers have writ. Six only I will name, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, Jerome, Oecumenius: All which have treated of
it; Let their Commentaries be looked on, upon that place, not one of them
applies it to the Church Government, which by all likelihood could not be
imagined but they would, if that had been the main place for it, nor find
those Offices in those words which they in good earnest tell us of, etc. As
much may be said for the other two Texts; Not Dr. And. Sermon. upon worshipping
imaginations.
one Father in their Comments upon them gives such a sense. Find one
Exposition for you and (which is much) we will yield you all.

Many there are that apply them to the Bishops. And so one for those many of
our Modern Doctors we could give you (to answer those modern you quote in
behalf of your Elders) of our English Church, Dr. Fulk by name we instance in,
applying these Texts to the Bishops only, whom we quote in regard of the
moderate judgment he was supposed to be of, in point of Church Government, and
therefore more likely to sway with you than any other we could produce; His
words are these: Amongst the Clergy, for Order, and Government, there was
always one principal, to whom by long use of the Church, the name of Bishop or
Super-intendent has been applied, which in Scripture is called (...), quoting
these Texts, Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and Heb. 13. 17.

And therefore it can be no betraying of the Truth of Christ, if you will
seriously weigh it in the balance of impartial and unprejudicate reason, to
part with them, and to take in the other, but a strengthening, and a backing of
it. Wherefore in the name of God, and in the tender bowels of Christ, we beg
again and again, beseeching you not to stand upon circumstantials or private
interests, But to apply your selves to this happy conjuncture and reconcilement
of so many poor Christian Souls, in truth, love, and peace, in this our English
Church, in these our days; The blessing that may redound to all parties thus
reconciled is unconceiveable; The lives and manners of dissolute persons (and
how many there are amongst our selves, of that sort, we are but too too
conscious) may by this loving accord, with brotherly admonition and exhortation
be reclaimed, or by due censures corrected and amended. Amongst your selves
also, many (who returned to their Canonical obedience which they have sworn to)
may blot out that charge of Schism that lies upon them: The Church of God
continued amongst us from age to age to the end of the world in a Succession of
a lawfully ordained Ministry; The word of God (that Candlestick) fixed firmly
amongst us, which otherwise is on tiptoes, ready to remove westward; as our
reverend Pastor, in this Church very lately did seem to presage: And we shall
happily be freed from the trouble of any further Rejoinder, unto your answer,
which otherwise we must do amongst other considerable reasons to take off your
Government, from that establishment of authority upon the proof whereof the
most considerable part (as to the bulk) of your answer, does insist.

Subscribed by us whose names are underwritten by the consent and on the behalf
of many others. Isaac Allen. Ferdinando Stanely. Nicholas Moseley. Francis
Moseley. Tho. Symond. John Ogden.

Manchester 9. March, 1657.
The Animadvertisement to the Reader annexed by the Gentlemen unto their Second
Paper, and prefixed to their Third in their printed Copy.
THe Reader must take notice, that upon the Ministers Answer to our first
Paper, we replied only in a second single sheet, conceiving some hopes of an
amicable and friendly agreement of these differences by submitting our selves
to the Judgment of that Learned Bishop, Dr. Usher, whom they seemed to quote
for a Patron and President of their Government, if not in all circumstantials,
yet in the substance and foundation of it; but upon our overtures for a
friendly treaty in order to such a Composure, they give us some verbal
exceptions against the last passage of our Reply, and put us upon that work to
invalid their civil Sanction; this is the occasion of a Reply, and a Rejoinder
also on our parts, without any further return from them but only in words.

THE ANSWER OF The First Classis Within the Province of Lancaster, UNTO THE
GENTLEMEN'S Second Paper.
WE do not question, but it is sufficiently manifest from our Narrative, unto
the impartial Reader, that you dealt not fairly with us, either in Printing our
Papers, or your own. For, to say nothing touching this, that what passed
betwixt you and us, was private, and should not have been made public to the
world, but by mutual agreement on both sides, you might have remembered, that in
the close of that answer, we gave unto your first Paper, we told you, If
notwithstanding tha^ answer given, you should yet rest unsatisfied, we desired
you to let us know, what it was you stumbled at, and that though in regard of
sundry other employments, that did lie upon us, it could not be expected, that
we, who met but once a month in ordinary, and about other matters, should hold
on a course of answering you still by writing; yet we said, We should be ready
to appoint some other way, that might be far more sp^edy, and (as we trusted)
as effectual to give you that further satisfaction, that might be meet and
just; and you know our proceedings afterward were accordingly, as the Reader
will fully understand from our Narrative. But it seems either the confidence,
you had touching the unanswerablenesse of what you had presented unto us: or
the diffidence you apprehended in us to make out publicly, what we had so far
appeared in: or some itching desire you had to be in Print: or some other
motive, that you your selves are best acquainted with, has induced you to
print both your papers and ours. And seeing you have chosen to run that course,
we must now follow you in your own way. For however we do not question but the
intelligent and judicious Reader, by comparing only what is said on both sides,
will of himself easily perceive, that neither in this, nor your third Paper,
you do tender any thing, that can have any show of satisfactoriness, unto the
answer we gave you yet least the weak should be imposed on, by your bold and
confident assertions, your scoffs and taunts at our answer) as generally weak,
and in some places absurd, and thereby to the prejudice of the truth, and cause
we stand for, be induced to conceive (if we should not return some further
answer) you had put us to silence, and we had nothing father to say: in the
midst of sundry other of our ministerial occasions, we are willing to be at
some further pains, for the satisfaction of such, as also for the vindication
of the truth, the Presbyterian Government, and our selves and actings, from the
many unjust aspersions, that are cast upon us in your papers; hoping also that
the Reader will consider, that if our answer to these your two other papers be
satisfactory, it comes out soon enough from us, who are a society, and many,
and must therefore on that account move the more slowly, though (we hope) not
the less surely, and who besides the inspection over our families and
congregations and our constant and daily pains amongst them, have other matters
also of public and common concernment to the whole Association, to attend on
at our Classical meetings, and which we could not think, were fit to be wholly
laid aside, or interrupted, that so our answer might be hastened to what you
have printed, we having just cause to fear, least, when we have said that,
which will be sufficient to satisfy the unprejudiced Reader, you will not
therein acquiesce. But we now come to your Papers, and shall first answer to
your Second, and then Animadvert on your last.

In the beginning of your second paper, to which we now answer, (though you
here causelessly complain of our prolixity) yet you court us with the sweetest
compellations, calling us, Your dear Friends (nay more) Brethren dearly beloved
to you in the Lord, and further you return us hearty thanks for our answer,
which you acknowledge is full of civility toward you; but in your third and
last paper, you fall on us with scoffs, and jeires, uncharitable censures, foul
aspersions pouring out that too much venom and distemper of spirit, which the
godly and wise Readers will soon be aware of, and which whether they be
agreeable to those sugared words you here give us, we leave it to your selves
in the searching of your consciences to judge of; as we doubt not, but when the
impartial Reader shall compare the civility of our answer, with what he may
find in your first paper, he will readily conclude, we merited no such things
from you as we meet with in your last.

But we do here observe, that you do not deny, but that there might be some
errors, and mistakes, and some sharp reflections upon us, and our government,
in that first paper, and with which we had charged you; And hereupon we have
reason to tell you, that you had evidenced more sincerity in this confession,
if the sense of your former failings, had withheld you from running into the
like and worse again; as had there not been a further discovery of the
distemper of your spirit, we should have been willing to have passed them over,
and covered them in love, upon this confession, according to that hope thereof,
which you do here profess.

And as touching the impertinencies, errors, and mistakes, which (you say) not
improbably might be discovered in ours, and which here you forbear to mind us
of; in your next paper you speak out, what here might be in your thoughts, and
which we shall forbear to return any answer to, until we come thither. But
thus are we brought to the matter of this Paper. And here the Reader will
perceive, that the main thing you do pitch upon in the first place, is what we
had quoted out of Dr. Bernard, showing the judgment of Dr. Usher concerning
the antiquity of the Assemblies he mentions, and particularly of Provincial,
and which the Reader may see more at large, if he be pleased to peruse the
third Section of our answer toward the latter end of it.

Concerning all this you profess, you shall close and join issue with us, and
that you willingly submit your selves to that order, and rule therein
expressed, which being that which was received in the ancient Church, in the
judgment of that reverend and learned Antiquary Dr. Usher (who was so
acknowledged by all that know him or are acquainted with his works) And also
the Assemblies there expressed, holding proportion with ours set down in the
form of our Church Government, and being the same with ours in substance, and
being proposed as an expedient for prevention of further troubles which have
arisen about the matter of Church Government; you do hereupon infer that you
fully expect we should also submit our selves unto for Peace and Unities sake,
and this the rather, in regard of those full and free expressions of ours ^o
that purpose, in the places of our answer, which you do here particularly
recite.

Unto all which we ^ave several and sundry things to say.

(1.) And first we desire, it might here be took notice of, what order and rule
it is, that is propounded by Dr. Usher in his reduction of Episcopacy to the
form of Synodical Government, received in the ancient Church; it is Episcopacy
something moderated and limited, it being there propounded. That in every
Parish the Rector, or incumbent Pastor together with the Churchwardens and
Sidesmen, may every week take notice of such as live scandalously in the
Congregation who are to receive such several admonitions and reproves, as the
quality of their offense shall deserve; and if by this means they cannot be
reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly Synod, and in the mean
time, be debarred by the Pastor from access unto the Lords Table; as is
evident from the first proposal. And he then propounds, that the Suffragans in
the several rural Deaneries supplying the place of those, who in the ancient
Church were called Chorepiscopi might every month assemble a Synod of all the
Rectors, or incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the major
part of their voices, conclude all matters that shall be brought into debate
before them, as is manifest from the second Proposal. And then further it is
proposed that the Diocesan Synod might be held once or twice in the year, as it
should be thought most convenient, and that therein all the Suffragans and the
rest of the Rectors or incumbent Pastors (or a certain select number of every
Deanery) within the Diocese might meet, or with whose consent or the major part
of them, all things might be concluded by the Bishop or Superintendent, etc.
This is the sum of the third Proposal. The like is propounded for the
Provincial and National Synods, saving that here all the Bishops and Suffragans
of every Diocese are to be members in these Assemblies, and only such of the
Clergy as should be elected, and the Archbishops to be the Moderators of these
Assemblies, as is clear from the fourth Proposal.

Now this is that Order and rule, that you do here profess your selves willing
to submit unto. And therefore you would consent; that some Ministers at the
least, might for the present, have some power in the governing of the Church:
but whether you would by these proposals, take your selves obliged, to submit
to be governed, by all the Ministers placed in Chapels, throughout the several
Parishes (that yet for sure are equal to the rest of their fellow Presbyters
in order and jurisdiction) or only to those that are beneficed men (as they
were wont to be called) we do much question; and whether you would consent,
that any other should vote in any of the fore mentioned Assemblies, we do also
doubt; as we have also reason, from what you express in your next paper, to
fear, you would but consent only thus far, because you may perceive, by these
proposals (where the Suffragans, Bishops, and Archbishops are to be constant
Moderators in the Assemblies mentioned, and without whom (as we apprehend) you
will understand them, nothing might pass and be concluded, notwithstanding
what was concluded, should be done by the major part of the incumbent Pastors,
or Rectors present; and when in the Diocesan Synod, all the Suffragans must be
members, and in the Provincial and National, all the Suffragans and Bishops)
fair way is made to raise up Episcopacy again, to the height to which it had
attained of latter times; especially when as you will perhaps further conceive,
from these proposals, that all that were to be admitted into any Benefice, must
come in only by the Suffragans, or Bishops, and these likewise come in
according as they had been wont to be admitted to these places in former times.
And if this be all you would willingly submit unto (as we have some reason to
believe it is) that which you would yield unto for peace sake, is not much.

(2.) But since you lay great stresse upon what we quoted out of Dr. Usher, we
desire the Reader would peruse our answer thoroughly, in which he shall not
find, that we did ^^e him as approving of all that he had propounded (nay we
expressly cautioned against Moderate Episcopacy) much less did we quote him as
Umpire and composer of differences betwixt you and us, or as our own man (as in
your next Paper much forgetting your selves, you do confidently assert) but we
quoted him only to prove the Antiquity of See Sect. 5.
Provincial Assemblies, where the Pastors of the several Congregations (to
whom he allows a decisive Vote) are Members. And we conceived, that if you
should be for Episcopacie in the height of it, he was the fittest Person to be
quoted by us, to moderate you as to that particular. It Is true, we said, That
the Assemblies, that were by him proposed within certain limited bounds, saving
that they were something larger then ours (which we said was but a
circumstantiall difference) did hold proportion with those set down in the form
of Church Government, and were for sustance the same with ours; But here we
understood him, and so do still (else he is at a further distance from us, then
we apprehended) that he would have all the Incumbent Presbyters or Pastors of
the several Congregations, meeting in the several Chapels within the
several Parishes, to have the liberty to be admitted to these Assemblies, as
Members of them, and there to have decisive Votes. This we gather from what he
grants in his first Proposal. Now these Assemblies thus Constituted, we said,
are for substance, that is, in regard of the Essence of them, the same with
ours, where ^all the Pastors of the Churches, have liberty to be admitted into
them; those that are Unbenefic'd Ministers as well as others. It Is true, we,
cautioning against moderate Episcopacie, could not but be understood, that we
judged Suffragans, and Bishops mentioned in those Proposals, as superfluous
Additaments to those Assemblies; and cautioning against the parting with the
Ruling Elder, were to be conceived, that we judged him to have a right to Vote
in those Assemblies, as a Member or integrall part of them. But yet as that
man, that has some superfluous Member, suppose a sixth Finger, or wants an
Hand, or Leg, or some other useful and necessary, or integrall part, or
member, is for the substance, or in regard of his essence, the same man in
kind, with him, in whom there is neither deficiency nor redundancy, in regard
of Members; so it may be said concerning the Assemblies, proposed by Doctor
Usher, though there be both some deficiency in them, in regard of some
integrall parts, and also some redundancy in regard of some superfluous
Additaments, that they are for substance, the same with the Assemblies
propounded in the form of Church Government.

(3) We said also in our Answer, that the Proposalls of the Assemblies above
mentioned, were propounded in the year one thousand six hundred forty one, by
Doctor Usher, as an Expedient for the prevention of those Troubles, which
afterward did arise, about the matter of Church Government; but these things
were mentioned by us.

1. To show the wisdom, and moderation of the Proposer, and how far off he
was, from the temper of sundry in those times, who so they might preserve
Episcopacy, in the height, that it was then grown to, did not matter the
engaging of three Kingdoms in a bloody War, which also they did.

2. That he was sensible of the great exorbitancy of Prelacy in those times,
and did interpose his endeavors to have reduced the Government of the Church,
nearer to the Primitive Pattern, and whereunto it is confessed, his Proposalls
tended.

3. But they were never mentioned by us, to intimate, that these Proposalls,
were to be the measure, of that Reformation, that was to be endeavored after
in these Nations: not only in regard of what we have to say against moderate
Episcopacy (and of which afterward anon) but also because they having not been
hearkened unto, by the late King, nor by that Party, that adhered to him (who
did their utmost to have upheld Episcopacy in its height) it is not equal
(except what is there propounded, could be proved to be necessary, and by
Divine Right) after the effusion of so much blood, for the deliverance of the
People of God in these Nations, from the miserable Yoke of Bondage they then
sighed under, and after the issuing of the War, and the determining of the
Controversy against that Party, that they should be now admitted of, to the
Hazard of our dear-bought Liberty, and the raising up again out of its Grave,
Episcopacy in the height of it, and thereby the inslaving us again, in as great
Servitude, or worse then ever before, and of which hereafter further.

4. But whereas you fully expect, that for Unity and Peace sake, we should
submit our selves to these Proposalls, and that in regard of those full and
free expressions of ours to that purpose; we must here crave leave to declare
our selves a little more fully.

(1) And first we do openly profess, we are the same still in heart, as we were
formerly, in our expressions; neither shall we (we hope) by any provocations
offered us by any Parties, we have had to deal with, or any oppositions, we may
hereafter meet with from them, so far forget that duty, that lies upon us, as
not to endeavor after Peace, to the utmost, yea, to pursue it even then, when
it seems to fly from us. We remember, that that God, in whom we profess to
have an Interest, is the God of Peace: that the Lord Jesus our great Master is
styled the Prince of Peace, his precious blood being shed for to purchase it,
and that thereby the middle Wall of partition being broken down, and the
Enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, being abolished
in his flesh, he might reconcile both Jews and Gentiles, unto God in one body,
as we do profess, we our selves were reconciled thereby unto God, when we were
Enemies.

(...) We further confess, That we are the Ambassadors of the Gospel of Peace,
that we are called unto Peace, that a Blessing is promised unto Peacemakers,
and that in this juncture of Affairs, when the common Enemies to the Protestant
Religion are banding together against us, it concerns all Parties nearly, that
have any true measure of soundness in them, as they tender the safety of
Religion, their own, and these Nations preservation from utter ruin, to
endeavor after Peace, and Union, (which is our strength) and an healing of
Breaches. And if we know our own hearts, Peace is so dear to us, that if
through the tender mercies of our God it might be restored again, unto these
Churches, upon safe and honest terms, we should not count, the purchasing of
it with our dearest blood, to be too dear a rate, to be paid for the obtaining
of it; considering that by the continuance of our Breaches and Divisions, the
Name of God is dishonored, his Doctrine blasphemed, Scandals do grow and are
increased, the Edification of the Church is hindered, the power of Godliness
impaired, occasion of great stumbling is ministered to the weak, and of triumph
unto Enemies, besides the advantage that is hereby put into their hands to undo
us, if they should have the opportunity: although we must acknowledge, it is no
small reviving to our dying hopes, that yet God may so far have mercy on us, as
to prevent, what we have just ground to fear, when we consider how many of our
reverend Brethren in the Ministry in the several Countries throughout the
Land, have united and associated themselves together, and do pithily and
earnestly exhort unto Union, though some of them be of different Principles and
Persuasions, and that there is, so far as we understand, a greater inclination,
in all that are truly Godly throughout the Land, unto Peace and Union, then in
former times, and for which we bless God heartily, as we do earnestly pray,
that the God of Peace would hasten to create that happy and desirable Peace
among us, that is so thirsted after by all good men.

(2.) But yet we cannot dissemble, what we apprehend and is in our thoughts,
that there are some sorts of Persons in this Land, that till God change their
Judgments, and the frame of their Spirits, though we shall, so far as is
possible, and as much as lies in us, live peaceably with them, and with all
others, and shall be ready to requite good for evil; by all Offices and Duties
of love toward them: yet we see little hopes, of any real and hearty Union,
and closure with them.

And here we must profess, that however we were willing for our own exoneration
(if no other end should be thereby attained) to entertain a Treaty with you,
touching an Accommodation (and which was pursued by us with all Cordialness and
Sincerity, being desirous to wait on God in the use of the means for that
purpose, so far as we saw any hope, not knowing what God might work out thereby
(as will appear we doubt not to the Reader, from our Narrative) yet you have
now discovered so much bitterness, and distemper of Spirit, and so much
unsoundness in your Principles and Opinions, together with a resolvedness to
adhere to them, for ought we can discern to the contrary, that till God do open
your Eyes, and change your hearts, giving you a through sense of, and s^u^d
humiliation for, what (to your own shame) you have published to the World in
your Papers, we have not any great hopes of accommodating with you, though we
shall not in the mean season cease to pray for you, and use the best means we
can, to bring you into the right way, from which you have turned aside.

But yet we desire we might not be here mistaken: For as for such as are
moderate, and godly Episcopal men, That hold Ordination by Presbyters, to be
lawful and valid: that a Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same Order of
Ministry (which are not your Tenants, as will appear from both this and your
next Paper) and that are Orthodox in doctrinall Truths; though we may differ
from them in Judgment, in some Points, touching Church Government, yet they are
such as we do heartily desire to accommodate with, and we believe that such
terms might be propounded, that betwixt them and us there might be an happy
Union, as we could heartily wish, that all and every of you, with whom we have
here to deal, were of this stamp. Although here also we must not conceal, that
we have many reasons, why we dare not admit of moderate Episcopacy, as the
terms of accommodation, with those of this sort. And because it is that, which
you press us with, fully expecting we should submit unto what is propounded, by
Doctor Usher, in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodicall
Government received in the ancient Church: (although as we have hinted to you,
we have reason from your own Papers to judge you aim at more then is there
propounded) we shall not here refuse to give you some of our reasons, why we
cannot consent to you in these Proposals, as you know moderate Episcopacy was
that we expressly cautioned against in our Answer to your first Paper.

And (1) First, We shall here mind you, of what is well observed by our
reverend Brethren, of the Province of London, Reasons against moderate
Episcopacy.
in their Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, Part second, in the Appendix Page
117, 118, 119. There they lay down their fifth Proposition in these words. That
when the distinction between a Bishop and Presbyter, first began in the Church
of Christ, it was not grounded upon a Jus divinum, but upon prudentiall
Reasons, and Arguments. And the chief of them was (as Hierome, and diverse after
him say) In remedium Schismatis, and ut dissentionum plantaria evellerentur:
For the remedy of Schism and that the Seeds of Error, might be rooted out of
the Church. This Proposition thus laid down they add.

Now that this prudentiall way (invented no doubt at first upon a good
intention) was not the way of God, appears (as Smectymnus has well shown)
thus.

Because we read in the Apostles days, there were Divisions, Romans 16. 17. and
Schisms, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 11. 18. yet the Apostle was not directed by the
Holy Ghost, to ordain Bishops for the taking away of those Schisms. Neither
in the Rules he prescribes, for healing of those Breaches, does he mention
Bishops for that end. Neither does he mention this, in his directions to
Timothy and Titus, for the Ordination of Bishops or Elders, as one end of their
Ordination, or one peculiar duty of their Office. And though the Apostle says,
Opportet haereses esse, ut qui probati sunt, manifesti fiant inter vas. Yet the
Apostle no where says, Opportet Episcopos esse, ut tollantur haereses, quae
manifestae fiunt: There must be Bishops that those Heresies, which are amongst
you, may be removed.

(2) Because the Holy Ghost, who could foresee, what would ensue thereupon,
would never ordain that for a remedy, which would not only be ineffectual to
the cutting off of evil, but become a Stirrup for Antichrist to get up into the
Saddle. For if there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many
Presbyters, for preventing Schisms, there is as great a necessity for setting
up one Archbishop over many Bishops, and one Patriarch over many Archbishops,
and one Pope over all, unless men will imagine, that there is a danger of
Schism only amongst Presbyters, and not among Bishops and Archbishops, which
is contrary to Reason, Truth, History, and our own experience. And then they
add, hence it is that Musculus having proved, by Act. 20. Phil 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5.
1 Pet. 5. 1. that in the Apostles times, a Bishop and a Presbyter were all one,
he adds. But after the Apostles times, when amongst the Elders of the Church,
(as Hierom says) Schisms arose, and as I verily think, they began to strive
for Majority, by little and little, they began to choose one amongst the rest,
out of the number of Elders, that should be above the rest in an higher degree,
and called Bishop. But whether that device of man profited the Church or no,
the times following could better judge, then when it first began. And further
adds, that if Hierom, and others had seen as much, as they that came after,
they would have concluded, that it was never brought in by Gods Spirit, to take
away Schism, as was pretended; but brought in by Satan to wast and destroy the
former Ministry that fed the Flock. Thus far Musculus. Sadael also has this
memorable passage. The difference between Bishops and other Ministers came in
for remedy of Schism. But they that devised it, little thought what a Gate
they opened to the ambition of Bishops. Hence also Dr. Whitakers asking, how
came in the inequality between Bishops and Presbyters, answers out of Hierom,
that the Schism and Faction of some occasioned the ancient Government to be
changed -- which says he, however devised at first for a remedy against
Schism, yet many holy and wise men, have judged it more pernicious, then the
Disease it self; and although it did not by and by appear, yet miserable
experience afterward showed it. First Ambition crept in, which at length begat
Antichrist, set him in his Chair, and brought the Yoke of Bondage on the Neck
of the Church.

The sense of these Mischiefs, made Nazianzen wish, not only that there were
no (...). No Dignity or tyrannical Prerogative of place, but also, that there
were no (...), no principal Dignity, to wit, in the Church, of which he is
speaking. But now (says he) contentions about the right hand and the left,
about the higher and lower places, etc. have bred many inconveniences even
among Ministers, that should be Teachers in Israel.

Thus far our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, which we thought
good to transcribe, that so it might appear to the wise Reader, upon what
grounds the Bishop came to have Superiority over Presbyters at the first, and
that however it was given him, upon prudentiall Reasons, and particularly for
the prevention of Schism, yet it not being a way of God, the device failed, as
sad experience in after times showed, the remedy proving worse then the
disease, as not only those reverend and learned Authors quoted by our Brethren
show, but also Church Story makes forth abundantly, and which was reason
sufficient, why we should not so readily submit, to re-admit moderate
Episcopacy as you expected.

(2) But as you may perceive by this account given, that the Superiority of a
Bishop above a Presbyter, was at the first introduced on prudentiall grounds
only: so we shall here forbear at present, to add any other Arguments, but
only prudentiall ones, why we cannot consent to admit of moderate Episcopacy;
as we shall refer both you and the Reader, to what has been solidly and
learnedly writ, against Episcopacy in the height, by reverend and godly Mr.
Banes, in his Diocesan Trial, Mr. Parker, Dr. Blondell, Salmasius, Bucerus,
and others: together with our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, in
their Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici: And whom we here cite, not for their
bare Testimony (though that were not to be slighted) but because they have
learnedly discussed this Point, and may present such things unto you concerning
the same, as may be worth your weighing. And so we come to give the Reasons we
here insist upon, why we dare not admit of moderate Episcopacy, as the terms
of accommodation with you, according to your proposal.

(1) And the first that we shall here urge, is, The sad experience, 1. Reason.
that we of these Nations have had, of the Tyrannical Bondage, and woeful
Slavery, that thousands of Gods precious Servants were brought under, during
the prevalency of Episcopacy. We cannot but remember, how when Prelacy was at
the height, all the Godly in this Land, Conformists as well as Non-conformists,
did grievously sigh under that heavy and intolerable Yoke; Though you in your
next Paper tell us, you are not so sensible of the multiplicity of Canons,
Sect. 10.
and burthensomness of Ceremonies, under which in the time of Episcopacy, any
truly conscientious did sigh and groan. But we cannot but be grieved, to hear
you express your selves after this manner. What! to say nothing, of many
thousands that were but in a private Capacity, who groaned under the
burthensomness of the old Ceremonies (that were rigorously pressed upon pain of
Excommunication, if not submitted to) and who (we doubt not) however you judge
of them, are by God, many of them, received up into Glory. Shall not
^artwright, Brightman, Ames, Parker, Baines, Bradshaw, Dod, Cleaver,
Hildersham, Hooker, Cotton; and in these parts Burn, Midgly, Bate, Langly,
Rathband, Paget, Nichols, and sundry other old unconformists (that in their
times were glorious lights in the Church of God, and such as this Land was not
worthy of) that were cast out, suspended, and silenced by the Prelates, for not
subscribing, and conforming to the Orders of those times, not be reckoned with
you in the number of those that were truly conscientious? Or have you been such
strangers in our Israel, that you have not heard what those have suffered under
Episcopacy? Or if you have heard, did their Sufferings never pierce your
hearts? Certainly you do hereby sufficiently discover the temper of your
Spirit: but we wish you may be found in a better frame before you die, as in
the mean season we are sorry, that your own sufferings (we speak of some of you
that adhered to the late King) have had not more kindly working on your hearts,
to the humbling of them, no not to this very day. But however you judge, we
doubt not, but there are many Myriads of people in these Lands, yet alive that
will give testimony with us, touching the piety, zeal, faithfulness,
conscientiousness of very many Ministers, and thousands of Christians of all
sorts, that suffered grievous things at the hands of the Prelaticall
Taskmasters, even to the undoing of many Families, the robbing of several
Congregations of their faithful and painful Ministers, that were driven from
their places and forced into Corners, or out of the Land, merely for not
conforming to such things as were then acknowledged by the most, that did
conform, to be but things indifferent and not in their own nature, or by virtue
of divine Precept necessary. Nay, it was grievous to the godly Conformists of
those times to see their de^r Brethren thus cruelly and unmercifully dealt
with, even for very Trifles. But at length (though we deny not, but there have
been some godly Bishops) the Pride and Exorbitancy of the major part of the
Prelates grew to that height, that old Conformity not serving the turn, except
men would prostitute their Consciences, to be subservient to their base lusts,
to cringe, bow at the Altar, read the Book for Dancing and other Sports, on the
Lord's Day, temporize, and do what ever was appointed. Nay, if Ministers would
be faithful, in the discharging the Duties of their Ministerial Function, in
Preaching, Catechizing, and the use of conceived Prayer, before and after
Sermon, though godly and painful, they were Wren excommunicated, suspended, or
deprived, silenced fifty godly painful Ministers, in two years, in Norwi^h
Diocese, for not reading the Book for Sports on the Lord's Day, for using
conceived Prayer, before and after Sermon, for not reading the Service at the
Altar, and such like; expelled three thousand persons with their Families, into
other Lands by such dealings. Bishop Pierce his practices in the like kind, are
not forgotten: He put down Ministers, and Preaching, till he thanked God, that
he had not a Lecture in his Diocese. He suspended Ministers for preaching on
Market-dayes, yea, put the Minister to Penance, that did but explain the Church
Catechism, etc. See Mr. Baxter on these things in his defense of the
Worcestershire Agreement, Page 51.
outed of their places, and thousands of Conformists both Ministers, and
Christians were driven out of the Land, till at length the Yoke began to be so
heavy, and the Cries of the Oppressed so loud in the Ears of God and men, that
the Parliament taking the heavy pressures of the Lords People into their pious
and serious thoughts, did cast out of this Church, with these Taskmasters,
this Tyrannical and Lordly Government, that suiting with the Pride, Ambition,
and Avarice of those that managed it, and backed with the Favor of the Prince
(to the serving of whose will and pleasure, being put into their places by him,
but too many of them were wholly devoted; as that was also unto him a strong
temptation, though to his own undoing, to espouse their Quarrel) emboldned
them to these intolerable Exorbitances. Now except it could be proved that the
Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, were an Institution of Jesus Christ,
prudence teaches to fly from that, as far as we may, with a good Conscience,
that heretofore has proved so burdensome and grievous; Especially considering
that,

(2.) If moderate Episcopacy, should once have footing in this Land, there is
very great danger, it would presently incroach 2 Reason.
upon the Pastors right, and in time grow up to the full height, that it was in
heretofore. Sad experience for Ages together, has showed how through the
Ambition and pride of the Bishops (that loved with Diotrephes to have the
pre-eminence) the Pastors, as to the governing of their Flocks, were spoiled of
all power: Out of what we quoted even now, you might take notice, that moderate
Episcopacy (brought in at the first upon prudentiall grounds) yet became a
Stirrup for Antichrist to get up into the Saddle; that first Ambition crept in,
which at length begat Antichrist, set him in his Chair, and brought the Yoke of
Bondage upon the Church; for so Dr. Whitaker expressed himself concerning it.

And 1. Are there not still in the hearts of the Sons of men, the same Seeds of
Pride and Ambition as in former times? And is there not hereupon cause to fear,
if there should be a tempting of God so far, as to admit of that, which would
cherish and warm those Corruptions, the same bitter Fruit would appear as
heretofore? Is it to be wondered, that the same cause, upon the same occasion,
being still like it self, and ever for kind one and the same, should produce
the like effects as heretofore it has done?

But 2. Yet further, If moderate Episopacy be no Plant of Gods planting (as if
it be not Jure divino, and yet an Officer introduced into Gods House, there is
no reason why it should lay claim to him, as to its Author) may it be thought
strange, if like unto a wild Vine, it should grow luxuriant? Or like a Weed,
that is set in a fat Soil, it should grow as rank as ever? especially if warmed
by the Favor of Princes, and great Ones, that might be induced out of respect
to their own Interests, to smile upon it, yea, to countenance it so far, as to
discountenance the most faithful Pastors in the Land, that would not dance
after their Pipe, even to the outing them of their places, and spoiling them of
all Rule, that so the Darling of Episcopy, that might be charmed, might grow
the greater.

But 3. if yet we should not be so wise as to hearken to reason, should not the
experience of those, that thereby purchased their after wisdom, at a dear
rate, lesson us sufficiently to beware how we meddle with moderate Episcopacy
(that will hardly be moderated) but would be found (to the cost of those, that
would be so foolish as to make further trial) to break all Bonds, and
limitations, though never so many and strong, and never so wisely made. Little
is propounded for the moderating of Episcopacy by Doctor Usher, in his
Reduction of Episcopacy, to the form of Synodicall Government, received in the
ancient Church (although we believe his Design in the Proposals there, was very
pious, and proceeded as well from a sense of the great Exorbitancy, that
Prelacy was grown to of late times, and its great unlikeness to what it was, in
the purer times of the Church, when it was first admitted; as out of a desire
to tender some expedient for the prevention of those troubles, which did
afterward arise about the matter of Church Government) unto those strickt
Bands, nay Shackles and Fetters, that so far as man's wisdom could foresee,
were laid upon it by the Church of Scotland, and yet it burst them all and
which shows that it is of that nature, that it cannot easily be tamed. In his
Proposals, so far as we can discern, the Suffragans that were to be constant
Moderators in the Assemblies o^ rural Deaneries, as the Bishops, and
Archbishops in the highe^ Assemblies were all of them to have Negative Votes.
These (as from the Platform it self is manifest) were to do all, and conclude
matters according to the major part of Voices in these Assemblies. But it is
not said, that if the Suffragan, or Bishop, or Archbishop were dissenting, any
thing might pass according to the major part of the Voices in the several
Assemblies notwithwanding. And hereupon if these constant Moderators were
corrupt, they might propound matters, or not propound them to the Assemblies,
as they pleased. And when they were propounded, yet not concurring with the
Assemblies, obstruct all their proceedings. Besides if all persons that were
admitted into any Pastoral Charges, and having cure of Souls, were to come in
only at their Door, how soon might the Ministry be so far corrupted, as
that it were easy for them, to procure the major part, in those Assemblies, to
Vote according to their minds, to over-sway, and overbalance the rest of the
Members of these Assemblies, that though godly and able, yet might not be so
favored by the times, as to be admitted into any Benefices (as they have been
called) of any considerable value, and so might be like to be for outward
estate poor, and in that respect the more contemptible. But yet further, if the
Suffragans must come into their places by the Bishops, and the Bishops into
theirs, as in former times, if there should be corruption here (where there is
more danger then in any) in the higher Assemblies (which yet should be the
freest from corruption, and should still be the better, the higher we go in
regard of the greater number of persons, of the choicest and best Abilities)
there were danger of far greater corruption, then in the lower. For all the
Suffragans are expressly by these Proposals to be Members of the Diocesan Synod,
and of the Rectors, or incumbent Pastors, besides the Suffragans, it is said,
the rest, or a select number out of every Deanery, as appears from the third
Proposal. And as touching the Provincial Synod, it is said, it might consist
of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such other of the Clergy as should be
elected out of every Diocese within the Province, as is clear from the fourth
Proposal. And so if the Bishops and Suffragans should be corrupted, that were
to be, as constant Moderators in these Assemblies, so constant Members of the
highest Assemblies: by their Power and Dignity, and greater port in the World,
and through the neglgence of the times, it might easily come to pass, that
these might be so biassed, that less good were to be expected from the higher
Assemblies (where yet the remedy should lie and whither Appeals were to be
made) then in the lower. To say nothing, that through the Favor of great ones,
if they should side with the Suffragans, or Bishops (that might be corrupted
the meetings of these Assemblies (though appointed by Law as well as
Parliaments) might be prevented and hindered, or if they might be easily spoiled
of their Freedom. We have taken the liberty to suggest, what exceptions the
forementioned Proposals, that were made by Dr Usher are liable to; and without
any intention to reflect in the least measure on so reverend a Person (whom in
regard of his Piety and Learning we honor, though herein of a different
apprehension from us) we believing he propounded what he did, with an honest
intention, as we have said before. And we hope there are no moderate Episcopal
Men, that will entertain any Animosities against us in this respect, we never
intending thereby, to set up a Wall of Partition betwixt them and us; as we
have used this Freedom, only to show what danger there is least if moderate
Episcopacy should be admitted again, it should within a while grow to that
height, that they as well as we, growing weary of it, would be ready to cast it
off, as an insufferable Yoke. We are the fuller of Jealousies in this respect,
when we consider, how far short, the Proposals mentioned, do fall, of the
strong Bonds that were laid upon Episcopacy in Scotland, and yet it burst them
all. And because it may be here of use, to mention them particularly, we shall
give the Reader an account of them, as we find them expressed in a short
Discourse, going under the Title of the unlawfulness, and danger of limited
Prelacy, or perpetual Presidency in the Church, briefly discovered, Printed in
the year 1641. and this the rather, because we do not know (the things now not
being common) that sundry Readers might ever come, to the knowledge of them, if
we should not be at some pains to transcibe them thence; but there they may be
found, Page 10, 11. by such as have the liberty to peruse that Discourse. And
thus they run.

In the year 1600. the Church of Scotland being met in a general Assembly at
Montross, these Cautions and Limits were agreed upon, the Kings Majesty
consenting;

First, That the Minister chosen to this place (speaking of him who, as
constant Moderator, was to be in the place of the Bishop) shall not be called
Bishop, but Commissioner of such a place.

2. That he shall neither propound to the Parliament, any thing in name of the
Church, without their express Warrant, and direction: Nor shall he keep
silence, or consent to any thing prejudicial to the Weal and Liberty of the
Church under the pain of Deposition.

3. Under the pain of Infamy, and Excommunication, he shall at every Assembly
give account, of the discharging of his Commission, and shall submit himself to
their censure, and stand to their determination whatsoever, without
Appellation.

4. He shall content himself with that part of the Benefice, which shall be
assigned him, not pre-judging any of the Ministers in their Livings.

5. He shall not dilapidate his Benefice.

6. He is bound, as any other Minister, to attend his particular Congregation,
and shall be subject to the trial and censure of his own Presbytery and
Provincial Assembly.

7. He shall neither usurp, nor claim to himself, any power of Jurisdiction, in
any point of Church Government, more then any other Minister.

8. In Presbyteries, Provincial and general Assemblies, he shall be have
himself in all things, and be subject to their censuring, as any of the
Brethren of the Presbytery.

9. At his Admission to his Office, he shall swear and subscribe to fulfill all
these Points, under the pains aforesaid, otherwise not to be admitted.

10. In case he shall be deposed, he shall no more Voice in Parliament, nor
enjoy his Benefice.

11. He shall not have Voice in the general Assembly, unless he be authorized
with Commission from his own Presbytery.

12. Crimen ambitus, shall be a sufficient cause of Deprivation.

13. The general Assembly, with the advice of the Synod, shall have power of
his Nomination, or Recommendation.

14. He shall lay down his Commission annuatim, at the foot of the general
Assembly, to be continued or changed, as the general Assembly, with his
Majesty's consent, shall think fit.

15. Other cautions to be made, as the Church shall find occasion.

One would have thought, judging according to the Rules of humane wisdom, that
these Bonds had been strong enough, to have shackled, and fettered Episcopacy,
if it could have been bounded: but as it follows, in the forementioned
Discourse, the godly and sincere Ministers, disliked this course, and some did
protest against him; foreseeing what afterward came to pass, and as it is
further there declared; for those that did love pre-eminence above their
Brethren, etc. did afterward break all those Bonds, and finding themselves
unable to give account, according to the counsel given to Pericles, they
procured, that there should be no free general Assemblies, least they should
be called to account, and when they were challenged of their Perjury, and
perfidious dealing, their printed Apology declared their Perfidy to be double,
and which is expressed in their own words, to teach us what in this Land might
be expected from their Fellows. Conditiones aliae pro tempore magis quo
contentiosisrixandi ansa praeriperetur, quam animo in perpetuum observandi,
acceptae. Resutat. libel. de Regim. Eccles. Scotorum in page 89.
By this account we may see, what Scotland to their sorrow had experience of,
and what we also may expect, would be the Issue here, if after Episcopacy has
been thrown out, there should be a recidivation and a tampering with it again,
especially considering that generally the sound and godly Party throughout the
Land, were heretofore so deeply sensible of those intolerable Burdens they had
groaned under through the exorbitances of the Prelates, that they not only did
remonstrate their grievances to the Parliament, before the Wars begun; but did
also humbly suggest by way of remedy: not the mere clipping of the Bishops
Wings, or the lopping of some Branches from Episcopacy, as sufficient, for the
redressing of their Grievances, but the taking it away both Root and Branch.
And whereupon the Parliament that then was (which will be renowned to all
Posterity, for easing of the Church of their intolerable Pressures, and
vindicating the Civil Liberty of the English Nation) did proceed to an utter
extirpation of it. And we hope (what ever may be your expectations, with whom
we have to do in these Papers) that neither the good People of this Land, nor
any succeeding Parliaments, will so soon grow weary of their dear-bought
liberty, as to admit that which might endanger the bringing of their Necks
again under the old Yoke.

(3.) But yet further we desire it might be considered, that the admitting of
moderate Episcopacy, would breed great dissatisfaction 3. Reason.
to sundry godly and conscientious Ministers and Christians at home in these
three Nations, and occasion much strife and contentious Debates, that were
likely to arise about it: some conceiving it to be utterly unlawful, as being
the Introduction of an Officer into the Church, that is not of Divine
Institution. Others that were satisfied touching the lawfulness of it in it
self, and yet judged it not necessary, might have fears, least moderate
Episcopacy once admitted, might be a step to introduce that kind of Episcopacy
or Prelacy, that had been expressly covenanted against: and upon that account,
might judge, they were obliged by their Covenant to foresee, so far as they
could, such an occasion, and to shun it. Others again might be much divided
amongst themselves (if they got over the former Blocks) touching the Rules,
according unto which, Episcopacy should be moderated, some apprehending the
Bonds laid upon it to be too straight, and others again thinking them to be
too loose. And these Divisions were like to be amongst persons of all Ranks;
Nobles, Knights, Citizens, Commons of all sorts, both of the Gentry, Ministry,
and others. Whereupon there were great danger to grow many Debates in the
Parliament, when that should assemble in the City, and throughout the Land,
Contests of Ministers one aagainst another in the Pulpits, and at the Presses,
and amongst private Christians in their private Conferences, as it has been
heretofore, about the Ceremonies and Episcopacy, to the further rending and
distracting of our already rent and torn Church, and which at this time would
be the more dangerous, when as the posture of Affairs does cry aloud upon the
wisest Physicians, both by their Skill and Power, to interpose for the healing
of Breaches in England, Scotland, and Ireland, that through our Divisions, we
be not made a Prey to the common Enemies of our Religion,; and therefore have
no need, that such a dangerous bone of Contention should be cast in amongst us,
as moderate Episcopacy might be like to prove, to the sadning of the hearts of
Friends, and gratifying only of those that would rejoice in our ruin.

(4.) It is not also to be slighted, that by admitting of moderate Episcopacy,
great offense might be taken by the best reformed 4 Reason.
Churches abroad. They have taken notice, that in the solemn Covenant, that was
entered into by these Nations, there was not only an Engagement, to endeavor
the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy (that is, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) according to which, the Parliaments that have been, have constantly
declared, that no Indulgency should be granted to Popery and Prelacy: and this
out of a conscientious respect (as we have hinted before in our answer to your
first Paper) unto this solemn engagement, as we judged: But there was also a
promise to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in England, and Ireland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best reformed Churches. These things have been published
to the World, and are known abroad, and however other matters contained in the
Covenant, that are of a civil Concernment may be judged of; they being in their
own nature variable, and not of the like necessity in themselves with matters
of Religion, and the things of God, and to be endeavored after, only in a
subordinate way unto Gods matters, and never to be pursued, in the manifest
destructiveness of the interest of Religion, that should be looked upon by all,
as the greatest and chiefest interest, yet they are not likely to imagine, that
moderate Episcopacy (that is not by them admitted but disowned) can be of that
necessity for us in these Lands (for which they do not judge, there was any
rule given in Gods word, requiring the setting of it up at the first) as that
after all the learned Debates, touching Church Government, for several years
together, that have been in the reverend Assembly of Divines, that sat by
Ordinance of Parliament at Westminster; and after their humble advice to the
Parliament touching the Presbyterian Government, as that Government, they
conceived, was most agreeable to the word of God (as it is evident it is most,
according to the example of the best reformed Churches) and after the
Parliament engaged also in that solemn Covenant, had (as they may conceive) in
pursuance thereof, made so great a progress, in the setting up of this
Presbyterian Government, that they passed by Ordinance, the form of
Church Government, Anno, 1648 after advice had with the Assembly of Divines, as
that Church Government which was to be used in the Church of England and
Ireland, it should be admitted of, to the setting up a partition Wall betwixt
us and them, instead of coming nearer to them, so far as we may do, according
to Gods word, according to the solemn Engagement. They cannot hereupon, but be
greatly grieved, when they shall see their hopes so far disappointed, as they
may hereupon be brought to fear, least if moderate Episcopacy be entertained,
as the Church Government of these Lands, after a while, that very Prelacy in
the height of it, that in the time of our Affliction was vomited up by these
Nations as loathsome, may be swallowed down again. Now we leave it to wise men
to judge, whether (especially at such a time as this, when Popish Enemies are
banding themselves together against us, and it is of so great advantage, for
our own preservation, and the preservation of the true Religion, that the
Protestant Party throughout Christendom, should endeavor after Union) it be
prudential to minister such occasion of grief and jealousy, concerning us to
our best Friends abroad, as to admit of that, which would be so much to their
dissatisfaction: as it would be occasion of endless strife and debate amongst
our selves at home, as has been said before; to say nothing of the hatefulness
of it unto Scotland, that yet we hope is looked upon by England and Ireland, as
a near Sister, and Neighbor Church.

5. Lastly, We offer it to the consideration of all judicious and prudent
persons, whether there be not more probability of 5. Reason.
union, amongst all sound, Orthodox, godly, moderate Spirited men, by means of
some other expedients, and upon some sober ground, then upon the admission of
moderate Episcopacy. As touching such that are for it in their Judgments, that
are sober and godly, and against Episcopacy in the height of it, they might be
accommodated in the Presbyterian way, with far more safety, and far less
occasion of Offense; as we gather from the Associations of the Ministers of
several Counties, that are printed, and particularly from that of Vide page
13. Of the Essex Agreement.
Essex, wherein they profess, that many of them think, according to Scripture,
and the way of diverse reformed Churches, there should be some adjoined to the
Minister in Government called ruling Elders, yet that diverse also of them, are
dissatisfied as touching such Elders; but all of them also conceive it meet,
and a Ministers wisdom to see with more Eyes then his own, and have the best
help he can, both to acquaint him with the conversation of his people, and to
assist him in matters of Concernment, that cannot so safely and conveniently be
done by him self alone. Therefore they also agree (as they shall see it fea
sonable and fit in respect of their people) to desire the Assistance of some
godly and discreet Persons of their respective Congregations, etc. And
therefore as touching ruling Elders (as there was a submission in the days of
Episcopacy, to Chancellours, and Commissaries) we conceive that moderate
Episcopal men might admit these upon prudentiall grounds, though they did not
acknowledge the Jus divinum, of their Office (and which opinion of them,
notwithstanding our own persuasion, we are far from imposing upon others) and
we do also hope, that such as would make trial of them, would have occasion to
bless God, for those great helps, that might be offered unto them, by them:
both for the better acquainting them with the Conversations of their people, as
also for the guiding and governing of them. As we do also further humbly
conceive; there might be such a proportioning of them, for the number of them
in the higher Assemblies, that neither it might be burdensome to the Elders,
that might be delegated to such Assemblies, when they are over many: nor the
Assemblies be disappointed for want of a Quorum of ruling Elders, as sometimes
they have been; nor any occasion of fear given unto any, that the Ministers
might be over-voted by the Elders, in matters of greatest weight and
concernment, which yet supposes a division betwixt the Ministers and Elders,
which in our own experience we have never met with. And as touching a standing
Moderator, that some moderate Episcopal men are for, we think their
Consciences might he satisfied in the way of Moderators, as they are in use
with us: we not discerning, what can be urged by them, as necessary to be
transacted by him from Gods Word, but it may be safely transacted by the
Moderators of our Assemblies. And as touching our Brethren of the
Congregationall way, we are sure, moderate Episcopacy will be no expedient, to
bring them and us unto nearer Union: but conceive, that as the Assembly of
Divines, did long agon enter upon that Work of Accommodation with them: so if
that Work were re^ assumed by the appointment and interposition of the Civil
Magistrate, through the blessing of God, we hope it might be brought to such a
conclusion, not only with them, but also with those, that are godly and
moderate Spirited, that are of the Episcopal way, that without admittance of
moderate Episcopacy (that would not further it) there might be an happy closure
of breaches in this rent and torn Church, all parties that have soundness, and
savor in them, seeming to be weary of their Divisions, and to earnestly thirst
and pant after Union.

But we hope by this time, the sober and judicious Reader is satisfied, that we
had some reason to caution against moderate Episcopacy, as we did, even where
we profess our selves earnest for peace; and that If you had considered things
well, you had no reason fully to expect, that we should admit of that
expedient, which you propounded for an Accommodation; which we for several weighty
reasons, had expressly cautioned against.

But we have now done with what you propounded, as the way wherein you expected
fully we should have closed with you, and shall now go on with you unto what
follows; wherein you declare your selves, That they who disturb this closure
and conjunction, are the ruling Elders; that yet were not only chosen out of
the people, but at the first constitution of the Congregational Elderships,
were examined and approved by this Class, as fit to join with the Ministers of
the Word, in the governing of the Church, and solemnly set a part with
exhortation and Prayer for that Work, although not ordained for to preach the
Gospel, or administer the Sacraments, and so not mere Laymen, as you apprehend
them to be. Now of these you say, you wish not (with the Apostle) that they
were cut off, but that they were taken away, that trouble you, for you say
(speaking of these) only they let, that will let, until they be taken out of
the away. Indeed the Apostle (unto whose words you allude) speaks of something,
that let and would let, the revelation of Antichrist, until he were taken
away, and if after Antichrist, has been cast out of this Land, the retaining
of the ruling Elders were likely to be a let to his setting foot again in it,
it would be very ill upon that account to part with them, but we do not discern
how the retaining of the ruling Elders should have hindered your closure and
conjunction with us, if you had been cordial for Peace and Union; for though
you could not admit them, upon the divine right of their Office, yet you, who
excepted not against the lawfulness of retaining of High Commissioners,
Chancellours, and Commissaries (and of which we shall speak more fully in our
answer to your last Paper) under the Prelaticall Government; might have
admitted of ruling Elders, on prudentiall grounds, upon the Principles of
sundry moderate Episcopal men; and as they have done, of which before: and as
you may see one zealous enough against the Jus divinum, of ruling Elders
Office, is not against them, as an expedient and behoovefull Order in the
Church, and where the right Governors of State, any where moving upon
prudentiall grounds, shall find the convenience of them. See Velitationes
Polemicae by J. D. quaest. 3. Touching Lay-Presbyters, Sect. 30.

But you now mind us, of what we had said in our Answer, scil. That we could
not consent to part with the ruling Elders, except we should betray the truth
of Christ, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. and for further testimony (you say) we
refer you to some modern Authors (all of Yesterday.)

Here we shall desire you to take notice of two things.

(1.) That being the Authors we referred you unto, were reverend, learned, and
able Divines, such as was the Synod or Assembly of Divines, that met at
Westminster, by Authority of Parliament, and the Provincial Synod of London,
besides the Divines, that we did particularly nominate, they should not have
been slighted by you (who profess you reverence Synods and Councels) in regard
of their testimony, because they were but of Yesterday. For upon this account,
all Synods and Councels, that shall hereafter be convened, must be rejected.

(2.) That it was not their mere testimony or authority, that we pressed you
with. We referred you to them in regard of their Arguments and Reasons they
urged for what they assert. And we think both you and we may learn much from
the learned and elaborate Labors of modern Authors. And that we are not to
disdain to weigh, what they present, because they are but of Yesterday. Else
you must neither consult Doctor Usher, Doctor Andrews, nor Doctor Hammond (whom
you mention) nor any other moderate Writers, that yet we judge, are in some
esteem with you: but betake your selves to the Fathers only. And because you
took not notice, of what the Authors, we referred you to, have, touching the
Jus divinum, of the Presbyterian Government, and which we said, had spoken so
fully touching that point, that we knew not what could be added more. We shall
give the Reader some short account, of what he may find more at large, in the
Authors themselves, only mentioning some things, which the London Ministers in
their Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, and the Provincial Assembly of
London, in their Vindication of the Presbyterian Government, have upon the
Texts we urged, to prove from them the Divine right of ruling a Elders Office.

(1.) The first Text we urged for the divine right of the ruling The Jus
divinum of the ruling Elders Office.
Elders Office, was Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. which runs thus. Having then Gifts
differing, according to the Grace given, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy,
according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry;
or he that teaches, on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation. He that
gives, ^et him do it with simplicity. He that rules with diligence: He that
shows mercy, with cheerfulness. Upon this Text the Provincial Assembly of
London in their Vindication, do thus express themselves. In which words (say
they) we have a perfect enumeration of all Page 42, 43.
the ordinary Offices of the Church. These Offices are reduced, first to two
general heads, Prophecy, and Ministry, and are therefore set down in the
Abstract. By Prophecy is meant, the Faculty of right understanding,
interpreting, and expounding the Scriptures. Ministry comprehends all other
Employments in the Church. Then these generals are subdivided into the special
Offices contained under them, and are therefore put down in the Concrete. Under
Prophecy are contained,

1. He that teaches, that is, the Doctor or Teacher.

2. He that exhorts, i. e. the Pastor. Under Ministry are comprised.

1. He that gives, that is the Deacon.

2. He that rules, that is, the ruling Elder.

3. He that shows mercy, which * Office pertained unto Esthius in Romans 1^.
Aliis placet etiam hac part speciale quoddam charisma sive officium
significari, and misereri dica^^^ iis, qui ab ecclesia curandis miseris,
postissimum aegrotis, praefectus est, i. isque praebet obsequia, velut etiam
hodie fit in nosocomiis, qui sensus handquaquam improbabil^s est.
them, who in those days had care of the sick. So that in these words we have
the ruling Elder plainly set down, and contradistinguished from the teaching
and exhorting Elder (as appears by the distributive Particles, (...), (...),
whether he that teaches, whether he that exhorts, whether he that rules,
etc.) And here likewise we have the Divine Institution of the ruling Elder, for
so the words hold forth, Having then gifts differing according to the Grace
that is given unto us. And this also in the third Verse, According as God has
dealt to every man, etc. This Officer is the Gift of Gods free Grace to the
Church for the good of it. Thus far the Provincial Assembly of London. And
then they vindicate the Text from what is objected against it. The London
Ministers in their Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, do urge the Argument
drawn hence for the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office more fully. After
they had given a view of the scope and contexture of the Chapter, and given the
like exposition of the Text, quoting also Paraeus, and Piscator, and Calvin,
and Beza, on the place (who give the same exposition, as is manifest to him
that will but consult those Interpreters upon the Text) they then do argue thus
from this place.

Major. Whatsoever (1) Members of Christ's organical body have an (2) ordinary
(3) Office of ruling therein given (4) them of God, (5) distinct from all other
ordinary standing Officers in the Church, (6) together with direction from God,
how they are to rule, they are the ruling Elders we seek, and that Jure divino.

Minor. But (...), i. e. He that rules, mentioned in Romans 12. 8. is a (1)
Member of Christ's Organicall Body, having an (2) ordinary (3) Office of ruling
therein, (4) given him of God, (5) distinct from all other standing Officers,
in the Church, (6) together with direction how he is to rule.

Conclus. Therefore (...), i. e. He that rules mentioned in Romans 12. 8. is the
ruling Elder, we seek, and that Jure divino. The several particulars noted in
the Major and Minor Propositions they do distinctly prove, and are too large
here to transcribe, but they may be seen all made good from Page 125. to Page
131. And to which we refer the Reader. Then they proceed to vindicate this
Text, from the several exceptions made against the alleging of it, for the
proof of the Divine right of the ruling Elders Office, by Field, Sutlive,
Bilson, from Page 130. to page 136. And as touching Dr. Sutlive, they have a
remarkable passage, which they note in the Margin, page 131. which we think fit
to recite in their own words, which are as follows. As for this Dr. Sutlive
(diverse times hereafter mentioned) the Reader may please to take notice here
once for all, that he told a reverend Minister in London, yet living, and ready
(if need were) to testify the same upon Oath, (who declared it to one of the
Authors of this Treatise, Feb. 16. 1646.) That he was sorry with all his heart,
that ever he put Pen to Paper to write against Beza, as he had done, in the
behalf of the proud domineering Prelates. And he spoke this with great
indignation. It is good for men then to take heed, that they be not too hot for
the Prelacy, nor too earnest in contending against the Office of ruling Elders,
for we see, they may come to repent hereof, before they die.

(2.) In the next place follows 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
Miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues.
Vide page 38, 39, 40. 41, 42.
The Provincial Assembly of London in their Vindication urge this Text thus.

Here we have an enumeration of sundry Officers of the Church, and amongst
others there are Helps, Governments. Calvin in locum. Chrysostom. upon 1 Cor. 12.
28. Estius upon 1 Cor. 12. 28.
By Helps are meant Deacons (as not only our reformed Divines, but
Chrysostom, and Estius, and others observe.) And by Governments are meant the
ruling Elders. That this may the better appear, they do here prove six things.

1. That by Governments are meant men exercising Government, the Abstract being
put for the Concrete; which they show appears first, by the beginning of the
Verse, God has set some in his Church, which relates to Persons, not to
Offices.

Secondly, By the 29, and 30 Verses, where the Apostle speaks Concretively of
those things, which he had spoken of before Abstractively. Are all Workers of
Miracles? Have all the gifts of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? etc. And so
by consequence, Are all Helpers? are all Governors?

2. That the Governor here meant, must needs be a Church Governor, not the
civil Magistrate, because this is beside the whole scope of the Chapter,
treating merely on Spiritual Church Matters, not at all of Secular or Civil.
Because also it is said expressly, That he is seated in the Church. Now the
Magistrate, as such, is not placed by God in the Church, but in the
Commonweal.

And lastly, Because the Apostle writes of such Governors, that had at that
time actual existence in the Church: whereas neither then, nor some hundred
years after, was there any Christian Magistrate.

(3.) That this Church-Governour is seated by God in his Church, and so is a
Plant of Gods one planting.

4. That this Church Governor, is a Church Officer. For though it be a
question amongst the Learned, whether some of the persons here named, as the
Workers of Miracles, and those that had the Gift of Healing, and of Tongues,
were seated by God, as Officers in the Church, and not rather only as eminent
Members, endued with these eminent Gifts; yet it is most certain, that
whosoever is seated by God in his Church, as a Church-Governour, must needs be
a Church Officer. For the nature of the Gift does necessarily imply an Office,
which they do further show from the Greek word (...), rendered Governments,
being a Metaphor taken from Pilots or Shipmasters governing their Ships.

5. That this Church-Governour is an ordinary and perpetual Officer in his
Church, as they show does appear from the perpetual necessity of him in the
Church, a Church without Government, being as a Ship without a Pilot, as a
Kingdom without a Magistrate, as a World without a Sun.

6. That this Church-governour is an Officer contradistinguished in the Text
from the Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, and all other Officers in the Church.
This they prove,

1. By the Apostles manner of expressing their Offices in an enumerative form;
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles,
then Gifts of Healing, etc.

2. By the Recapitulation, V. 29. 30. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are
all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles, etc.

3. By the scope of the whole Chapter, which is to set down different Gifts and
Offices in different Subjects, as they do more at large show, answering an
Objection, and then showing, that this Interpretation which they have given, is
not only the Interpretation of reformed Divines, both Lutherans and
Calvenists, but of the ancient Fathers, and even the Papists themselves. And
here they quote Gerhardus de ministerio ecclesiastico. Calvin in locum. P.
Martyr in locum. Beza in locum. Piscator in locum. Ambrose in locum. Chrysostom.
in locum. Salmer. in loc. Septimo loco ponit gubernatores, i. e. eos, qui
praesunt aliis and gubernant, plebemque in Offici^ continent. Et Ecclesia
Christi habet suam politiam and cum pastor per se omnia praestare non posset,
adjungebantur duo Presbyteri, de quibus dixit, qui been praesunt presbyteri
duplici honor digni habeantur, maxim qui laborant verbo and doctrina, qui una
cum pastore deliberabant de ecclesiae cura and instauratione, qui etiam fidei
atque honestae vitae consortes erant.

Thus far the Provincial Assembly of London. The London Ministers in their Jus
divinum, do urge the Argument hence thus.

Major. Whatsoever Officers God himself now under the new Testament has set in
the Church, as Governors therein, distinct from all other Church Governors,
whether extraordinary or ordinary, they are the ruling Elders we enquire after,
and that Jure divine.

Minor. But the Governments named in 1 Cor. 12. 28. are Officers which God
himself now under the new Testament has set in the Church as Governors
therein, distinct from all other Church Governors whether extraordinary or
ordinary.

The Major being in it self clear, they prove the Minor in the several
Branches of it. proving,

1. That the Church here spoken of is the Church of Christ now under the N. T.

2. That the Governments here mentioned, are Officers set in this Church (not
out of the Church) as Rulers governing therein.

3. That they are set not by man, but by God himself.

4. That these Governments thus set in the Church are distinct, not only from
all Governors out of the Church, but also from all governing Officers within
the Church.

Whence the Conclusion is inferred. Therefore these Governments in 1 Cor. 12.
28. are the ruling Elders enquired after, and that Jure divino. This Argument
thus urged is confirmed in the several Branches of it, from Page 136. to Page
144.

And after they vindicate the urging of this Text for this purpose, from the
several exceptions made against the same by Dr. Field, Sutlive, Whitgift, Mr.
Coleman, and Bilson, from Page 144. to Page 150.

(3.) The third and last Text, we urged for the Divine right of ruling Elders
Office, was 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy
double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

For the understanding of whichwords, the Provincial Assembly of London lay
down this Rule; That every Text of Vide page 45, 46, 47. 48.
Scripture is to be interpreted according to the literal and Grammatical
construction, unless it be contrary to the Analogy of Faith, or the Rule of
Life, or the circumstances of the Text. Otherwise (say they) we shall make a
Nose of Wax of the Scriptures, and draw quidlibet ex quolibet. And then they
add, Now according to the Grammatical Construction, there are plainly held
forth two sorts of Elders: The one only ruling, and the other also laboring in
the Word and Doctrine. Then they give the true Analysis of the words, thus.

(1.) Here is a Genus, a General, and that is Elders.

(2.) Two distinct Species, or kinds of Elders: Those that rule well, and those
that labor in Word and Doctrine, as Pastor and Doctor.

(3.) We have two Particles expressing these two kinds of Elders, Ruling,
Laboring. The first do only rule, the second do also labor in Word and
Doctrine.

(4) Here are two distinct Articles, distinctly annexed to these two
Participles, (...), they that rule, they that labor.

(5.) Here is an eminent discretive Particle, set before these two kinds of
Elders; these two Participles, these two Articles, evidently distinguishing one
from the other, Viz. (...), especially they that labor, etc. They do urge out
of Dr. Whitaker, That it is absurd to say, that this Text is to be understood
of one and the same Elder. If a man should say, All the Students in the
University are worthy of double honor, especially they that are Professors of
Divinity, he must necessarily understand it of two sorts of Students. Or if a
man should say, All Gentlemen that do Service for the Kingdoms in their
Counties, are worthy of double honor, especially they that do Service in the
Parliament, this must needs be understood of different persons. And however
they do take notice, that Archbishop Whilgift, Bishop King, Bishop Bilson,
Bishop Downame, and others, labor to fasten diverse other Interpretations upon
these words, yet they observe, that all other senses that are given of these
words, are either such as are disagreeing from the literal and Grammatical
Construction, or such as fall into one of these two absurdities; either to
maintain a Non preaching Ministry or a lazy preaching Ministry to deserve
double honor, and which they make to appear particularly, as the Reader for
his more full satisfaction may ^ee upon his perusal, Page 47, 48.

The Authors of the Jus divinum regiminis ecclesiastici, do urge the Argument
for the Divine right of ruling Elders Office from this Text more fully, and do
very learnedly and elaborately vindicate it from twelve several exceptions
that are made against it, by those that do oppose it, from Page 150. to page
169. and whereunto for his more full satisfaction we do refer the Reader.

We shall forbear to mention what is further urged, either by the Provincial
Assembly of London, out of the Old Testament and New, or by the rest of the
Authors we have quoted in our former Answer, or by the Author of the Assertion
of the Government of the Church of Scotland (that fully and learnedly discussed
this Point some years before) to prove the Office of ruling Elders to be by
divine right. We conceive by this account given, it is manifest enough unto the
unprejudiced Reader, that the learned Labors of our reverend Brethren in this
matter, and their Arguments urged from these very Texts, that we alleged, were
not so contemptible, but that they might have merited a better answer (when we
referred you to them) then to have been turned off as not worth the weighing,
because they are but of Yesterday. And however our pains be accounted of by you
in transcribing out of them, what we have done, yet we hope it will not be
esteemed useless by judicious and sober persons, such who never have seen the
Labors of our Brethren in this kind, having this advantage by it, that they
have a taste given them, of what is more at large said, by feverall reverend,
learned, and godly Divines, for the Divine right of that Office, that is so
much despised, and hereby have some direction given them, where they may find
this truth more fully vindicated; as they also, that are acquainted fully with
their Labors, may reap this Fruit by what we have recited, that the memory of
what they knew before, will hereby be revived; and hence it may be to both
sufficiently manifest, that so much is spoken touching this matter, that it
will not be to any great purpose to add any more.

But now let us consider, what you oppose unto all that is said, by the Authors
we quoted for the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian Government, and particularly
of the Office of ruling Elders. In the first place we take notice, that when we
said, We could not part with the ruling Elders, unless we should betray the
truth of Christ (as we judged) by this Parenthesis you gather, that we are not
so wedded to the opinion, but that we can, and will submit to better reason,
when offered to us. Unto which we say, That we are ready to hear, what you or
any others shall present unto us, for the clearing up the mind and will of God,
in this, or any other point in Controversy, amongst such as are godly, sober,
and Orthodox, in the main points of Christian Religion. And if you will not
wilfully and pertinaciously hold a contrary Tenent, as you profess, or at least
a Tenent contrary to what your Principles might allow you, there would be the
greater hopes, that you would cease the debate touching this matter. But before
we can be convinced that the ruling Elder is not an Officer of Jesus Christ,
held forth in those Texts, that we quoted, we must have far stronger reasons
brought, then you urge, although you profess, that you will proceed to show us
that Lay Elders (as you mistake them) are not meant nor mentioned in those
Texts by us alleged. Here is indeed much undertaken, but little performed. And
however you promise to do this hereafter more largely, if what is comprehended
in this Paper be not judged satisfactory, yet in your next, wherein you would
make show, as if you had given in a full reply to our Answer, you perform
nothing. So easiea matter is it with you to undertake great things, and fall
short in your performances. But we must here needs tell you, that if you will
indeed satisfy us, you must perform more, then only (as here you do) send us
to the Fathers in general, or more particular Councils, or the Fathers apart
(and which you will have to be the only sure rule for the interpretation of
Scriptures, though how soundly this is asserted by you will come to be examined
in our answer to your next Paper) neither must you think, that the bare
allegation of the exposition of some Fathers (for we are not wholly destitute
of the testimony of them touching the matter in controversy, as we shall show
anon) ought to be of that weight with us, as that they should be forthwith
received, as the certain interpretations of these Texts, against the Arguments,
that are urged from them, by modern Synods and Assemblies, learned and able
Divines, Expositers of the Scriptures, both of our own and other reforned
Churches for that interpretation of them, which we close with, and whereof we
have given account already in part. And yet we are far from contemning either
Fathers or Councils, but shall give them all that due respect, that our truly
Protestant Divines have given them in their Writings against the Papists; as we
do heartily wish, that you had not expressed your selves, especially in your
next Paper, to be too Popish, in respect of that Authority, which you profess
they are in with you, which yet is an honor given them, that they themselves
would have disavowed, and of which afterward more fully.

In the mean season you have not dealt fairly with Calvin in fathering upon
him, what he does not say, though in your Printed Copy you cover the matter,
not quoting the place, where he should assert any such thing, as you allege
him for. The thing you charge upon him in both, is one and the same. Your words
are these, Calvin says, there can be no better, nor surer remedy of deciding
of controversies, no better sense nor interpretation of Scripture then what is
given by the Fathers in such Councils. The places you quote in that Copy you
presented unto us, are those in his Institutions, Lib. 4. cap. 9. Sect. 8. 13.
But in these places, there is nothing that can with any color be alleged to
make out what you charge upon him. In the 8. Sect. it is confessed, he would
not have all Councils condemned, and the Acts of them all rescinded (as we are
far from desiring any such thing) but he says, Quoties concilii alicujus
decretum profertur, expendi primum diligentur velim, quo tempore habitum sit,
qua de causa habitum, and quo concilio, quales homines interfuerint: deinde
illud ipsum, de quo agitur, ad Scripturae amussim examinari; idque in eum
modum, ut concilii definitio pondus suum habeat sitque instar praejudicii,
neque tamen examen, quod dixi, impediat. You may here perceive, that as he
would not have the determinations of all Synods promiscuously to be admitted,
so he would have their decrees that are produced, to be examined according to
the rule of Scripture, notwithstanding that reverence which he (from whom
therein we differ not) does give them. But you may see, he further goes on and
adds, Vtinam eum omnes modum servarent, quem praescrib^t Augustinus libro
adversus Maximinum tertio: Nam cum hunc haereticum, de syncdorum decretis
litigantem breviter vult compescere; Nec ^go (inquit) Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec
tu mihi A^iminensem debes tanquam praejudicaturus objicere. Nec ego hujus
authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum authoritatibus, non
quorumcunque propriis, sed quae utrisque sunt communes, res cum re, causa cum
causa, ratio cum rotione certet. The intelligent Reader will hereby
sufficiently perceive, that however Calvin gives due respect unto Councils, yet
both he and Augustine, whom he cites, would have all Controversies touching
matters of Religion to be determined by the Authorities or Testimonies of
Scriptures. And however he presently after says, That those ancient Synods,
the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, the first Ephesine and that at Chalcedon, and
the like, we do willingly receive and reverence as holy, Quantum attinet ad
fidei d^gmata, So far as concerns the Doctrines of Faith, (let that be marked)
and acknowledges, that they contain nothing, but the pure Native
interpretation of the Scriptures. Yet what is that, to what you would father
upon him, Viz. That there can be no better sense nor interpretation of the
Scriptures, then what is given by the Fathers in such Councils? All that Calvin
says, is, That he acknowledges these Councils, did in Doctrinals rightly
interpret the Scriptures, but he would not have their interpretation of
Scripture for to be the rule of its interpretation, as in your next Paper (when
there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture) you assert it ought to
be; and which there you alleging this place of Calvin would represent him to
patronize, and for which purpose you do also seem to allege him here. Although
the Reader, by what has been quoted out of him in this Section, will see the
contrary. Besides, that he did not say touching matters of Discipline and
Government (which are the things only in Controversy betwixt you and us)
those Councils, he spoke of, did contain nothing but the pure and native
interpretation of the Scriptures, but limited the same to Doctrinals, as we
have showed. And therefore we leave it to the Reader to judge, whether you have
thus far dealt fairly with Calvin, or no.

You also quoted the thirteenth Section of this ninth Chapter, lib. 4. But
there we find only, that he expresses himself thus; Nos certe libenter
concedimus, si quo de dogmate incidat disceptat nullum esse nec melius, nec
certius remedium, quam si verorum Episcopo^um Synodus conveniat, ubi
controversum dogma excutiatur. He acknowledges then, that when a Controversy
does arise, there is no better, nor surer remedy for the determining it, then
by a Synod of true Bishops (which are the Bishops mentioned in Tim^thy, and
Titus in Calvin's sense) but yet he concludes that very Section thus; Hoc autem
perpetuum esse nego, ut vera and certa sit scripturae interpretatio, quae
con^ilii suffragiis fuerit recepta, i. e. But this I deny to be perpetual,
that that is a true and certain interpretation of Scripture, which has been
received by the Suffrages of a Council. And if we should here press you to
that, which Calvin says as touching this point. Seeing it has been determined
by the late Synod or Assembly of Divines, See the Propositions of the Assembly
touching Church Government, bound up with the Confession of Faith and
Catechism, page 9, 10.
that, As there were in the Jewish Church Elders of the people joined with the
Priests and Levites in the Government of the Church (as appears in the 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10) so Christ has instituted a Government and Governors
Ecclesiastical in the Church; has furnished some in his Church, besides the
Ministers of the Word, with Gifts for Government, and with Commission to execute
the same, when called thereunto, who are to join with the Minister in the
Government of the Church, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 2. 8. which Officers
reformed Churches commonly call Elders. You ought nor against their
determination touching this matter in Controversy betwixt you and us, by your
opposition, to trouble and disturb the peace of the Church, and which is that,
which seems to be clearly Calvin's mind in this Section. This for the
Vindication of Calvin, is we hope sufficient.

As touching the Fathers, you wish us to consult on Romans 12. intimating out of
Doctor Andrews, That not one of them applies it to the Church Government, and
as much (you say) may be said for the other Texts, not one Father in their
Comment gives such a sense, and which you are so confident of, that you offer,
that if we find one exposition for us, you will yield us all. Unto this we say,

(1.) That we believe all wise and sober Readers will easily discern, that your
overmuch confidence has put you on to over-shoot a great deal too far. For we
can hardly be brought to persuade our selves, that you have any of you, much
less all of you, who are the Subscribers of this Paper, consulted all the
Fathers upon any, and much less upon all these Texts. And if so, it was a great
deal too much presumption to make such an offer, upon the Testimony of Doctor
Andrews (that yet is alleged by you to speak but to only one of the Texts) or
any other, having not consulted all the Fathers your selves, and that upon
every Text. For what an hazard do you put your Cause upon? If but one Father be
produced against you in this matter, if you should be taken at your word, it is
quite lost. And if it be Gods Cause and Truth you stand for, can you be
excused, that you have offered to quit it upon such easy terms? But we will
be more liberal to you, then to take you at such a disadvantage, though you
have been too presumpteously liberal in making such an offer.

(2.) But suppose none of the Fathers could be produced thus to expound any of
these Texts; If from the Texts themselves, and what may be urged from other
places of the Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament, it may be gathered,
that that is the meaning of them, which we with sundry other modern Authors
give, why should this Interpretation be rejected, because not backed with the
Testimony of some of the Fathers thus expounding them? Is not the Scripture
sufficient to expound it self? This indeed is your opinion, as appears
plainly from your next Paper, but the Popish unsoundness of it we question not
but to discover, when we come to it.

(3.) But if the Fathers do not many of them determine the Controversy
touching ruling Elders from these Texts (it having been started since their
time) yet is it not sufficient, if they shall be, several of them, found to
allow of the thing it self, and give testimony to the being of these Officers
in the Church in their time? We shall here mention only some of those that may
be alleged touching this particular.

And first Ambrose his words on 1 Timothy 5. 1. are full and plain to our purpose.
Vnde and synagoga, and postea Ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsoleverit, nescio; nisi
forte doctorum desidia, aut magis superbia, dum sibi volunt aliquid videri (i.
e.) Whence both the Synagogue, and afterward the Church had Elders, without
whose counsel nothing was done in the Church. Which thing by what negligence
it grew out of use, I know not, unless perhaps through the Teachers
sloathfulness, or rather haughtiness, while they alone would be thought
somewhat.

In the next place observe what Optatus says, lib. 1. Adversus Parmen: Eram
Ecclesie ex auro and argento quam plurima ^rnamenta, quae nec defodere terra,
nec secum po^tare poterat; quare fidelbus Ecclesiae senioribus commendavit. i.
i. e. The Church had many Ornaments of Gold and Silver, which she could neither
hide in the Earth, nor carry away with her, which she committed to the Elders.
The Provincial Assembly of London do observe, that Albaspinaeus that learned
Antiquary, upon the place acknowledges, that besides the Clergy, there were
certain of the Elders of the people, men of approved life, that did tend the
Affairs of the Church, of whom this place is to be understood.

To these we may add, That Austine gives frequent intimations of the ruling
Elder in his time. We shall here only mention some places. In his 137. Epistle
to those of his own Church, he thus directs it. Dilectissimis fratribus,
Clero, Senioribus, and universae plebi Ecclesiae Hipponensis (i. e.) To the
most beloved Brethren, the Clergy, Elders, and all the people of the Church at
Hippo. Where we see Elders are mentioned distinctly, and are interposed between
the Clergy and the people as distinct from both.

Again, De verb. Dom. Sermon. 19. Cum ob errorem aliquem, as^nioribus arguuntur,
and imputatur alicui de illis, cur ebrius fuerit, etc. When they are
reprehended for any error by the Elders, and its imputed to any of them, why
was he drunk, etc.

So again Lib. 3. contra Cresconium cap. 56. Peregrinus Presbyter and seniores
Musticanae regionis. Peregrine the Presbyter and the Elders of the Mustican
Region.

And long before him, Origin. contra Celsum lib. 3. has this passage. Nonnulli
praepositi sunt, qui in vitam and mores eorum, qui admittuntur, inquirant, ut
qui turpia committant, iis communi caelu interdicant, etc (i. e.) There are
some Rulers appointed, who may enquire concerning the Conversation and manners
of those that are admitted, that they may debar from the common Assembly such
as commit filthiness. This place of Origin is clear for ruling Elders, whose
work it is to enquire into the Conversation and manners of those, that are
admitted to communicate with the Congregation at the Lords Table, and is so
understood by others, as well as our selves.

We might allege more Testimonies of the Fathers for the proof of what we are
in hand with, but that we judge these sufficient. Even those that do oppose the
ruling Elders Office with too much vehemence, are forced to confess, that
besides Pastors and Doctors, and besides Magistrates and Elders of the City,
there are to be found in Antiquity Seniores ecclesiastici, Ecclesiastical
Elders also. But they will have them to be only as our Churchwardens, or
rather as our Vestry-men, as one of them speaks. See the Author of Episcopacy
by divine right, page 146. whereas the Testimonies alleged show, they were
Rulers and Judges in Causes Ecclesiastical, and did assist the Ministers of
the Word, in the ruling and governing of the Church, which being very clear
from the above mentioned Testimonies, and others of the like kind; another
zealous enough against them, would have them to be some or other in chief Rank
amongst the rest of the people, taken in occasionally for advice and present
assistance, and so an extraordinary kind of Church-Guardians, without any
peculiar and settled Jurisdiction. Which is but gratis dictum, said without all
proof. See Velitatienes polemicae, by I. D. page 96 But at last this Author, as
not satisfied with former Answers given, and granting that the Fathers in truth
do make for them (as indeed they do) yet he would not have their Testimonies
amount, to so much as to the clearing up of Divine Right, so strongly stood
upon by diverse, as he speaks. But the matter of Fact then is granted, that
there were such Ecclesiastical Officers which the Fathers owned and allowed of.
And being the Divine Right of their Office was not then questioned; it is as
easy for us to affirm. that as those Fathers did not deny it, so they owned
it, as it is for that Author to say, That they were but admitted as an
expedient and behoovefull Order in the Church, or on prudentiall grounds; To
use his own expressions quoted before, Vide Page 96. Sect. 30. Although this
being granted will be sufficient to vindicate this Office of the ruling Elder
from all suspicion of novelty: and to show, That it was no new fangled device
of Calvin at Gevena, as some tauntingly have said. And for your admittance of
the ruling Elder, this might be sufficient for your satisfaction, as we think,
according to your Principles.

But now to return to the Texts alleged by us, to prove the Divine Right of
the ruling Elders Office. After you had sent us to the Fathers to consult them,
you tell us, Many there are, that apply them to the Bishops, and amongst these
you instance Doctor Fulk, applying these Texts to the Bishops only, whom (you
say) you quote in regard of the moderate Judgment, he was supposed to be of in
point of Church Government, etc. But you having not dealt so fairly with
Calvin, as had been meet, you must pardon us, if we cannot take the matter you
quote him for, upon trust and from your representation of him. You do not here
cite the place, but for what reason your selves best know, as we leave it to
the Reader for to judge. But the words, that you allege out of him (though
mangled by you) we find in him, in his Answer to the Rhemists on Titus. 1. 5.
And we shall give them the Reader entirely and at full length, and they are
these. Amongst whom (speaking of the Clergy) for Order and seemly Government,
there was always one Principal, to whom by long use of the Church, the name
of Bishop or superintendent has been applied. Which Room Titus exercised at
Crete, Timothy in Ephesus, and others in other places. Therefore although in
Scripture, a Bishop and an Elder is of one Order and Authority in preaching the
Word and administration of the Sacraments (as Hierome does often confess) yet
in Government by ancient use of Speech he is only called a Bishop, which is in
the Scripture called (...), (...), (...). Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13.
17. However it is not reasonable, that we should be obliged, to own every
expression here used by this reverend Author, who is produced by you as an
Adversary to us in the matter in Controversy; yet here we desire that it might
be observed:

1. That he only says, for Order and seemly Government there was always one
Principal, to whom by long use of the Church the name of Bishop or
superintendent has been applied. By which words he seems clearly to intimate,
that that superiority, which a Bishop had above the rest of the Clergy or
Presbyters, was but an Ecclesiastical Constitution only in that he ascribes
it to Order and Decency.

2. He makes a Bishop and an Elder in Scripture to be but of one Order and
Authority in preaching the Word and Administration of the Sacraments (as he
says Hierom does often confess (all which you leaving out do obscure Doctor
Fulk's meaning. For he asserting a Bishop and an Elder in Scripture to be but
of one Order and Authority in preaching the Word, and attributing the
difference that is betwixt them in regard of Government to the ancient use of
Speech, sc. That he only is called a Bishop, which is in Scripture called
(...), etc. citing the Texts above mentioned, does intimate a quite different
sense, to what you allege him for. For he does not say, that the Scripture in
these Texts called the Bishop only (...), for which purpose you allege him;
but that by ancient use of Speech (which might be different from the use of
Scripture, and as in this particular it was) he is called a Bishop, which is in
Scripture called (...), etc. By which we doubt not it is clear to the judicious
Reader, that Doctor Fulk is not in the number of those many, that (you say)
apply these Texts to the Bishops only, taking the word Bishops, as you take
them.

We have now done with that you have produced here to satisfy us touching
Lay Elders (as you call them) that they are not meant nor mentioned in those
Texts by us alleged, which you undertook with some confidence, but have as
unsatisfactorily performed, as (we think) ever any did, that did attempt a
matter of this nature. Yet you now proceed hereupon to make your inference.
That therefore it can be no betraying the truth of Christ to part with the
ruling Elders, if we will seriously weigh it in the Balance of impartial and
unprejudicate reason (which yet you have not produced, that might with any
show, be sufficient to satisfy the Conscience, either of us, or any other men)
and to take in the other (i. e. the Bishops) which you say would be but a
strengthening and a backing of it, though we see not how: And now you fall upon
exhorting and beseeching us in the name of God (which we hope is dear unto us)
and in the tender Bowels of Jesus Christ (for whom we are willing to suffer the
loss of all things, and to whom we profess to owe our selves, and whatever we
are, or can do, as unto the Lord, that bought us, and to whom we must be
faithful, as being his Stewards) not to stand upon circumstantials (though the
ruling Elder (whom you exhort us to part with) is not a mere circumstantiall
matter, he being a Member of Christ's Organicall Body, and an Officer appointed
by him in his Church, as has been already showed) or private interests (which
we see not how is any way advanced by our pleading for the ruling Elder) but to
apply our selves to the way of conjuncture and reconcilement of many poor
Christian Souls, (whose Welfare we have reason to tender, as we hope we do)
propounded by you, and called by you happy (though, as we have showed,
apprehended by us to be both dangerous and indeed destructive unto Union) and
asserted by you to be a way of reconcilement of them, in truth, love, and
peace, and which, if we could discern, we should upon that account embrace with
all our hearts, we having already professed enough for peace, (and whether our
Professions and Hearts do not go together, is known to the Searcher of the
Hearts and Reins) as our earnest contending for the truth, is that which
hinders some men from being at peace with us. But after you have propounded the
terms of reconciliation, which you beseech and beg of us, again and again to
accept of (though we should not need to be so earnestly entreated, if they were
safely to be admitted of) you come to urge some Fruits, that would ensue upon
our harkening to your motion. And here we shall not deny, but the blessing that
might redound to all parties, in a just way of reconciliation, would be
unconceivable, as it is that, we shall be ready to lay out our selves to our
utmost for; as we see there is any hope, or probability to attain it. We do
also confess, that the lives and manners of dissolute persons (and how many
there are amongst your selves of that sort, you say you are but to too
conscious, as we do earnestly pray, that both you and we may be so sensible
thereof, as that we may more truly and deeply lay it to heart) may, by a true
loving accord, which yet is to be in the way of truth, with brotherly
admonition and exhortation be reclaimed (and in which way their reformation is
most desirable) or by due censures corrected and amended, we not being willing,
that such sharp Physic should be applied for any other end. But here we cannot
but express our fears, least there be some amongst us (and we heartily wish,
that you be not found in the number) that are of that temper, that, whatever
might be the fruit of brotherly admonition and Church censures, and of
reconciliation and union amongst all Parties (and hereof you profess to be
desirous) they are resolved to be reconciled in no other way, then upon
admittance of Episcopacy, and casting out of the ruling Elder, But with those
that are of this stamp, we have no hopes of any cordial Union, till God alter
their Judgments and change their hearts.

But whereas, to persuade us to accept of the terms of Union by you
propounded, you now do further add and say; That amongst our selves also, many
(who returning to their Canonical Obedience, which they have sworn to) may blot
out the charge of Schism that lies upon them: and the Church of God be
continued amongst us, from age to age, to the end of the world, in a succession
of a lawfully ordained Ministry. We are far from being convinced by these
Argument, and must take the liberty to speak to them particularly, and fully,
that so we may wipe off the Aspersions, that thereby are cast upon us, and the
Church of God. The Arguments you here urge, are two; we shall speak unto them
both, and in their order.

(1.) And here we shall speak in the first place unto the charge of Schism,
that you would fasten upon us; reserving unto another The imputtion of Schtaken
off.
place our Answer unto the charge of Perjury, where you do it more plainly and
expressly, though here you might intend to insinuate it. But as touching that of
Schism, you plainly declare, That such Ministers (and of this sort, you say,
there are many amongst us, though if we should put you to prove this, you would
never be able to make it out) as return not to that canonical Obedience (as you
call it) which they were sworn to (as you say) lie under the blot of Schism.
But in your next Paper, you charge us with this more then once, and call it a
Rent indeed, a Schism in the highest. See Sect. 9 of their third Paper.
We shall not examine that, which you here seem to take for granted, sc. that
all Ministers that were ordained by Bishops, did swear Canonical Obedience to
them, (which we are sure is very untrue concerning many) as how far those, that
did take any such Oaths, were bound to obey, is not to our purpose now to
discuss.

But as to that blot of Schism, you would bring us, and the Ministers of these
Nations under, who return not to that Obedience, they sometimes yielded to
their several Diocesans, we must speak the more fully, because the Charge is
foul.

(1.) But we shall in the first place speak something of the nature of Schism.
The word (...), or Schism, signifies a Rent or Division: So it is used 1 Cor.
12. 25. That there be no (...), or Schism in the body. In Js. 7. 43. its said,
There was (...), a schism or division among the people because of Christ. And
John 9. 16. Therefore some of the Pharisees said, this man is not of God,
because he keeps not the Sabbath day: Others said, how can a man that is a
sinner, do such Miracles? And there was (...), a division or schism among them.
So John 10. 19. And so we read Acts 4. 4. That the multitude was divided, and
part held with the Jews, and part with the Apostles. This acceptance of the
word is general, and may comprehend under its Latitude any kind of Dissension.
And hereupon Divines, though restraining it to Dissentions or Divisions about
matters of Religion, speak of a good Schism, that is justifiable; which is the
dissolution of a bad Union, and that is but a conspiracy against God, as was
that Union, that was amongst the Jews, before they heard the Doctrine of
Christ, of which John 10. 19. By this kind of Schism afterward, the whole
World was rent, and of which Christ speaks, Matthew. 20. 35. For I am come to set
a man at variance against his Father etc. And hereupon Gerhardus Vide loc.
theol. tom. 5. cap. 11. Sect. 156.
in answer to Bellarmines charge of Schism upon the Protestants, says; Denique
concedimus nos esse sano sensu schismaticos, quia scilicet ab Ecclesia Romana,
and ejus capite Pontifice Romano secessionem fecimus, nequaquam vero ab unitate
Ecclessiae, and ejus capite Christo Jesu nos separavimus. At beatum schisma!
per quod Christo and verae catholicae Ecclesiae uniti sumus. This Schism is
that, which is commanded Come out of her my people, Revel. 18. 4. And of this
Schism Ambrose speaks, Siqua est Ecclesia, quae fidem respuit, deserenda est.
1. e. If there be any Church, that refuses the faith, it is to be forsaken.
But as when we speak of Schism, it is usually taken in the worse part, so it
is the bad and sinful Shisme, that is here spoken of. But thus also it is
sometimes taken generally, for any division in the Church, that is
unwarrantable; and so it comprehends also Heresy. And so the words Heresy and
Schism are sometimes used in the same sense, 1 Cor. 11. 19. For there must
needs be Heresies, or Schisms, or Sects, that those that are approved, may be
made manifest among them. Although strictly Heresy be opposed unto Faith, and
Schism unto Charity. And this leads us to show, what Schism is, taken
strictly and properly, which in brief may be thus described. Schism is a
dissolution or breach of that union, that ought to be amongst Christians,
consenting together in the same Faith. And because this breach of Union does
chiefly appear, in denying or refusing Communion with the Church, in the use of
Gods public Ordinances, therefore that kind of separation is by a kind of
singular appropriation, truly and rightly called Schism. Thus much for the
opening the nature of Schism. Now because you here charge us with it, we must
needs tell you, the charge is great. For Schism truly and properly so called,
and as it is taken in the worser part, is a very hurtful, dangerous, and
pernicious evil: The Apostle warned to take heed of it, and condemned it in the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. V. 10. 11, 12, 13. It is a work of the flesh, and
therefore the Apostle proves the Corinthians to be carnal, because of the
divisions, that were among them, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. It is a great offense against
Christ's being a rending of the Unity of his mystical Body. It is a wrong unto
the Church, whose peace is thereby disturbed: and to the Members of the Church,
their edification being thereby hindered. And to conclude, Schism opens the
door unto Heresy, into which it does oftentimes degenerate, and so makes way
to separation from Christ. And therefore you here charging us to lie under the
blot of Schism, until Episcopacy be again admitted of, and there be a
returning to that Obedience, that formerly has been given to the Bishops,
should have produced some Arguments for the making out your Charge. But here
you are wholly silent, and think it sufficient to insinuate this so high a
Charge, without giving any reasons to convince us of our guiltinesses. As if we
must presently without reason judge our selves, because you accuse us.

(2.) Yet because some may be ready to take the matter upon trust, and, except
we purge our selves from this Crime, by saying something for our selves,
conclude we are guilty, because you say so; we shall therefore in the second
place offer to the Reader these following considerations, that we may thereby
clear our selves from this foul aspersion.

(1.) That though Episcopacy be never restored and neither we, nor any other
Ministers in this Land, return to that Canonical Obedience, that has formerly
been yielded, yet still both we and they may continue in Communion with the
same Church of England, that we held Communion with during the continuance of
Episcopacy, and with which we also do hold communion in all the Ordinances of
Gods Worship, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. This in the beginning of this Paper
you do not deny, for you there speak of us, as Brethren of one and the same
Church and Fellowship. And we know not, what other Church you mean, but the
Church of England; some of you, that are the Subscribers of this Paper, not
being Members of the particular Church at Manchester, nor any of you
acknowledging, or owning our Presbyterian Classical Church or Association. And
therefore you here take us to be of the same Church of England with your
selves, and confess, that we are in fellowship with it, notwithstanding
Episcopacy be taken away; and which is that, which we our selves do constantly
profess.

(2.) That that Episcopacy that was submitted to by the Ministers of this Land
of later times, was burdensome and grievous: It spoiled the Pastors of that
power; which of right did belong unto them, and which they did not only
anciently exercise (as Doctor Usher shows in his Reduction of Episcopacy, to
the form of Synodicall Government, received in the ancient Church, Page 3, 4
5.) but which also by the order of the Church of England (as the same Author
out of the Book of Ordination shows) did belong unto them. For he there says,
By the Order of the Church of England all Presbyters are charged to administer
the Page 1.
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this Realm has received; and that they might better
understand, what the Lord has commanded them, Ibid. ex Acts 20. 27, 28.
the Exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, is
appointed to be read unto them, at the time of their Ordination. Take heed
(...), so taken, Mat. 2. 6. Rev. 12. 5. and 19. 15.
unto your selves, and to all the Flock, among whom the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers to rule the Congregation of God which he has purchased with his
blood. All which power the Pastors were deprived of during the prevalency of
Episcopacy, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven being taken out of their hands,
they having neither power to cast out of the Church the vilest of Offenders,
that were often kept in against their minds; nor any power to restore into the
Churches Communion, such as had been never so unjustly excommunicated, though
of the best of their Flock. And so that Episcopacy, that formerly was submitted
unto, was a plain and manifest usurpation upon the Pastors Office and
Authority; was very oppressive and grievous unto the Church and injurious to
her Communion: and whereupon it will follow, that there is no breach of that
Union, which ought to be maintained in the Church; by not admitting of it
again, but rather the Churches peace; the power, that of right belongs unto the
Pastors, and the Privileges of the Members, are all better secured, in the
absence, then in the presence of it.

(3.) That however both godly Conformists as well as Nonconformists, did groan
under the burthensomness of it, yet in licitis and honest is, they submitted
and yielded Obedience to it, whilst it continued established by the Laws of the
Land; And that out of respect to the peace of the Church, although they did not
thereby take themselves obliged, to forbear the use of any lawful means, for
their deliverance from that bondage, as opportunity was offered. And hereupon
they petitioned the Parliament of late for an abolition of it, as had been
formerly desired in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James; as when other
Laws have been found to be inconvenient and mischievous, it was never accounted
any disturbance of the civil peace, to remonstrate the grievousness of such
Laws to the Parliament, that they might be abolished.

(4.) Let it also be further weighed, that that Episcopacy, to which you would
persuade us by this Argument to return, is now abolished and taken away by the
Authority of Parliament, as appears by the Acts and Ordinances for that
purpose. (See them cited in our Animadversions on your next Paper, Sect. 4.)
And therefore both the Bishops as such, and that Superiority, which they
challenged and exercised over the Ministers in this Land, are dead in Law; and
so there can be no guilt of Schism lying on the Ministers in this Land, for
not returning to that Canonical Obedience, that is not hereupon any longer
due: or for not submitting themselves to that power and jurisdiction, that is
extinct. There is the greater strength in this consideration, if it be observed

1. That whatever Jurisdiction the Diocesan Bishops did exercise over
Presbyters, they did obtain only by the Law of the Land, and Canon of the
Church.

2. That the Parliament did lawfully take away that Jurisdiction from them, and
had therein the concurrence of a reverend and learned Assembly of Divines.

The first of these Propositions is clear upon this consideration, that the
Scripture makes a Bishop and a Presbyter all one. This is clear from Titus, 1.
Ver. 5. compared with the seventh; whence it appears, that those, whom the
Apostle had called Elders, or Presbyters, Ver. 5. he calls Bishops, Ver. 7. And
indeed otherwise he had reasoned very inconsequently, when laying down the
qualifications of Elders, Ver. 6. he says Ver. 7. For a Bishop, etc. For a
Bishop must be blameless. Whereunto may be added that other known place, Act.
20. 17. compared with Ver. 28. For the Apostle says to those Elders, that the
Holy Ghost had made them Bishops or Overseers of the Church. Besides, what
Office the Bishops had, that the Elders had. Both are charged to feed the Flock
of Christ, Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 12. and which is both by Doctrine and
Government. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were committed to them, Mat. 16.
19. both the Key of Doctrine, and the Key of Discipline. The former is not
denied; and for the other, it is proved from 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb.
13. 7, 17, 24. where we see they are called (...), those that are over them;
(...), those that rule well; (...), those that rule. And for power to Ordain,
we may see its plain from 1 Timothy 4. 14. where Timothy is charged not to neglect
the Gift, that was in him, which was given him by Prophecy, with the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery. This Text you your selves tell us, in your next
Paper, Sect. 5. is understood by the Greek Fathers, as Ignatius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, and others, and some few of the Latins
also, Of the company of Presbyters, i. e. Bishops, who lay hands on the new
made Bishops, or Priests. But from these several Texts thus urged, it is very
manifest, that the Scripture makes a Bishop and a Presbyter both one, or one
and the same order of Ministry. And hereupon it follows, that whatever
Jurisdiction the Diocesan Bishops exercised over Presbyters, they had it not by
Divine Right, but obtained it only by the Law of the Land, and Canon of the
Church. And thus the first Proposition is clear.

We now come to make good the second. And that the Parliament did lawfully take
away the Jurisdiction and whole Office of Diocesan Bishops, is proved from the
grounds already laid. For this Jurisdiction of theirs above Presbyters, did not
belong unto them by Divine Right; we having proved that the Scripture makes a
Bishop and a Presbyter to be both one. And therefore the Parliament, that by
Law gave them their power, might, seeing just cause for it, by Law take it
away. They had also just reason for to take it away, in regard of the
oppressiveness and burthensomness of it, both to Ministers and People, to this
whole Church and Nation, as has been proved before. And therefore what they
herein did, was justly, yea, piously, and prudently done, and for which the
Church of God in this Land, both Ministers and People, do for the present, and
will for the future, see great cause to bless God, for many Generations.

And that they had the concurrence herein of a reverend and learned Assembly of
Divines, is clear from their Exhortation annexed to the Ordinance of Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, with Instructions for taking the League and
Covenant in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. In this Exhortation
of the Assembly of Divines, in answer to some Objections, they apprehended,
might be made against the taking of the Covenant, they thus express themselves.
If it be said, for the extirpation of Prelacy, to wit, the whole Hierarchiall
Government (standing as yet by the known Laws of the Kingdom) is new and
unwarrantable. This will appear to all impartial understandings (though new)
to be not only warrantable, but necessary; if they consider (to omit what some
say, that this Government was never formally established by any Laws of this
Kingdom at all) that the very life and soul thereof is already taken from it,
by an Act passed this present Parliament, so as (like Jezabels Carcass, of
which no more was left but the Skull, the Feet, and the Palms of her hands)
nothing of Jurisdiction remains, but what is precarious in them, and voluntary
in those, who submit unto them: That their whole Government is at best but a
humane Constitution, and such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of
Parliament (in which the Judgment of the whole Kingdom is involved and
declared) not only very perjudicial to the civil State, but a great hinderance
also to the perfect reformation of Religion: Yea, who knows it not to be too
much an Enemy thereunto, and destructive to the power of Godliness, and pure
administration of the Ordinances of Christ; which moved the well-affected,
almost throughout this Kingdom, long since to petition this Parliament (as
has been desired before in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James) for a
total abolition of the same: And then a little after. And as for these
Clergymen, who pretend that they (above all other) cannot covenant to
extirpate that Government, because they have (as they say) taken a solemn Oath,
to obey the Bishops in licitis and honestis: they can tell, if they please,
that they that have sworn Obedience to the Laws of the Land, are not thereby
prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means the abolition of those Laws,
when they prove inconvenient or mischievous. And yet if there should any Oath
be found, into which any Ministers, or others have entered, not warranted by the
Laws of God and the Land, in this case they must teach themselves and others,
that such Oaths call for repentance, not pertinacy in them

Thus far the Assembly of Divines in their Exhortation, for the taking the
solemn League and Covenant, and which we have thought requisite to transcribe,
that so it may appear, how fully they concurred with the Parliament in what
they did, touching the abolition of Episcopacy, as it does also confirm by
their Testimony, several things, that have been mentioned by us, wherein the
Reader may perceive their concurrence in Judgment with us. From all which it is
clear, that seeing Diocesan Bishops did but obtain that Jurisdiction, they
exercised over Presbyters, by the Law of the Land and Canon of the Church: The
Parliament finding this Government of Episcopacy to be very oppressive to this
Church, A great hinderance to the perfect Reformation of Religion, and
prejudicial to the civil State, they might both lawsully and laudably, being
therein also backed with the advice of a reverend and learned Synod, take it
away. And hence it will follow, that if the Ministers of this Land, for
severing themselves from the Bishops, and withdrawing their Canonical
Obedience from them, as some speak (the Parliament according to the reverend
Synod, having before taken away from them all that Jurisdiction over
Presbyters, that did belong unto them) must needs be accused of Schism, It is
a good Schism, yea, a blessed Schism, (to use the words, that Gerhard did,
defending the Protestants withdrawing from the Pope and the Church of Rome)
that they will be found to be guilty of. The blot whereof, as it is not to be
much regarded, so it is easily wiped off; and as we think it is already done,
in the Eyes of all impartial and unbyassed Readers, by these Considerations,
which we have laid down.

We have only one thing more to add, which is the third general Head we offer
to the Reader here, before we leave this first Argument, with which you would
persuade us, to return again to our former Yoke of Bondag.

(3.) For we offer it to the consideration of all impartial men, whether
considering what has been spoken touching the nature of Schism in the
general; and how lawfully and laudably the Parliament did abolish Episcopacy,
and how they passed by Ordinance the form of Church Government, Anno 1648.
establishing the Presbyterian in room of the Episcopal, and that how it was
set up in this County by their Authority; If they but observe, what your
actings have been, and what your expressions are in your Papers, they will not
thereupon see just cause to impute Schism (taken in the worst part, and as it
is taken most usually) unto you, who have been so forward, though without
reason, to fasten this blot upon us? But we are sure, during the prevalency of
Episcopacy, those that were not guilty of any such disturbance of the peace of
the Church, by any such boisterous Ventings of the Distempers of their Spirits,
as you are, were counted and called by the Prelates Schismatics. And from
which Aspersion, though sundry of those (being peaceable and godly, however
Non-conformists) were free, yet you being very unlike them, are not thereby
quit.

But we have now done with the first of those Arguments, we promised to speak
to particularly, whereby you would persuade us to admit again of Episcopacy;
and hope we have said to it that, which is sufficient.

(2.) We therefore now come to the second, wherein The being of the Church and
a lawfully Ordained Ministry secured in the want of Episcopacy.
you still rise higher, for therein you insinuate a thing of a far greater
and more dangerous consequence, if Episcopacy be not restored. For you
intimate, that it is necessary, That the Church of God may be continued amongst
us, from Age to Age, to the end of the World, in a succession of a lawful
ordained Ministry. And in your next Paper, you falling foul upon us, and
charging us with a rent indeed, a Schism in the highest; you add, which is not
satisfied but with the utter overthrow of the Church, from whom they rent. Here
you lay a great stress upon Episcopacy; and such an one, as none of our true
Protestant Divines, that defend the truth of our own and other reformed
Churches against the Papists, would ever have laid upon it. But here two things
are hinted, which we shall severally examine.

1. You intimate that by the taking away of Episcopacy, the Church is
overthrown; it cannot be continued amongst us from Age to Age, to the end of
the World, except Episcopacy be restored.

2. But yet there is a further Implication, sc. That there cannot be a
Succession of a lawful ordained Ministry (which Succession yet you intimate to
be necessary to the being of the Church) if we have not Bishops again, that
may Ordain.

(1.) Unto the first of these we shall answer, after we have premised a
distinction touching the word Church. For either the Church of God amongst us
(which you here speak of) is taken essentially, for that part of the Catholic
visible Church, which in regard of the place of its abode in this Land, is
called the Church of England, as the several parts of the Sea (which yet is
but one) receive their Denomination from the Shoares they wash. Or else you
take the word Church, for a Ministerial Church, or for the Church
represensative, as it is taken, Matthew. 18. 27. This premised we answer;

If you take the word Church in the former sense, your Position is very gross,
no other then this, that for want of Bishops, the whole Church of England is at
present overthrown; and that there is no way of recovery of it, but by the
restoring of them; and so in the mean season it is no Church, with whom we may
safely hold Communion: which lays a Foundation for separation from it, and of
Apostasy unto Rome, where Bishops may be had. We shall therefore to this say
no more, but only mind you of what is well observed by Mr. Baxter out of B.
Jewel, in the defense of the Agreement of the Worcestershire Ministers, Page
58. where he has these words; B. Jewel in his defense of the Apology
(Authorized to be kept in all Churches) Part 2. Page 131. [Neither does the
Church of England depend on them, whom you so often call Apostates, as if our
Church were no Church without them.

They are no Apostates Mr. H etc. Notwithstanding if there were not one,
neither of them, nor of us, left alive, yet would not the whole Church of
England flee to Lovaine. Tertullian says, Nonne and Laici sacerdotes sumus?
Scriptum est, regnum quoque and s^cerdotes Deo and patri suo nos fecit:
differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit ecclesiae authoritas, and
honos per ordinis concessum sanctificatus a Deo. Vbi ecclesiastici ordinis non
est concessus, and offert, and tingit sacerdos, qui est ibi solus. Sed and ubi
tres sunt, Ecclesia est, licet Laici]

But if you take the word Church for a Ministerial or Organized Church, we
oppose your Position with these following Arguments.

(1.) That which we have already proved, sc. That a Bishop and a Presbyter are
all one in Scripture acceptance, will necessarily infer, that the being of a
Ministerial or Organized Church, does not depend on the continuance or
restoration of Bishops, taking them for such, as are superior to Presbyters,
either in regard of Order or Jurisdiction. For though these be never restored,
yet Presbyters being continued (that yet are Bishops in Scripture sense) the
Organized and Ministerial Church of Christ is fufficiently secured against the
danger of perishing.

2. But by the Tenent, you here hold forth, you do very uncharitably unchurch
the best reformed Churches throughout the World; The Protestant Churches of
France, Scotland, the Low countries, and Geneva, must all be p^t out of the
number of free Organized and Ministerial Churches; and their Ministers must
(because they admit not the Bishops; that you are for) be accounted no lawful
Ministers: Yea, you here again very undutifully unchurch your Mother the
Church of England, if she restore not Episcopacy; and herein gratify the
Papists no little, that vilify her and other reformed Churches, as no true
Churches, and ^ry out against their Ministers as no lawful Ministers. But
blessed be God, both the Church of England, and other reformed Churches and
their Ministers, have had, and still have better Advocates, and more dutiful
Sons, then you herein approve your selves to be, to plead their Cause.

3. By this Tenent also it will follow, That all the Ordinances, that are
dispensed in these Churches, are null and void. Their Baptism is no Baptism:
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper Administered amongst them, is no Sacrament;
and the like must be said of all the Ordinances, that are dispensed in our
Church, by such as were not ordained by Bishops; and so it makes them as to
outward Church Priviledges no better then mere Heathens; and hereupon it
ministers occasion of endless Doubts and Scruples unto the Members of those
Churches, of questioning the validity of their Baptism, and whether they ought
not to be rebaptized? which doubts also by your Tenent are occasioned also to
all those among your selves, that were baptized by such Ministers, as were not
Ordained by Bishops. Thus you see, how you lay the Foundation of Anabaptisme,
which yet you would seem to be zealous Opposers of.

4. Add hereunto, that hence it will unavoidably follow; That you must not hold
any Communion with these Churches, nor such Congregations in the Church of
England, where these Ordinances are dispensed by such, as were not Ordained by
Bishops; their Ministers, according to your Doctrine, being not lawful
Ministers; and for the Ordinance dispensed by them null and void. And here is a
Rent indeed, a rent in the highest (to use your own expressions) from which
our old Episcopal Divines, that were sound Protestants, would never have
excused you, no nor Doctor Usher, with whom in some things you profess to
close. For however he is represented by Doctor Bernard, to have held, that a
Bishop had Superiority in degree above a Presbyter by Apostolical Institution,
Vide pa. 128. of Dr. Bernards late Book. * Vide pa. 126.
and had expressed himself sharply enough in his Letter to Doctor Bernard,
Touching the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as had severed themselves from
Bishops, yet a little after speaking of the Churches of the Low Countries * he
says: For the testifying his Communion with these Churches (which he
professes to love and honor as true Members of the Church Universal) he
should with like affection receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the
Dutch Ministers, if he were in Holland, as he should at the hands of the French
Ministers if he were in Charenton. By which you may perceive (however he held
those Churches defective in Government for want of Bishops) yet he neither upon
this account does unchurch them, nor would have refused Communion with them, as
you, by what you do here hold forth, must needs do.

5. Nay lastly, hence it will follow, that when all the Bishops in these Lands,
and those that were Ordained by them, shall be dead, if there be no Bishops to
be found in any other reformed Churches, nor Ministers, that were Ordained by
them, a retreat back again to Rome must be sounded, that so we might have a
lawful Ordained Ministry and a Church: which yet cannot be, but by owning the
Pope as the Head of the Church and renouncing the Protestant Religion; as in
the mean season great advantage is given to the Popish Emissaries to ensnare
the weak by such a dangerous Insinuation, as this is, sc. That for want of
Bishops, or that when all the Bishops are dead and those, that were Ordained by
them, we have amongst us neither Church nor Ministry, nor Ordinances, and thus
must continue to the end of the World, except we return to Rome, and which
they will not be wanting to tell them. But if you had consulted Bishop Jewel,
Bishop Downame, Doctor Field, Bishop Davenant, Mr. Mason, and other Orthodox
Episcopal Divines in this Point, and weighed their Defenses of the reformed
Churches and Ministry against the Papists, you would have found, they would
never have owned such a dangerous and unsound Position, as the Argument, you
here urge us with to admit again of Episcopacy, does imply. Neither do we
believe, that they, if they were now alive, would judge, that you had here
argued well for your Mother the Church of England, that has her self also,
ever since the Reformation, even during the time of Episcopacy, acknowledged
the reformed Churches of France, Scotland, Low Countries, Geneva, to be true
Churches of Christ, and has given them the right hand of Fellowship as Sister
Churches, and owned their Ministers, Ordained without Bishops by Presbyters
only, to be true Ministers.

(2.) We now come to the second thing employed in this your second Argument,
with which you would persuade us to admit of Episcopacy, which is, as we have
said before, that if it be not restored, there cannot be a succession of a
lawfully Ordained Ministry. Which succession yet you seem to judge to be
necessary unto the continuance of the Church of God amongst us. Here two things
are employed:

(1.) The first whereof is, that a Succession is necessary to the very being of
the Church, and of a lawfully Ordained Ministry. And so 1. You do hereby
strengthen the hands of the Papists, who make the Succession of Bishops and
Pastors without any interruption from the Apostles, to be a Mark of the true
Church, although they are therein opposed generally by our Protestant Divines.
The Condition of the Church being many times such, that the Succession of
public Teachers and Pastors is interrupted. Doctor Sutlive says well, In
externa Lib. de Ecclesia cap. 18. fo. 123.
successione, quam and haeretici saepe habent, and Orthodoxi non habent, nihil
est momenti. 2. You do also hereby Minister occasion of such scruples unto
private Christians, as you will never be able satisfactorily to resolve. For
suppose one on this ground questions the truth of his Baptism, sc. Because he
does not know whether he was baptized by one that was Ordained by a Bishop, who
himself also was Ordained by a former true Bishop, and he by a former, until
the Succession be carried on as high, as that we are brought to such a Bishop,
that was ordained by one of the Apostles. How will you be able, making this
Succession necessary to the continuing of the Church, and a lawfully Ordained
Ministry, to resolve the scruples of such an one? What Church-Story shall be
able to resolve the doubts that may be moved on this occasion? Or on what
grounds (holding the necessity of this Succession for the continuance of the
Church, and a lawfully Ordained Ministry) will you be able to satisfy the
Conscience of such, as may be stumbled?

3. Nay, will not this Assertion give occasion to sundry, to question all
Churches, Ministry, and Ordinances, and so to turn Seekers; the Grounds you lay
down, giving them occasion to question the truth of our Churches, Ministry, and
Ordinances.

4. Neither shall the best and ablest Ministers, that are already entered into
that Calling, or such as are to enter into it, be able on your Principles in
this particular, either to satisfy their own Consciences touching the
lawfulness of their calling, or be able to justify and defend it against
those, that shall call it in question But our Protestant Divines have more sure
Grounds, on which to justify our Churches, Ministry, and Ordinances, and to
satisfy their own and their peoples Consciences concerning them, then what you
insinuate

(2.) The second thing that is further employed in this Argument, is that the
Succession of a lawfully Ordained Ministry to the end of the World, does depend
upon Episcopacy, which is not true. There was a time, when Bishops had no
Superiority above Presbyters; a Bishop and a Presbyter in Scripture sense being
all one, as has been proved before. And though this Superiority should never
be restored unto them, yet the Succession of a lawfully Ordained Ministry might
be by the means of Presbyters Ordaining Presbyters. And thus we say it was
continued, not only in the days of Episcopacy, (though not without the
mixture of some corruption cleaving to the Ordination then in use) the Bishops
(notwithstanding their usurped Superiority above their fellow Brethren) being
themselves also Presbyters, and so their Ordination valid in that respect (and
which we have constantly maintained against those of the separation) but also
in the darkest times of Popery, and that our Ministry descended to us from
Christ, through the Apostate Church of Rome, but not from the Apostate Church
of Rome; as our reverend Brethren of the Province of London do well express it,
in their Jus divinum ministerii Evangelici, where they do solidly and learnedly
prove, That the Ministry, which is an Institution of Christ passing to us
through Rome, is not made null and void, no more then the Scriptures,
Sacraments or any other Gospel Ordinance, which we now enjoy, and which do also
descend to us from the Apostles, through the Romish Church. And concerning
which, if any one do doubt, we refer him unto the Book for his satisfaction
Part 2. cap. 3. where (as they well say) -- this great truth so necessary to be
known in these days, is fully discussed, and made out.

We have now at length done with both those Arguments, we promised to speak to
particularly, with which you urged us to accept of the Proposal, touching the
taking in the Bishops: wherein we have been the longer (though perhaps this
Discourse may by you be accounted tedious) that so we might wipe off the foul
aspersion of Schism, that we are therein charged with, and likewise show, that
the Church of God and a lawfully Ordained Ministry, are sufficiently secured in
the non-admission of Episcopacy; and which we have also before proved, tends
not to secure the Church or Ministry, but to inthrall both, and bring them
under bondage.

And now as touching the next Argument you use; we are sure there is no need of
Episcopacy, that the Word of God might be firmly fixed among us; but rather we
say, That the danger of its removal Westward, hinted to you lately by one of
the reverend Pastors of the Church of Manchester, would by the admitting of it,
be increased; considering how many godly, painful Ministers were silenced by
the Prelates, and driven into America of later times; and so hereupon there
would be danger, that the Word of God, that is now on the Tiptoes (ready to
remove, if God of his infinite mercy prevent it not) should presently take its
flight from us and be gone, being sent unto a people, that would bring forth
better Fruit, then we have done; or then this will be found to be, to take in
Prelacy again, and that in time of peace, after we had in the days of our
Affliction, according to our solemn Covenant, cast it forth.

Now whereas you add, that you should by our accepting of your Motions, have
been happily freed from the trouble of any further rejoinder unto our Answer.
Which otherwise (as you say) you must do, amongst other considerable reasons,
to take off our Government, from that establishment of Authority, upon the
proof whereof the most considerable part, as to the bulk, of our Answer, does
insist.

We shall here only mind you of some few particulars;

1. Though we shall not take advantage of words, yet when you tell here of a
Rejoinder to be made to our Answer, from which you should have been freed, if
we had closed with your Proposals, we do not conceive you speak properly. For
your first Paper was your Bill of Complaint, which we answered, and to one part
whereof you reply in this Paper, in way of tender of some terms of agreement;
which because not accepted of by us, you reply to our Answer more particularly
in you next. This did concern you to have minded who carp at words; that we
used in our Answer, though, as we shall show, when we come to it, without any
cause.

2. You here say, That the most considerable part of our Answer, as to the
bulk, does insist upon the proof of the establishment of our Government by
Authority; and this you say again and again in your next Paper, though
without any show of truth: as when we come to examine that Paper, we shall
there manifest.

3. You by this close intimating or rather Threatenings, that if we did not come
up to your Proposalls, you must be put to the trouble of a Rejoinder (as you
speak) amongst other considerable reasons, to take off our Government from the
establishment of Authority, that we lay claim to: And having told us in your
first Paper; That it concerned us to look to it, whether we had not run our
selves into a Praemunire, gave us sufficient reason (as we believe all candid
Readers will judge) to put you upon the work to unvalid our civil Function,
and which is all that in your Advertisement to the Reader you can charge us
with, as that which ministered any occasion of provocation: and which it seems
was so great, after you had recived that Answer, that in your next Paper, even
after you had slept upon it, it breaks forth into a flame. But we should have
judged you a great deal more happy, if you had never put your selves upon the
trouble of such a Rejoinder (as you call it) considering what unquietness and
distemper of Spirit you do there discover, as every Reader may easily conceive,
that if from our Answer to your first Paper, you conceived some hopes of an
amicable and friendly agreement of differences, and as you profess in your
Advertisement to the Reader, you did; you had no just cause given you to
conceive from those verbal exceptions against the last passage of your Reply,
that we gave you, as you there speak; nor from the Work we put you on which you
there mention; that we intended not any friendly treaty with you in order to
such a Composure. Although we must needs confess, that if you conceived hopes
of agreement with us, upon the terms you here propound, you were therein much
mistaken; they being those very things we expressly cautioned against in our
Answer, as we have said before; having also fully showed your further great
mistake, when you appehended, we quoted Dr. Usher, as our own man, or an
Vmpire and Composer of differences betwixt us, as likewise has been declared
before: Although we must still say, that Dr. Usher does Patronize, whatever we
quoted him for: And this may be a sufficient Answer both to the last passage in
this Paper, and likewise to what you have in your Advertisement to the Reader,
which is subjoyned to it.

But we have thus finished our Answer to this Paper; wherein we have been
purposely the larger upon some Points; that, they being here more fully
discussed, as occasion was offered, when the things you have here hinted, shall
come again to be mentioned in your next Paper, this our Answer to them, once
for all, may suffice.

The third and last Paper that was presented to us by certain Gentlemen and
others within the bounds of our Association.
To the first Class at Manchester within the Province of Lancaster, these.
SECT. I.
Though we could not but take notice of the prolixity of your last answer in
writing, yet we gave you an acknowledgment of your civility, so far as it
related Cl. cop.
to us, and hoped you would have closed with us in a happy, and amicable We
have already returned our thanks for your Answer, full of civility (as to us)
though not of brevity.
union, and composure of all differences amongst us, in the Church of God here;
you pretending so cordially to desire it, and we condescending to come so near,
even (as it were) to your own terms. But oh! that there had been such a heart
in you! then had you spared us the pains of this Rejoinder to your long Answer,
made longer, through that needless and tedious discourse of yours, concerning
the civil sanction of the Presbyterian government: And though (in the very
Preface) you say your leisure will not permit you to spend time about
impertinencies; its wonder to think how quickly you forget your selves: for you
no sooner have said it, but straightway fall in hand, to prove this Thesis,
viz. That your Church government is established by the Law of this Land, and to
stuff your Paper, with the recital of sundry Orders and Ordinances of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, etc. which takes up many pages
throughout your paper: Which as it was no Question of ours, but started now by
you, we shall not here take the pains to reply to, but defer it till anon:
Though (we crave leave to tell you) you have hereby started more doubts then
you can assoyle, and said more, then you have as yet proved, or can make good:
but we have not leisure at present to follow you further then our way lies, and
therefore come to the matter in hand.

The Animadversions of the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, on
this paper.
1. FIrst, There was no reason, why (though our answer was large (which you
complain of) seeing it was in order to, and necessary for your satisfaction)
that should hinder your acknowledgement of our civillity toward you;
especially considering those sharp reflections on us, and on our Government in
your first paper, (which in your second you do not deny) and which ministered
unto us occasion of provocation; but we were resolved not to answer you in your
own kind, as through the grace of God we hope (though we must deal faithfully
with you) we shall keep our selves still from returning railing for railing;
notwithstanding in this paper you deal far more uncivilly and unchristianly
with us, as the Reader will perceive.

Secondly, But whereas you acknowledge our civillity only so far, as it
related unto you, we cannot see any reason for this restriction, we having not
dealt uncivilly with any, that we had occasion to mention or quote in our
answer.

Thirdly, Neither did we give any occasion, by the answer we gave you to your
second paper, to conceive that we intended not an amicable union, and composure
of differences, according to our profession of our cordial and hearty desires;
although (we must needs confess) whatever your hopes were, we did not apprehend
any great likelihood of a closure with you, or that you had reason so to
conceive, upon the terms you propounded in your second paper, as we have said
already in our answer to it; except you thought we might be courted out of our
principles, upon your earnest entreaty, without any grounds and reasons at all.

Fourthly, We cannot but wonder that you should say with any qualification,
that you condescend to come to our terms; except it be, as it were, to come to
our terms, to propound in order unto peace, What? in that very place, where we
profess our selves so willing and desirous of union, we had expressly cautioned
against, as being things we could not in conscience yield unto. But when you
speak of your condescension, we cannot but thereby conceive your meaning to be
this, that if you grant preaching Presbyters any power in Ecclesiastical
matters, and to have decisive votes in Synods (where the Bishops are to be the
superintendents and perpetual moderatours, according to the proposals of Dr.
Usher) you think you condescend very far. And upon this and other grounds, we
have cause to fear, if the ruling Elders were removed, and you should come to
be censured by the preaching Presbyters, your exceptions then would be as much
against them in such a case, as against the ruling Elders now; and that then
you would cry up the Bishops, as having the solitary power of jurisdiction, and
that it belonged not to other Ministers to meddle therein at all.

Fifthly, When mentioning our professions cordially to desire peace, (which you
will have to be but a pretending to it only) you say, Oh that there had been
such a heart in us! We must needs tell you, that we can approve our hearts to
him that is the searcher of them, that there was then, and is still, a cordial
desire of peace and union, with all that are truly godly and orthodox
throughout the Land, however differing from us in some points, touching
Discipline and Government; and do heartily wish, that you closed with us in
those desires, as cordially and heartily as we do. But we hereby perceive, that
except we have an heart for Episcopacy (condescended by you for the present to
be moderated) and to throw out the ruling Elders (even to the forcing of our
consciences against the Scriptures we urged in our answer, for the divine right
of their office, and against the Scriptural arguments thence urged, to which we
referred you, (though by you slighted) and against the reasons also we urged
in our answer, where we cautioned against moderate Episcopacy, never so much as
attempted to be answered by you) you judge us to have no hearts for peace.

Sixthly, Whereas you say, our discourse concerning the civil sanction of our
Presbyterian Government (which produced the authority that awarranted all that
was in that paper, we published in our several Congregations, and whatever we
have acted in the exercise of that Government from the first to the last, since
it was set up) was needless, we leave it to the Reader to judge of, when he
shall consider, that in your first paper you told us, of our making Laws and
Edicts, and publishing them openly in the Church, for all to obey upon pain of
Excommunication, contrary to the Laws in force -- and that it concerned us to
look unto it, whether we had not run our selves into a praemunire.

Seventhly, But it seems you count that discourse also tedious; though it was
necessary, both for our own vindincation, and to give you full and particular
satisfaction, touching the rules prescribed unto us in the form of
Church Government to walk by; besides that this fair manner of dealing with
you, in bringing to your hand, what we judged you might never have enquired
after, gave you the opportunity to have excepted against us, for transgressing
our rule, if you had any thing to have alleged against us in that respect:
But perhaps the mentioning of any Ordinances of Parliament, and rules therein
expressed for the Presbyterian Government, was that which was tedious to you,
and which we have some reason for to think; and therefore afterward you
endeavor (though you perform not what you undertake) to take them all away,
and utterly to nullify all Ordinances of Parliament whatsoever.

Eighthly, You judge also, that we quickly forget our selves, when we said in
our answer, our leisure would not permit us to spend time about impertinencies,
and yet presently fall upon alleging of sundry Orders and Ordinances of
Parliament; but these were not produced by us to prove, that the Presbyterian
Government was established by the Law of the Land, but to give you some account
how the setting up of the Presbyterian Government in this County, the dividing
it into several Classes, the making those Classes into a Province, and
appointing this Class to be the first, was all done by Authority of Parliament:
this being the inference that we made from our recital See the first Section of
it toward the close.
of the Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, that were mentioned in our answer,
and which was occasioned by your selves, who having entitled us in your first
paper, The first Class at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster, then
presently added, Give us leave to salute you in your own terms: We judged you
might be ignorant of the particular Orders and Ordinances touching what
concerned this Province of Lancaster, and this Class in particular, in the
particulars abovementioned, though you might have seen some Ordinances in the
general, for the Presbyterian Government, and which we believe any indifferent
Reader will discern, are distinct things; as the Parliament also in passing
them, distinguished them; and therefore you should not have dealt so
disingeniously with us, as to have accounted the discourse impertinent, which
was necessary for your information, if you were ignorant: If you knowing these
Orders and Ordinances, would yet have this discourse impertinent,
notwithstanding your jerking us, for calling our selves the first Classis
within the Province of Lancaster, (which terms we told you we gave not to our
selves, till the Parliament had first given them us) we leave it to the Reader
what to judge of it.

Ninthly, Here is also another strange assertion, when you say, it was no
question of yours, whether our Government be established by the Law of the
Land; when as in your first paper, in the words thereof recited even now, you
told us of our making Laws and Edicts, and publishing them contrary to the Laws
in force, and questioning whether we had not run our selves into a praemunire.
Doubtless if our Government be established by Ordinance of Parliament, and that
Ordinance awarrant us for whatever was published by us in the paper, and yet
that be asserted by you to be contrary to the Laws in force, it must needs be a
question of yours, whether our Government be established, by the Law of the
Land; as it is that which afterward you go about to prove, that it wants the
establishment of Authority; and so however you dare not tell the Justices of
the Peace, that have acted on other Ordinances of Parliament (that yet are also
null and void, if that we have acted on be) that they are not thereby
sufficiently secured against the danger of a praemunire; yet you dare tell us
of this once and again, and yet also it be no question of yours, whether our
Church Government be established by the Law of the Land; but how contradictory
these things are one unto another, we leave it to be judged of. As touching our
starting more doubts, then (as you say) we can assoyl, we shall have leisure
hereafter to examine, in the place where you have a mind to encounter us, and
now shall follow you in the way you have chosen to go in. And so we come unto
the next.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. II.
To that mistake you charge us withal, in the Preface of our Paper, concerning
the Title of yours, we answer; We find in the close of that your ^aper these
words (This presentation is approved by this Provincial Assembly; Tho. Johnson
Moderator, Edw. Gee Scribe) So it is approved by the Provincial Assembly under
that title of a presentation as we call it, Cl. cop.
in all the Copies we have seen: But this (as you say) might be the mistake of
your Scribe, and not to be insisted on. It is of greater weight and moment (you
say) to take notice of what we publish, as our sense The Scribe.
and apprehension of it, viz. The matter contained in your Paper. Not resting
in the judgment or determination of any general Council, contrary thereto (If
any such should be) much less to one of your Provincial Assemblies, etc. And
here you tell us of a public, and authoritative Judgment that is in
Councils, concerning matters of Doctrine, and Discipline (though tied to the
rule of Gods Word in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law) to which we ought
to be subject; And how far is that? viz. They have the power of expounding, and
explaining the difficult places of Scripture, as the Judges have of the
exposition of the Law) And in this sense we ought to subject to the sense, and
determination of a general Council. And therefore (you say) Questionless if in
the time of S. Augustine, (who was no con^emner of Synods and Councils) any in
this sense had declared, That they would not have submitted their apprehensions
to their Judgment, he would have cried out against them, as well as against
the Donatists, O Impudentem Vocem! And you hope, when we have weighed the
matter better, we will not in this sense, see any reason, to refuse to submit
either our sense and apprehension of your Paper, or what we may publish as our
own private judgments in other matters about Religion to the judgment of a
general Council supposing it might be had.

God forbid but we should submit; neither need we for this to weigh the matter
better, for in this sense we have done, and yet shall submit to any shall come
hereafter: Neither had you any reason so to judge your selves, or induce others
to that persuasion of us, that we should in this sense refuse to submit our
Judgments to the Judgment of any general Council; Our words are plain, We
publish this our sense, and apprehension of it, as far as it is plain to us,
Which words you omitting, deal not fairly with us. and which words carry
another sense with them; For so far as the matter contained in your Paper is
plain to us, we close, and join with you; Being as we explain our selves
afterward so fully warranted thereto by the Word of God, and constant practice
of the Catholic Church that therein so far as it is made thus plain unto us,
we shall not submit our Apprehensions to the Judgment of a general Council:
But by this Aposiopesis of yours, you would make the World believe, we refuse
to submit our Judgments to the Judgment of a general Council, not only
touching matters of faith, and such Articles of Religion, which are plainly
warranted by Gods Word, and constant practice of the Catholic Church: But
also touching matters, which are not so plainly set forth in the word of God:
Touching which last we prosess our willing submission to the Judgment of a
general Council, and are glad to hear you of the same mind, though we fear (as
we shall hear you declaring anon) you will hardly grant that to a general
Council, which you seem to grant to your Provincial. In which we dissent from
you as we have said.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
FIrst, We perceive you are resolved to stick to what you have once said,
though it be only the taking advantage of some litteral mistake, and which in
our answer we had told you was none of ours, when you called our paper by the
title of a presentation, but imputed it to the Scribe, (speaking indefinitely,
which might be yours as well as ours; though in your printed Copy you will have
us to say what we did not, that it was the mistake of our Scribe) and however
you say now, that in all the Copies which you have seen (which implies many)
you find in the close of that our paper, these words; this presentation is
approved by this Provincial Assembly, Thomas Johnson Moderator, Edward Gee
Scribe: Yet we believe, that if you be put upon the proof, it will be hard for
you to produce one Copy that was given forth by the Class, and written by our
Scribe, where you find our paper approved by the Provincial Assembly under the
title of a presentation, but of a representation only, as we said in our
answer. But as in the Preface to these papers that you printed, you insinuate
that we are men of low and cheap abilities; and in this paper do afterward
jeer and scoff at us, as persons destitute of all learning, as if you would
monopolize (as all power and jurisdiction) so all learning, and make the same
proper to your selves and your own party, (though we hope we have so much, as
to fathom the depth of that which you would make some show of) so here we have
cause to fear, you had a mind to represent us, (and which is worse, the
Provincial Assembly too, and those reverend and learned brethren, the Moderator
and Scribe of it also) to be such poor illiterate persons, as did not well know
how how to write good English.

Secondly, In your representing what we said touching submitting to Synods and
Councils; you do it but by the halfes, (and so deal unfaithfully) never so much
as mentioning what we had in our answer in the first place declared, viz. that
our faith was not to be resolved into the determination of any company of men
on earth whatsoever, or to be built on the judgment of Synods and Councills,
etc. for which we gave our reasons. And further we there said, that (when you
had said in your first paper, that as touching what you therein declare as your
sense and apprehensions of ours that we published, you did not rest in the
judgment and determination of any general Council contrary thereunto:) if your
meaning therein was the same with what we had declared ours to be, you had not
us differing from you. After we came to declare, in what respects they were to
be reverenced; viz. as they were the ordinances of God, and in respect of their
authoritative judgment, and that, in that respect they were to be submitted
to; in which respect we said we submitted our apprehensions, in the case
propounded to the judgment of the Provincial Assembly. But to make this more
plain, we proceeded to distinguish betwixt a private and public judgment in
matters of Religion, allowing the private to our selves and others, who (we
said) were all of us to see with our own eyes, and judge concerning what is to
be believed in matters of this nature. Again we distinguished the public and
authoritative judgment, into a concional (which belonged (we said) to every
Minister, to whom the key of Doctrine was committed, by himself singly) and
juridical; which (we said) belonged to Synods and Councils, who having the key
of Discipline committed to them, were to enquire into, try, examine, censure,
and judge of matters of Doctrine and Discipline authoritatively, (though tied
to the Word in such proceedings) and likewise to censure offenders; and then we
applied this to our purpose, and said that it was in this sense, that we
submitted our apprehensions, in the paper we published, to the judgment of the
Provincial Assembly, and for which we urged our grounds; all which will be
clear to the Reader, upon the perusal of the second Section of our answer: But
you only mention this last branch, and say, we tell you of an authoritative
judgment of Synods and Councills, and how we hoped when you had weigbed the
matter better, you would not in this respect see cause to submit, what you may
publish as your own private judgments about matters of Religion, to the
judgment of a general Council, suppose it might be had. But seeing, toward
the close of this Section, you profess, you are glad to hear us of the same
mind with you, touching this submission to Synods and Councills; you should not
thus maimedly have represented out opinion; considering how vastly different
ours and yours is in this matter; as will appear from what has been declared
to be ours, and what you declare to be yours in this Section, and which we
shall manifest anon to the Reader.

Thirdly, You seem here to abhor the refusal to submit, what you have
published or may publish as your own private judgment, in matters of Religion,
to the judgment of a general Council that has been, or any that may be
hereafter, and do complain, that we should either our selves judge, or induce
others to the persuasion of you, that you should refuse to submit your
judgment in the sense declared. But here we must mind you, that the sense we
declared was, that there was to be a submission to them, in regard of their
juridical authority; not that faith was to be built on their judgment; And in
this latter you will be found to submit too much; as if they should determine
against you, we fear in the former you would be found to submit too little. We
shall give the Reader our Reasons for both, that we may not seem to wrong you,
in fastening upon you without ground, what perhaps, as we have expressed the
matter, you may be ready to disclaim.

For the first; You do in this very Section profess, as touching matters which
are not so plainly set forth in the word of God, your willing submission to the
judgment of a general Council; and hereafter in the sixth Section of this
Paper, you say, where there is a doubt or difficulty, the Church may expound
the Scripture; although you grant what we said, soil. that it is tied to the
rule of Gods words in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law; though we do not
see, it is lawful for any private persons to examine, whether in case of such
a doubt or difficulty, the Church has given the right sense of Scripture; but
must (notwithstanding any grounds, they may have from that Text, which the
Church may expound, or other Texts of Scripture, to the contrary;) submit their
faith and belief in the case, to the Churches determination. For you there add
and say, we are b^und up by that, speaking of the Churches exposition, as you
say, we are to those cases in the Law, which are the judgment and exposition
of the Judges, upon the dark places of the same: the Churches exposition and
practice, (as you there further say) is our rule in such cases, and the best
rule too -- and when there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture,
it is to give way to private interpretation, and dominari fidei, to lord it
over the faith of others, to utter any other sense of Scripture (which you
there call the uttering of men's own fancies) then has been delivered by our
Forefathers, as you do more fully declare your selves in that place. From all
which it follows, that however in this Section you say, in matters of faith,
and such articles, as are plainly warranted by Gods word, and constant practice
of the Catholic Church, you refuse to submit your judgment to the judgment
of a general Council; yet in matters of Religion, that are not so plainly set
forth, you do; and to the Churches exposition, where there is a doubt and
difficulty, which is your rule, and the best rule too, and by which you are
bound up; which what is it else, then to build your faith in such cases, upon
their judgment, and so to submit to them, as we said, too much? And seeing,
there is almost no point of faith, but it is controverted; if all such points
must be judged, such matters, as about which there is doubt and difficulty, and
not plainly set forth in Gods word; then in all such cases it must be the
Churches exposition of the Scriptures and practice (as you do insisinuate) that
must be the rule by which you must be guided, and that on which in such cases
your faith must be built; and which, when we come to the sixth Section, we
shall show to be very unsound, and with the Papists, in whole or in part, to
resolve your faith into the determinations of men, the exposition of the
Church, or of Synods and Councils, that are the Church representative. The
Reader by this account may perceive, that in this respect you submitted too
much to Synods and Councils, and a great deal further then ever we submitted,
as is manifest from what we have showed, was in this our declared judgment, in
our answer to your first Paper.

But we shall now further proceed, to give the Reader our Reason, why if Synods
and Councils (and you say of these, you shall submit to any that shall come
hereafter) should determine against you, we feared, in regard of their
juridical authority, you would submit too little. There is betwixt you and us a
controversy touching the superiority of Bishop above Presbyters; we deny it,
you herein are for the affirmative. You assert in the very next Section, that
Ae*rius was condemned for heresy, for asserting this parity of
Church Officers; and it is Bishops and Presbyters only that are there spoken
of. There is also another controversy betwixt you and us, touching ruling
Elders, whether they be by divine right or no; you herein deny, and we affirm.
In these matters then, we shall take it for granted, till you deny it, that you
yield there is a doubt and difficulty, and touching which you will not have the
Scripture to be so plain, but that Fathers and Councils must be consulted in
these cases; and which was the reason, why in the case of the ruling Elder, you
sent us to them for to consult what exposition they gave of the Texts that we
alleged for the divine right of those Officers. Now the Question is, whether
you will submit to the determination of Synods and Councils in regard of their
juridical authority? As touching the first of these matters in difference, we
shall, in our Animadversions on your next Section, show, that there are Fathers
that determine against you. As touching the other concerning ruling Elders, we
have in our Answer to your second Paper, showed, there are several Fathers that
do give in clear evidence touching the being of this Officer in their times;
But as touching this Officer, whether he be an Officer of the Church by divine
right, we have not read of any general Council, before whom this case in
controversy was brought, much less that they determined against what in this
point we hold: (but we suppose) that from what you, or we may allege out
of Fathers or Councils of ancienter times, these points will not be found to
be determined, but there will be a difference betwixt us still. What then is
it, that you will submit to? To a general Council that shall come hereafter?
If so, and that you will give that due respect to Synods and Councils, that
may be hereafter, in regard of their juridical Authority; Then until a general
Council may be had, that may be regularly and duly called, and rightly
constituted; seeing the matters in difference betwixt you and us have been
tried and examined, judged and determined This is manifest from the advice of
the Assembly to the Parliament, touching Church Government.
against you, and for us, by a reverend and learned Synod and Assembly of
Divines (against vvhom^, your exception against our Provincial Assembly, in
regard of the Elders being admitted there as members, lies not) that was called
by the Authority of the Civil power, of this Nation under which we live; you
ought to testify your submission to that Synod, and not contrary to their
resolution of the cases in difference, and the Ordinances of Parliament for the
Presbyterian-Government, and against Episcopacy, disturb the peace of the
Church, by publishing your own private judgments (if their determinations had
been against us, and we had published ours in the cases in difference, you
would have called them our fancies) and thereby testify what little respect
you have to their resolutions. Upon this consideration we cannot but think;
that if a general Council should hereafter come, and determine these cases
against you, you that now submit not, would not submit then: And so the upshot
of the matter would be this; that if in these or such like cases in
controversy, you were otherwise resolved in your judgments, you would not
submit to the determination of a general Council, in regard of their juridical
authority; only if they determined according to your resolutions, then you
would submit; wherein notwithstanding your great professions of submission, you
do not submit much.

Fourthly, But now you find your selves agrieved, because when you said, you
did publish this your sense and apprehension of our Paper, as far as it was
plain to you, we leaving out the words, as far as it was plain to you, dealt
not fairly with you: for you say those words carry another sense with them,
then indeed we did understand them in; that is, as here you explain your
selves; so far as the matter contained in our Paper was plain to you, you
closed and joined with us, being (as you say) you explain your selves
afterward; so fully warranted thereunto by the word of God, and constant
practice of the Catholic Church, that therein so far as it is thus made plain
to you, you shall not submit your apprehensions to the judgment of a general
Council; but now your complaint of us is, that by leaving those words out,
which you thus explain, we represent you, as if where matters were not so
plain, but doubtful, you refused to submit. The truth is, we took these words
referring to our Paper, so far as it is plain to us, in opposition to obscurity
and darkness, you after complaining, that other parts of our Paper were full of
darkness; and then though we left those words out, yet we could not conceive,
we wronged you therein, being you could not profess your closure and joining
with us in any thing in our Paper, any further then you understood our plain
meaning. But seeing you here otherwise explain your selves, and say, you did it
before; we will be more liberal to you, then you are to us afterward, and
shall allow you the liberty to explain your selves; though we do not think,
that the sound and orthodox Reader will judge that your opinion thus explained,
and which you have here declared, touching your submission to Synods and
Councils, is any sounder, then as we understood you to have meant those words;
and which we doubt not, but he will discern from what has been said concerning
it, in the Animadversion going before.

5. But by this explication of your selves, you have created to us a further
scruple; for it a^peats to us from thence, (seeing you join the word of God,
and constant practice of the Catholic Church together, (as that which must
make those matters of faith and articles of Religion so plain to you, that you
thereupon will refuse to submit such matters, so made plain, and your
apprehensions concerning them, to a general Council) that except the plainest
matters of faith, and articles of Religion from Gods word be also made plain,
to have been the constant practice (rather judgment, as we think you should
have expressed it) of the Catholic Church, they are not so plain to you, as
not to submit your apprehensions concerning them to a general Council; and so
the word of God alone, even in the matters of faith and articles of Religion,
that are therein most plainly contained; shall not be a sufficient foundation,
to bottom your faith upon, except it be also evident, what was the constant and
universal practice (rather judgment) of the Church in those points; and so
your faith, even in the plainest articles of Religion, must be resolved into
the constant practice, or rather declared judgment of the universal Church, and
which makes it a mere humane not a divine faith. But touching this, as the rule
in any cases of matters of Religion, we shall have further occasion to speak in
our animadversions on the sixth Section of this paper.

6. As touching our selves, we have declared, that we did not submit to Synods
and Councils, so as to build our faith on their dictates, or resolve it into
their determinations; and in this we would be understood touching all matters
of faith whatsoever; not only those that are most plainly contained in Gods
word, but also such as about which there may be some doubt and difficulty,
although we reverence Synods as an Ordinance of God; and in way of means, judge
it more likely in doubtful cases, that what is Gods mind should be boulted
forth to our satisfaction, by the learned debates of learned, judicious and
godly Divines in such Assemblies, then by the discussion of one Bishop, or some
few Ministers. But as touching the juridicall power of Synods, we profess our
selves to be ready, to submit to their judgment, and did so submit our Paper
wholly to the judgment of our Provincial, which was a Synod actually in being,
and to whom we knowing our selves to be accountable, and judging we ought so to
be, thought it not meet to publish the Paper, that was read in our several
Congregations, except it had first been approved of by them. Now how far we
do, in this declaration of our judgments, touching our submission to Synods
and Councils, concur with what here you declare to be yours, we leave it to
your selves, and the Reader to judge of; but we are sure there is herein a great
distance betwixt your declared judgment and ours; though you shall not find
afterward, that we do hardly grant that to a general Council, rightly
constituted and regularly called, which we either in truth or any show, do
grant to our Provincial.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. III.
Having done with our Preface, you come to the matter; and as we said, Cl. cop.
Say now.
so we find we much dissent not, only in the third and last, concerning the
Heresy and Schism of those who Err so grossly, whether in Doctrinals, or
points of discipline: You give us the reason wherefore you did not so expressly
mention them, their sin, and punishment, as the grossly ignorant and
scandalous; Which is, because they are very inconsiderable in comparison of the
other; and in sundry of your Congregations (if not in most) not any at all,
that you know of. But if you will seriously consider the number of those, that
have rent themselves, from a true constituted Church, and of those who have
severed themselves, from those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn Canonical
obedience, and therefore in the Judgment of that Learned and Rever end Bishop
Usher and others, Cl. cop.
cannot possibly be excused from being Schismatic: we say if you consider
this, you will find a considerable number, even within the verge of your own
Association. Several Associations.


What we said touching the way of Catechizing for Information of the ignorant;
we are glad to hear you so heartily wish, for a more general practice thereof
in your Churches at home at (you say) it is practiced abroad. It was enjoined,
and practiced in the Church of England before your separation; And if you by
your pretended Reformation have destroyed that practice, the fault lies at your
own doors.

You understand us aright in this, That we hold it not fitting, that Persons
grossly ignotant should be admitted so the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: But
your conclusion thence is not good, viz. That we cannot therefore in reason
deny, that there ought to be an Examination and trial of all Persons (de novo)
before they be admitted, etc, Especially by your Eldership, To whom (you say)
the power of judgment and examination is committed, and not to any one
Minister, before whom all must come for re-examination, whatsoever their trial
and examination heretofore has been. Those Persons who have anciently been
Catechized, and have been a long time Commoners at the Lords Table and
witnessed a good confession for parts and piety, must these again yield
themselves to the examination of an Eldership before they can be admitted?
Pardon us if herein we pronounce a dissent from you.

Concerning the scandalous, and wicked in their lives, you say we fully come up
to you, and are glad there is an agreement in judgment betwixt us thus far,
(viz.) That the Churches lawful Pastors have power to Excommunicate such, upon
which (you say) you cannot see how we in reason can find fault with your
proceedings, in such a way, against such Persons though your ruling Elders
(which in our judgment a^e but mere laymen) do join in the Government with
you: There Is another non sequitur, a conclusion as bad as the former, and the
reason of that conclusion as weak as the rest. Because High-Commissioners,
Chancellors, and Commissaries, in the time of Episcopacy (to which Government
we submitted) that were as much Laymen, as your ruling Elders, had so great a
share as to suspend Ministers, etc. and so far as to decree the sentence of
Excommunication against them, and others, as there was occasion for it: For
when you can prove that these Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. did not officiate
by deputation, from and under a lawful Pastor, but in equal right with him,
and jure divino, as your ruling Elders do, Then your Comparison of them, and
your ruling Elders may hold good: till then it is weak, and frivolous.

Now whereas you desire to know, whom we mean by lawful Pastors; our Answer
is, we mean such Persons as have received their Ordination from men lawfully,
and truly qualified with a just power of conferring Orders; which you (and we
believe it is none but you) presume one Presbyter may give another: Whereupon
you instance the opinion of Dr Usher, in a late Letter of his, set forth by Dr
Bernard, and refer us to Dr Bernards animadversions upon it. We have perused
the Papers to which you refer us, and find that Dr Usher does not invalidate
the Ordination by Presbyters, but with a special restriction, to such places
where Bishops cannot be had: But this we must desire you to consider, is ex
necessitate, non ex perjurio and pertinacia, which he in the next page clearly
dilucidates; his words are these, You may easily judge that the Ordination made
by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from those Bishops, unto whom
they had sworn Cannnical obedience, cannot possibly by me be excused from
being schismatic. Examine your selves in this particular, we shall not judge
any man.

For this Purity amongst Church Officers (an Error first broacht by Ae*rius,
and for which amongst other things, he was most justly condemned of Heresy)
and Ordination by Presbyters, otherwise then before expressed, cannot possibly
be made out by any instance out of Dr Vshers Letter, or Dr Bernards
animadversions upon it, since he is clearly against it; and so that Catalogue
of Divines, Schoolmen, and Fathers, by you out of him collected, is
frustraneously cited.

Concerning submission to the judgment of Councils rightly called and
constituted, we have said enough before. In which point, if you will hold to
what you profess, you shall not have us dissenting from you: But we shall find
you of another mind, before you come to a conclusion.

As for your Provincial Assembly at Preston, or any other elsewhere of that
nature, we say it is a new Termed Assembly; Not for the words sake (Assembly)
but new both in respect of the word (Provincial) and place (at Preston.) That
this County of Lancaster should be termed the Province of Lancaster, and the
Synods and Assemblies therein convened (at Preston or elsewhere) should be
termed Provincial, all new: New also in respect of the Persons constituting
this Assembly: Laymen to preside, to rule, and to have decisive voices, in as
ample manner as the highest, and chiefest in holy Orders, is a novelty, no
Antiquity can plead for it: Nor does Dr Bernard, or Bishop Usher, that Learned
and reverend Antiquary, or the Fathers, and Councils there alleged, and by
you, out of him so confidently cited, any way make for such an Assembly. And so
your Provincial Assembly at Preston, may in the Judgment of Bishop Vshor, be
accounted a new termed Provincial Assembly, and remains as yet uncleared from
all suspicion of novelty.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
FIrst, We must desire the Reader to take the pains to peruse the third Section
of our Answer, to which you do here reply. You do in the next Section tell us,
that the most considerable part of our Answer (as to the bulk) does insist on
the proof of the establishment of our Government by Authority; this you also
said in the close of your second Paper: But if the Reader but compare what is
contained in this Section, with what is in the next, where we prove this
establishment of our Government by authority, he will find our answer here, in
this one Section, is considerably larger, then all that great bulk you complain
of in the next; and it will be found to be as much, as all that we have
touching this matter throughout our whole answer. And therefore we cannot but
wonder, that you should so much forget your selves, and so little consider what
you say, as again and again to assert, with no small confidence, what is so
far from truth. But in this Section the Reader may further descern, that you
pass over some things in silence, to which you should at the least have made
some reply; testifying, either your assent to them, and so your receiving
satisfaction, or have given us the grounds of your dissent: but we shall desire
that what was answered by us, and is by you replied unto, might be compared
together by the candid Reader, that he may see with his own eyes, wherein you
fall short.

Secondly, You profess that in some things; you find we much dissent not, only
in the third and last, concerning the heresy and schism of those, who err so
grossly in Doctrinals or points of Discipline, you mention the reason, we gave
you, why we did not so expressly mention them, their sin and punishment, as the
grossly ignorant and scandalous, scil. the inconsider ableness of the number of
the former, to the number of these; But

First, This was not the only reason we gave, but there was also another
mentioned, scil. because we were to give in to the Provincial Assembly, what
our apprehensions were, touching the case propounded to us by them, touching
some further means to be used, for the information of the ignorant, and
reformation of the scandalous.

Secondly, But yet this you pitch upon, because you had a mind to charge us,
and all others, that have in our Congregations severed themselves from the
Bishops, with schism, that so you might hereby also invalidate that reason
rendered of our not mentioning expressly the heretical and schismatical. But we
hope we have, in our answer to your second Paper, said that, which will be
sufficient to wipe off that aspersion; and you must pardon us, if wherein Dr.
Usher, in this point differing from us in judgment, expressed himself too
far, we therein (though we otherwise reverence him both for his piety and
learning) look upon him as a man. We cannot as yet be persuaded, that the
Bishops were the only true constituted Church of England; from whom because we
have severed our selves, you do here (though without any reason) charge us to
be schismatical, and to have rent our selves from a true constituted Church.

Thirdly, But seeing in this third and last, touching those that are chargeable
with heresy and schism, you profess to diffent from us, you might have
testified, either your assent to, or dissent from that previous course, that in
our answer we mentioned, was to be taken with these before they were to be
excommunicated; especially considering, we had told you, that though you
allowed of admonition of the scandalous, before there was process to the
censure of them, yet you said nothing of this course to be taken with the
other; and wherein therefore we purposely declared our selves, that if you
judged the previous course of admonition necessary to be held with the
scandalous, you might not censure us, as indulgent toward any of the other,
that might be in any of our Congregations (though we said the number of them
was not considerable to the number of the scandalous) because we took it to be
our duty, according to the practice of the Apostles in the Synod at Jerusalem,
and the Fathers of the Nicene Council, and others we instanced in, to endeavor
their conviction, in the due use of all good means, before there was a process
to excommunication. We remembered also, how quick the Prelates were, in
thundering out their excommunications, against such as (though godly and
religious) were in those times accounted by them to be schismatical; and we
thought it requisite, to bear witness against those manner of proceedings. But
of this you take no notice, and we do not much wonder: for we see you count all
those, that severed themselves from the Bishops, schismatical; and may be, if
they had power again in their hands, you did not much matter (though you are
willing the scandalous should be admonished before) if all these, for their
great schism, in your esteem were forthwith excommunicated.

Thirdly, As touching public Catechizing we said, we heartily wished it had
been more generally practiced in our own Church at home, as it is practiced by
the reformed Churches abroad: But by our own Church, we meant the Church of
England, as it is a national Church; and in which, though Catechizing was
enjoined in former times, yet it was neither so generally and constantly
practiced, as it should have been; else we should not have had so much cause to
have complained of the gross ignorance of so many aged persons in our
Congregations (who were nor trained up under the Presbyterian, but Prelatical
Government) as now we have. And here we observe, that when you profess you are
glad, to hear us so heartily wish, that Catechizing had been more generally
practiced, it is but that you may take occasion to affix the greater blot upon
us; for you would have it to be our Churches in whom this neglect is chiefly or
only to be found; and it is we, (that are again by you charged with separation)
that have by our pretended reformation, (as you are pleased to speak) destroyed
this practice. We wish as heartily in this case, as we did in the other, that
you may be sensible how prone you are to revile and slander, and pray to God
that it may not be laid to your charge.

But you might have remembered, that as we professed our selves to be for
public Catechizing (which blessed be God is practiced in our Churches, though
you would make the world to believe that we had destroyed it) so we professed
to be for private too, that so such as were not like, in regard of age, or
timorousness, to be brought to instruction by the public, might yet by the
private gain some knowledge. In the Paper also, that was published in the
Congregations, there was some order appointed, for the better and more
convenient practice of it. And doubtless, by how much we were willing to be at
the more pains for the information of the ignorant, the greater fault will lie
at your doors, and be charged upon you, (if you repent not of it) that by your
opposition, you have not only labored to obstruct the good courses by us
propounded, for the help of poor ignorant souls; but accused us also, that by
our pretended reformation we have destroyed Catechizing.

Here also we take notice, that however in your first Paper you had a proviso
touching Catechizing, that it be public, and that we thereupon gave you some
reason (though briefly) for private Catechizing, yet this you wholly pass over
in silence, and say nothing to it; thus you pretend to make a reply to our
answer, and yet but speak to what of it you please. But if you had manifested
any dissatisfaction, touching private Catechizing, we should here have
proceeded, to have given further reasons for it; although this work is so fully
done to our hands by Mr. Baxter in his Gildas Salvianus, that it would have
been needless unto those that have read that Book, and whereunto, for his
further satisfaction, we refer the Reader, if he desire it.

Fourthly, If we understood you aright in this, that you held it not fitting,
that persons grossly ignorant should be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, the conclusion that we inferred hence, stands good against any thing
brought by you to invalidate it.

But here we observe, you stretch it beyond its scope, and that in two
particulars.

1. In that you would have it refer to examination before the Eldership,
which was not that, which we spoke of: we only said, there ought to be
examination and trial of all persons before they be admitted to the Lords
Supper, not determining here, touching the persons by whom this examination was
to be made; but only inferring, that then there ought to be this examination;
that so the grossly ignorant might not be admitted, as they might be, if all
promiscucusly were to be admitted without any trial at all; and which was the
reason, that we alleged in our answer, for the inference we made, and which
still stands good, you urging nothing at all to take away the strength of it.
It is true, that the examination and judgment of all such as shall for their
ignorance, not be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in
the power of the Eldership of every Congregation, and not in the power of one
Minister only, by the rules of our Government. See form of Church Government,
page 30.
But this was not the thing we there spoke of; we only concluded, that there
ought to be an examination, and hoped that we had gained from your own
concession, this one further step, toward an agreement betwixt you and us, that
all such persons, as should be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
must be examined by some or other, not determining by whom; there being no way
to discover the ignorant, but by trial. And as touching our practice, it is
well known, that when the Eldership is sati^fied, touching the knowledge of
such as offer themselves to that Sacrament, upon the examination of a Minister
and one Elder, or upon the examination of two Ministers (however none is to b^
debarred for their ignorance, but by the juridical act of the Eldership, and
which is for the better securing of the Church-priveledges to the members, then
to have left the power to the Minister alone) such are not required, to be
examined before the Eldership, but are upon the testimony of the examiners,
(there being nothing to be objected justly against them) admitted by the
authority of the Eldership.

2. There is also another thing, wherein you would make our inference to be
that, which indeed it was not; for neither did we speak, concerning any
examination de novo, of such persons, as had been formerly admitted; our words
recited even now, and to be seen in our answer, do plainly speak, concerning an
examination before admission to the Lords Supper, not concerning an examination
de novo. Indeed we shall neither be ashamed of, nor deny what is our practice,
which is to take a trial of all the communicants de novo, before admission of
them to the Lords Supper. We well remember how under the Episcopal government,
there was a general admission, and that sundry grossly ignorant did crowd in
amongst the rest, unto this Ordinance; and therefore that these might be
discovered, and kept off from this Sacrament, till fitter for it; we judged it
requisite, that, according to that power that is glven to the Eldership in the
form of Church Government, for this purpose, there should be a trial taken of
all the communicants, that so there might be some distinction made, and not be
a promiscuous admitting of all as heretofore. And we are sure, that such
amongst us, who, having been anciently catechized, and a long while commoners
at the Lords Table, (to use your own expressions) have witnessed the best
confession for their parts and piety, have been the most forward, to draw on
others to be willing to be reexamined, by their own good example therein; and
that the greatest opposers of this course, however they may be some of them
persons of parts, yet have been such, as have been either scandalous in their
lives, or not so forward for piety as were to be desired. We have thus given an
account, of what is our practice in this matter; but this examination of
communicants de novo, was not the thing we here spoke of, as why the
examination of them before their admission of them at the first, was here
mentioned, we have delared before. But we see you are willing, to lay hold on
any thing, wherein you apprehend you have any advantage against us, though it
be never so small.

Fifthly, You charge us again with another non sequitur; when we infer, that
if the Churches lawful Pastors have power to excommunicate the scandalous, we
see not in reason, how you can find fault with our proceedings, if there should
be occasion for our censuring any such persons; but this inference yet stands
good against any thing by you alleged to the contrary, and in it self is
clear and manifest; being there is no excommunication that passes with us
against any, but by the juridical act of the lawful Pastors of our several
Churches or Congregations; and whose power by you should not be questioned, or
the validity of their censures, because of the concurrence of the ruling
Elders; as by way of preventing an Objection, we hinted to you in our answer,
considering what power was exercised in the time of Episcopacy, by the High
Commissioners, Chancellors and Commissaries (as much Laymen then in your
judgment, as ruling Elders can be now) to whom yet there was a submission by
you; This reason you say is weak, but you do not prove it to be so; Nay here
you fall short in two main points, For

1. You misrepresent the matter of fact, and that in two particulars: 1. When
you would intimate, that the High-Commissioners, Chancellors and Commissaries,
did all of them officiate by deputation from, and under a lawful Pastor; when
as it is manifest, the High-Commissioners had no deputation from the Bishop,
but received their Commission from the King, (if not the Chancellors also,) and
did act in those Ecclesiastical censures, that were by them passed, in joint
and equal power with the Bishop by virtue of their Commission. 2. The
Parliament, that did appoint the ruling-Elders in the form of Church
government, did not oblige any, that were to submit to them, to acknowledge the
jus divinum of their Office, neither do we impose this opinion of them upon
any. And therefore, notwithstanding our own judgment concerning them in this
respect, the comparison betwixt them and the other, as to what is necessary for
your satisfaction, does still hold good, and is neither weak nor frivolous, as
you say.

2. But if the matter of fact should be granted to have been according to your
representation, sc. that High-Commissioners, Chancellours, etc. did all of them
officiate by deputation from, or under a lawful Pastor, how does this help the
matter, to make your submission to these lawful, and yet your submission to
the ruling Elders unlawful? For 1. we are as yet to learn (and we think you
will never be able to make it good) that a trust committed to one by man See Sr
Francis Bacon.
, much less reposed by God in an officer in the Church, and particularly in the
Pastor may be delegated. If this be so, he might sufficiently discharge his
duty by another, preach by another, administer the Sacrament by another, as
well as dispense the censures of the Church by another, who yet himself is to
give an account of their souls unto God; which he will never be able to make,
in the omission of those duties in his own person, though he appoint another
unto them. But being the highest officer in the Church, does not himself act
out of plenitude of power, (for that were to make him a Pope and Antichrist;
that belonging only to Jesus Christ the King and Matthew. 28. ver. 18.
Lord of the Church, to whom all power is given in Heaven and earth) and has
no more but a ministry committed to him, which he has received of Christ, as
his servant, who has required him to fulfill it; he may not Col. 4. 17.
depute any other as under him, or as his servant, to do that which his Lord
and master has entrusted him with, and appointed him to do himself. 2. But
further we do here enquire of you, whether by virtue of that deputation, which
the persons spoken of received from a lawful Pastor, according to your
allegation, you will have them to be Ecclesiastical officers, or but mere
laymen still? If, notwithstanding that deputation, they be but mere laymen,
how will you awarrant them to meddle with Ecelesiasticall censures? because
deputed thereunto by the Bishop? when God has excluded all those that are but
mere laymen from meddling authoritatively with Ecclesiastical matters? If the
High Priest in the time of the Law, had given to Vzziah a Commission, to have
gone into the Temple of the Lord, to burn incense upon the Altar of incense,
and he had so officiated by deputation from and under him, would that have been
sufficient to have born him out in so doing, whenas that work pertained not
unto him, but unto the Priests the sons of Aaron, that were 2 Chr. 26. 18.
consecrated to burn incense? If by virtue of that deputation they had from the
Bishops, they were Ecclesiastical officers, invested with authority, to
exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and dispense Church Censures, and so not
mere laymen; we may say much more for the outward call unto that office, that
our ruling Elders do execute, they having been elected by the people (that
anciently had a vote in the choice, even of the very Bishops, as is clear from
the Records of Antiquity) and examined by the Pastors of the Churches, and by
them approved as fit, and set apart solemnly to rule in the house of God by
exhortation and Prayer, as has been said before.

6. But you now go on, and declare whom you mean by lawful Pastors, sc. such
persons as have received their Ordination from men lawfully and truly
qualified with a just power of conferring Orders. Now these, according to what
you have declared in your former Paper, are the Bishops, without whom, you
there insinuate, the Church of God cannot be continued amongst us, in a
succession of a lawfully ordained Ministry, and so at once cashier out of the
numbet of law-full Pastors, all such Ministers either of our own, or other
reformed Churches, that are ordained by Presbyters only, and to whom you allow
not the power of Ordination, as you here also do plainly declare your selves.
But we have in our answer to that clause quoted out of your former Paper,
sufficiently (as we hope the Reader will judge) declared the absurdity of this
your opinion: And you your selves (as all men may see) may hereby perceive how
vain a thing it is, for you and us to labor in any way of accommodation,
whilst you retain these principles, they being destructive to union, and your
communion in several of our Churches, either in Baptism or the Lords Supper.
For how can you have communion in those Ordinances dispensed by such Ministers
amongst us, as being ordained by Presbyters only, you on this ground will
conclude to be no lawfully ordained Ministers? And therefore if you be cordial
for union, we wish you to revise what you have as touching this matter
asserted, and weigh what in our former Paper we have opposed unto it. But as
touching the power of ordaining Presbyters by Presbyters only, you will have
it to be our opinion only, and that in this we are singular; for you say, we
(and you believe it is none but we) presume one Presbyter may confer orders
upon another. And here indeed 1. If we held that one Presbyter might ordain
another Presbyter, you had reason to accuse us of singularity: but we are
professedly against all solitary power in ordination, as well as in
jurisdiction, by whomsoever this power is, or has been exercised. 2. But if
your meaning be, that it is we only that hold, Presbyters alone, without any
Bishops, may ordain Presbyters: 1. You might have known, that this was and is
the judgment of the reformed Churches abroad, as well as ours. 2. And further
you may remember, we alleged out of Dr. Bernard, the testimony of several
Episcopal men, as well as of Dr. Usher, asserting and proving, that in places
where Bishops cannot be had, the ordination of Presbyters stands valid; which
special restriction we mentioned in our Answer (as the Reader will find) and
which, though added, would not have hindered (if you had been of the same
opinion with them) but you might have acknowledged, that such as are with us
ordained by Presbyters only, are notwithstanding lawful Pastors; Bishops
being now taken away by the power of the civil Magistrate, and excluded from
having any liberty to ordain, by those acts where Prelacy is exempted from that
indulgence, that is granted to some others. If also that Catalogue of Divines,
Schoolmen and Fathers, that we cited out of Dr. Bernard, (who are cited by him
also out of others) be consulted, they will be found to affirm (as we said in
our Answer, though you take no notice of it) that Episcopacy non est ordo
praecise distinctus a Sacerdotio simplici; Bishop Davenant (as he is alleged
Vide page 130. of their last Book published by Dr Bernard.
by Dr. Bernard for this purpose) producing the principal of the Schoolmen,
Gulielmus Parisiensis, Gerson, Durand, etc. for this opinion. Whence also it is
evident, that they are not by us frustraneously cited, though it be an easy
matter for you to assert the same without any reason, or ever answering to what
they were alleged for to affirm. We shall not here deny, but Dr. Usher says,
that the ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from
those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn canicall obedience, could not possibly
by him be excused from being schismatic. But yet he does not say that the
ordination by them is null and void, although in his judgment there was thereby
a schism made. There may be schisms in the Church; yea some particular
Churches may be schismatic, and yet for the substance of them continue true
Churches of Jesus Christ; as if it were to our purpose, might be cleared both
from Scriptures, and also Fathers. But as touching the aspersion of schism,
that is cast on such Presbyters that have severed themselves from the Bishops,
we hope it is sufficiently wiped off, by what we have already spoken in our
answer to your second Paper.

7. However it seems that charge was not high enough, The imputation of perjury
taken off.
and therefore in this you proceed further, charging us with perjury and
obstinacy; for you having mentioned that special restriction of Dr. Ushers, of
not invalidating the ordination by Presbyters, where Bishops cannot be had, add
and say, but this we must desire you to consider, is ex necessitate non ex
perjurio and pertinacia; and however you would smooth up the matter, by bidding
us. examine our selves in this particular, and saying you shall not judge any
man; yet it is plain enough to any discerning Reader, who they are that are
charged by such expressions. But as touching the thing it self, we shall now
examine the justness of the charge. And first we shall begin with that of
perjury, unto which we shall need to say the less, considering that the grounds
laid in our Answer to your second Paper, (proving that such Presbyters, as
since the Parliaments abolishing Prelacy, have severed themselves from the
Bishops, or cast off Episcopacy, are not justly to be charged with schism) do
here also take place, to acquit such Ministers, that did swear Canonical
obedience to the Bishops, from the guilt of perjury. We shall here only mind
you and the Reader of two things; 1. That seeing the superiority which the
Bishops challenged and exercised above Presbyters in this Nation, did belong
unto them only by the Law of the Land, (we having proved in our Answer to your
second Paper, that a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture sense are both one) and
was taken away from them by the Legislative power of this Nation, (as they
might lawfully take it away) that power which they exercised not being due to
them by Divine right, nay being an usurpation upon the Pastors office, as has
been also showed) and so their whole Office as Diocesans, together with their
jurisdiction, as sundry also of their Persons are all extinct (and as is
manifest in particular, touching him that was the Bishop of this Dioces) we
wonder much (and we think every Reader will here wonder with us) that your
great heat for Prelacy, should thus far have transported you, as to charge us
with perjury, for which there is not the least color. Consult Dr. Sanderson de
juramenti promissorii obligatione; consult all other Casuists, and you shall
find, that the best and soundest of them, do determine with one consent, that
when the matter of an Oath cease, the obligation by virtue of that Oath
cease also; and therefore Prelacy being taken away by lawful authority,
there can be no perjury in such Presbyters, as now disown it, and join with
other of their Brethren in the ordination of Presbyters, without the
concurrence of any Diocesan Bishop, and which is the case here spoken to. 2 But
every intelligent Reader will readily discern, how the Parliament is also
wounded through our sides; for if we be guilty of perjury for disowning
Prelacy, it is easy for to gather, what apprehensions you must needs hereupon
have of the Parliament, that by their authority took it away. But we think we
have said that which is sufficient to roll away the reproach, that is cast
either on them or our selves in this respect, and therefore shall forbear to
add any more. We therefore now come to the second thing, you here charge us
with, which is pertinacy; but why should we be charged with this? For no other
reason, that we can imagine, but because we cannot force our consciences, to
admit of Episcopacy again; which the Parliament, upon many weighry and sound
considerations has removed, and of the necessity whereof you never went about
to convince us, either from Scripture or sound reason. But we do not question,
but all sober Readers, will here see cause to censure you for great
uncharitableness, laying such heavy things to our charge, for which you have
not the least show of proof; as we we do also believe, that what you count
pertinacy, they will judge to be constancy in us, in sticking close to our sound
and good principles, that we must not forgo on so easy terms, as you would
have us. And however you would here make Dr. Usher to patronize you, because he
confesses the ordination by Presbyters to be valid, where Bishops can not be
had, and so in case of necessity; yet he has not a word, touching the
imputation, either of perjury or obstinacy to such Presbyters, as have severed
themselves from the Bishops, as he was of a far other spirit, then to have
been so censorious.

8. As touching Ae*rius, of whom you say, that he was most justly condemned for
heresy, for holding a parity amongst Church Officers; we well know that this
is commonly said, by some Episcopal men, (from whom we judge you received it)
but we also know that it has been as often answered by such as were
Antiprelatical. Mr. Banes in his Diocesans trial, has spoken to it
satisfactorily; Dr. Whitaker says in answer to Campians tenth reason, page
241. of the second Edition in Octavo; Cum Aerio Hieronymus de Presbyteris
omnino sensi^; illos enim jure divino Episcopis aequales esse statuit: i. e.
With Aerius Hierome did conceive altogether the same thing concerning
Presbyters; for he determined that by divine right they were equal unto
Bishops. And because Hierome is here said by Dr. Whitaker, to be of the same
opinion in this point with Ae*rius, we shall give you and the Reader an account
thereof from Hierome himself. His words in his Commentary upon the Epistle to
Titus (making the same inference from the words of the Apostle, Chap. 1. Ver.
5, 6, 7. that in our answer to your second Paper, we have done) are these: Idem
est ergo Presbyter qui and Episcopus and antequamdiaboli instinctu; studia in
Religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego
autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. And then
a little after he says, Putet aliquis non Scripturarum, sed nostram esse
sententiam, Episcopum and Presbyterum unum esse: relegat Apostoli ad
Phillippenses verba, dicentis, Paulus and Timotheus servi Jesu Christi, omnibus
sanc^is in Christo Jesu, qui sunt Phillippis, cum Episcopis and Diaconis;
gratia vobis and pax, and reliqua Phillipi una est urbs Macedoniae, and certe
in u^a civitate plures (ut nuncupantur) Episcopi esse non poterant. Sed quia
eosdem Episcopos illo tempore, quos and Prebyteros appellabant; propterea
indifferenter de Episcopis quasi de Presbyteris est loquutus. Whence its clear,
that he did not only hold Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, but proves this
from the Scriptures; and then after adds other Texts to prove the same thing,
expounding those Texts he quotes, in the same manner as we have done in our
answer to your second Paper. More might be urged out of Hierome, to show that
he was of the same opinion with Aerius, as touching the parity of a Bishop and
a Presbyter: and therefore if this opinion was an heresy in Aerius; Hierome,
according to your assertion should have been also most justly condemned for
heresy. But if you would but take the pains to peruse David Blondellus, he
might perhaps satisfy you, that Hierome was not to be accused of heresy for
this opinion; he apologizing for him herein, and proving at large, from the
concurrent testimony of the Fathers, that he held not in this any singular
opinion, but what was generally received amongst the ancients. His Treatise is
a large Quarto, and the main subject of it is, to apologize for Hierome in this
respect, as the title of his Book does also show. But it is well observed by
the Provincial Assembly of London, See their jus divinum Ministerij evangelici
part. 2. page 143, 144.
that Ae*rius was never condemned by any Council of heresy, for holding the
identity of a Bishop and a Presbyter: but that on the contrary, Council.
Aquisgranens. sub Ludovieo pio Imperatore, 10. anno 816. has approved it for
true Divinity out of the Scriptures, that Bishops and Presbyters are equals,
bringing the same Texts that Ae*rius does. They also well observe, that he is
called an Heretic by Epiphanius and Augu^tine, but this was especially, if
not only, because he was an Arrian; and that the same Authors condemn Aerius,
as much for reprehending and censuring, pr^ying and offering for the dead, and
the performing good works for the benefit of the dead; as for holding Bishops
and Presbyters to be all one, and which opinion (as it is commonly thought)
they condemned in Ae*rius. But will you say, that Ae*rius was most justly
condemned for heresy for those opinions also? But this for Ae*rius his opinion
touching a parity amongst Church Officers, may be sufficient

9. Concerning your submission to the judgment of Councils, you have indeed
declared your selves before, and we have showed, you have submitted therein too
far, as you will further declare your selves to this purpose hereafter. But
as touching our selves, you shall not find that we vary, from what we have
professed, to be our judgment touching this matter, either in our first
answer, or in what we have said in answer to the second Section of this Paper;
and whereunto we refer the Reader, that by comparing of what we say there,
and what you charge us with here or hereafter, touching our not holding to what
we have professed, he may the better judge, how groundlesly you herein do
accuse us.

10. But you will still have our Provincial Assembly at Preston a new termed
Assembly, not for the words sake (Assembly) but first in regard of the word
(Provincial) although that, in the judgment of Dr. Usher (who in his reduction
of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government, received in the ancient
Church, does expressly mention among his proposals (as we said also in our
answer) the Provincial Synod) would not have been accused of novelty; but that
which you are here offended at, is, that this County of Lancaster should be
termed the Province of Lancaster, and the Synods and Assemblies therein
convened, should be termed Provincial; for which yet you have little reason,
if you had considered, all this was done by the authority of Parliament, who
had power to bound the Province and the Synod or Assembly to be held thereih,
for the ordering and regulating the affairs of the Church, within the bounds
set, as they judged to be most convenient. And seeing that a Synod within the
bounds of a County, may meet more frequently with convenience, for the
regulating the affairs of the several Classical Presbyteries within those
bounds, then if the bounds had been larger, (especially if so large as to have
comprehended within them several Counties, as formerly the two Provinces of
York and Can^erbury comprehended all the Counties within the Land) and which
doubtless the Parliament considered, when they ordered, December. 21. 1646. That
the several Classes in Luncashire should be one Province; (and of which we had
before given you an account in our answer to your first Paper) if you had
acquiesced in the authority of Parliament, as sufficient for the ordering of
such a matter, you would not have found fault with this for its novelty; all
Laws that are newly made, though for the ease of the su^j^cts, being as liable
to exception in that respect as this. Your next reason why you charge our
Provincial Assembly with novelty is, in regard of the place (at Preston) but
this exception was prevented in our answer (unto which here you make no reply)
when we said, if Provincial Assemblies be warrantable, and have been of ancient
use in the Church, that having been long in disuse, they of late began to be
held at Preston, that could not justly incur your censure; and certainly the
most famous Synods and Councils that have been, or that may be hereafter, must
be all accused in regard of novelty, if this be a sufficient ground of
accusation, even the first four general Councils, of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus and Chalcedon, those being all as new in regard of their places, where
they were assembled at the time of their first meeting (there having been never
such Assemblies convened in those places before) as our Provincial Assembly was
or is, that met, and still ordinarily does at Preston. But perhaps there is
more strength in the last reason, why you charge it to be a new termed
Provincial Assembly, when you say, it is new in respect of the persons
constituting this Assembly, laymen presiding, and ruleing, and having decisive
voices in as ample a manner, as the highest and chiefest in holy Orders, nor
does Bishop Usher (as you say) or what we allege out of him, make for such an
Assembly. But here

1. We must mind you, that we did not cite Dr. Usher, for to prove the
antiquity of Provincial Assemblies, in regard of these members constituting
them. Let our answer be perused, it will be found to allege him for to prove
the antiquity of the Assemblies of the Pastors of the Churches, for the
ordering Church affairs, and having the power of ruleing them; and because we
did not know, whether you were not so fond on Prelacy, as not to allow of these
Assemblies, we quoted Dr. Usher, for to prove their antiquity; neither did we
conceive, that Dr. Usher would have judged these Assemblies, where the Pastors
of the Churches are members, to have been wholly new, or the Pastors to have
lost their authority in them, because the ruling Elders are admitted into them
as members, whatever his own thoughts might be concerning them.

2. But as touching them we must further mind you, of what we have said
before, that they are not mere laymen, but duly and orderly called to an
Ecclesiastical Office, although they never praeside in these Assemblies as
moderatours. And further that we have proved from antiquity, in our answer to
your second Paper, the being of such an Officer in the Church, in the time of
Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Optatus, and which is so clear, that the
adversaries of this Officer cannot deny it; only they would have him to have
been as an extraordinary Church-guardian, or admitted on prudential grounds,
which yet is but gratis dictum, as we have said.

3. We shall now only further add what is well observed by the Provincial
Assembly of London, that Sutlivius, (a Prelatical Divine, and otherwise an
opposer of the Office of ruling Elders,) de council. lib. 1. cap. 8. says, that
among the Jews Seniores Tribuum, the Elders of the Tribes, did sit with the
Priests in judging controversies of the Law of God; hence he argues against
Bellarmine, that so it ought to be in the Christian Church also, because the
priveledge of Christians is no less, then the priveledge of the Jews. And it
is not denied by other Prelatica! Divines, but by them held and proved, that
men of abilities, which are not Ministers, are to be admitted into general
Councils, (as they have been also anciently, and which is too manifest to be
denied, it appearing to have been so from the ancientest historians, and
subscriptions of Councils) and to vote in them as members of these Assemblies.
And therefore, however the ruling Elders be be admitted into our Provincial
Assemblies, as members, (whom you account to be but laymen) and have decisive
votes there, the Assembly should not by you have been accused of novelty in
this respect: for you see such as were no Ministers, have been anciently
admitted into Synods and Councils, to vote there as members, according to the
old rule, Quod tangit omnes, debet tractari ab omnibus.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. IV.
Well! b^t (you say) we go on and tell you, etc. But had your professions and
expressions for Peace, and Unity, been as real, and as cordial as ours; we
had proceeded no further in this way of Rejoinder, but closed hands, and hearts
together, as in our last humble address appears. Which certainly might have
found a more ready compliance, and merited a far more civil and satisfactory
Answer, from such cordial wishers of Peace and Unity, such godly and sober,
such moderate spirited men, as you pretend to be.

But you have required we should go on, and accordingly we go on to tell you,
that other parts of your Paper are full of darkness: To which you thus Answer,
We cannot apprehend any such darkness in our Paper as you speak of; but because
you question what Authority we have from the civil Magistrate; and the extent
of it; and your mistakes of our meaning, may perhaps some of them arise from
your unacquaintedness with the rule we walk by; Although we were not to be
blamed for any mistakes that might arise ab ignorantia juris (whether simple or
affected, that we determine not, but leave y^u to judge) Before we come to make
answer more particularly to what follons, we are willing to be at some pains,
to give you some farther account of the power, we are awarranted by the civil
Authority for to exercise, To what Persons within our bounds it extends it
self, etc.

Much pains you have taken, and that willingly, and spent much time, and Paper
too, which has swelled your Answer to so great a bulk, to prove that which was
not oppugned, nor so much as quest oned by us, so Impertinent to the business
of our Paper: Though you have said you are not willing to spend time about
Impertinencies: By which (however we go on yet) you wheel about and are come to
the Pole you first started at, like a Horse in a mill that travels all day, and
is no further at night, then he was in the morning. You went about to prove
your Government established by civil Authority, the first work you took in
hand, you are no further yet, but going about to prove, out of your way quite;
But since you compel us to follow you a mile, we will walk with you twain,
till we have conducted you (if possible) into the good old Way again, by taking
of your Government from that establishment of Authority, upon the proof
whereof, the most considerable part (as to the bulk of your Answer) does
insist. To prove your Presbyterian Government to be established by Law, and to
be warranted by the civil Authority, you produce several Orders, and
Ordinances, but one more especially you instance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament bearing date the 10th August 1648. Which you say is
without any limitation of time, and remains unrepealed to this day, nay more by
the humble Advice assented unto by his Highness it receives strength.

To which we answer, when you speak of a Government established by Law, we hope
you mean, such, as has the force and strength of a Law, to bind the free born
People of this Nation, otherwise you say nothing. If such a Law you mean; then
we much question, whether your Ordinance of Lords and Commons, though
unrepealed to this day be of that force; and seeing we be no Lawyers, we shall
not take upon us the determination of that point: but refer you in that
particular, to the Judgment, and resolution of the Sages of the Law; who
affirm, that nothing can have the force of a Law to bind the people, without
the concurrent consent of the three Estates in Parliament: My Lord Cook is
most full throughout his works, published by the special appointment of that
long Parliament: Hear you him, For the Parliament, concerning making and
enacting 2d part Institut. fol. 157, 158.
of Laws, consists of the King, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
C^mmons; and it is no Act unless it be made by the King, the Lords and Commons.

Again, If an Act be made by the King and Commons, this binds not, for it is no
Act of Parliament. Ibid.

Again, It is no Act of Parliament, but an Ordinance, and therefore binds not.
4th part Instit. fol 23.

Again, Nothing can pass as a Law, without the Kings r^yal assent, and
authority to bind the people. 3d part Inst^^. fol. 9.

See him also again in his Instit. 4th part fol 232. where he cites several
Charters and Ordinances made in the behalf of the Court of Stann^ries and in
the end says, These things were done de facto; b^t let us ^^rn our selves to
that, which has the force of a Law.

And in the same 4th part cap. 73. of the Courts of forests, fol. 293. see
there a prescription good against a Statute of Ed. 3. cap. 2. because it was
made but in affirmance of the common Law of the Forest, and against such a
Statute a man may prescribe: And good also against the Ordinance of 34. E. 1.
and the only reason given, is, because it was but an Ordinance and no Statute.

An Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land by their own confession
(meaning the Parliament) says Judge Jenkins, 1 part Coll. Ordinances, fol. 728.

This was the only Law stood in force and binding, which was made by the
concurrent consent of al^ in the judgment of these Sages, and was called the
Law of the Land: None else in old time was judged valid, or to have the force
and strength of a Law: Nor at this day will any Ordinance of one or both Houses
be judged valid without his Highness assent thereunto, as we humbly conceive.

But admitting Ordinances of one, or both Houses of Parliament, without the
Kings of old, or his Highness assent of late, to have a^ great a force and
strength in them, and to be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if their
assents were given thereto: Yet this we affirm of your Ordinance, settling
Presbyterian Government throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, That it is made of little or no force at this day in respect of those
several subsequent Acts granting liberty to all pious and conscientious
Christians throughout this Land, to serve God in their own way of worship and
disclpline, notwithstanding any Law or Ordinance to the contrary; which though
they amount not to an express, yet at least to an implicit Repeal of your
Ordinance, so far as it is contrary to this Liberty; for Leges posteriores
priores contrarias abrogant.

But stand you upon an express Repeal? Then be pleased to peruse an Act made
Anno 1650. for Relief of Religious and peaceable people from the rigor of
former Acts of Parliament in matters of Religion. And to peruse a little better
the humble Advice by you in your Answer alleged, and you will find it far
otherwise than you say.

In the eleventh Section, All Ministers throughout the Land, and their
Assemblies professing the true Protestant Christian Religion, though of
different judgment in Worship or Discipline, are all of them equally protected
in the liberty of their profession; Have you liberty to exercise your Church
Government amongst your selves? They as much. Have you protection? Others as
much. What power have you that others have not? Are these within the bounds of
your Association, and subject to your Government, unless they will renounce
their Baptism, and Christianity? Nay, they have their way of Worship, and
Protection in that way granted them as well as you: And as they may not revile
or reproach, nor disturb you in your Assemblies; no more may you them in their
Assemblies, nor compel any by censures or penalties to submit to your
Government. Is there a Presbyterian Government so settled by Ordinance, as to
compel any contrary to this Liberty? Read the Act of 1650. abovesaid, and you
shall find an express Repeal: Read also the close of this Section, and you
shall find an express Repeal of it there also in these words, All Laws,
Statutes, Ordinances, and Clauses in any Law, Statute, and Ordinance, so far as
they are contrary to the aforesaid Liberty, be repealed. Does not this take
from you what you may conceive was granted by former Ordinances? Does your
Presbyterian Government (for all your Glosses upon it) receive strength from
hence? Does the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for
settling Presbyterian Government throughout the Land, remain yet unrepealed, for
any thing you have seen or heard to the contrary? Yea, so you affirm, and would
have us credit you.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1 IN the first place you charge us, that our professions and expressions for
peace and unity, were not as cordial and real as yours; but how is this proved?
scil. because in that answer we gave to your second Paper, we put you upon the
invalidateing the civil sanction for our Government, being before warned by you
of not running our selves into a praemunire. But let the Reader judge, what
incivility or unsatisfactoriness there was in this answer; or whether there was
any thing, that did not become cordial wishers of peace and unity, godly, sober
and moderate spirited men, as we do not only pretend, but hope to approve our
selves to be, both to God and men. If it be indeed inconsistent with, either an
hearty desire of unity and peace, or with godliness and sobriety, to insist
upon the authority of that Parliament, that was instrumental for our freedom
from Prelatical bondage, and that settled the Government, wherein we have acted,
and that does fully awarrant us for whatever we have acted therein; and to
insist upon this authority, when we were challenged as transgressors, in making
Laws and Edicts contrary to the Laws in force, then we must confess, we
pretended only to be for peace and unity, when in our hearts we were not real
for it. But as our own consciences accuse us not of dissembling, (professing
that which we never intended) so we believe, whatever your censures of us be,
others will be more equal judges, then to say, the answer we gave to your first
Paper, was any evidence thereof; and such as know what some of you were in time
past, will rather conclude that the urging the authority of Parliament for the
settling of our Government, and the awarranting of our actings, was that indeed
which you could not brook.

Secondly, But as you judge our answer to your second Paper was uncivil, and
not suitable to that moderation we made profession of; so still you will have
the answer we gave unto your first to be full of darkness; although, even as
you here represent it, it is very plain to any ordinary understanding, to hold
forth thus much, that because the mistakes we saw you had run into, might
perhaps some of them arise, from your unacquaintedness with the rule we walk by
(although we said, we were not to be blamed for any mistake, that might arise
ab ignorantia juris, i. e. in you, as the whole tenor of the discourse shows;
and therefore we added, whether simple or affected, that we determined not, but
left it to you to judge of, who were most; fit, to be judges in a matter of
that nature, you therein knowing your own hearts best) we were willing to be at
some pains to acquaint you with it. This we desire might be taken notice of,
because what is here manifestly our meaning, even from your own representation,
is afterward See Sect. 9. toward the end.
most grossly perverted by you; for you would make the world to believe, that we
assert such an absurd position as this, that we were not to be blamed, for our
ignorance of the Law, and then cry out of it as a strange saying. But you did
warily forbear, the imputing any such thing to us here, where our words are too
plain, to be so wrested; and reserve this for another place, hoping the Reader
would, by that time he came thither, have forgotten, what you had here
represented us to have said, and there take the matter wholly upon trust from
you, believing us to be so far devoid of reason, as you would there make us
to be. But this is but a small part, in comparison of the injury you do us; yet
we desire you might see it, that you might not hereafter be charged with it, by
him that is to be the supreme Judge betwixt you and us at the great day.

Thirdly, As touching the pains that we have taken, and of which you do here
again complain, as having swelled our answer to so great a bulk, yea so as that
the most considerable part thereof (as to the bulk) insists thereon, (as you
say) scil. to prove our Presbyterian Government, to be warranted by the civil
anthority; and which you say, was not by you oppugned, nor so much as
questioned by you; as also touching your judging this discourse to be
impertinent, we refer the Reader unto what we have already said, in the
sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Animadversions on the first Section of this
Paper; as also to what we mind him of in the first Animadversion on the third
Section thereof; by perusal of all which, he will find how much you forgot your
selves, when you come over and over again with such assertions, they having in
them no more show of truth, then only to evidence, that it is wearisome to you
to hear of Ordinances of Parliament; especially such as are for the settling of
the Presbyterian Government, or what makes for our own necessary vindication,
and to manifest that our actings in the management of that Government, have
been regular and orderly, according to the form of Church Government appointed
by authority; and to see that we took off that Objection, that is commonly made
against the Presbyterian Government, as being established by the Parliament but
for three years only; and unto which purposes, all the Orders, or Ordinances
of Parliament, or Rules by them given, and by us recited, tended; and all which
in the fourth Section of it (to which the complaint here refers) takes not up
above four leafes of our answer, which yet in your Preface, your selves say is
seven sheets.

Fourthly, But what you cannot make out with any color of truth, you hope to
do by scoffs and jeers; and therefore you say, we wheel about, and are come to
the pole we first started at, like an horse in a mill, that travels all day,
and is no further at night then he was in the morning, in which also there is
as little truth, as in your other assertions; we having already showed, that
our first essay was, to give you some account, how the terms (when we called
this, the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, which you had called
ours) were no other, then the Parliament had given us by their Order. That
which we attempted in the fourth Section of our answer (to which you here
reply) was to show, that the Ordinances of Parliament, for the Presbyterian
Government, were still in force, and that those rules laid down in them,
awarranted all our actings, and particularly what we had published in our
several Congregations in our Paper; and which whosoever does not so start at,
because they are Ordinances of Parliament, but that he keeps in his right mind,
he will see to be different things. But you do still go on with your flowts,
and will needs have it to be, that we went about to prove (which is your own
phrase and not ours) our Government to be established by civil authority, the
first work we took in hand, and that we are no further yet, but going about to
prove, (your own phrase again) as if the matter must needs be, as you say it
is; or therefore true, because you represent it to be so, after a scoffing
manner.

Fifthly, And when you have thus pleased your selves with your taunting
expressions, you now would profess to do us a kindness, being willing to
conduct us (if possible) into the good old way again, by taking off our
Government from the establishment of authority, upon the proof whereof (as you
say) so great a part of our answer does insist. But seeing the way you herein
go (as will appear anon) does quite overthrow all other Ordinances of
Parliament, as well as those that are for the establishment of the Presbyterian
Government; you must excuse us; though upon your most earnest entreaty, we dare
not follow you in this your way, being w^ll assured we should be then indeed
out of our way quite.

Sixthly, But now you come to answer to the Orders and Ordinances of Parliament
by u^recited, and so to the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, Aug 29. 1648 establishing the form of Church Government, to be
used in the Church of England and Ireland, and which remains (as we said)
unrepealed to this day, and receives strength by the humble Advice, assented to
by his late Highness, and which Ordinance was by us more especially insisted
on. But what is it that you allege, to take away the strength of any
Ordinance of Parliament, that we made mention of in our answer?

In the first place you tell us, that when we speak of a Government established
by Law, you hope we mean such as has the strength and force of a Law, to bind
the free born people of this Nation, and thereupon you question, whether our
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, though unrepealed to this day, be of that
force; and touching this you refer us to the judgment and resolution of the
Sages of the Law, affirming, that nothing can have the force of a Law, to bind
the people, without the concurrent consent of the three estates in Parliament:
and you instance particularly in the Lord Cook, and several passages in his
Institutes.

In answer unto all which, we must needs in the first place (as we did in our
answer to your first Paper) apologize The claim for the Presbyterian Government
to the civil Sanction made good.
for our selves; that being no Lawyers, we shall not take upon us to determine
any Law case; and that our cause in this particular, were fitter to be pleaded
by the learned in the Law, that have far better abilities for it, then we
have; only till some of these undertake in this particular to plead for us, we
hope we may be allowed, freely to speak for our selves. And here we shall not
say all that we could, much less what persons better able to deal in an
argument of this nature, might. But that which we shall say is, first something
in the general; then we shall proceed to answer more particularly.

In the general we say two things, 1. That if the Ordinances of Parliament for
Church Government be of no force, because there was not the concurent consent
of three Estates to the making of them, then all Ordinances of Parliament
(without exception of any) are null and void, and of no force to bind the
people, as well as those that concern Church Government: and so it concerns all
Committees that have been throughout the Land, and those that have acted under
them, or do yet act, and all Judges and Justices, that have acted or do act,
upon any Ordinance of Parliament, to consider what they have to say, to what
you do here allege against their proceedings, as well as against ours. Nay
then the Act made Anno 1650, for Relief of Religious and peaceable People, that
yet is afterward much insisted on by you, is of no force; for to that
questionless there was not the concurrent consent of three Estates in
Parliament.

2. That the Parliament themselves, who made these Ordinances, declared; That,
the King having not only withdrawn himself from the Parliament, but leavied
war against it, salus populi was suprema Lex; and thereupon by Ordinance of
Parliament they proceeded to settle the affairs both of Church and State
without his consent; yea and to repeal some former acts; and as they did
expressly, when they passed the Ordinance for the Directory for Worship;
repealing the Acts of Parliament, that had been passed formerly for the Book of
Common Prayer, as appears by their Ordinance for that purpose of Jan. 3d 1644.
And also when they passed another Ordinance October. 9. 1646. for the abolishing
of Archbishops and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
W^les, by which they are expressly dis^nabled, to use or put in ure any
Archiepiscopall or Episcopal jurisdiction, or authority, by force of any
Letters Pattents from the Crown, made or to be made, or by any other authority
whatsoever, any Law, Statute, usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding,
as appears from the very words of that Ordinance. And if we forget not, it was
by them in those times further declared; That however the King had withdrawn
his Person from the Parliament, yet his Royal Authority could not be
withdrawn. But we know, that what the Parliament in those days acted, in the
passing those and such like Ordinances, was approved by the Sages of the Law,
that in those times adhered to the Parliament. And this will now lead us to
return our more particular answer, to what you present, for to take away the
obliging force of Ordinances of Parliament.

And therefore, 1. We say, That that long Parliament (as you call it) who did
so much honor the Lord Cook, as to publish his Works by their special
appointment, did so well understand him, that they were well assured, there was
not any thing in them, that condemned their proceedings as illegal: as on the
contrary, we do thereupon conceive, that if he had been alive in those times,
he would have justified them. And further we say (under correction) that all
youalledg out of him, was and is to be understood in cases ordinary, not as it
was in the times when the Ordinances for Church Government, and other
Ordinances for the settling the affairs of the Nation were passed, when the King
had withdrawn himself from the Parliament, and levied war against it. 2. But to
add some further confirmation to what we here assert; be pleased to take notice
that we meet with a Book printed in this very year, 1658. Entitled, A
collection of Acts and Ordinances of general use, made in the Parliament, begun
and held at Westminster, the third day of November 1640. and since unto the
adjournment of the Parliament begun and holden the 17th of Septem. Anno 1656.
and formerly published in print, which are here printed at large with marginall
notes or abreviated; being a continuation of that Work from the end of Mr.
Poltons Collection, by Henry Scobell Esquire Clerk of the Parliament; examined by
the Original Records, and now printed by special Order of Parliament. In this
book, as we find the Ordinance for the Directory of Worship, recited at large,
and likewise the Ordinance above mentioned, for the abolishing of Archbishops
and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, so likewise we
meet with the Ordinance of Aug. 29. 1648. establishing the form of Church
Government, to be used in the Church of England, and Ireland, after advice had
with the Assembly of Divines; and this recited at large, as will appear to any
that will peruse that book. And being the design of that book was, to make a
continuation of a Collection of Acts and Ordinances of general use, from the
end of Mr. Poltons Collection, as appears by the Title of it; the Parliament,
that appointed this book to be printed by their special Order, and Mr. Scobell
the Clerk of the Parliament, who collected these Acts and Ordinances, and
examined them by the original Records, were much mistaken in the putting forth
this book, that is also printed in a large black Character, after the manner of
the Statutes; if no Ordinances of Parliament have in them any force to oblige
the people of this Nation. 3. We have only one thing more to add, sc. that in
the 16th Section of the Humble Advice, (and whereof we minded you in our
Answer) it is expressly provided, that the Acts and Ordinances not contrary
thereunto, shall continue and remain in force: Now that there is nothing in the
form of Church Government contrary to any thing contained in the humble Advice,
we shall make out anon: But thus we hope, we have said that which may be
sufficient, for answer to your first exception against the Ordinances of
Parliament for Church Government, as not having the concurrent consent of the
three Estates, and to what you allege out of the Lord Cook. As touching what
you urge out of Judge Jenkins, saying, an Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of
the Land, by their own confession (meaning the Parliament) 1. part Coll. of
Ordinances, fol. 728; we cannot give that credit to his representation of the
Parliament, (he having been an opposer of it) as to conclude thence, there is
no force in any Ordinance of Parliament, to oblige the people of this Nation;
considering that in some of their Ordinances, they do, as we have said,
expressly repeal former Acts of Parliament, made by the concurrent consent of
the three Estates; and considering, that if they have any where any expressions
to that purpose, they may be understood either of Ordinances of Parliament made
in cases ordinary, when the King had not withdrawn himfelf from it, or
concerning such as were of no long continuance, but for the present emergency;
or of such as were but temporary and long since expired; and which sort of
Ordinances, Mr. Scobell in his Preface to the Book above mentioned, says, he
collected not; but only such whereof there is or may be daily use, as he there
speaks.

We have now donewith your first exception against the Ordinances by us
recited, for the establishing Church Government and come to your second; for
admitting Ordinances of Parliament, to have an obligatory force in them; yet
those that concern the establishment of the Presbyterian Government, you would
have to be repealed. Indeed here you said something, if you could bring forth
any of those subsequent Acts, that you speak of, (granting liberty to pious
people in the Land) that did repeal the Ordinances for Church Government,
either implicitly or expressly: For we shall not deny, that Leges posteriores
priores contrarias abrogant, but in this you fall short, as in the former.
There is not any subsequent Act or Ordinance, that we have seen, or that you
mention, that grants any liberty to any, which is denied in the form of Church
Government. The Act made 1650, for relief of Religious and peaceable people,
from the rigor of former Acts of Parliament in matters of Religion, (and which
you will have to be an express repeal) does not make void the Ordinance which
we act^on: It only repeals the poenall Statutes, that imposed mulcts and
punishments on the offenders against those Laws, in their bodies or estates: It
does not at all refer to the Ecclesiastical censures, nor so much as mention
them, as will be clear to him that will peruse it. And so the Ordinance
establishing the form of Church Government, stands whole and entire, and
untoucht at all by this Act. But here we desire two things might be observed;
1. That if this Act stood good against our proceedings, repealing the
Ordinances establishing the Presbyterian Government, so as that the persons
mentioned in it, were thereby exempt from all Ecclesiastical censure, then it
must needs much more stand good against all other sorts of persons, that have
no such Ordinance awarranting their proceedings, and would be a bar in their
way, that they could not censure with Church censures any of their members. 2.
That, being you in your Papers do fully declare your selves for Episcopacy; and
that the Acts granting some indulgence to some persons, yet do still provide,
that the liberty granted by them, should not be extended to Popery and Prelacy;
neither this nor any other Act for the relief of any pious or concientious
Christians, can with any color, be alleged by you, to the purpose for which
you urge them.

As touching the eleventh Section of the humble Advice, (to which you refer
us) we had thoroughly perused it, and seriously weighed it, before you minded us
of it: but we never did, neither do we as yet see any contrariety betwixt it,
and the form of Church Government established by Ordinance of Parliament. We
find still, as we told you in our answer, though you here neither take notice
thereof, nor make any reply thereto) that it seems clearly to own the Directory
for worship, and the form of Church Government, as the public profession of
the Nation for worship and Government; as we also said in our answer, there
were the like expressions in the Government of the Commonwealth of England
Scotland and Ireland, as it was publicly declared at Westminster, December. 16.
1653. page 43. Sect. 37. And if you had pleased, you might have found, that
whatever indulgence, is granted to any in this Sect: it is there expressly
provided, that that liberty be not extended to Popery and Prelacy. And
therefore you, and all men may discern, that when you say (speaking of the
humble Advice) that in the eleventh Section, all Ministers throughout the Land
and their Assemblies, professing the true Protestant Religion, though of
different judgments in worship and discipline, are all of them equally
protected in the liberty of their profession, that proposition is a great deal
larger, then the humble Advice will allow of; it expressly concluding, even from
that protection allowed to some others, the way of Prelacy, though it should be
set up by some Ministers and others of the Protestant Religion; and therefore
all Ministers and their Assemblies, though professing the Protestant Religion,
cannot equally lay claim to the protection there spoken of. But for answer to
all that you here urge out of this eleventh Section, of the humble Advice, we
shall say two things. 1. That as your selves speak only of protection, allowed
by it, to some persons of different judgment in worship or discipline, so
whoever will peruse this Section, shall not find, that it says one word,
touching the restraint of the exercise of Churchdiscipline toward any; when it
speaks of some (that shall differ in other things (sc. that had been mentioned
particularly before) in doctrine, worship or discipline, from the public
profession held forth, to whom it allows protection from injury, as it grants
them a freedom from mulcts and civil penalties; and then after of such
Ministers, or public Preachers, who shall agree with the public profession in
matters of faith, although in their judgment and practice they differ in
matters of worship and discipline, whom it makes capable, (being otherwise
duly qualified and duly approved) of some special grace and favor, that the
former sort are not capable of; it is plain from those expressions, that it
owns a public discipline, which is not held forth any where, but in the form
of Church Government, established by Ordinance of Parliament for the Church of
England and Ireland, Aug. 29. 1648. that has been often times mentioned. But
you will not find, that the exercise of this public discipline held forth, is
any where at all in this Section prohibited, or that it is restrained in regard
of its exercise toward any, or limited only in that respect, to the Ministers
and Assemblies of this or the other persuasion. And yet that this public
discipline held forth, as aforesaid, might be free from all suspicion of any
undue rigor or harshness toward any; we shall here mention one rule (which we
recited, with several other things, in our answer to your first Paper) touching
the Order prescribed in the form of Church Government, of proceeding to
excommunication, which runs in these words;

But the persons who hold other errors in judgment, about points wherein
learned and godly men possibly may or do differ, and which subvert not the
faith, nor are destructive to godliness, or that be guilty of such sins of
infirmity, as are commonly found in the children of God, or being otherwise
sound in the faith, and holy in life, (and so not falling under censure by the
former rules) endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
and do yet out of conscience, not come up to the observation of all those
rules, which are or shall be established by authority, for regulating the
outward worship of God, and government of his Church, the sentence of
excommunication for these causes shall not be denounced against them. By this
one rule it is very clear, that as this discipline is not to be accused of
undue severity, so there is no repugnancy between the humble Advice and it. 2.
That which in the second place we have to say, is, that admitting your
proposition were fully as large in the humble Advice, in regard of the persons
to whom you would have liberty to be extended, as you have laid it down (which
yet we have showed is not so) yet how inconsequently do you argue? when you
will infer an exemption of persons from Church censures, authorized to be
exercised by the form of Church Government, from the humble Advice, because it
affords them a protection against civil injuries. As if this proposition were
most certainly true; All those, that according to the humble Advice, are to be
protected against civil injuries, are thereby exempted from Church censures;
and yet this must be proved, or your consequence is never proved. But to make
that out, we shall allow you time, and in the mean season must deny it.

And so now all you have, to the conclusion of this Section, is but mere
varnish; although we are able to tell you, as we have told you even now, and
often before, what power is granted unto us (who act by an unrepealed Ordinance
of Parliament, and yet in force) that others have not; although when you say,
are these within the bounds of our association, subject to our Government,
unless they will renounce their Baptism and Christianity? (and which you would
represent us to assert, in that recital you make of our words in the beginning
of the next Section) you do therein manifestly offer violence to the words of
our answer: for if the Reader peruse the first part of the fifth Section of our
answer, he may there find, that we declared our selves in the first place,
fully against those of the separation, and concluded that discourse with these
words, that hereupon our work was not to constitute Churches, but to reform
them only: And that therefore none within our bounds, except they shall
renounce Christianity and their Baptism, can be deemed by us to be without in
the Apostles sense; this being our answer, to what you had pressed us with, in
your first Paper, pleading your exemption from under our Government, from the
words of the Apostle, and saying, for what have you to do, to judge those that
are without? The conclusion then that we inferd, did answer that argument you
urged from the Apostles words. For its plain from our declaring our selves, we
judged none to be without in the Apostles sense, but only Heathens, of whom the
Apostle spoke; or such, as having formerly professed Christianity, did renounce
it, and their Baptism; and that therefore none could be exempted, by those
words of the Apostle, from being within the verge of our Presbyterian
Government; which was the inference we thereupon made. By all which it is very
clear, in what sense those words were to be taken, that you here mention; and
that we did not say, that except men did renounce Christianity and their
Baptism, they were subject to our Government, (as you would have it to be) but
that they could not be judged by us, to be without in the Apostles sense,
except they should make so great an apostasy; and wherein we were more liberal
and charitable toward you, then you were toward your selves. It is one thing,
that makes a member of the Catholic visible Church, and another, that makes a
member of this or that particular Church; as it is also true, that the censures
of the Church, Government, Offices, and Ordinances are first given to the
universal visible Church, before they be given to this or that particular
Church; although it be true also, that he who is a member of the Catholic
Church, must also be a member of some particular Church, under the Discipline
and Government thereof.

But we did not argue from what made you members of the Catholic Church, to
prove you to be members of some one or other of our particular Churches, and so
to be under the Government of this Class; this we prove from individuating
circumstances, because within the bounds of our Association appointed by
authority of Parliament, and other circumstances. And so we do not say, that
except men renounce Christianity and their Baptism, they are subject to our
Government; but we say, we look upon all those within the bounds of our
Association, who have not renounced Christianity and their Baptism (of which
sort we know not any amongst us) as persons we have an inspection over, and
appointed by Ordinance of Parliament to be subject to our Government; which yet
we exercise toward all, according to those rules, and that moderation, that is
prescribed in the form of Church Government.

And thus we have answered, all that you have here presented, to take off our
Government from its establishment by the civil Sanction; for it is not your
coming over again with the Act of 1650. already answered, and bidding us to
read it; nor your bidding us to read the close of the Eleventh Section of the
humble Advice, and not proving any thing in the form of Church Government to be
contrary to it, that will prove either an express or implicit repeal, though
pressed with never so much vehemence of expressions; that only proclaim your
heat, and earnest desire to have it so; and how gladly you would be believed
upon your word, and confidence in this matter, when you want further arguments
to make out what you say.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. V.
And thus having proved your Presbyterian Government to have the civil Sanction
(just thus and no otherwise) you come now to answer more particularly to that
which follows; And first you explicate (what was before dark unto us) who are
meant, by the many persons of all sorts, that are Members of Congregations,
etc. And you tell us all persons are within your verge; none without except
they will renounce Christianity and their Baptism, but are within the verge of
your Presbyterian Government; their not associating with you in regard of
Government, does not exempt them from censure by it, etc. Independents,
Anabaptists, and others; all are subject, and censured by your Government, if
they should Cl. cop. censurable.
be such Offenders as by the Rule thereof are justly censurable; it being not a
matter arbitrary, for private persons at their own will and pleasure to exempt
themselves from under that Ecclesiastical Government that is settled by
authority.

Here Gentlemen you may do well to consider, whether you do not subject your
selves to the contempt and scorn of all other parties, who conceit they have as
full power by Cl. cop. For this all parties hiss you and laugh you to scorn,
having as full, etc.
their Rules of Church Discipline to censure you, as you have them (jam sumus
ergo pares) yet they dare not censure or punish any out of their Church
Membership, contrary to the several Acts made for Toleration. To the Act of
the 27. September 1650. and to the express Article in the humble Advice above
mentioned; If you be so bold, we have told you before, and tell you again, an
Ordinance of Lords and Commons for settling of your Fresbyterian Government,
will be no sufficient plea, for your Actings contrary to the known Laws since
made, but will prove you Contemners of all Civil power, and may run you upon a
Praemunire.

But here you seem offended at us for calling Presbytery a common fold. What?
Presbytery a known Scripture expression, 1 Timothy 4. and interpreted by Object.
sundry of the Fathers, as we do (as has been before declared) to be termed a
common fold? You might have used a more civil expression.

What? Presbytery interpreted by sundry of the Fathers as you do? How is that?
We shall tell you the Fathers are different in the sense, and interpretation
Answ.
of this word Presbytery, in the Scripture expression, 1 Timothy 4. The Latin
Fathers generally, as Hierome, Ambrose, Primasius, Anselm, and others, taking
this word Presbytery, for the Function, which Timothy received when he was made
Bishop or Priest; and thus Calvin takes it in his Institutes. Quod de
impositione manuum Presbyterii dicitur, ^non ita accipio quasi Paulus de
Seniorum Lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 16. in fine.
collegio loquatur, sedhoc nomine ordinationem ipsam intelligo. The Greek
Fathers as Ignatius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and
others, and some few of the Latins also taking it for the company of
Presbyters (i. e.) Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests;
and in this sense likewise in his Comment upon this place it is interpreted by
Calvin; saying, Presbyterium, qui hic collectivum nomen esse putant, pro
Collegio Presbyterorum positum, recte s^n^iunt meo judicio. Although he is here
as flat opposite to his former Judgment, as high noon, is to midnight: And we
fear Cl. cop. wandering.
we shall find you as wavering and unsettled in yours, when it comes to
scanning. For diverse of the Fathers (you say) interpret this word as you do,
and as you have before declared. Now how you interpret it, and where to find
this place, where it is before declared, That your Interpretation agrees with
sundry of the Fathers, we have not yet discovered.

Indeed we find you quoting Dr Usher that Learned and Reverend Antiquary, to
prove the antiquity of Synods and Assemblies, and thereby you think he
vindicates your Assemblies, in our thoughts, from all suspicion of Novelty. We
find also by you out of him, there quoted certain Fathers, as first Ignatius,
who by Presbytery mentioned by Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 14. did understand the Community
of the rest of the Presbyters or Elders; And for further proof Tertullian is
alleged in his general Apology for Christians, that old-beaten saying by you
and your party, praesident probati quique Seniores, etc. Now do these interpret
as you do? Is Presbytery such as you pretend to be established by Ordinance of
Parliament, and such as you stand for in your sense, is it we say so understood
by Dr Usher, and does he bring in these Fathers speaking in this sense? If we
press you to stand to their opinion and sense, you will run back; how may you
then for shame assert that their Interpretation is the same with yours? Dr
Vshers Judgment of Assemblies agrees with yours? and his proposals of
Assemblies are the same in substance with yours? Whom you quote (you say) as
more likely to sway with us, in case we do differ from you in this point. And
here these Fathers are brought in, giving the same Interpretation as you do:
will you thus confidently assert this, and stand to nothing; have you two
hearts, and not one forehead? In our last Adress, we offered to stand to Dr
Vshers Judgment, and you declined your own man: We submit to the
Interpretation of those Fathers there alleged by him, touching the word
Presbytery, which you say is the same with yours. Can you so cordially join
your selves in Dr Bernards wish, and heartily recommend it to others to close
therein? Can you thus tender the Judgment of Dr Usher, as an Umpire, and
composer of differences betwixt us, and allege these Fathers on your behalf*
and when we would close with you, upon your own Terms, run back and eat your
own words?

Presbytery in their's, and Scripture Expression we reverence; but yours we
still term a Common-fold, and those godly pretenses of yours as so many wast
Papers, wherein your Presbytery is wrapped, to make it look more handsomely,
and pass more currently. Whereat again you are no little offended and say, We
do earnestly desire, that in the Examination of your Consciences, you would
seriously consider whether you have not both transgressed the rules of Charity
in passing such hard censures upon us, and also usurped that which belongs not
to you, in making your selves judges of what falls not under your cognizance:
To which we Answer; those words are not our own, they are borrowed of another;
if you would know the Author, we must tell you, it was the late King in his Cl.
cop. He was a Person of known Eminency in his days.
(...), who is gone before, and you must follow after. And we leave it to the
Tribunal at the great day to be determined, whether he or you, have more
transgressed the rules of Charity, in passing such hard censures upon one
another, and also usurped that which belongs not to you, in making your selves
judges of what falls not under your cognizance; The things, (as you say) men
ioned, belonging only to be tried by your and our Master, to whom we must all
stand or fall.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. ALthough we will neither flout at you, nor triumph over you, as you do over
us (as if you had quite taken away our claim to the civil Sanction, and made
all that we had said for it void) yet we doubt not but the Reader will judge,
that what you attempted with great confidence, you have performed but so and
so, weakly and no otherwise. And as touching what you now recite, out of our
Answer, we desire the Reader not to take it upon your representation, but to
peruse himself the whole fifth Section thereof, you having not dealt fairly with
us: your representation being neither full nor candid; we not concluding, as we
have already showed, that except men will renounce Christianity and their
Baptism, they are within the verge of our Presbyterian Government; but that
except they renounce Christianity and their Baptism, they are not without in
the Apostles sense; although, because they are within our bounds, we look upon
all such, as under our Government, according to Ordinance of Parliament, as we
have said before.

2. Neither shall we upon this assertion, have any cause to fear the contempt
and scorn of any other parties, there being none, but the Presbyterian party
only, that can lay claim to the civil Sanction, for the establishment of that
Government which they exercise, as you (who would gladly crowd your selves into
the number of those, to whom some indulgence is granted, have no liberty
granted you by any of the Acts, that have been made since the Ordinance of Aug.
29. 1648. that established the Presbyterian Government; you not being under the
Character of the persons spoken of, either in the Act of the 27. of September.
1650, or the humble Advice, or any other; you being for Prelacy, that is
excluded from that indulgence, granted unto others. Nay you might have known,
that for reading the Common Prayer book, such persons are punishable, by the
Act for ejecting of scandalous Ministers; and therefore if you, or any of you
(who are members of our several Congregations, and within the bounds of our
Association) shall be found at any time justly censurable by the rules of our
Government, it will be no great boldness for us, to proceed to censure you, we
being backed with an Ordinance of Parliament, that still stands in force,
against any thing you have alleged to the contrary, and therefore do not fear
your threatening us again with a Praemunire.

3. We were offended at you, for calling Presbytery a^common fold, and instead
of removing that offense given, you increase it. But you first represent in
your paraphrase upon our words, after your own manner, the ground of the
offense taken, and then return your answer; in which we observe, (that you
might with more freedom lash at Presbytery and us) you are here pleased, to
enlarge your selves, upon a very few words of ours, brought in by way of a
Parenthesis only, though in other parts of your Reply, you leave whole leaves
untoucht; and often say nothing at all, to several considerable things in our
Answer, to which you should have spoken: yea in the fifth Section of this your
Reply, you pass over in silence, all that we had said in the beginning of the
fifth Section of our Answer; wherein we had declared our selves against those
of the Separation, in several positions, thereby making way to the answer we
gave, how we understood the Apostle, when he spoke concerning such as were
without; which you took no notice of, but rent part of our words from what went
before, and wrested them from their proper sense, as we have showed before. And
not only this, but when in your first Paper, you had upbraided us, with the
garnishing of our Government, with the specious title of Christ's Government,
Throne and Scepter, and we had answered you out of your own Paper, and showed,
from the expressions you had therein used concerning the Government, that you
are for, that that with you must be Christ's Government, Throne and Scepter; and
that therefore, we were not to be condemned, if we had used such expressions
concerning our Government, till you had convinced us that it was not such; yet
all this is passed over, without so much as mentioning what we had said, or
returning any answer to it; as if it were nothing for you to upbraid us with
what, if it were a transgression, you your selves were found guilty of; and
when we had so answered it, to say nothing to it; the like whereunto you do
also here practice, in saying nothing to what we had answered, when you had
told us, that it was the chief design of the Paper, we published in our
Congregations, to subject all to our Government. For in our Answer we first
apologized for our selves, professing, that though we were charged by some to
affect dominion, etc. yet the Government of the Church was but Ministerial,
and that we acknowledged all subjection to the civil Magistrate; and then we
retorted upon you thus, and said, that you being for the settling a Government
in the Church, we did not judge you to be so irrational, as to be for a
Government, and yet deny subjection to it; whence also it was clear, that that
was not to be condemned in us, which you would justify in your selves: yet
about this also in this your Reply, there is deep silence. But thus we have
showed, how you are pleased to several things in our Answer to say nothing, as
it will be evident to the Reader, you say as good as nothing in sundry places,
where you would seem to say something; and yet you would be thought to say,
what might be sufficient to give us satisfaction. For in your second Paper,
speaking to one head of our Answer. sc. that about ruleing Elders, you said you
would proceed to show us, that Lay Elders (as you call them) are not meant in
the Texts by us alleged; briefly thus, but more largely hereafter, if what is
comprehended in this Paper be not judged satisfactory; and yet when you should
come in this Reply in the next Section, to make this appear more fully, you say
nothing to the Texts we urged, but only, that they are too general, to prove
our ruling Presbytery out of; and tell us of wresting the Scriptures, with such
like expressions, suitable to your way of replying all along, and which we
doubt not but the wise Reader will of himself observe; only we thought it
requisite, upon the occasion you here give us, to mind him of it, that he might
the better observe you through your whole Reply.

But we shall now examine, whether we had not just cause to be offended at you,
for your calling Presbytery a common fould. One of the reasons, which we g^ve,
you mention, and that indeed which was the chief; yet there was another given
in that parenthesis, which you touch not on, sc. That out of respect to the
authority ordaining it, you might have used a more civil expression. But this
it seems you had no mind to meddle with, the authority of that Parliament,
that settled the Presbyterian Government, being of little esteem with those of
you, that were either actually engaged with, or friends unto the party that
fought against it; and whereupon it is no great wonder, that you omit this
reason of our offense. But the other you speak to, and that with some more
freedom, then does become you, as we shall show anon. This other reason was
this, Considering the word Presbytery is a known Scripture expression, 1 Timothy
4. and interpreted by sundry of the Fathers, as we do, as has been declared
before; you might have used a more civil expression. In answer unto this, 1.
You tell us, the Fathers are different in the sense and interpretation of this
word Presbytery, in the Scripture expression 1 Timothy 4. And we must tell you,
that of what low and cheap abilities soever we may be accounted with you, yet
this different interpretation of this place (whereof you would seem to inform
us, out of the Fathers) we have been long since acquainted with: only when you
alledg the Greek Fathers, as Ignatius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilac^,
Oecumenius, and others, and some few of the Latins also, taking the word
Presbytery for the company of Presbyters, i. e. Bishops, who lay hand on the
new made Bishops or Priests; you must hereupon, 1. Acknowledge, that these
Fathers held Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, else how could they
understand by Presbyters, the Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or
Priests, you do here represent them to explain the word (Presbyters) by
Bishops, and the word (Bishops) by Priests, (which word is the same in sense
with Presbyters) which is manifestly to make Bishops and Presbyters all one.
This we desire to be took notice of, because when you may come hereafter to be
pressed with it, we fear you, that are so ready to charge us therewith, will
your selve^ run back and eat your own words. 2. You confess, that they expound
this word, touching the company of Presbyters; which is enough for our
vindication, when we said that 1 Timothy 4 was interpreted by sundry of the Fathers
as we do. 3. And whereas you say, they take it for the company of Presbyters,
i. e. Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests, explaining the
word (Presbyters) by Bishops, and again the word (Bishops) by Priests (that is
a quipollent to the word Presbyters) you must hence be forced to confess, that
these Fathers acknowledged, the Ordination by Presbyters only, to be valid;
they by their explication of themselves, by you alleged, making Bishops and
Presbyters (who without controversy laid on hands) all one. And therefore if
you here be of the mind of these Fathers, by your selves produced, you must
retract your opinion, formerly declared with much confidence, against the
Ordination by Presbyters only. There is no place for you here to evade, except
you shall say, that the Fathers by you alleged (and explaining the word
Presbyters by Bishops, or you expounding them so) by Bishops understand such
Bishops, as were superior to Presbyters, either in Order and Jurisdiction, or
at least in degree; (and whom you will have to concur at the least, and
preside in the Ordination, or it is null and void) but this is to say that the
Fathers, expounding the Scripture, do make it a nose of wax, and in effect to
assert, that quidlibet may be drawn ex quolibet. For if by Presbyters that are
expressly mentioned, not Presbyters themselves, but another and distinct sort of
persons are to be understood, never called in Scripture by that name, may we
not by this rule of exposition make the Scripture speak what we please,
according to our own fancies, and contrary to the express words of the Text?

To say nothing, that this evasion (if admitted) would not help the matter at
all; feeing you do here represent the Fathers, not only explaining the word
(Presbyters) by Bishops, but again explaining the word (Bishops) by Priests
(the same word in sense with Presbyters) and so making them every way one;
because they make these words Bishops and Presbyters mutually to explain one
another.

2. We have done with the different interpretation of the Fathers upon the
Text, 1 Timothy 4. and now we come to Calvin, whom you bring in here, as contrary
to himself, in that Exposition that he gives upon it. But we see, you have a
mind to asperse him, (though he be so far above you, in regard of that
deserved praise, that he has throughout the Churches, that it is not your
biting at him, that can detract any thing from him) else you would not have
said, that in his Comment upon this place, he is as far opposite to his
judgment delivered in his institutions, as high noon is to midnight. For
however in his Comment upon this place, he first says, Presbyterium qui hic
collectivum nomen esse putant, pro collegio Presbyterorum positum, recte
sentiunt meo judicio, yet he adds; Tametsi omnibus expensis, diversum sensum
non male quadrare fateor, ut sit nomen officij; Ceremoniam pro ipso ^actu
posuit; and which is the sense that in his Institutions he does adhere to. But
Calvin must not have leave from you, first to alledg one interpretation, as
that which in his judgment was probably true, and so to approve of it; and
afterward, upon consideration of all things, he thought were to be weighed, to
conclude with another; if he do, and thus deliver himself in his Comment upon
this place, he is flat opposite to himself in his institutions, as you judge,
though we believe, all equal judges, will be more candid toward him, then to
approve of your censure of him in this particular.

3. But it may be, this of Calvin was mentioned by you, that thence you might
take the occasion to have a fling at us. For after you had aspersed him, you
say, you fear you shall find us as wavering and unsettled in our judgments, when
it comes to scanning. But wherein? For that we said, diverse of the Fathers did
interpret this word (Presbytery) as we did, and as we said had been declared
before. That which in our answer we said, had been declared before, referd to
what we had before (sc. in the latter part of the third Section of it) alleged
out of Dr. Usher, in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodicall
Government; where he proves from several of the Fathers, and from the 4th
Council of Carthage, that Presbyters had a hand in the administration of the
Discipline of Christ. We produced him, alleging the Fathers you here make
mention of; and you your selves, even now alleged many more, interpreting the
word (Presbytery) used 1 Timothy 4. in the same sense that we concur with; and
which concurrent sense of ours with the Fathers we declared, in that short
Parenthesis on which you do thus enlarge, when we said, the Fathers did
understand the word (Presbytery) as we do. But now what is it that you lay to
our charge? or what is it that is our offense, with which you here upbraid us?
You tell us, it is because we said, the Fathers understood the word
(Presbytery) as we did, and because we produce Dr. Usher, speaking in this
sense. But as to the preaching Presbyters (and which was all that in the place
abovementioned in our answer, we alleged him to bring in the Fathers to speak
for) is not this clear and manifest to him that will either peruse what he
has, or what you acknowledge, we allege out of him, or shall but consider
what Fathers you your selves do say, do expound 1 Timothy 4. touching the company
of Presbyters, i. e. the Bishops that lay on hands? And therefore if you press
us herein to stand to their sense and interpretation, by us alleged out of
Dr. Usher, we shall not run back, nor have any cause to be ashamed, when we
assert, that their interpretation of the word (Presbytery) is the same with
ours. Yes say you, we may be ashamed to say so. For that Presbytery, which we
say is established by Ordinance of Parliament, and is that which we stand for,
and which when we speak of the Government of the Church by Presbytery, do mean
by that word, is not the same with that Presbytery, which the Fathers
understand. And this we suppose you say, because you judge, the Fathers do not
comprehend the ruling Elders under the word (Presbytery) mentioned, 1 Timothy 4.
To which we answer, that where we alleged the Fathers out of Dr. Usher, we
never produced them for any such purpose, as to prove, that the ruling Elders
were comprehended under the word (Presbytery) 1 Timothy 4. only we thought to gain
upon you by steps, and from what Dr. Usher alleged the Fathers for, thence to
infer the antiquity of Assemblies, where the Pastors of the Church are
members, have decisive votes, and a right to rule; and unto which if you
assented, we judged, then we were so far agreed; and which was the reason
why, mentioning his proposal of Assemblies, we said, they were the same in
substance with ours, (and for the reason of which expression, we have in this
our answer to this your Paper, given a full account before, and to prevent
repetition, do refer the Reader thither) however the ruling Elders be
admitted into them as members; although we desire the Reader to take notice,
and do mind you thereof, that we have showed, that it is no novel thing, for to
admit such to have decisive votes in Synods and Councils, that were never
ordained to preach and administer the Sacraments; and that we have alleged
testimonies of the Ancients, for to prove the being of such an Officer, as the
ruling Elder in their times; and consequently, that he was a member of the
Ecclesiastical consistory. But we have thus showed, for what sense of the word
(Presbytery) we alleged the Fathers out of Dr. Usher; as it will be manifest
to him that will peruse our answer, in that place where we cite them. And now
we leave it to the Reader to judge, whether we have for this, merited such
language from you, as here you give us. Do we confidently assert, that the
Fathers give the same interpretation of the word (Presbytery) as we d^, and yet
stand to nothing? Do we not still own, that very sense of the word (Presbytery)
1 Timothy 4. which you your selves produce sundry of them to give? Where then is
our wavering or unsetledness in our judgments, that you charge us with? Or in
what do we run back, eating our own words, as you here say we do? But this is
but a little matter in comparison; for you will have us hereupon, to have two
hearts, and not one ferehead. But what? were we in your second Paper; your dear
friends; nay more, brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord? and are we now
become monsters in Christianity, having two hearts, and have not that common
shamefastness, that might be found even amongst Heathens, having not one
forehead? We leave it to the Reader to judge, how cordial you were, in those
sugared words you gave us there, when you do here thus vent the rancor, that
was in your hearts, and that upon so sseight an occasion; doubtless the answer
we gave in words to your second Paper, could give no just cause, for such
unchristian and uncivil censures to pass upon us; neither was there any thing,
in that part of our answer to your first Paper (which your selves acknowledge
was full of civillity toward you) unto which you here reply, that gave any
such occasion; the Fathers we quoted out of Dr. Usher, being for such a sense
of the word (Presbytery) as we cited them for. But your uncharitableness, in
passing such hard censures upon us, is not all; for you do also here charge us
with sundry manifest untruths. For we never quoted Dr. Usher, who in his
proposals is expressly for moderate Episcopacy (which we as expressly cautioned
against) as our own man, whom we declined or tendered his judgment, as an
umpire and composer of differences betwixt us, as you here say; although we
reverence him, as a man that was learned and godly, and of a far different
spirit from the generality of those, that dote upon Episcopacy; but for what
purpose we quoted him, and how far we accord with him, we have, as in answer
to this occasionally, so fully declared our s^lves before, in our answer to
your second Paper. And therefore you should not have been thus rash, as to
impute such things to us, for which there is not the least show of truth; as
there is not any in what you further add, saying, that you would have closed
with us on our own terms; unto which we have spoken sufficiently, in the
beginning of this answer to this Paper, showing how much you forgot your
selves, when you said so before. And we must further tell you, that however you
may conceive of us, yet we can still profess with a good conscience, that we
can cordially our selves join in Dr. Bernards wish, and heartily recommend it
to all sober spirited and godly persons, that are sound in the main points of
Religion (though of different opinions in some things touching Church
Government) that they would close therein; there be nothing more that we long
after, then an happy healing of breaches amongst those that are the children of
peace.

4. We having thus vindicated our selves, do now come to what follows, where
you say, that Presbytery in the Fathers and Scripture expressions you
reverence; but ours you still term a common fold, and th^se godly pretenses of
ours, (as you call them) as so many waste Papers, wherein our Presbytery (you
say) is wrapped, to make it look more handsomely, and pass more currantly. But
if you had reverenced Scripture expressions, as it had been meet you should,
you would have abstained from terming our Presbytery a common fold; that
Presbytery, which you acknowledge to be the Scripture expression, according to
the interpretation of the Fathers by you alleged, being thereby reproached;
that being Presbytery still, and part of that, that by you is so ignominiously
spoken of, as (seeing it is disputed betwixt you and us, whether ruling Elders
be not comprehended under the latitude of the word Presbytery, when speech is
touching the Ecclesiastical judicatory) due reverence unto Scriptural
institutions would have withheld you, from coming near to the vilifying that,
which you are not certain, but may be of God; especially considering, how the
reformed Churches abroad, the late reverend, pious, and learned Assembly of
Divines at home, the Provincial Assembly of London, and the Ministers of the
Provincial Assembly of this County (to which you owe respect) do all conceive
the ruling Elders to be Officers of the Church, appointed therein by Christ;
and so consequently may be comprehended, under the latitude of the word
Presbytery. But the truth is, we have cause to fear, that you, or most of you,
are so much devoted to Episcopacy, that Presbytery in any sense, is not any
further in esteem with you, as any Government of the Church to be owned by you,
but as you apprehend in this juncture of affairs, it being admitted for the
present, with Prelacy moderated, might be a step to erect again in time,
Episcopacy in its full height; and which we judge to be that cause, which in
your Preface to these Papers you have printed, you profess to love; as we do
also conceive, we may further say, without transgression of any rules of
charity, that if the late King had not been too much bent for the upholding of
that kind of Episcopacy, that was on foot in his time (that spoiled the Pastors
of the Churches of that rule, which our Church acknowledged, did of right
belong to them) and had not been therein backed with the concurrence of some of
you, and sundry others throughout the Land, that were therein fully of his
mind; the proposals of Dr. Usher, touching the reduction of Episcopacy, to the
form of Synodical Government, had been more readily complied with, then they
were, to the prevention (in likelihood) in a good measure, of those troubles,
that afterward did arise about Church Government. But however, there was no
reason, why either he, or you should have called Presbytery a common fold; or
why you should, though you had been backed with the authority of the greatest
Prince on earth, have called it the anguis in herba, whereof you had need to
beware, and to which you here say nothing, though you used that expression
concerning it, in your first Paper. And whereas you had also there said,
referring to the Paper we published in our several Congregations) that she came
ushered in with godly pretense of sorrow for the sins and ignorance of the
times, and the duty incumbent on us, to exercise the power that Christ had
committed to us, for edification and not destruction, and then said, that these
were but so many wast Papers, wherein Presbytery was wrapped up, to make it
look more handsomely and pass more currently, yet that is no purgation of you
from your uncharitable censuring of us, and usurping that which belonged not to
you, in making your selves judges of that which fell not under your cognizance,
and which was that, which we had charged you with in our answer; but from which
you do not here acquit yourselves. But as touching our selves, we are not
conscious, that we have so far transgressed the rules of charity, in passing
hard censures either upon him, you, or any others, but that we may approve our
selves here to God, touching our innocence herein, and the sincerity of our
hearts; and hereafter, stand with boldness, before the Tribunal of the great
God and our Savior Jesus Christ, at the great day; and we do heartily wish,
that neither any of you, or any others throughout these Nations, who adhered to
the late King, in that war he levied against the Parliament, had given the
occasion, justly to be complained of at that day, as therein his greatest
enemies.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. VI.
And now we come (you say) to frame an Objection out of your Paper, and return
our Answer, profeising that we pray for the establishment of such a Church
Government throughout his Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of
God, and Universal practice of primitive Churches: By which two (viz.) the will
of God, and Uinversal practice of Churches, we seem to Cl. cop. the Church.
make up the rule (as you say) for deciding of Controversies of this Nature, or
of any other in matters of Religion: In which you profess to differ greatly
from us, as not sound and orthodox. For the Word of God is the only rule to
judge of matters of this Nature, or of any other matters of Religion, and
therefore away with the constant and Universal practice of the Church. We might
have cut the matter a great deal shorter and said, That we are for the
establishment of that Government that is most consonant to the will of God,
revealed in Scriptures, and that the Word of God alone should determine this
controversy, etc.

Who can forbear laughter, to see Scripturists under the Gospel (as these under
the Law, Templum Domini, Templum Domini.) cry Verbum Domini, Verbum Domiui,
nothing but Scripture, the Word of God being there the only rule of faith and
manners? Take to your Bibles then, and burn all other Books, as the Anabaptists
of old did, who when they and their Bibles were left together, what strange and
Fantastical opinion soever came into their brain? Their usual manner was to
say, The spirit taught it them: as Mr Hooker in his preface to his Eccles. Pol.

The determination of Councils, and Fathers, and the Churches Universal
practice for matters of Church Government, must all be abandoned, and then to
that old Question of the Papists, Where was your Church before Lutber? or that
of ours to you, Where was your Church before Calvin? (Just like the Arguing of
the Samaritanes with the Je^^s, about the Antiquity of their Church on Mount
Gerizim, recorded by Joseplus) per Saltum, by a high Jump over all the
Universal practice and successions of the Church, you can make your Church and
Church Government as ancient as you list, by saying it is to be found in the
Scriptures, referring it to Christ, and the Apostles; nay higher yet, if you
please, to the Jewish Sanhedrim 1500. years at least before Christ Mr Henderson
will assist you much in th^s, who in his dispute with his Majesty, averring
that Presbyterian Government was never practiced before Calvin's time, replyeth;
Your Majesty knows the Cammon Objection of the Papists against the Reformed
Churches, Where was your Church, your Reformation, your Doctrine before Luthers
time? One part of the Common Answer is; it is to be sound in the Scriptures;
the same I affirm of Presbyterian Government. Thus he.

Make you such defense in behalf of your Church; but (thanks be to God) the
Protestant cause has not, does not, nor (we hope) will ever want far abler
Disputants and Champions, in her defense against her adversaries, then he or
you be. For though we grant, and shall ever pay that reverence to the sacred
Scriptures, that it is an unsallible unerring rule, yet may we not (...). 1 Timothy 3. 15. Cant. 1. 8.
cry up Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the Church, which the
Scripture it self teaches men both to honor and obey. We will endeavor
therefore to give either their due according to Christ's institution, that the
Scripture, where it is plain, should guide the Church, and the Church, where
there is doubt or difficulty, should expound the Scriptures as says a Bishop:
And you your selves may remember what you affirm of General Councils Bishop
Lauds preface against Usher.
(the Churches Representative) nay more of your Provincial Assemblies, even in
your Answer to that you call the preface to our Paper, That there is in them
invested an Authoritative juridicall power (to whose Authority you profess your
selves to be subject, and to which all ought to submit, alleging 1 Cor. 14.
32. Matthew. 18. and Acts 15. for proof hereof) to Inquire into, Try, Examine,
Censure and judge of Matters of Doctrine, as well as of Discipline; And tax us,
as if we refused to submit in such matters, to the Judgment of a General
Council. Though here you retract and eat your own words, casting it out as
unsound and Hetrodox, what was before a Christians duty to practice. You still
own subjection in matters of Doctrine, and discipline, to the Judgment and
determination of your Provincial Assemblies, though you deny the Authority of
General Councils, and the Catholic Church; That those should be our guide,
and rule, and comment upon the Word of God, to tell us, what is his will
revealed there, touching Church Government, and discipline. Said we not truly,
that you seem to submit to your Provincial, what you will hardly grant to a
General Council?

But the Church (as we have said) where there is doubt or difficulty, may
expound the Scripture, though it be tied (as you have said) to the rule of Gods
Words in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law, and we are concluded, and
bound up by that, as we are to those cases in the Law, which are the Judgment
and Exposition of the Judges, upon the dark places of the same. The Churches
exposition and practice is our rule in such cases, and the best rule too: As
our late King affirms, (viz.) Where the Scripture is not so clear, and
punctual in precepts, there the constant and Universal practice of (...).
Chap. 20.
the Church, in things not contrary to reason, faith, good manners, or any
positive command, is the best rule that Christians can follow. So when there is
a difference about ^nterpretation of Scripture (that we may not seem to abound
in our own sense, or give way to private interpretation, Dominari fidei, to
Lord it over the faith of others) we are not to utter our own phansies, or
desires to be believed upon our bare word, but to deliver that sense which has
been a foretime given by our Forefathers, and forerunners in the Christian
says: and so we necessarily make another Judge and rule for interpretation of
Scripture, or else we prove nothing.

Thus have the best and ablest defenders of our Protestant Religion defended it
against the Papists (out of the Word of God too) but not according to their own
but the sense which the Fathers unanimously in the primitive Church, and
Councils gave.

See Mr Philpot, that glorious Martyr in Queen Mary's days to the like
Question propounded, viz. How long has your Church stood? Answers; from the
beginning, from Christ, from the Apostles, and their Immediate Successors; And
for proof thereof desires no better rule, then what the Papists many times
bring in on their side; to wit, Antiquity, Universality, and Unity. And Calvin
acknowledges (as in our last Paper we showed you) there can be no better, nor
surer remedy for Interpretation of Scripture, then what the Fathers in the
primitive Churches gave, especially in the first four General Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, which contain nothing (says he) but the
pure and genuine Interpretation of Scripture, and which he professes to
embrace, and reverence, as hallowed, and inviolable; So they rest not in
private interpretation, but willingly submit to a judge and rule besides the
Scriptures, even such as the Papists themselves cannot except against; (viz.)
the primitive Churches practice, and Universal and unanimous consent of
Fathers, and general Councils. By these our Church is content to be tried, and
to this rule we bring the Church Government to be tried thereby.

And on this score your Presbytery is quite our of doors, being of examples and
practice of the Church, and Testimonies of the Fathers wholly destitute, (...)
Chap. 17. ^
wherein (as the King has it) the whole stream runs so for Episcopacy, that
that there is not the least rivulet for any others. Which you being sensible of,
have no way to evade this rule, but una* litura to blot out all records, and
monuments of Antiquity, for the space of three hundred years after Christ, as
imperfect, and far from showing the Universal practice of the Church then; and
to brand the most approved Authors of those times, as spurious and corrupt;
void of all modesty, and showing thereby no great store either of judgment or
honesty.

But suppose the Monuments and Records of Antiquity for the space of three
hundred years after Christ, were now (as you say) grown unperfect, and not able
to show what was then the Churches practice; yet come we to the General
Councils (which are the best Expositors of Scripture, and of the Churches
practice) and we by them shall find the practice of the Church in former time.
That famous Council of Nice, which must be, and is of all wise and Learned men,
reverenced, esteemed, and embraced next unto the Scriptures themselves, shows
you the practice of the Church in its form of Church Government, by Patriarch,
Metropolitan, Archbishop, Bishop, etc. as by the 6th, 7th, 13th, 25th, 26th,
and 27th Canons of the same Council appears. Not that this Council did
constitute, and create, as some falsely conceit, but did only confirm and
strengthen those orders and degrees which were in the Church even from the
beginning: so are the words of the Council, Can. 6. The very first words of
that Canon (whereby it is ordained, that the whole power of all Egypt, Lybia,
and Pentapolis, should belong to the Patriarch of Alexandria, even as it is
also there decreed, that the ancient Customs and Privileges which belonged to
the Bishop of Rome, Antioch, and the Metropolitanes of other Provinces should
be preserved) are (...), The very words which Ignatius uses to express the
Apostolical Traditions. Anriqui mores obtineant in Aegypto, Lybia and
Pentapoli, etc. i. e. Let the ancient customs in Egypt, Lybia, and P^ntapolis
continue, that the Patriarcks of Alexandria should have power over all these:
even those Customs which were deduced down to those times, from St Mark the
Evangelist, not only Bishop of Alexandria but of the Churches of Egypt, Lybia,
and Pentapolis also. So Eusebius, lib 2. cap. 15, 16. and others.

So that these Canons, here made, gave no new thing; did not de novo, institute
or establish this standing subordination in the Church (viz.) of all inferior
Officers in the Church; to the Bishop in every Diocese; of the Bishop in every
Province to the Metropolitan; of the Metropolitan in every Region, to the
Patriarch or Primate: but did only confirm it. These standing powers, and
subjection, being defined and asserted by the ancient Canons, yea the most
Ancient even in memorial Apostolical Tradition and Cl. cop. cap. 9. 20. cap.
19. Sect. 5.
Custom, avouched for it as may appear, Council Nicen. 1. cap. 4, 6. Council.
Antioch cap. 1, 20. Council. Chalced. cap. 119. See more of this in Dr Hammond
of Schism, Cap. 3. sect. 22. 23, 24, 25. cap. 8. sect. 8.

Thus much to show the practice of the Church, in point of Church Government
for the first three hundred years, even from general Councils, the best
Expositors of the practice of the Church in those times. And as they are our
best Informers of the Churches practice, so are they the best Interpreters of
the mind and will of God in Scripture touching Church Government. Calvin
reckoning up the several orders and degrees of Bishops, Archbishops,
Metropolitan and Patriarch, and rendering the reason of such Governors
ordained by the said Council of Nice, though he dislike the name Hierarchy,
which some gave unto that Government; yet (says he) omitting the name, if we
look into the thing, we shall find that these ancient Bishops did not frame a
form of Church Government, differing from that which Christ has prescribed in
his word. Mark, we pray; the Churches practice, in the form of Church
Government, was hitherto according to the prescript of Gods Word, in Calvin's
judgment. And this was 330. years after Christ: Yea Beza likewise, that earnest
^atron of Presbyterian discipline, confesses; That those things which were
ordained of the ancient Fathers, concerning the seats of Bishops,
Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs, assigning their limits, and attributing to them
certain Authority, were appointed optimo zelo, out of a very good zeal; and
therefore such sure as was according to knowledge, and the word of God,
otherwise it would be far from being optimus, the best zeal. And thus we have
found a Church Government agreeable to the will of God, and universal practice
of primitive Churches: such a one as we pray for, may be established in this
Nation, putting both together, not the word of God alone, nor the Churches
practice alone, but both together, and both in their due piaces; not crying up
the Church above the Scripture, nor crying up the Scripture to the contempt and
neglect of the Church: but restoring the practice and customs of the Church
into that credit, is due unto them; by invalidating of which, all heretical
and schismatic persons seek to overthrow the Church. Nay, but yours is that
Government which is most consonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures,
and your ruling Elders are jure divino, which you cannot part with, unless you
should betray the truth of Christ, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. We answer,
these Texts are too general to prove a ruling Presbytery out of; and so you
have been often told by many more learned Doctors of our English Church. Yet
ruling Elders must be found here, for so you will have it, let Gide^ns fleece
be wet or dry; That is, whether there be dew enough in those Texts to water the
sense or no: Therefore being resolyed on it, you wrest the Scriptures (which St
Peter complains of) with Expositions, and glosses newly coined, to make them
speak what they never meant, giving such new and strange senses to places of
Scripture, as the Church of Christ never heard of till of late years. This
wresting Cl. cop. this mann^ wresting.
of Scripture, Dr Andrews taxes the Papists withal, saying, Malus hic
Cardinalium mos; and we as truly, Malus hic Presbyterorum mos -- rem facias,
rem -- si possis recte, si non, quocunque modo rem, etc. such a sense you give
of these places, which none of the Fathers ^ave, or heard of; and being a
stranger to them, we can but term it an Imagination of yours, and so leave it
and you to what we have in our last Paper further spoken of it. Touching which,
no reply has been as yet sent us from you.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
WE are sure we are now come, to that which is the worst part in all your
Paper, your principles here being very corrupt, even in a Doctrinall matter of
high concernment, and that distemper which was upon your spirit, breaking out
here into railing in an high degree, if not to blasphemy; besides your
flandering of us and scoffing at us, which is ordinary with you, of which we
shall speak anon particularly.

1. But we shall begin with that Representation, which you first make, of what
we answered to that Objection which you made out of our Paper; wherein as you
cut it short, so you do manifestly deprave our words; for though, speaking of
that, which was to be the rule of deciding controversies, touching Ghurch
Government, or of any other matters of Religion, we said, That the Word of God
alone, and then added (which you here wholly leave out) and the approved
practice of the Church recorded there (whether it was the universal and
constant practice of the Church or no) is to be the only rule to judge by, in
this or any other controversies in matters of Religon; yet we never said, away
therefore with the constant and universal practice of the hCurch, this being an
addition of your own: and which, when you profess to represent what we said,
was no more fair, then your former substraction; especially when such
additions, or substractions belonged to the true stating of the Question
betwixt you and us; although, if the universal and constant practice of the
Church, must be added to the will and Word of God, or it is not a sufficient
and perfect rule whereby to guide us; we may well then say, away with the
constant and Universal practice of the Church, in this sense. And yet in our
Answer you might have taken notice; that we said, we did much honor and
reverence the Primitive Churches, although we professed, we owed greater
reverence to the Scriptures then to them; and whereby we did not judge, they
were any whit disparaged, as they themselves would never have thought upon such
an expression. But in our Answer, after we had propounded the rule which you
seemed to us to make for deciding of the controversy, touching Church
Government and other matters of Religion, sc. the Word or will of God, and the
constant and Universal practice of the Church (as if the Word of God alone,
except confirmed or explained by the constant and Universal practice of the
Church when there were any doubt about any matter (as here you speak) were not
of it self sufficient to determine it, and which is that rule which here you
own, we first (supposing it were admitted of) put you upon it to prove, what
was the Universal prctice of Primitive Churches, in the matter of Church
Government; intimating to you, that we thought it would be hard for you, or any
others to demonstrate out of any Records of Antiquity, what tha^ was for the
whole space of three hundred years after Christ, or the greatest part thereof
(excepting so much as was left upon record in the Scriptures of the new
Testament) for which we gave you our reasons, unto which you say something,
after you had first vented your distemper against us, for not admitting your
rule; but how satisfactory will come afterward to be examined. In the next
place we came to oppose the rule it self, and for this also we gave you our
reasons, none of which you do either recite in your representation of what we
had here said, or return any answer to afterward; and which is such a kind of
replying to our Answer, as we believe, all ingenuous rational men would have
been ashamed of, who would have conceived, they were obliged either to have
returned some answer to our arguments, or to have never replied at at all, but
been silent. But seeing you mention them not, we shall give the Reader a short
account what they were, and refer him to the answer it self, where he may see
them more fully. The reasons we gave, why we could not admit of the rule you
laid down, were three, although we did not in our answer number them, and which
perhaps might be the reason, why you might think, if you took no notice of
them, such an escape might the more easily pass.

The first reason we urged against your rule was, because thereby the
Scriptures were accused as imperfect, or as not having light enough in
themselves, for the resolving all doubts touching matters of faith and
practice, except it were first known, what was the universal practice of
Primitive Churches.

2. The second was, because admitting the constant and universal practice of
Primitive Churches, to be that which must assure us, what is the will of God
concerning Church Government, our faith is hereupon resolved into a most
uncertain ground, and so made fallible, and turned into opinion; there being no
monuments of antiquity besides the Scriptures, that could infallibly assure us,
touching the matters of fact therein contained.

3. Our third reason was, because if we could be assured what was the universal
and constant practice of the Primitive Churches, yet that could not be a rule
to us, what is most consonant to the will of God; considering, that in such
matters as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, we did not see, but the
universal practice of the Churches, might in some things be dissonant to the
will of God revealed in Scriptures. We here showed, there were corruptions and
so failings in practice in the best of men, instancing in the hot contention
betwixt Paul and B^rnabas, Peter's dissimulation, Gal. 2. and not only in these
Apostolical men, but also in Apostolical Churches, as of Corinth, Galatia,
Asia; and then showed, how afterward corruptions grew in the Church, in
Doctrine and Government, as the Reader will see more fully upon perusal of our
answer; and where he will find all these reasons, though you here were pleased
to take no notice of any of them. But we hereupon inferred, that whereas you
say, that you pray for the establishment of such Church Government, as is most
consonant to the will of God, and universal practice of Primitive Churches; we
did believe you might cut the matter a great deal shorter (which you eagerly
catch at in the representation you make) and say, that you are for the
establishing of that Government, that is most consonant to the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures, and that the word of God alone (and on which only
faith must be built, and into which at last be resolved, when other records of
antiquity, that yet are not so ancient as it is, have been searched into never
so much) shall determine what that is; and so those wearisome and endless
disputes, about what is the universal and constant practice of Primitive
Churches (and which if it could not be found out, in any good measure of
probability, for the first three hundred years after Christ, could never yet
be so far issued, as to be a sure bottom, whereon our faith may safely rest)
may be cut off; it being a most certain rule, and especially in matters of
faith, that the factum is not to prescribe against the jus, the practice
against the right, or what ought to be done.

We have been the larger, in making this representation of what we had
answered, because yours is here so short; and also because you come not at all
afterward, to answer any of our reasons, but fall upon us with foul language,
as if that were sufficient to answer an argument; but upon this representation
that we have made, and the Reader his perusing, what he may find in our answer
more fully, and what you here reply unto it; comparing all together, he will be
better able to judge concerning the whole matter; as we doubt not, but he will
conceive, the arguments we urged, against the rule you had laid down, for the
deciding of controversies in matters of Religion, standing still in their full
strength, it will not be necessary for us, to urge any more to that purpose,
till these, that we have already urged, be answered.

2. Yet because you say something, against what we insinuated, touching making
the word of God alone, the determiner, and so be judge concerning all
controversies in Religion, and particularly concerning that betwixt you and us,
touching Church Government, we shall first examine what you oppose thereunto,
and then shall give our reasons for this assertion. We cannot call, what you
oppose us with, Arguments; but what you say, such as it is, we shall speak to.
1. And first, For our laying down this rule, you cannot (it seems) your selves
forbear laughter, and think it strange, if there be any, that can forbear
laughing hereat with you; and then you rail upon us, calling us Scripturists,
and such as cry, verbum Domini, verbum Domini, nothing but Scripture, the word
of God being there, the only rule of faith and manners. If these words had been
belched out by some railing Rabshakeh, a stranger to the true God and the true
Religion, we should have held our peace, and not answered you a word, according
to the Commandment that was given by Hezekiah, saying, answer him not: or had
they been uttered by some Papist, or Popish Priest, we should not much have
wondered; but when they come out of the mouths of such, as profess themselves
to be Protestants, and dissenting Christians (though in the principle here laid
down, touching the judge of controversies, you are downright Popish, and that
Mr. Allen, an ancient Protestant Minister, has put his hand to such stuff as
this, who should not have reproached his fellow brethren upon this account; it
being no ways allowable, that Ministers should press any thing upon the
consciences of their people, but what they do bring verbum Domini, the word of
the Lord for. We cannot here be silent, but must needs tell you, that seeing
now your Papers are published to the world, we must expect a public
retractation, of what you have thereby so much dishonored God, and justly
offended and grieved the Church of God, and not us only: and had the intended
treaty gone on, we should have insisted on satisfaction (as we hinted to you in
discourse) for that distemper of spirit, that you do here and elsewhere in your
Paper let forth (though then the more private might have served the turn)
before we could have closed with you in any way of accommodation. 2. But in the
next place you parallel us with those under the Law, that cried Templum Domini,
Templum Domini; though we are sure that you cry the Church, the Church, that is
Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, to the prejudice of the Scriptures,
that are verbum Domini, the word of the Lord. 3. Then you come to compare us
with the Anabaptists of old, of whom you say, when they and their Bibles were
left together, what strange fantastical opinion soever came in their brain,
their usual manner was to say, the spirit taught it them, quoting Mr. Hooker.
And yet in the beginning of your second Paper, we were your dear friends, (nay
more) brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord, to whom you returned hearty
thanks, for our Answer full of civility toward you; and thus we might have
continued in your esteem of us, if we could have come up to your terms, in
admitting of Episcopacy, and casting out the ruling Elders. 4. In the next
place you proceed to misrepresent our assertion, and to father that upon us
which is not true; and whether that be not slandering, we leave it to you to
judge; for, as upon our asserting the Word of God alone, to be the judge of all
controversies in matters of Religion, it follows not that then we must take to
our Bibles, and burn all other books, as you say; but rather being the
Scriptures are the only judge, and these are profound and deep, we must use
the greatest diligence and best helps we can, to come to understand what is the
will and mind of God revealed there; so upon this account, though we dare not
build our faith upon such an unsure foundation, as the determination of
Councils and Fathers, and the Churches practice, for matters of Church
Government, or any other matter in Religion; yet we are far from abandoning
or despising them, which yet is that, you here charge us with: But it is you
(who attribute more unto them, then ever the great Champions for the Protestant
cause did) that will be found joining hands in this point with the Papists,
(enquiring where was our Church before Luther? and whom, our Divines answering
sufficiently from the Scriptures, do yet ex superabundanti prove the main
points of the Protestant Religion, wherein they differ from them, both from
Councils and Fathers) and making that plea, for that Church Government for
which you contend, and against that, which we, from the Scriptures argue for,
which the Papists did against our Protestant Divines, for their unwritten
traditions and superstitious ceremonies, and devotion. For you ask of us, where
was our Church (you here sure mean, where was our Presbyterian Government? else
you take not the Church of England, to which you belong, to be the Church you
are members of) before Calvin? But we answer you, though we need not take such
an high jumpe, over all the practice and successions of the Church, as you talk
of; being able, ex superabundanti, to evidence it from antiquity, in the purer
times of the Primitive Church after Christ and his Apostles (whereof we have
given some account already, and shall anon give some further) yet it will be
sufficient for us, and all sound Protestants, if we can prove it to be as
ancient, not as we list, but as the Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
wherein it is to be found, and whereof we have given some account also, out of
what we have in our second Paper urged out of the Vindication of the
Presbyterian Government by the Provincial Assembly of London; and the Jus
Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, by some London Ministers; and of which the
Reader (and you also, if you would take the pains to peruse them) may see more
at large, not only in Mr. Rutherford's works, but also in Aarons Rod
blossoming, written by Mr. George Gillespi, and in the Assertions of the
Government of Scotland (conceived by some to be penned by the same M. Gillespi,
yet therein assisted by Mr. Henderson) wherein the jus Divinum of the ruling
Elders office is proved, not only from the new Testament, but also from the
old; and which books (proving the Presbyterian Government, as from Christ and
his Apostles, so also from the Jewish judicatories, (to which some conceive
Christ alludes, Matthew. 18. when he says, tell the Chutch,) which were
appointed many hundred years before Christ, and answering the opposers of this
Government in all the material points, that ever were objected against it, by
the greatest Champions for Episcopacy) were never yet answered, that we have
seen to this day. And for this assistance (however you contemn it) yet we bless
God; neither are we ashamed of Mr. Hendersons answer to his late Majesty,
telling him, that the Presbyterian Government was to be found in the
Scriptures, as our Divines have answered the Papists sufficiently, after the
same manner, touching other matters; as we are not ashamed neither to make this
defense on the behalf of our Church. And though we thank God heartily, for
those far abler disputants and Champions of the Protestant cause, then we or
any of us, have ever pretended to be (not thinking our selves worthy to be
mentioned for any abilities, amongst them) yet we desire to know which of those
Champions (though they refused not to fight against the Papists with their own
weapons, sc. the testimonies of Fathers and Councils) did ever refuse the
Scriptures, as the sole judge and determiner of controversies in matters of
Religion, as you do? or did they not rather stoutly and irrefragably maintain
and defend this main point of faith, against the adversary? 5. But now you come
to tell us, what reverence you pay to the sacred Scripture; for you say, you
acknowledge it to be an infallible and unerring rule. And will not a Papist say
so too? But let us enquire of you, will you acknowledge the Scripture to be the
sole supreme judge of controversies in matters of faith? Except you come up to
this, you are as yet, in regard of any reverence you pay to the Scriptures, no
further then a Papist; nay you join hands with them; for they say, as you do;
we may not cry up Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the Church, which
the Scripture it self teaches men to honor and obey; and sano sensu, in a
right and sound sense, we shall say so too. But you further declare your selves
touching this matter, and say, that the Scripture where it is plain should guide
the Church, and the Church, where there is doubt or difficulty, should expound
the Scriptures, as says a Bishop; and you quote in your margent BP Laud's
Preface, that is not against Usher but Fisher *. The Jesuit.


But here 1. You mistake the Question, for it is not, Whether to the Church
belongs not a Ministry, for the expounding of the Scriptures? This is readily
granted to her by us, as it is by our Protestant Divines; and that the Texts
you cite in the margent will prove. 2. You plainly discover your opinion to be
no other, then what in this point is held by the Papists; and is abundantly
refuted by our Protestant Divines in their writings. The matter is plainly
thus, and no otherwise; for when you say, where the Scripture is plain, it must
guide the Church, but where there is a doubt or difficulty, the Church is to
expound the Scriptures; you plainly insinuate, that the Scriptute is not to be
the sole and supreme judge, touching controversies in Religion; for there is no
controversy in Religion, but the Adversaries (be they Antitrinitarians,
Arrians, Papists or whomsoever) may say as you here do, in such and such points
in controversy, the Scripture is not plain, here is a doubt and difficulty,
and we must stand to the Churches determination, who is in such cases to
expound the Scripture; neither is the Scripture in such cases, to be the only
sure infallible interpreter of it self, to which all parties are to stand, and
in whose determination alone they are to rest, and into which our faith must be
resolved; which yet is that which is maintained by our Protestant Divines
against the Papists, and of which we shall speak more fully anon. Only for the
present we must mind you, that this assertion is fetched out of the dreggs of
Popery, and is such an opinion as all sound Protestants will disclaim; neither
do the Texts you cite in your margent, prove any such a thing, Not 1 Timothy 3.
15. that is usually urged by the Papists, for that very opinion which you
maintain, but is sufficiently vindicated by our Divines; showing, that the
Church is there called, the Pillar and ground of Truth, in regard of her
Ministry only, by her preaching, publishing and defending the truth, and
thereby transmitting it to posterity; but not to intimate, that the Scripture
in any point, where there is doubt or difficulty. did borrow authority from the
Church, no more then the Edicts of Princes do from the publishers of them, or
from the pillars and posts to which they are affixed, that they might be the
more generally known. The other Text, sc. Cant. 1. 8. proves indeed, that the
Church has a Ministry committed to her, for the feeding of babes in Christ, as
well as stronger men, which is not denied; but if you will stretch it further,
its plain you wrest it. 6. In the last place you urge us, with what we our
selves granted unto Synods and Councils, acknowledging, they were invested with
an authoritative juridicall power, to enquire into, try, examine, censure and
judge of matters of Doctrine, as well as of Discipline, and to whose authority
we professed our selves to be subject, and to which all ought to submit; urging
Scripture for it, etc. nothing whereof we do here retract, or eat our own
words, casting that out as unsound and hetrodox, as you say we do, which before
we acknowledged was a Christians duty to practice. For here you do not
distinguish, betwixt the submission of our faith to the determination of Synods
and Councils, and the submission of our persons to their censure, in regard of
any matter of Doctrine, held forth by us, or any practice. This latter
submission we still do readily yield unto them, and that in regard of the
juridicall authority, they are invested with by the Ordinance of God; and this
submission was that, we professed before to yield unto them; and was that we
argued for. But as touching the submission of our faith to their
determinations, or so as to resolve it into any other principles then the Word
of God alone, or to build it on any other foundation, was not that reverence we
ever acknowledged was to be paid to Synods and Councils, and is that which here
we do professedly deny. And therefore you do here again no less then slander
us, when you say, we still own subjection in matters of Doctrine and
Discipline, to the judgment and determination of our Provincial Assembly, and
yet deny the Authority of General Councils, and the Catholic Church; whom
neither we ever denied to be a guide, or their Expositions of Scripture to be
an useful Comment thereon, for the better helping us to understand, what was
Gods will revealed there, touching Church Government and Discipline; but denied
them to be our sure guide: and further asserted, the Word of God alone to be the
only rule to judge by in this, or any other controversies in matters of
Religion, (and which are the words we used, in that part of our Answer, to
which you here reply) as it is a received rule amongst Protestant Divines, that
the only sure rule or guide for the interpreting of Scripture, is not Fathers,
Councils, or the practice of the Church (and wherein we must further oppose you
anon, giving you our reasons for that also) but the Scripture it self, that is
the only infallible comment or sure guide, or (as we spoke) interpreter. And
now we leave it to the Reader to judge, how true it was said by you, that we
seemed to submit to our Provincial, what we will hardly grant to a General
Council.

But you hitherto having no otherwise, then thus, opposed, what we had
intimated to you, was to be the only rule and sole judge of controversies in
matters of Religion, sc. the Word of God alone; we shall now proceed to give
you our Reasons (according to what we promised) for this assertion. And
however, this pains to some may seem needless, considering how full our Divines
are in this point in their writings against the Papists, yet we judge it
necessary to say something (though it be but what has been said before) that
so we may neither seem to slight any means, we are obliged to use to reduce
you from your error; nor neglect the souls of those that are committed to our
charge; in not laying before them some grounds for the better establishing them
in the present truth. Our Reasons then for making the Scriptures the only rule
of faith and life, and sole supreme judge of all controversies in matters of
Religion are briefly these:

Argument 1. Because it is the Scripture only, or Word of God contained there,
that begets divine faith and full assurance The Scriptures the sole supreme
judge of all matters in Religion.
in matters of Religion, so as to remove all doubts and scruples; and hence it
is that faith is said to come by hearing, Romans 10. 17. i. e. from the sense of
Scripture truly perceived and rightly understood. Timothy is also said to have
gained the assurance of what he had learned from the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16. neither is there any other firm foundation, whereon we can build, but the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. and therefore it is the
Scripture only that is the sole judge of controversies, removing all doubts
and scruples, and so determining the matters in difference touching Religion,
in whose sentence only we can rest, and to whose determination we must stand.

Argument 2. If the Scriptures must be refused, as the sole and supreme judge
and determiner of controversies in matters of Religion; then it is, because
they are either imperfect, and so not reaching to all cases and matters in
controversy, or else because they are obscure, and so not sufficiently plain
for the resolving of all doubts, whereupon there is a necessity supposed of
appeal to some other judge.

But the Scriptures are not imperfect; for the Law and Scripture of the Old
Testament is said to be perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. And therefore there was nothing
wanting in it, that was necessary for the instruction of the people of God,
under the Old Testament, in matters of Religion that concerned them to know;
integrum, or that which is perfect; being that, according to the description of
the Philosopher, Cui nihil deest, and extra quod nihil eorum quae sunt ejus
accipi potest, i. e. that to which nothing is wanting, and without which,
nothing of those things that belong unto it, can be taken. And hence it is that
God did so strictly prohibit his people of old, that they should not, either
add any thing to, or detract any thing from his Law, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and therefore
much more are the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament perfect; neither
is there any case in matters of Religion needful to be resolved, but the
determination thereof is to be found there; especially considering, all
Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

And as the Scriptures are not to be accused of imperfection, so neither of
obscurity. The word of God is a lamp to our feet, and a light to our paths,
Psalm. 119. 105. and hereupon our only sure guide, as a torch or lantern in the
night, that so we may be guided in the way we should walk, and thereby be
cautioned against errors on all hands. The Apostle Peter also, speaking of the
Scripture, calls it a more sure word of prophe^sie, whereunto we should do well
to take heed, as to a light shineing in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and
therefore the Scripture is sufficiently plain, for the resolving of all doubts,
and determining of all controversies in Religion. Although if in some things
the Scripture be obscure, yet this is no sufficient reason for the refusal of
it, as the sole determiner of controversies; perspicuity not being of the
essence and nature of a rule, but certainty and authority; the Laws of men
being often obscure, as Lawyers know, and yet not thereupon ceasing to be a
rule.

Argument 3. God is the author of Scripture, all Scripture being given by
inspiration from him, 2 Timothy 3. 16. received by immediate divine revelation, 2
Pet. 1. 21. and is the word of Christ, Col. 3. 16. and therefore is the
testimony, and sentence of God himself the supreme Judge, and therefore is to
be acknowledged by all, to be the only sure guide and determiner of all
controversies in Religion.

Argument 4. Nothing is to be believed in matters of Religion, and to be
received as from God, or to be taught in the Church, but what is confirmed by
the testimony of Scripture; whence it was, that in the old time, the people
were sent to the Law and to the Testimonies, Isa. 8. 20. Paul taught nothing
but what was to be found in the Prophets and Moses, Act. 26. 22. and hence it
was also, that the Bereans were commended for trying by the touchstone of the
Scriptures, what they heard from Paul, Act. 17. 11. And therefore the
Scriptures are the only rule and supreme Judge of all controversies in Religion.

Argument 5. The people of God are commanded, that they turn not aside, either
to the right hand or to the left, from that path that is chalked forth in the
Scriptures for them to walk in, Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and Chap. 17. 20. Josh. 1. 7. and
therefore the Scripture is the only sure rule in matters of Religion, to which
we must exactly keep, and from which we must not in the least thing turn aside.

Many more reasons might be here urged, but we judge these sufficient, and so,
having dispatched what we promised, we shall now proceed.

3. For you, having not urged Arguments, against the rule by us propounded, for
the determining controversies in matters of Religion, but only vented against
us the distemper of your spirit for that proposal, do now further declare your
selves, touching what you would have to be the judge, and rule for
interpretation of the Scripture; and do add unto the universal ^ractice of the
Church, mentioned in your first Paper, the Churches exposition, meaning the
exposition of Councils, and unanimous consent of Fathers, as you here declare
your selves: concerning which we shall, 1. Propound the true state of the
Question betwixt you and us; 2. And then urge some Arguments against the rule
by you here made; 3. and lastly, We shall answer what you have here to say for
your opinion. As touching the first; we do here declare our selves, that we do
readily grant, the Church may expound the Scripture, though (as we said in our
answer, which you here acknowledge) it be tied to the rule of Gods word in such
proceedings, as Judges to the Law; and so therefore the Churches exposition may
and is to be made use of, as a means appointed by God, that we might
understand the word, where there is a doubt or difficulty, but we must not
allow what you further add, sc. that we are bound up by the Churches
exposition, as we are (according to what you say) to those cases in the Law,
which are the judgment and exposition of the Judges upon the dark places of
the same: neither must we close with you, when you say, the Churches exposition
and practice is our rule in such cases, and the best rule too; or that when
there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture, we must necessarily
make another judge and rule for interpretation of Scripture, besides Scripture,
as you speak, the Scripture it self being in such a case, the only sure
interpreter of it self; the doubtful and hard places thereof being to be
expounded by the more plain. Further we do here declare, that we grant, the
Church is a judge, touching matters of Religion in controversy, or touching
the interpretation of doubtful or difficult places of Scripture, but a
ministerial Judge only; and not the rule for its interpretation, as you speak;
or such a judge from which there is no appeal, no not to the Scriptureit self,
as you intimate. Again the Church is such a judge, to which all parties ought
to submit, in regard of her juridical authority, to be censured by her in
regard of opinions or practices; but not such a judge, to whose determination
we must submit our faith, or resolve it into her sentence. In a word, we grant
unto the Church a Ministry, but not a dominion over our faith, nor make her
interpretation of the Scripture, where there is a doubt or difficulty, the rule
of faith or practice. And if you had given to the Church no more, nor had
ascribed to the Scriptures in this case too little, we should not have had this
for a controversy, that is now a great matter in difference betwixt you and
us. For whereas you reject the rule propounded by us in our answer, touching
the determining of controversies in Religion, sc. the word of God alone, and
notwithstanding our reasons there urged, against your adding the universal and
constant practice of the Church, unto the word of God, to make up the rule to
judge by in matters of this nature, yet do here professedly adhere, to what you
did but seem to insinuate, in your first Paper: and because we had propounded
the Scripture only, as the only sure rule to walk by, you hereupon (as has
been said) rail upon us, calling us Scripturists, and scorn and scoff at us,
for making the word of God alone the rule of faith and manners; we hereupon
cannot but conceive, you ascribe a deal more to the Church, then a mere
Ministry, setting up her determination, for the rule of interpreting
Scripture, and issuing of controversies, and take away from the Scripture, that
which you should yield unto it, even to be the only sure rule for the
interpreting it self: for though you here acknowledge, that the Church in
expounding Scripture, is tied to the rule of Gods word in such proceedings, as
Judges to the Law, yet you say, we were concluded and bound up by her
exposition, and therefore though she be tied in her expounding of Scripture;
according to this concession, yet by this assertion it will follow, that we are
bound to believe, she has rightly expounded the Scripture, according to her
duty: for you say, her exposition and practice is our rule and best rule too,
and that we necessarily make another judge, and rule for interpretation of
Scripture, or else we prove nothing, and that else we give way to private
interpretation, (which is the Popish false gloss, upon the Text pointed at in
that expression) and anon you tell of another judge and rule, besides the
Scripture, that is to be submitted unto, even such as the Papists themselves
cannot ex^, viz. the Primitive Churches practice, and universal and ^nimous
consent of Fathers and general Councils, and which though you would father upon
Mr. Philpot, and Calvin, yet is that (...) they, together with all other sound
Protestants in their was against the Papists have unanimously disclaimed; (...)
as the Papists more anciently, seeing if they mu^ the determination of
Scriptures they were cast, ^ly to Councils and the unanimous consent of
Fathers, as to the rule, whereby they would be tried; so you with them, betake
your selves to these, and refuse to be tried by the Scriptures, as the sole
judge, because thence it is manifest, that that Episcopacy, that you are for, is
quite cashiered, the whole current of the Scripture of the New Testament,
making a Bishop and a Presbyter all one.

But the Question betwixt us being thus stated; as we gave our reasons even
now, why the Scriptures were to be the only judge of controversies, and rule of
faith and life; so we shall now give our reasons, why the Churches exposition,
the unanimous consent of Fathers and general Councils, are not to be the rule
of its interpretation, much less the best rule, where there is a doubt or
difficulty, as you assert.

Argument, 1. Because it is God only, that is the author of Councils and
Fathers not the rule of the Scriptures interpretation.
Scripture; all Scripture being given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. It
is he only that is the chief Lawgiver and Doctor of the Church, Jam. 4. 12.
Mat. 22. 10. and therefore he only, speaking in the Scripture, and in the
hearts of his people by his Spirit, is the supreme and infallible interpreter
of Scripture, every one being the best interpreter of his own words, and the
Lawgiver best understanding the meaning of the Law he makes; and being the
Scriptures cannot be interpreted and understood, but by that same Spirit
whereby they are written, whence that of Bernard, Nunquam Pauli sensum
ingredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberis; and again, Nunquam Davidem
intelliges, donec ipsa experientia Psalmorum affectus indueris: and therefore
the exposition of the Church, the unanimous consent of Fathers and general
Councils, are not the best rule for the interpreting of the Scripture.

Argument 2. Because no men can be sufficient interpreters of the Scripture,
so, as when there is a doubt or difficulty, by the interposition of their
authority, they can remove it, and determine the controversy about it; because
then they should have a dominion over the soul and over faith, which the
Apostle denies, 2 Cor. 1. 24. yea then faith, which stands not in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. should be resolved into the
sentence and judgment of men; and their sentence be the matter of our faith,
or the thing that were to be believed, and whereon our faith were to be built;
which were quite to overthrow it, and to bring in an humane faith in the room
of a divine. But on the contrary, when there is any controversy about any
matter of Religion, and so about the interpretation of any Text of Scripture,
the controversy is to be determined, and the doubt and difficulty to be
removed, not by the authority of any men, but by the authority of God, and of
the Scriptures. Whence it was, that the Fathers of the Nicene Council,
disputing with Arrius, pressed him with the authority of Scriptures, and
condemned him by the testimonies thereof. And therefore not the unanimous
consent of the Fathers, and of Councils, is to be the rule for the interpreting
of Scriptures.

Argument 3. The unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils cannot be the rule
for interpreting of the Scriptures, because then this should always have been
the rule, it being of the nature of that which is a rule, that it be always
one, and that sure, firm, and perpetual: but that this was not always a rule
is manifest, because there was once a time, when there were no writings of the
Fathers extant, nor when there had been any general Councils; the Council of
Nice, that was the first general Council of all other, after the death of the
Apostles, not having been convened till above three hundred years after
Christ, and many of the Fathers having written nothings till four hundred
years after Christ, and some not till five hundred or six hundred years after
him; and so before that time, the unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils,
could not be the rule of interpreting Scriptures. Besides after the Fathers had
written, yet there is not in all things an unanimous consent amongst them, in
their interpreting of Scripture, as might be evidenced by several and sundry
examples. You your selves told us, that the Fathers are different, in the sense
and interpretation of the word (Presbytery) in the Scripture expression, 1 Timothy
4. The Latin Fathers generally, as Hierome, Ambrose, Primasius, Anselme and
others, taking this word (Presbytery) for the function which Timothy received,
when he was made Bishop or Priest, as you express it. The Greek Fathers as
Ignatius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius and some others, and
some few of the Latins also, taking it for the company of Presbyters. We shall
add only another example, Origin, Jerome, Athanasius, Ambrose, do so interpret
those words of the Apostle, Romans 7. where he says, I am carnal, sold under
sin, etc. as that they say, Paul does not there speak concerning himself, but
in the person of a man not regenerated, whereas Augustine will have it to be
understood (as indeed it ought to be, touching a man, that is regenerated; and
so, that Paul there speaks of himself, as he most certainly does. Many more
examples of this kind might be given, but by these we may sufficiently
conjecture of the rest.

Argument 4. Add unto the former, that the Fathers have sundry of them erred,
which is so manifest to him that is conversant in their writings, that it will
not be denied; as if any should be so impudent as to deny it, it is easy to
make it good in manifold instances: yea some general Councils have erred, as
that Council held at Ariminum, that established the Arrian heresy; and the
second Council of Ephesus, that confirmed the Eutichian heresy; and the second
Council of Nice, that established the worshipping of Images, which is forbidden
in the Law of God. Whereupon the Fathers have acknowledged, that the authority
of Councils was only so far of force, as their determinations are agreeable to
Scriptures; and that there lies an appeal from all unto the Scripture. Whence
that of Athanasius, speaking concerning the Arrians of old urging Councils,
Fru^^ra inquit circumcursitantes praete^unt, ob fidem concilia se postulare.
Divina enim Scriptura perfectior est and sufficientior omnibus Conciliis. We
see, he acknowledged the divine Scriptures to be more perfect and sufficient,
then all Councils. But hence it is clear, that if both Fathers and Councils
have erred, the unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils cannot be the rule;
much less the best rule, as you speak, of interpretin^ Scriptures.

Argument 5. Besides, sundry of the Fathers, and of the writings that go under
the names of the most approved Fathers, are doubtful, others suppositious and
spurious, and others corrupted. This is clear, because there have been many
writers heretofore, that have been publicly adorned with the title of the
Fathers, that are now rejected as heterodox, and unworthy to be called by the
names they go under, and whereof if you doubt, learned Voetius does afford you
a catalogue. That there are also many suppositious and spurious works
attributed to the genuine and true Fathers, and published with their works,
which some receive, others reject, others do doubt concerning; is so clear and
manifest, that it will not be questioned by any, that ever saluted the Fathers
writings, and had either sound judgment of his own, or would believe the
censures of the Learned concerning them, as of Rivet, Erasmus, Perkins and
others; and which is so clear, that the Papists themselves, as Bellarmine,
Cajetan and others will not deny it; and, as if it were to our purpose might be
particularly proved, by instancing in the suppositious writings attributed to
Ignatius, Cyprian, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine, and others
of the most approved Fathers; and from all which it will follow, that the
unanimous consent of the Fathers, cannot be a rule for the interpreting of
Scripture; it being that which will be disputed concerning some, whether they
be not mere feigned Fathers; and concerning sundry of the works, that are
attributed to the genuine Fathers, (and in which such Scriptures may be
interpreted, where there is doubt and difficulty) whether they be not
suppositious.

Argument 6. To say nothing of the difficulties or obscurities in the genuine
Fathers and their genuine writings, by reason of phrases now grown out of use,
Idiotisms, Histories and Antiquities, that make them the more hard to us of
these times, and so their interpretations of Scriptures often more difficult to
be understood, then the Scriptures that they interpret: this also is very
considerable, that it will be out of the compass and reach of the most persons
of ordinary rank, to procure all the writings of the Fathers and Councils, that
are yet extant: as we do not believe, that any of you are so well stored, as
that you have such a Library, wherein all the Fathers or most of them might be
consulted: which yet were necessary to be procured, if their unanimous consent
must be the rule for interpretation of Scripture, when there is a doubt or
difficulty. And if some persons might be found of that ability, as to procure
the Works of all the Fathers, yet it is not easy to imagine, how even the
Learned, though Divines, much less the simple and ignorant, could ever be able
to read over all their Works, compare all the Fathers together, and their
interpretations, that so they might, when there was a doubt or difficulty,
gather what was the unanimous consent of the Fathers, touching the
interpretation of a Text, the sense whereof we questioned. And hereupon it will
follow, that what you propound as the rule, yea and the best rule too, for
interpreting of Scripture, is so far from being such, that it is a very unfit
and unmeet rule, being such, as few or none, if any at all, are able in all
cases or the most to make use of.

But by this time, we doubt not, notwithstanding your great confidence touching
the sureness of your rule, that it is manifest, from the reasons we have given,
(unto which we might add many more, if there were need) that your rule for the
interpretation of the Scriptures, participates not of the nature, of what is to
be a rule: and therefore, however the exposition of the Church, Fathers and
Councils, is not to be despised, yet it is not to be made a rule; but that the
only sure rule for the interpreting of the Scriptures, is the Scripture it
self.

But because you allege something for your assertion, we shall now in the last
place, examine it, of what nature and strength it is. And ^. You quote the late
King in the (...), although his assertion is more limited then yours, as from
the words you cite is clear and manifest. And as touching that, which his words
are alleged for, we must say, that such a Church Government, as is not found
instituted in Scripture, in regard of the substantials of it, is therefore
contrary to the commands of Scripture, because not found instituted there: and
this we affirm, touching that Episcopal Government that you plead for; that
superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, in regard of order and jurisdiction,
being a mere device of man, without and against Scripturall warrant, as it was
that, that was unknown to the primitive Church in the more ancient and purer
times, and of which afterward. 2. But you further add and say, that except your
rule for interpreting of Scripture, be admitted of, we shall seem to abound in
our own sense, and to utter our own fancies or desires, to be believed on our
bare word, and so to give way to private interpretation; whereas we should
deliver that sense, which has been aforetime given by our forefathers and
forerunners in the Christian faith: unto which we say, that whether it be the
interpretation that we ourselves shall give of Scripture, or it be the
interpretation of others, however Fathers or Councils, and forerunners in the
Christian faith; yet if it be an interpretation inferred, or brought to the
Scripture, and not found in the Scripture; the uttering of that interpretation,
is the uttering our own, or other men's fancies, and so is that private
interpretation of Scripture, which the Apostle Peter, 2d Epist. chapter 1. ver. 20.
condemns, and to whose words there, you do here point; it being the Holy Ghost
the author of Scripture, whose interpretation is that public interpretation
that the whole Church and every member thereof is to give heed to, and is that
which is opposed to the private interpretation mentioned, as the Apostle shows,
ver. 21. in the words following. But seeing you do here urge the very popish
argument, and that text which they quote, touching the rule they make for
interpretation of Scripture, in direct opposition to our Protestant Divines; it
is hence very clear, that your opinion, touching the rule of interpreting of
the Scriptures and judge of controversies in matters of Religion (which you make
to be the Churches exposition, and consent of Fathers and Councils) is the very
same with theirs, and wherein, you approve not your selves to be either sound
Protestants, or to own the Doctrine of the Church of England against the
Papists in this particular. 3. Yet you go on, and urge another argument: for
when there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture, not to admit for
a rule, the exposition of the Church, consent of Fathers and Councils, you say
that is dominari fidei, to Lord it over the faith of others: but we say, (as we
have showed before) that to impose a necessity of admitting the interpretation
given by the Church, Fathers, Councils; when it is not evident from the Text so
expounded, either the words of it, scope or other circumstances of it, the
things going before, or following after, or from some other Texts, with which
it is compared; this is certainly dominari fidei, to Lord it over the faith of
Gods people: and which Paul, though so great an Apostle, and immediately and
infallibly inspired, would not presume to do, 2 Cor. 1. ^4. The Church having
only a Ministry committed to her, which is only to propound that sense of
Scripture, which the Scripture it self gives, and no more. 4. But thus say you,
the best and ablest defenders of our Protestant Religion defended it against
the Papists, though out of the word of God too, giving the sense, which the
Fathers unanimously in the Primitive Church and Councils gave. But this is not
the question, whether our Divines defended the Protestant Religion against the
Papists, not only out of the Word of God, but from the testimony also of
Fathers and Councils; but whether they did ever make the unanimous consent of
the Fathers and Councils, the judge of controversies or rule for interpreting of
Scripture? He that shall hold the affirmative here, does plainly show, he is a
stranger to the writings of the best and ablest defenders of the Protestant
Religion. We shall readily grant that our Divines do ex super abundanti defend
the truth against the Papists, from the testimony of Fathers and Councils; but
did never assert, that the defense of it from the Scriptures alone was not
sufficient, as they would never have quarrelled with the Papists, touching the
judge of controversies, and the rule for interpretation of Scripture, if they
would have been contented to have stood to its determination. Its true Mr.
Philpot that glorious Martyr, might be willing to fight with the Papists, with
those weapons they so often call for, Antiquity, Universality, Unity; but where
did he ever refuse the Scriptures as the sole judge and determiner of
controversies, and the only rule for interpretation of the Scriptures, as you
do? Besides it is to be observed, that it was matters of Doctrine that he and
other Protestant writers did offer to defend against the Papists, from the
testimony of Fathers and Councils, not matters touching Church Government and
discipline, which began sooner to be corrupted; the mystery of iniquity working
even in the Apostles days, and the godly Fathers in the Primitive times,
sundry of them laying a foundation (though unwillingly) for Antichrists getting
up into his seat, when the Doctrine was kept pure and inviolable: in respect
whereof it is, that Calvin, whom you cite; when he acknowledges, that the
first four general Councils did contain nothing, but the pure and native
interpretation of the Scriptures, does expressly limit his words, and says,
quantum attinet ad f^dei dogmata, so forre as concerns the doctrines of faith,
and as we have noted before in our Answer to your second Paper: where also we
have showed you, how those words of his are to be understood, when he says,
nullum esse nec melius nec certius remedium, quam si verorum Episcoporum
Synodus conveniat, ubi controversum dogma excutiatur: If there be a disputation
or difference touching any Doctrine, there is no better nor more certain
remed^, then if a Synod of true Bishops do convene, where the controve^t^d
Do^^riae may be discussed: but he concludes, hoc autem perpetuum esse nego, ut
vera and certa sit Scripturae interpretatio, quae Concilii suffragiis fuerit
recepta; i. e. but this I deny to be perpetual, that that is a true and
certain interpretation of Scripture, which has been received by the suffrages
or determination of a Council. And therefore you wrong Calvin and Mr. Philpot,
and the best and ablest of our Protestant Divines, when you say, they willingly
submit to a judge and rule, besides the Scriptures, however they refuse no^, to
try the Doctrines of the adversaries, by that which they themselves, sc. the
Papists cannot except against; it being their own rule, they propound to be
tried by, sc. the exposition of the Fathers and Councils, and whose
interpretation is not by them acknowledged, to be that public interpretation,
in opposition to the private, wherein they professed to rest, any farther then
it appears to be the true sense of the Scripture, or holy Ghost, the only
public inter^reter. But it is you, and not they, that are so willing to submit
to a judge and rule, besides the Scriptures, sc. the primitive Churches
practice, and universal and unauimous consent of Fathers, and general
Councils, and to this rule you bring the Church Government, to be tried
thereby; because your plea from Scripture, for that kind of Episcopacy, which
you so earnestly contend for, is but weak: and the most you have to say for it,
is from Fathers and Councils, and practice of the Church, since the Canon of
the Scripture has been perfected: although we must tell you, that that
Episcopacy, which the Fathers, you would be tried by, speak of, was nothing
like that Episcopal Government of later times. Neither will upon this score (as
you say) our Presbytery be quite out of doors, or be found to be wholly
destitute of Examples and practice of the Church, and testimonies of the
Fathers: neither can you prove, that therein the whole stream runs so for
Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any others; and as you from
the late King affirm, by which we are now brought unto what we put you upon in
the first place to prove, sc. what that Church Government is, which is so
consonant to the will God and universal practice of primitive Churches.

4. And therefore having fully discussed, whatever you have urged, against the
Scriptures being the rule to judge by in this controversy; we shall now not
refuse to try, what strength there is, in what you allege for to prove, what
was the universal and constant practice of Primitive Churches in this matter.
But 1. We must remove that aspersion, that you cast upon us, when you say, that
we being sensible, that the whole stream of the examples and practice of the
Church, and testimonies of the Fathers, runs for Episcopacy, have not way to
evade this rule, but una litura, to blot out all records and monuments of
Antiquity for the space of three hundred years after Christ as imperf^ct. But
the words that we used in our answer to your first Paper will speak for us,
which we shall here therefore recite, because you do not. Having put you to
prove, what that Church Government is, which is so consonant to the will of
God, and universal practice of Primitive Churches, we thus declared our selves.
For our parts, we said, we think it will be very hard for you, or any others,
to demonstrate out of any records of antiquity, what was the universal practice
of Primitive Churches, for the whole space of the first three hundred years
after Christ, or the greatest part thereof, (excepting so much as is left upon
record, in the Scriptures of the new Testament) the monuments of Antiquity that
concern these times, (for the greatest part of them) being both imperfect, and
far from showing us what was the universal practice of the Church then, (though
the practices of some Churches may be mentioned) and likewise very
questionable. At least it will not be easy to assure us, that some of those
that go under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are
neither spurious nor corrupted. From the words of our answer thus recited, it
is manifest, we did not una litura, blot out all records and monuments of
Antiquity, for the space of three hundred years after Christ: we only said,
they were imperfect; and said it would be hard for you, or any others, to
demonstrate out of any records of Antiquity, what was the universal practice of
Primitive Churches, for the whole space of the first three hundred years after
Christ, or the greatest part thereof. And is not this manifest to him that is
conversant in Ecclesiastical story? Does not Baronius himself despair of making
up any perfect story of a good part of this time next unto the Apostles days?
And if it had been easy for you to have demonstrated, what was the universal
practice of the Church for the whole or greatest part of this time, why did you
not begin your demonstration hereof sooner, then from the Council of Nice?

Again we said, that it would not be easy for to assure us, that some of the
works, that go under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are
neither spurious nor corrupted; but we did not, as you charge u^, brand the
most approved Authors of those times, as spurious and corrupted. The works
that may be attributed to some approved Authors, may be spurious or corrupted,
when yet the Authors themselves are not branded. And therefore this is but
another of your wonted slanders, and which through out your Paper are but too
common with you. But as to the thing it self, who knows not, but in the
Primitive times there were many spurious works put forth, under the names even
of the Apostles, (as appears from 2 These. 2. 2.) and blessed Martyrs, that yet
are generally rejected, as none of theirs, and of which sort were those many
false Gospels, that we read of, as of Thomas, Andrew, Nicodemus, and St Peter,
and St Marks Mass: of this sort also are, the Apostles constitutions, held for
Apocryphal (as Mr. Perkins shows) in the Decretals, and were condemned by the
sixth Council of Constantinople. The works also of Dionysius Areopagita, are by
many learned men absolutely denied to be the works of that Dionysius,
mentioned, Act. 17. for which they do in their Comments upon that Chapter and
elsewhere, give many reasons. We might instance in many others, as we shall
come anon to speak, touching the Epistles that go under the name of Ignatius,
and unto which we had special reference in the passages we used, that you here
except against, but yet without the least reflection upon so glorious a
Confessor of the faith of Christ, as he was. And such as are equal judges, and
who know, what were the practices of Impostors in the Primitive times, in
putting out their own corrupt writings, under the names of the Apostles and
blessed Martyrs of those times, that thereby they might gain belief to their
errors, will be far from censuring us, to be void of all modesty, and showing
thereby no great store either of judgment or honesty, as you here do, because
we said some of the works, that go under the names of the most approved
Authors of those times, were spurious or corrupted, considering what Rivet,
Cocus in his censur a patrum, and Perkins in his preparatives to the
demonstration of the problem, and other learned men do say touching this
matter: and we may here well say to you, that you had showed more judgment and
honesty your selves, if you had not censured us, as persons destitute of both,
and also all modesty, for that, which all those, that read the Fathers with any
measure of judgment, will readily acknowledge.

2. Having vindicated our selves from what you aspersed us with, we now come to
examine, what you cite for the antiquity of Episcopacy, which is the Government
you plead for. And here we observe you take a very high jumpe (to use your own
expression) over all that is to be found in the writings of the Fathers, who
lived in the three first Centuries of the Church; and only pitch upon the
Council of Nice, that which you find there, making (as you apprehend) most for
your purpose, and (as you say) showing the practice of the Church in its form
of Church Government, by Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, Bishop, etc.
Although you having a little before insisted upon the exposition and practice
of the Church, and the unanimous consent of Fathers, as well as general
Councils, as the rule, to which you would bring Church Government to be tried;
and in your first Paper and this also, telling of the universal and constant
practice of the Church, should not so quickly have forgot your own rule, and
mentioned nothing at all before the Council of Nice, out of the writings of the
Fathers, to evidence what was the universal and constant practice of the
Church, for the whole space of the first three hundred years after Christ, or
the greatest part thereof, touching Church Government; especially considering
that this was that, which in our answer to your first Paper, we had put you to
prove But you think (may be) this you do sufficiently by citing the Council of
Nice, general Councils showing us (as you say) what the Churches practice was,
considering also that this Council did ratify and confirm, what had been
anciently practiced by the Church before, the sixth Canon mentioning an ancient
custom, which by it is established. Unto this and what further you do here
urge, for the proving from this Council, that which you cite it for, we have
several things to say.

1. And first, though we do most readily yield, all due reverence and esteem
unto this Council, that was and will be famous for the condemning of Arrius,
together with his damnable heresy, yet we shall mind you, of what Augustine
(quoted by Calvin and alleged in our answer to your second Paper) says
touching insisting on the testimony of this Council. He in his Book against
Maximinius, when he would silence that Heretic, contending with him touching
the decrees of Synods, says; that neither he would object to him the Synod of
Nice, nor he ought to object to him the Synod of Ariminum, but would have them
both to contend, not by the authority of either of these Synods, but by the
authority of Scriptures. It is also clear from Ecclesiastical story, that
Constantine did admonish this Council after they were assembled, that in the
determining and judging of heavenly Doctrine (seeing they had in readiness the
Evangelical, Apostolical, and Prophetical Books) they should fetch from thence
their forms of censure, and so determine controversies of Religion from the
Scriptures; and according unto which religious and worthy counsel they
proceeded, disputing with Arrius from the Scriptures, and by the testimonies
thereof condemning his heresy.

2. Seeing you will have it, that the form of Church Government by Patriarch,
Metropolitan, Archbishop, Bishop, etc. was established by this Council, and
that this Council established nothing herein, but what had been defined and
asserted (as you say afterward) by the ancient Canons, yea the most ancient,
even immemorial Apostolical tradition, and custom, and that the customs which
this Council speaks of, were deduced down to those times from St Mark the
Evangelist; We do here enquire of you, whether the Church Government that you
would prove from this Council, be jure divino, or by divine right? If it be (as
we suppose, you will and must say it is, for which purpose you say it is
defined and asserted by immemorial Apostolical tradition, and deduced from Mark
the Evangelist) we do then again enquire of you, whether the Government of the
Church by Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, etc. be to be found in
Scripture? If you say it be, we desire you to prove it, and make it to appear,
that it is there found. If you say, it is not to be found in Scripture, it is
in vain to urge the authority of the Council of Nice, or any other Councils,
for to prove the divine right of that, which is not to be found in Scripture.
Further you should consider, that you alleging for it immemorial Apostolical
traditions and customs, (of which the Scripture is silent) do again join hands
with the Papists, pleading for the authority of unwritten traditions, and
customs not to be found mentioned or awarranted by the Scriptures, making with
them the Scriptures imperfect, and that their imperfection must be supplied by
these unwritten traditions; but wherein they are opposed by our Protestant
Divines, to whom we send you, touching this matter.

3. But that we may come to speak to the Canons themselves, that you cite out
of this Council particularly. 1. First, We do not find in that sixth Canon,
that you do chiefly insist on any of the words, Patriarch, Primate, or
Archbishop, at all there used; only it is decreed, that the Bishop of
Alexandria (he is not called the Patriarch, as you call him) have power over
Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis. We confess the word (Metropolitan) is used in
this Canon, but not any of the other abovementioned; the like whereunto is to
be observed, touching the seventh Canon by you cited. And yet we lay no great
stress on this, that these words are not there found, but hint only thus much
to you by the way, who take advantage at us in regard of words, though without
reason; but shall grant unto you, that the things understood by those words,
may be there found. As touching the thirteenth, which you here quote, that
speaks nothing at all touching the business, but wholly concerns the lapsed
Catechumeni. And whereas you cite the twenty fifth, twenty sixth, and twenty
seventh Canons of this Council, you do therein both wrong this Council, and
your selves, in fathering upon them supposititious Canons, there being not
above twenty Canons that are genuine. Indeed it is well observed by Lucas
Osiander (after he had recited in his Epitome of Ecclesiastical History,
Centur. 4. lib. 2. Chap. 10. the twenty Canons of this Council, and which only
he judged to be genuine) that there are other besides these, that are read in
some supposititious writings of the Fathers, (under the names of Athanasius and
Ambrose) but he judges them, and that rightly, to be falsely ascribed to the
Synod of Nice. Perhaps you judged us to be so little conversant in the Fathers
and Councils, as that we should have let all these things pass for current; if
otherwise, we see you are so addicted to the Episcopal cause, that you matter
not, so you can make it out, though it be out of supposititious writings. 2. As
to the main thing you cite this Council for, and that which indeed is chiefly
to be here insisted on, sc. the ancient custom that the sixth Canon speaks
of, touching the power and dignity of the Metropolitanes, (which yet was not
such as you imagine, at the first appointing them, and of which more anon.) Let
it be granted, as you would have it, that this Council did not constitute and
create those Metropolitans, but confirm them, and what power and dignity they
had before, according to an ancient custom, yet we say, that ancient custom
is to be limited in in regard of its Antiquity. And 1. It cannot refer so
high as to the times of the Apostles, there being then no Metropolitan Bishops,
they being never at all mentioned in the New Testament, either by that name, or
the thing thereby signified. 2. Neither can it refer to the age next unto the
Apostles, because in that age, and a good while after, a Bishop and Presbyter
were all one. We shall for the proof of this, first mention a very observable
passage in a Letter, written by the Lord Digby unto Sir Kenelmne Digby, and
which, for the observableness of it is cited by others See the Provincial
Assembly of London in their Jus divinum Ministerij Evangelici, part 2. page
107. See also Mr. Baxter in his desence of the Worcesteshire agreement, page
61, 62.
, and with good reason, considering how much he was for that kind of Episcopacy
that you contend for. His words are these; He that will reduce the Church now,
to the form of Government in the most Primitive times, should not take in my
opinion the best nor wisest course; I am sure not the safest: for he would be
found pecking toward the Presbytery of Scotland, which for my part I believe,
in point of Government, has a greater resemblance, then either yours or ours,
to the first age of Christ's Church; and yet it is never a whit the better for
it, since it was a form not chosen for the best, but imposed by adversity
under oppression, which in the beginning forced the Church from what it wished,
to what it might; not suffering the dignity and State Ecclesiastical, which
rightly belonged unto it, and which soon afterward, upon the least lucida
intervalla, shone forth so gloriously in the happier, as well as more
Monarchical condition of Episcopacy, etc. You see this Gentleman, who was firm
for Monarchical Episcopacy, does yet acknowledge, that in the most Primitive
times, and first age of the Church, that kind of Episcopacy had no footing; and
that the Presbyterian Government, as it is in Scotland, and so consequently as
it is in other reformed Churches, and with us, is nearer to the Primitive
pattern of the Church, then that Episcopal Government, which you would prove
from the Council of Nice. And therefore in those times there was no such
superiority of a Bishop over a Presbyter, no Archbishops and Metropolitans, or
Primates and Patriarehs, as you speak of, and for which you quote this sixth
Canon of the Council of Nice. But if you would peruse Blondellus his Apologia
pro sententia Hieronymi de Episcopis and Presbyteris, he would give you a
particular and large account, touching this matter; he undertaking to prove (as
he is a man of vast reading) that until the year 140. or thereabout, there was
not any Bishop over Presbyters. And in the days of Polycarpe, we find in his
Epistle to the Philippians, but two orders of Ministry mentioned, sc. Bishops
and Deacons, according to what Paul in his Epistle to the Church had signified
more anciently. Hear his own words, (...), i. e. therefore you ought to abstain
from all these things, being subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, as unto God
and Christ. And therefore this ancient custom, mentioned in this sixth Canon
of the Council of Nice, which you quote, must hereupon be limited and
restrained, in regard of ancientness, and is not to be understood, so as to
refer to the whole space of 327. years after Christ, or thereabout, before
its assembling; although the custom of appointing Metropolitans before, might
be called ancient comparatively with those customs, which were but sprung up
more lately, or were very new. And though we shall not undertake to show, what
was the universal and constant practice of the Church, for either the whole
space of the first three hundred years after Christ, or the greatest part
thereof, (though it concerned you, who are so confident, that the whole stream
of testimonies to be produced, showing the unanimous consent of Fathers, and
the universal and constant practice of the Church, even up to the Apostles
days, runs so for Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any
others, to have made this out) yet this we may say, that Episcopacy did not
grow up to that height, that it was in, at that time when the Council of Nice
assembled, all at once, but by steps and degrees; and that it was then nothing
like to what it grew up to afterward; and further, that however those godly
Fathers, that did first set it up, and afterward upheld it, did so out of a
good intention; yet that therein they were but subservient, to what afterward,
was effected in the Bishop of Rome, to lift up Antichrist into his seat; and
which is not much to be wondered at, whenas the Apostle tells us, that in his
days the mystery of iniquity did then already work; and that good men may be
instrumental, though unwittingly, to promote and advance a very ill and bad
design; God therein leaving them to themselves, and he thereby in his secret
and unsearchable providence, though just, holy, and wise, bringing that about,
which he had before appointed in his eternal counsel. And yet for all this, we
do aver, that however, as Hierome See his Commentary upon the Epistle to
Titus.
does well observe, at the first, a Bishop and a Presbyter were the same, and
that before by the instinct of the Devil, there were contentions in Religion,
and it was said amongst the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of the Presbyters; but that after
every one thought, that those were his, which he did baptize, not Christ's; it
was decreed throughout the whole world, that one of the Presbyters should be
chosen, and set over the rest, unto whom all the care of the Church should
belong, and the seeds of schisms taken away. Yet not only in that age, but
long afterward, as also long before the assembling of the Council of Nice,
(that speaks of Metropolitans, and confirming their power) a Bishop and
Presbyter were acknowledged to be one order of Ministry; as they did also join
with the Bishops, after their setting up in the Government of the Church, as
is acknowledged and proved by Dr. Usher, in his reduction of Episcopacy to the
form of Synodical Government in the ancient Church; and which indeed, is
that, which is acknowledged by your selves. For you confessed before, that
Ignatius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and others of the
Greek Fathers, with some of the Latins also, did take the word (Presbytery) 1 Timothy 4. for the company of Presbyters, i. e. Bishops who lay hands on the new
made Bishops or Priests, (as you express it) making Bishops and Presbyters
mutually to expound each other, as has been already observed. And herein you
are not alone, as has been partly showed before, and is abundantly showed by
others, and particularly by our reverend Brethren of the Province of London,
who in their part. 2. cap 4.
Jus divinum Ministerij Evangelici, prove not only from the Scriptures, that a
Bishop and Presbyter are all one, but do urge also sundry other testimonies for
the proof thereof; not only out of Hierome and Augustine, but likewise do
alleadg Dr. Reynolds in his Epistle to Sir Francis Knowles, showing the same
thing out of Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Theodoret, Primasius,
Sedulius, Theophilact; and do further urge, that Michael Medina affirms lib.
1. de Sacris originibus, that not only Hierome, but also that Ambrose,
Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, were of the same judgment with Ae*rius, and held that there was
no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter by Scripture, besides other
testimonies, which they do there urge. But David Blondellus, in his Apologia
pro sententia Hieronymi, does clear this up so fully, in that his large
Treatise, penned on purpose, to show what concurrence of Antiquity there is for
this opinion of Hierome; that we believe those that are unprejudiced, that will
but take the pains to read and weigh what he there presents, will readily
grant, that long before the Council of Nice, and long after, it was
acknowledged, that a Bishop and Presbyter are one order of Ministry. We have
thus said, that which we judge sufficient unto the Canons themselves, that you
cite out of the Council of Nice, and particularly to the sixth Canon of that
Council, on which you lay the greatest weight, and shall now proceed to examine
what follows

4. For you will have the words (...), that we used in the 6th Canon of the
Council of Nice, to be the very words, which Ignatius uses, to express the
Apostolical traditions, Antiqui mores obtineant in Egypto, Lybia, Pentapoli,
etc. i. e. Let the ancient customs of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapoli continue,
that the Patriarch of Alexandria should have power over all these. But
concerning the Epistles, that go under the name of Ignatius, you might know,
there are different opinions of the Learned about them. Salmasius conceives
they were written by a pseudo-Ignatius, to bring into credit that Episcopal
Government, that deviated from the primitive institution; and that they were
written, at that very time, when that was set up. Others that conceive any of
them to be genuine, yet do not receive them all. Mr. Perkins in his
Preparatives to the demonstration of the Problem, observes that seven
Epistles of his, Hierome and Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 35, and 36. reckon for
true; but now they are increased unto twelve; five whereof he judges to be
counterfeit, and these to be, 1. ad Mariam; 2. ad Tarsenses; 3. ad Hieron; 4.
ad Antiochenos; 5. ad Philippenses. Dr. Usher, that Reverend and Learned
Antiquary, acknowledges only six of these Epistles to be genuine, and says,
the other six are spurious; and of those six that he acknowledges, he says,
they are depraved and corrupted. Nay Mr. Perkins observes, that Bellarmine
himself confesses of these Epistles, that the Greek copies are corrupted. And
to evidence this, we wish you to consider two passages only, that we shall
instance in. In his Epistle to the Trallians, he boasts of his knowledge; for
he says, (...) etc. I am able to understand heavenly things, the orders of
Angels, the differences of Archangels, and of the heavenly Host: the
differences between powers and dominations: the distances of thrones and
powers: -- yea as follows a little after, the Kingdom of the Lord, and the
incomparable Divinity of the Lord God Almighty. These expressions savor not of
that humility that was in that faithful servant of Christ, the true Ignatius.
And in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses, he takes upon him to correct, if not to
contradict Solomon: (...), etc. He says, my son honor God and the King, but I
say, honor God as the Author and Lord of all things, and the Bishop as the
Prince of Priests, etc. and after him it behooves you to honor the King. More
here might be urged: but these and other passages, that might be instanced in,
do show plainly, that these Epistles are either counterfeit, or corrupted. And
this was the reason of those expressions, we used in our Answer, when we said,
it would not be easy to assure us, that some Works, that go under the Names of
the most approved Authors of the Primitive times (referring therein after a
more especial manner to the Epistles of Ignatius) are neither spurious nor
corrupted. But hence it will follow, that what is alleged by you out of
Ignatius, for the support of the Episcopal cause, is not of that weight, as to
prove, what was the practice of the Church in the time of the true Ignatius;
much less to prove, what was the universal practice of the Primitive Church,
long before the assembling of the Council of Nice, or to evidence that that
Council in the 6th Canon, had any reference to the words of Ignatius, which you
cite, and which might as well be foysted into his works afterward, as other
things; and so nothing thence to be concluded, either with the show of any
certainty, or of any good measure of probability.

5. Now whereas you will have these ancient customs touching the power and
privileges of the Metrapolitans, and Patriarchs, to be deduced from St. Mark
the Evangelist, who, you say, was not only Bishop of Alexandria, but of the
Churches of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, and will have the subordination of all
inferior Officers in the Church to the Bishop in every Diocese, of the Bishop
in every Province to the Metropolitan, of the Metropolitan in every region to
the Patriarch or Primate; these standing Powers (as you call them) and
subjection, to be defined and asserted by the ancient Canons, yea the most
ancient, even immemoriall Apostolical tradition and custom: you must either
prove that the customs, standing Powers, and subjection, that you speak of,
are warranted, defined, and asserted by the Canon of Scripture, which you will
never be able to do: or else you do hereby intimate, that you would have it to
be believed, that there are some customs and traditions, that are
Apostolical, and to be received as such, that are not found written in the
Canon of the Scripture. But by this assertion you gratify the Papists,, and
open a door to let into the Church, the many unwritten traditions, they would
obtrude upon it, under the specious name and title of Apostolical traditions:
though you might have known, they are abundantly therein consuted by our
Divines, that yet were never answered by them, or any other patrons of
unwritten traditions. And upon this account we hope we shall be sufficiently
excused, though we forbear to either examine, or say any thing particularly to
the Councils, and Dr. Hammond, that you cite for this purpose. But as touching
Mark the Evangelist, whom you will have to be, not only Bishop of Alexandria,
but also of Egypt, Lybia and Pent apolis also; you do herein assert things
inconsistent, sc. that he was an Evangelist, and yet an ordinary Bishop. For
Evangelists properly were extraordinary Officers, extraordinarily employed in
Preaching of the Gospel, without any settled residence upon any one charge; were
companions of the Apostles, and under the Apostles had the care of all
Churches, and in which sense Mark was an Evangelist, as well as in regard of
the Gospel which he wrote. But Bishops were Officers that were ordinary, and
fixed to one particular charge, neither did they ordinarily travel with the
Apostles from place to place, as the Evangelists did: Neither could Evangelists
be any more called Bishops properly, then the Apostles could be so called; who
were not such formally, but only eminently and virtually. But as touching
Eusebius, whom you cite, Scaliger says concerning him, that he read ancient
Histories parum attente. But further you are to consider, that the Apostles
themselves were called Bishops in those times: and yet they could not be so
called properly, as is proved by Mr. Banes in his Diocesan Trial See quest. 2.
p. 29.
, who there gives reasons, why Apostles neither were, nor might be both
Apostles and Bishops properly. We shall only urge one of the reasons there
mentioned, which also does strongly prove, that Mark the Evangelist, neither
was, nor could be an ordinary Bishop; for then he is made liable to error, as
all ordinary Bishops were, and are; and then in writing of his Gospel, as well
as in his teaching he might err: and hereupon, occasion is given, to call that
part of Canonical Scripture in question; as the asserting the Apostles to be
Bishops properly, gives the like occasion to call all their writings in
question, which is dangerous, and no ways to be admitted of. And hence it will
follow, in what sense soever you call Mark an Evangelist, yet he could not be a
Bishop properly, although it should be granted, he had an inspection under the
Apostles, of all those parts you mention.

6. But thus far, we hope it is manifest unto the Reader, that as yet you are
to show, what the practice of the Church was in point of Church Government, for
the space of the first three hundred years after Christ, that which you have
alleged out of the Council of Nice, not manifesting it, either for the whole
space or the greatest part thereof; as appears by what we have said touching
this matter. Neither must we allow, what again you here further assert, sc.
that General Councils are the best enterpreters of the mind and will of God in
Scripture, touching Church Government, the Scripture it self being a far more
sure and safe interpreter of Gods will and mind therein revealed, in the plain
places thereof, when there is a doubt and difficulty, arising from the darkness
of some other places, and as has been fully showed; as also considering, that
there was some swerving in point of Church Government from Scripture rule,
before the first general Council met or assembled, when yet there was more
purity, as to that matter, then there was afterward.

7. Neither must we suffer that to pass for current, which you here say of
Calvin, sc. that though he disliked the name Hierarchy, yet he allowed the
thing. The place you here chiefly refer to is, as we judge, that place in his
Institutions, lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 1, 2, 3. but especially what we find, Sect.
4. where we grant, having mentioned Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs, and
having given the reason of the first institution of them, in that fourth
Section, he has these words, Gubernationem sic constitutam, nonnulli
Hierarchiam vocarunt, nomine (ut mihi videtur) improprie; certe Scripturis
inusitato, etc. Verum si rem omisso vocabulo intuemur, reperiemus veteres
Episcopos, non aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere, ab ea quam
Deus verbo suo praescripsit: i. e. the Government of the Church so
constituted, some called the Hierarchy, by an improper name (as it seems unto
me) certainly by a name not used in the Scriptures, etc. But if omitting the
Word, we look upon the thing, we shall find, that the ancient Bishops would not
frame another form of governing the Church, from that which God has
prescribed in his Word. He speaks then here, of what was in their intention,
not as approving every thing they did. He says, they would not, they had not
any such a will, purpose or intention; he does not say, as you say, that they
did not frame a form of Church Government, differing from that which Christ
has prescribed in his Word. He had intimated in the first Section, that many
of the Canons that were made in those times, sc. of the ancient Church, did
seem to express more, then was to be found in sacred Scripture; and though in
regard of that good measure of purity of Government and Discipline, that did
remain in those times, he does seem to extenuate, what deviation there was from
the word of God; yet he does not allow of every thing, that was then appointed.
In the second Section he comes to show, how Bishop came up at the first, sc.
that for the prevention of Schism, the Presbyters chose out of their number,
in every City one, to whom they gave the title of Bishop, and that upon this
reason, lest dissentions should arise from equality. But withal, there shows,
that the Bishop, thus superior to the rest of the Presbyters in honor and
dignity, had not any dominion over the Presbyters, whom he calls his
Colleagues; but only had that office, as the Consul in the Senate, and as
indeed the Moderatour has in our Assemblies, as from that which he there
instaneeth in, that did at the first belong to him, is clear and manifest. And
then he adds, and says, even this it self, the Ancients themselves confess,
was at the first brought in, Pro temporum necessitate, in regard of the
necessity of the times, and humano consensu, by the consent and agreement of
men; as he proves out of Hierome. And in the fourth Section (which you chiefly
here refer to) he says, whereas every Province had amongst the Bishops one
Archbishop, and whereas also, in the Synod of Nice, there were constituted
Patriarchs, who were above the Archbishops in regard of dignity that did belong
(as he there says) to the conservation of the discipline But yet adds,
Quanquam in hae disputatione praeteriri non potest, quod ^arissimi ^rat usus, i
e. although in this disputation it may not be omitted, that it was of most
seldom or rare use. And then he shows, that the use of the Archbishop was, for
the calling a Provincial Synod, as there might be occasion, when the matter
requiring it, could not be determined by fewer, and so by a lesser Assembly;
and in case the cause was more weighty or difficult, that then the Patriarch
was to call a more general Synod, from which there was to be no appeal, but to
a general Council. And thus Calvin shows, what was the reason of the first
institution of Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs; but from that account
given by him of this their first appointment, it is manifest, that their
superiority above their fellow Brethren, was not from the beginning, it being
but an humane constitution only; and that at the first, yea even in the time of
the Nicene Council, it was nothing like to what it grew to be afterward; And
that that power, even of the Patriarchs, and Metropolitans, that was appointed
or confirmed by the Nicene Council, was nothing like unto that power, that was
exercised by the Bishops and Archbishops in this Land, whilst Episcopacy
stood; their power at that time being chiefly, if not only, for the calling of
Synods, sc. Provincial, or of a larger circuit, as there might be need; and
they having therein only a presidency, or moderatorship, and not exercising any
dominion over their Colleagues, according to that representation of the matter
of fact, that Calvin truly makes. And because the appointment of them was done
out of a good intent, without any will or purpose, to appoint any form of
Government in the Church, differing, from that, which God had appointed in his
word; and as an Ecclesiastical constitution only, which the godly Fathers in
those times thought might be of use, (though afterward, as we have before
showed, it proved otherwise) and considering what a good measure of the ancient
discipline, remained entire in those times, Calvin did therefore speak
moderately of what they did, though he did not (as is manifest) approve of all
they did. But thus the Reader may discern, that you have not dealt any more
fairly with Calvin here, (whom in this place you would make to be a justifier
and patron of Prelacy) then you have dealt with him elsewhere; though by what
we have said, we hope he is sufficiently vindicated, and the contrary, to what
you allege him for, fully evidenced. And this that has been said concerning
Calvin, will likewise show, how Beza is to be understood, if he any where say,
what the ancient Fathers appointed touching the Hierarchy, was done optimo
zel^, out of a very good zeal. For by that expression he only approves of their
pious and good intent in what they did, but not of all that was done; and when
you call him that earnest patron of Presbyterian discipline, you should not, by
stretching his words beyond their scope, have represented him, to have approved
of that, which the Presbyterian discipline does not own.

8. And thus having answered fully to what you have said, for that Government
which you are for, and pray might be established in this Nation; we must still
mind you, that, whatever you here again say to the contrary, as yet you have
not proved this Church Government to be agreeable, either to the will of God
(which was not as yet attempted to be made out by you) or to the universal
practice of Primitive Churches, your proof for this falling far short; and that
however now you would mince the matter (speaking of the rule, whereby we are to
judge, touching Church Government, or other matters of Religion) in saying, you
put both together, not the word of God alone, nor the Churches practice alone,
but both together, (and which is not to be disallowed of, when it is clear,
that the Churches practice is agreeable to the word of God) yet by what you
have discovered to be your opinion in this Section (and of which we have fully
spoken) it is manifest, you have given that to the Church, Councils and
Fathers, and their exposition, which is proper to the Scripture, sc. to be the
only sure interpreter of it self, and judge in all controversies of Religion;
and which is that, which we have asserted and defended against you in this
answer, and by giving of which unto the Scripture, we have detracted nothing
from the credit, that is due unto the Church, or her lawful and laudable
customs; which we are so far from any ways invalidating, that we do assert
and defend the same, as also her authority against all heretical and
schismatical persons, that seek her overthrow; although we see no reason to
count those heretical and schismatical persons, that seek to overthrow the
Church, that cannot either believe, that the Church is the only judge of
coutroversies in matters of Religion, or her exposition the best and surest
rule for interpreting of Scripture, or that judging the Government of the
Church by Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, then Chancellours,
and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Arcadeac^ns, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, not to be a Government
agreeable o the will of God, and universal practice of Primitive Churches, do
therefore cast it off, which yet w fear are Articles in foam men's Creeds.

5. But having spoken, what we judge sufficient, unto what you have alleged
out of the Council of Nice, and to what you further have urged, for the proving
of that, which you do here cite it for; we shall now proceed, to consider what
you have to say against our Government, as not being that, which is most
consonant to the will of God revealed in Scripture; and to prove, that the
ruling Elders are not jure divino, nor any such Officers appointed by Christ in
his word, but that they may be parted with, without any danger of betraying the
truth of Christ, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5.

Now here we might have reasonably expected, that you should have urged some
arguments, to have proved, that ruling Elders are not meant in these Texts,
considering what more large satisfaction you promised in your second Paper
afterward, if what was comprehended therein was not judged satisfactory. But we
find that (notwistanding your large promises and confident and high
undertakings) you discover barrenness in arguing, though what is wanting in
reasons, you make out in foul language; yet we shall consider the utmost that
you say. First in answer to these Texts you say, they are too general to prove
a ruling Presbytery out of; But this you should have made good, and not
magisterially have asserted it, as you do, without all proof. But you think it
is enough that we have been often told so, by many more learned Doctors of our
Church. And we must tell you (who it seems reckon your selves in the number of
these learned Doctors) that it is a greater part of learning, to prove these
Texts to be too general to prove a ruling Presbytery out of, then only to say
so much; as by that account which we have given you, in our second Paper, we
have there showed, that both the Provincial Assembly of London, in their
vindication of the Presbyterian Government, and the London Ministers, in their
Jus divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici, do more then say, that these Texts do hold
forth such an Officer in the Church, as the ruling Elder; for they do also
prove it, yea and that he is there particularly mentioned, and distinguished
from all other Officers of the Church; they also, together with the Assertors
of the Government of the Church of Scotland (to whom with other reverend and
learned men of our own and other reformed Churches, we have referred you) do
answer whatever we have heard alleged by those many more learned Doctors of
our English Church, that you here speak of, to prove these Texts to be too
general, to prove a ruling Presbytery out of. And therefore it is not
according to our will, or what we are resolved on, that the ruling Elders are
found there, but according to the clear evidence of strong and good reason,
showing (notwithstanding your scoff) that the sense we have given of these
Texts, is the true sense and meaning of them. But though you urge no argument
to convince us of so great a fault, yet you can readily enough accuse us of
wresting the Scriptures with expositions and glosses, to make them speak what
they never meant; and which you think is sufficiently made forth by telling us,
that we put such strange senses to places of Scripture, as the Church of Christ
never heard of till of late years; as if nothing were to be received, that is
contained in Scripture, as the true sense and meaning thereof, but what can be
confirmed to be so, by the testimony of Fathers and Councils; or as if all the
expositions that had been given of these and other Texts of Scripture, by the
Church of Christ till of late years, were now to be made evident from the
writings of the Fathers, that are extant, showing what the expositions given by
the Church were; or as if the expositions of reverend and learned Synods and
Assemblies of Divines, of our own or other reformed Churches (having had the
help of all the labors of those, that had been in the Church of Christ before
them) backed with the evidence of Scripture reason, and the circumstances of
the Texts, were all to be slighted, and to be had in no account, both by us
and you, who yet profess (though in your practice you show but little of it) to
reverence Synods, and to be ready to submit to their determination, although we
have also told you in our answer to your second Paper, that (however it being
no controversy in the purest Primitive times of the Church, whether ruling
Elders were understood in those Texts, nor this case brought before the Synods
of those times, that ever we have read of; and so not that occasion given to
the Fathers, to discuss this matter upon their expositions of those Texts) we
are not wholly destitute of the testimony of the Fathers, for the being of such
an Officer, as the ruling Elder in the Church; and do herein refer you and
the Reader, to what we have said to this purpose, in our answer to your second
Paper. But yet for all this, we must with you be esteemed wresters of the
Scriptures; and to brand us the more, you apply unto us (yea to all Presbyters)
what Dr. Andrews taxed the Papists withal, whereby you show the esteem we are
in with you, in that you herein parallel us with the Popish Cardinals; which is
also the charity you have toward us, who in your second Paper, whilst you had
hopes by courting us, to have brought us on to a compliance with you, were your
dear friends (nay more) brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord; and this
also is that more large satisfaction that you now give us, in performance of
your promise there made, if what was comprehended in that Paper, was not
sufficient. But having here said nothing, that can have any show of this
promised satisfaction; you do well to refer us, to what in your second Paper,
you say, you had further spoken of it; for the Reader hence may be ready to
think, though he find here little but flouts and uncharitable censures; yet
there you had said something to the purpose, which yet when it is summed up,
will be found to be only this, sc. your sending us to the Fathers, to consult
what interpretation they gave, and telling us none of them expound these Texts
as we do; which yet is that you say over again here, and to which there is no
need to return any further answer, then what has been already made: only we
cannot but take notice, that your way of giving satisfaction is very easy, sc.
by ridding your hands quickly of the work, and it is only in one way, which is
briefly this, sc. what exposition the Fathers unanimously give of any Text of
Scripture, that must be received; and what exposiition cannot be backed with
their concurrent testimony, that is to be rejected, and this ought to satisfy.
But unto this, one answer does serve the turn, sc. that your principle is
unsound and very corrupt; and which has been already in our answer to this
Section so fully evidenced, that it is needless here to add any more. And this
for answer to what you present in this Section, may be sufficient.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. VII.
But now as to you, and what follows, say you, and so go on mintaining your
power of excommunication, and the extent of it, being as you pretend, backed by
the Authority of the civil Magistrate, which Authority is taken off by
several subsequent Acts of Parliament, and so your Church Government, and
Church Censures are of no force upon any, but such as are willingly (and no
longer then they are willingly) subject thereto, as we have showed before.

The Civil Sword does and can reach others, your Ecclesiastical cannot: The Act
inflicts a civil punishment, whether corporal or pecuniarie, upon all lawless
persons, whether such as contemn Gods Laws or Man's, and not a spiritual, and
therefore not censurable by you. And this is a mistake of yours to think, that
notwithstanding the punishment inflicted upon the offender by the civil
Magistrate, you may for the same offense proceed to execute Church Censures
also; so a man may come to be punished twice for one offense, which is against
the Law; and therefore in such Statutes (as in Cl. cop. cap: 2.
1 Mar. cap. 3. and 1 Eliz. cap. 12.) where there is a punishment prescribed to
be inflicted by the Civil Magistrate upon the transgressors of that Act, and
also another to be inflicted by the Church; yet there is a special Proviso
immediately follows, That whatsoever person offending the premises, shall for
any the offenses afore-recited, receive punishment of the Ordinary, having
testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaries Seal, shall not for the same
offense eftsoon be convicted before the Justice, nor in likewise receiving for
the said offense, punishment by the Justice he shall not receive for the said
offense punishment of the Ordinary.

Now these latter Acts and Ordinances, against drunkenness, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, etc. enjoining punishment by the Civil Magistrate
only, has utterly taken off all power of excommunication: And therefore our
advice to you, to complain to the Civil Magistrate of such lawless persons
was not amiss, because that Sword is sharper and longer then any you have, or
can pretend to.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. IF we went on to maintain our power of censuring the scandalous, according
to what (as we told you) both God and the civil Authority had entrusted us
with, it concerned you the more to have made good what you undertook. But
herein you have fallen short, as we have sufficiently proved, by what we have
said in answer to the fourth Section of this Paper, whereby also we doubt not,
but it will appear, that we are backed by the Authority of the civil Magistrate,
and that this Authority is not taken off by any subsequent Acts of Parliament,
that you have instanced in; and that therefore our Church Government and
censures are still of force, and that it does not depend on the voluntariness
of the members of our several Congregations being subject thereunto, but upon
the Parliaments appointing them to this subjection, that any persons within the
bounds of this Association are subject to this Government.

2. We do readily grant the Civil Sword, does and can reach, as those offenders
against the Laws of the Lands, that submit to the Churches censures; so also
those, that are unwilling to be subject thereunto. But your Argument is very
inconsequent, when you would infer, that the Act or Acts of Parliament
inflict a civil punishment, whether corporal or pecuniary, upon all lawless
persons, whether such as contemn Gods Laws or man's, and not a spiritual,
therefore such offenders are not censurable by us. For except there had been
some late Act, that had repealed the Ordinance of 1648, for Church Government,
that appoints the inflicting of spiritual censures; such offenders, as are
justly censurable by that Ordinance, are still censurable by us. Neither do we
yet see, how it is our mistake, to think, that, notwithstanding the punishment
inflicted upon the offender by the Civil Magistrate, we may, for the same
offense, proceed, to execute Church censures also: or that it is either sound
Divinity, or good Law, that a man may not be punished twice for one offense;
which yet is the argument whereby you would prove us therein for to mistake.
Indeed we hold it not just, that one and the same person, should be punished
twice for one and the same offense, with one and the same kind of punishment;
but that such offenders, as are punishable by the civil Magistrate with civil
punishments, may be proceeded against by the Church with Church censures, is
manifest, 1. From your Civil penalties do not free from Ecclesiastical censure.
own concessions. You had granted in your first Paper, that such as are
scandalous and wicked in their lives, were to be admonished, both publicly and
privately; and that if notwithstanding, they continue still in their scandalous
courses, and would not reform, the Churches lawful Pastors had power to
excommunicate such. And in your second Paper, it was one of the Arguments you
urged to bring us to a compliance with your Proposals there, that, by that
means the lives and manners of dissolute persons, might with brotherly
admonition and exhortation be reclaimed, or by due censures be corrected and
amended. But now you eat your own words, and flatly contradict what there you
had granted: for now you say, such offenders as are punishable by the civil
Magisttate, according to the Acts, that inflict civil punishment, are not
censurable at all by the Churches lawful Pastors; nor by us, since we have
refused to comply with your Proposals; for then a man may come to be punished
twice for one offense. 2. From the justice and equity that is in so doing,
considering the different nature of Civil punishments, and Ecclesiastical
censures; the one being only corporal, or respecting the outward man, the
other being spiritual and respecting the soul. And therefore seeing men
consist not only of bodies, but have souls also; such as are offenders against
the Laws both of God and men, may and ought to be punished, as with civil
punishment, appointed by the civl Magistrate, to be inflicted on the outward
man; so also with Ecclesiastical censures, appointed by Jesus Christ, to be
inflicted on the soul, in case of impenitency. 3. This also further appears, by
the necessity and usefullness that there may be of this double punishment. The
Magistrate may have punished the offender in his purse or body, and yet he
continue in an insensible and impenitent state, in which respect there may be a
necessity, why he should be noted with the censure of Excommunication, that he
might be ashamed, 2 These. 3. 14. be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.
5. The Magistrate also may have punished him to the satisfaction of the Law,
and yet the Church remain unsatisfied, and there be danger also of leavening
others by his unreformedness, except this old leaven be purged out, 1 Cor. 5.
6. Civil punishments are necessary to be inflicted, for the restraining from
public disorders, not fit to be tolerated in a Christian state: But if there
be not repentance for such offenses, the souls of such offenders,
notwithstanding the Law be satisfied, may be damned for their impeniteney; for
the preventing whereof Church censures are necessary and useful. Both
Magistracy and Ministry are Ordinances of God, the power of both are necessary
and useful, a blessing from God may be expected on the due punishment and
censures that are inflicted by both. And therefore the asserting of the one
does not take away or destroy the other. But if your doctrine be good; if there
be an appointment of civil punishments, to be inflicted by the civil
Magistrate, and the civil Magistrate proceed to do his duty, all the power of
the Church is vacated, neither must she inflict any censures or spiritual
punishments, that she is entrusted with the dispensing of, though she see her
members to be incorrigible, impenitent and in danger to perish (if her physic,
that is for the soul, be not applied, after the civil Magistrate has gone as
far as he can) because then one and the same person should be punished twice
for one offense; which you say, is against Law, but we are sure, is against the
rules of sound and good Divinity.

3. But seeing you say, that for a man to be punished twice for one offense is
against Law, and to make this out do urge two Statutes, 1. Mar. chap. 3. 1.
Eliz. cap. 2. unto this we say, that however it does not properly belong to us
to expound the Laws of the Land, we hope we may have leave to say, what upon
the perusal of those Statutes, common reason does dictate to us. And therefore
we answer, 1. Your assertion is too general to be made out by these Statutes.
That of the first of Mary, speaking only of the penalties to be infficted on
those that should disturb by word or deed Preachers in their Sermons, or should
molest a Priest, preparing or celebrating Mass, or other Service; or abuse the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, or should break any Altar or
Crucifix: and providing in the close of it, that the persons offending in the
premises, should be but once punished for one offense: as there had been
reason, for some of those things, that are there mentioned as offenses, why the
transgressors of that Act, should not have been so much as once punished. The
other Statute of the first of Elizabeth, cap. 2. (for so your quotation is, in
the Copy you presented unto us, and which we judge to be the Statute you here
mean, there being nothing to this purpose to be found cap. 12.) is likewise as
expressly limited, as the former. For it entreats only of the penalties to be
inflicted on those, that should use any other Service then the Book of Common
Prayer, or should deprave the same Book; or should do any thing, or speak in
the derogation of it, or cause other Prayer to be said or sung, or should not
resort to the Church on the Sundays, or other Holy days: and then after the
appointment of the punishment to be inflicted by the civil Magistrate in such
cases, and the other punishment to be inflicted by the Ordinary, does provide,
that whatsoever persons shall offend in the premises, shall be but once
punished for one offense, providing particularly as you mention. But you might
have taken notice, that the book of Common Prayer is taken away, and so are
Holy days, by the Ordinance appointing the Directory; and we could never see,
there was reason for that severity, either of Ecclesiastical censures, or
civil punishments to be inflicted upon all those that might be found punishable
at any time by this Act. However, the provisions mentioned in these Acts,
refering only to the particular cases mentioned in them, your proof from them
falls short, to make out your assertion, that is general, that it is against
Law for a man to be punished twice for one offense. 2. But yet we further
answer, that when the Parliament passed the Ordinance of 1648, whereby the
offenders there mentioned, are made censurable by us with the Church censures,
as there may be occasion, according to the rules laid down in the form of
Church Government, there were sundry penal Statutes in force, inflicting civil
punishments on several of the offenders, mentioned in that Ordinance, and yet
there is no proviso in this Ordinance (that was passed after those Statutes) to
the purpose you speak of, and restraining the Church from inflicting Church
censures, in case the civil Magistrate had punished them by civil punishments;
but it gives the Church full liberty to proceed, without the least hint of any
such a limitation. 3. You also (who pretend to be so expert in the Laws) might
have taken notice, that in the Statute of the 5th of Eliz. cap. 23. there is an
appointment of the order of awarding and returning the Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo: See the ^ction Statut^ Fardin Pulton.
and also what was to be done upon the appearance of the offeudor, and what if
he could not be found: and by which Statute, it is most clear, that the civil
Magistrate was to inflict a civil punishment upon the same offender, that had
been excommunicated by the Ordinary; as it is there provided, that upon the
Bishops receiving the submission and satisfaction of the person excommunicated,
and certifying the same, the party was to be released from the Sheriffs custody
or prison. By which, we think, it is manifest, that you (who would appear to be
men so well skilled in all Laws, both of God and men) have laid down such a
general assertion, as can be made out by neither; it being clear by that Act,
that a civil punishment was to be inflicted on the person, that by his offense
had incurred the censure of Excommunication.

Further you might have observed, that by the Statute See C^ on of t^ tutes ^^
dinanaton.
10 Caroli, cap. 1. there is a forfeiture appointed, to be levied on every
person using any unlawful pastimes on the Lords day, and yet in the close
thereof, there is a proviso in these words; that the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within this Realm, or any the dominions thereof, by virtue of this
Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be abridged, but that the
Ecclesiastical Court may punish the said offenses, as if this Act had not been
made. The like proviso we also find, in the Statute 30 Caroli, cap. 1. which
yet appoints fofeitures, in case of profanation of the Lords day by Carriers,
etc. that travel on the Lords day, or by Butchers that sell or kill victuass on
that day. By all which you may plainly see, if you will not shut your eyes,
that it is not against Law, that a man may come to be punished twice for one
offense. Nay what has been heretofore more ordinary, then the
High-Commissioners imprisoning, fining and excommunicating for one and the same
offense?

But yet you will have the latter Acts and Ordinances against drunkenness,
swearing, profanation of the Sabbath, etc. enjoining punishment by the Civil
Magistrate only, (though they do not speak one word, that tends to the
repealing of the Ordinance for Church Government) to have utterly taken off all
power of Excommunication. But this we must not so easily grant; and yet we
shall not be unready, as there may be occasion, to complain to the civil
Magistrate of any lawless persons, that are justly censurable with the censure
of Excommunication, the conjunction of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Sword,
being sharper and longer, then either of them alone.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. VIII.
And you further proceed to make answer to our several ensuing Quaeries, but
how fully and satisfactorily all may judge, that have perused what has
formerly been said touching the civil sanction of your Government. Our first
Quaerie is, Why Government in singulari? Your answer is, Because it is the
only Government that is established in this Church by Civil Authority. This
Answer has been confuted before, we shall say no more here to that. But we are
unsatisfied, what you mean by (this Church) whether you mean this Church at
Manehester, where your Classis is; or you mean the Church of England. If you
mean this Church of Manchester of your association, it is established not so
much by Ordinance of Lords and Commons in Parliament, as by later Acts,
grauting the free exercise of Religion in Doctrine and Worship to all Churches
and Congregations in their own way, to all, and all alike, but such as are
particularly cautioned against. And so you in your Presbytery in your Church at
Manchester are protected, because you have possessed your selves of that
Church. But then others in other Churches and Congregations, to wit, Prestwich,
Bury, Middleton, and the like, may say of their way of worship, it is the
only Government which is established in this Church. But if your meaning be of
the Church of England, (and so we conceive by the subsequent words, viz. That
there is no other Government but yours owned as the Church Government
throughout the whole Nation) You are certainly mistaken, and dare not maintain
it, that his Highness, or his Council owns Presbytery, and none but that
Government.

But leaving the Civil Sanction, you come to the divine right of Presbytery,
and prove it to be the only Government in singulari; because it is that only
Government which Christ has prescribed in his word; and what Christ has thus
prescribed, must needs be de jure, one and the same in every Church. And
Calvin's judgment (you say) in this particular is so manifest by his works, to
the whole world, that it needs no proof. We have told you before of the form
and order of Church Government appointed by the Council of Nice, by Patriarch,
Archbishop, Bishop, etc. How this Government (which we suppose you will not
say is Presbyterian) is in Calvin's judgment, not differing from that which
Christ has prescribed in his word. And in his first Section of this Chapter,
he tells us of Bishops, (not one word of Elders, chosen out of the people who
should rule in the Church) but Bishops that did all, viz. make and publish
Canons (a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in the Church) in which
(says he) they so ordered all things after the rule of Gods word, that a man
may see they had in a manner nothing differing from the word of God. And this
form of Government did represent a certain Image of divine Institution. Can
Calvin say more for your Presbytery? nay, can he say so much? then how manifest
is his judgment for the jus divinum of your Presbytery, that it is that
Government in particular, which Christ has prescribed in his word?

Thus have we taken off your Calvin and Beza (as above) your modern Doctors,
for Fathers you have none; and now you descend to the Assembly of Divines. The
jus divinum, by London Ministers, the provincial Synod at London, Rutherford,
Gyllaspie, to prove your divine right of Presbytery, modern Authors of
yesterday, with whom you paint your Margent in abundance, and may serve your
turn amongst the ignorant and vulgar sort; who measure all by tale, and not by
weight; when others that know what, and who many of them are, will conclude you
draw very near the dregs.

As for such as are lawless persons, and who those be, whether drunkards,
swearers, unclean persons, prophaners of the Sabbath, such as will not subject
themselves to the present Government, etc. all together or a part, conjunctim
seu divisim, whether you will, they are only punishable by the Civil
Magistrate, you cannot exclude them the Church by any of your censures, as we
have said before.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. WE did indeed proceed to make answer to your several Queries, and desire
the Reader to peruse the Queries, you propounded to us in your first Paper, and
the answer we gave unto them, and then to judge how satisfactorily we did it,
after he had fully weighed our answer, and what you have said to take off the
establishing of our Government by the civil Sanction. But whereas your first
Query was, why Government in singulari? and our answer given thereunto was,
because it is the only Government, that is established in this Church by civil
Authority; you say this answer has been confuted before; but how strongly, we
shall leave it to the Reader for to judge. But it seems, this answer has
raised another scruple in your minds; for you are unsatisfied, what we mean by
this Church; although in our answer we had sufficiently explained it, it being
that Church, wherein the Prelatical Government formerly had been set up, and
wherein, that being put down, the Presbyterian was set up, in its stead, as the
only Government that was owned, as the Church Government for the whole Nation,
as we had told you; and which words did sufficiently declare, that by (this
Church) we meant the Church of England. This you confess is that which you
conceive to be our meaning; yet you quarrel at the word, that so upon
supposal, that the Church of Manchester, of our Association, and where our
Classis meets, might thereby be understood, you might take ye liberty to tell
us, that our Church Government is not so much established by the Ordinance of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, as by later Acts, (granting (as you say)
the free exercise of Religion in doctrine and worship to all Churches and
Congregations in their own way) to all, and all alike; though you might have
observed, that the way of Prelacy was ever in the number of those ways
particularly cautioned against; and that those of the Presbyterian way have
that prerogative, above all those of other ways, to whom any indulgence is
granted; that their way of Government is owned and established by the
Parliament, as the Government of the Nation, which is not to be said for any of
the other. And therefore neither the Church at Manchester, nor our Classical
Presbytery meeting there, are protected merely upon the account of possession
of that place, as you imagine, but because being awarranted thereunto by
Authority of Parliament, they set up that Government, which the Parliament
appointed and established as the Government of the Nation; and who also in
their approval of the division of this County into nine Classical Presbyteryes,
appointed Prestwich (wherein the Government was set up and exercised for along
while, although since Mr. Allen's return thither, the Eldership of that
Congregation could do little) to be within the bounds of this Classical
Association; and Middleton and Bury (in the latter of which Congregations, the
Presbyterian Government according to Ordinance of Parliament was also set up,
though the present Minister join not in it) are appointed to be within the
bounds of the second Class. And so these Congregations, that you would suggest,
have a liberty for some way of worship and different Government from the
Presbyterian, granted unto them and exercised by them, (though they are not any
of them under any character of indulgence granted to others other ways) are
all of them under the power of the Provincial Assembly of this County, and one
of them under the power of this; and two of them under the power of the
neighbor Classical Association. And hereupon we are certain, we are not
mistaken, when we say, that there is no other Government but the Presbyterian,
that was owned by the Parliament, they establishing this Government only, as
the Government of the Nation; and which we do not see, but is also acknowledged
by the humble Advice, assented unto by his Late Highness, as we have said
before.

2. But now (you say) leaving the civil Sanction, we come to the divine right
of Pres ytery, and prove it to be the only Government in singulari, because it
is that only Government, which Christ has preser bed in his Word. But here we
have cause to complain, you do us manifest wrong, in that you would represent
us either absurdly proving idem per idem, or that Presbytery is of divine
right, because it is so; or to argue very weakly in saying it is of divine
right, because it is prescribed by Christ in his Word, and so leave the matter
without any further proof, nothing whereof at all, is any where to be found in
our answer; only we find the same in that chimerical fancy, which you had first
conceivd your selves, and then were pleased to impute unto us. Then you add,
and what Christ has thus prescribed, must needs be de jure, one and the same
in every Church, which words did not here follow, whereby you render, what we
had plainly expressed, not intelligible to what purpose it was uttered. But
because we desire the matter might be judged of, neither according to your
representation of it, or what we say of it, we shall give the Reader a full
account, of all that was here expressed by us, and which he will find upon the
perusal of our answer, whereby he will perceive, that we were not at all
reasoning (as you represent us) but only declaring our judgment, and that in
plain expressions, without any ambiguity. Our words speaking of the
Presbyterian Government were these. And as it is that which we judge to be most
agreeable to the will of God, so also we conceive, that whatever is of Christ's
prescribing in any other different Government (whether Episeopal or
Congregational) is to be found here, as we do apprehend the redundancies of
them both, to be taken away in this, and the defects of them both to be bear
supplied; and however there may be differences amongst godly meant, concerning
Church Government, which it is in particular, that Christ has prescribed in
his Word, yet we judge that the Government which Christ has prescribed in his
Word is but one, as all those must say so too, that not being Erastians, do
bold that one Church Government or other is of divine right. The Reader will
hereby perceive, that we did without any manner of reasoning at all, only
declare our judgments; but you represent us as arguing, and that absurdly; and
then you mangle our words, breaking them off, from what they had immediate and
necessary dependence on, and reference to; for having thus far declared our
selves, we came to answer to what you had urged in your first Paper, out of
Calvin, saying, Scimusenim unicuique Ecclesiae, etc. to which we said, the
circumstantials of Government (of which we told you, we did believe, if you had
quoted the place, where Calvin used those words, it would appear he speaks)
being variable, and so but the accidentals of Government, may not be one and
the same in all Churches. And then we added the words, you in part mention; but
if Christ have prescribed a Government in his Word, for the substantials of it,
it must be de jure, one and the same in every Church. And then further said;
and that the Presbyterian Government is that in particular, which is there
prescribed, in Calvin' s judgment, is so manifest by his works, to the whole
Christian world, that it needs no proof. Whereby it is very manifest to any
ordinary understanding, that the expressions we here use (and which you
mention) have reference to what you had cited out of Calvin, in your first
Paper, showing, that however he might say, that every Church might have their
different forms of Government, in regard of the circumstantials of it, yet
seeing the Government prescribed by Christ in his Word, for the substantials of
it, is but one, and in Calvin's judgment the Presbyterian Government is that
Government; when Calvin says, Scimus enim unieuique Ecclesiae, etc. he was to
be understood, to speak concerning the circumstantials of Government only, and
not of the substantials thereof. Hence also it is clear, that we were not here
neither, arguing for the divine right of Presbytery; but only declaring and
proving, how Calvin was to be understood in the expressions you quoted. But as
we have said, you mangle our words, and break them off from what immediately
went before; whereby from your representation, it is not conceivable to what
they referred; but then, you joining them to other words going before, to which
they had no reference, represent them to have been used by us, to have patched
up such a poor argument for the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian Government, as
before has been declared; but whether this be either sincere or ingenuous
dealing, we leave it to the Reader to judge.

3. But as touching Calvin's being in his judgment for the Presbyterian
Government, as that which Christ has in particular prescribed in his Word,
(though here again you would make him a patronizer of the Government by
Patriareh, Archbishop, Bishop, etc. in our answer we said, was manifest from
his works to the whole Christian world. And is not this clear to any that will
but consult what he has written touching this matter? Consult his Expositions
and Commentaries, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and you will find
him there to be downright for the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office.
Consult his Institutions, you will there find, Lib. 4. Chap. 3. Sect. 8.
expressly, that he takes Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors for one and the same,
and that according to the use of Scripture, as he there speaks, and argues for
that purpose, Tit. 1. 5. Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. and having reckoned up the
preaching Officers, he then comes in the very same Section, and mentions the
ruling Elders, showing that they are mentioned by Paul, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor.
12. 28. We will but cite only one passage, that he here has concerning his
quoting these Texts. Guhernatores fuisse existimo seniores de plebe electos,
qui censurae. morum, and exercendae disciplinae una cum Episcopis praeessent.
Neque enim secus interpretari queas, quod dicit, qui praeejt, id faciat in
solicitudine. Habuit igitur ab initio unaquaeque Ecclesia suum Senatum
conscriptum ex viris piis, gravibus and sanctis; penes quem er at illa, de qua
postea loquemur, jurisdictio in corrigendis vitiis. Porro e^usmodi ordinem non
unius saeculi fuisse, experientia ipsa declarat. Est igitur hoc gubernationis
munus saecu^is omnibus necessarium. Whence it is very clear, that Calvin's
judgment is so full for the Office of the ruling Elders, that otherwise he
says, we shall not be able to interpret that of the Apostle, He that rules,
let him do it with diligence. And hence he concludes, that every Church had
from the beginning its Senate or Consistory, that consisted of men that were
godly, grave, and holy, to whom did belong the jurisdiction, in correcting of
vices, of which after he says he will speak. Further he says, that experience
it self declares, that this was not an order of one age; and thence inferres,
that therefore the ruling Elders Office, whom he undestands by the Office of
Government, is necessary for all ages. Is it possible for any man to declare
himself more fully and plainly for the Presbyterian Government, then Calvin
here does? We forbear to cite any other parts of his works; we doubt not but
the Reader by this will be sufficiently satisfied, and will presently hereupon
conclude, that you but gather out of Calvin, what you think makes for your
purpose; and when we cite him for that which he is so full for, matter not much
how you misrepresent him to the world, that so you might make him to appear
otherwise. But we wish you to consider, that it is not safe for any to make
lies their refuge. But you have, notwithstanding all this, the boldness to
allege Calvin, as a Patronizer of Episcopal Government, as you did before.
And because you come over again with the same thing, we shall be forced for his
vindication, to make some repetition of what we have in part already said. That
in Calvin which you here refer us to, is the place in his Institutions which
was before quoted, sc. Lib. 4. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. But in the Chapter immediately
going before, we have even now showed, that he declares himself fully for the
Presbyterian Government; but this you wholly conceal, in which you deal not
honestly with him. Nay in the very first words of this Section, which you cite,
he tells you, he had been hitherto speaking of that order of governing the
Church, as it is delivered to us out of the pure word of God, and concerning
the Ministeryes, as they were instituted of Christ. And then he adds, now that
all these things might appear more clearly and familiarly, it will be
profitable in those things, to take a view of the form of the ancient Church,
which (as he there says) will represent unto us, a certain image of divine
institution; which are part of the words, that you cite. But hence it is clear,
that seeing it is Calvin's scope in this Chapter, to compare the form of
Government in the ancient Church, with that form of Government, that he had
held forth, in the Chapter going before, from the Scriptures, he judged
(whatever construction you put upon him to the contrary) that that very
Government, in the substance of it (which he had before proved was held forth
in the Scriptures, and which, as we have already showed, from what we have
cited out of him, out of the third Chapter goin gbefore, was the Presbyterian)
was to be found in the ancient Church, in the purer times of it.

But in the next place he comes to prevent an Objection, in these words,
Tametsi enim multos Canones ediderunt illorum temporum Episcopi, quibusplus
viderentur exprimere, quam sacris literis expressum esset, ea tamen cautione
totam suam Oeconomiam composuerunt ad unicom illom verbi Dei normami, ut facile
videas nihil fere hac part habuisse a verbo Dei alienum. Hence it is yet
further plain, that however he confess, that the Bishops of those times did
seem to express in many of their Canons something more, then was expressed in
Scripture, yet that he says, they did compose their whole Economy unto the
only rule of Gods word, that one might easily see, they had in this particular,
nothing almost differing from the word; he hereby declares his judgment yet
further, that for the substance, the Government of these times was the same
with the Government, he had held forth from the Scriptures in the former
Chapter. But hence it is also clear, that (as we observed before) he did not
approve of every thing in those Canons; as also he presently after confesses,
there was something deficient and wanting in them. For however he excuse them,
in regard they endeavored to keep the institution of God with a sincere
endeavor, yet he acknowledges, that in something they erred, although he
says, not much; as is clear from his own words, which are as follows,
Verumetiam si quid posset in ipsorum institutis desiderari, quia tamen sincero
studio conati sunt Dei institutionem conservare, and ab ea non multum
aberraverunt, plurimum conducet hic breviter colligere, qualem observationem
habuerint. And then he shows, what the Ministers of the ancient Church were.
Thus we have given a full and particular account of what Calvin has in this
Section, and that in the very order which he himself observes there, which you
doing but partially, and catching only at some passages, that you think makes
for your purpose, do most grossly wrong him, by your misrepresentation. And if
we should deal by other Authors, even such as are for the Episcopal Government,
as you deal by Calvin, which of them almost, but we might make to appear
Patronizers of the Presbyterian Government? But you will have Calvin to say,
that in the ancient Church, the Bishops did all, viz. make and publish Canons,
a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in the Church. Thus you represent
him, to hold forth the Bishops exercising solitary power of jurisdiction in
those times, which as it is in it self as contrary to truth, as light is to
darkeness, so it is expressly contrary to what Calvin says in the very next
Section to that which you cite. For in the former Section he says, that they
to whom the Office of preaching was enjoined, (speaking still of the ancient
Church) they called all those Presbyters. These (says he) did in every City
chcose out one out of their own number, to whom they gave more specially the
title of Bishop, lest dissentions should arise from equality, as often it comes
to pass. But yet he presently adds, and says, Neque tamen honor and dignitate
superior er at Episcopus, ut dominium in Collegas haberet; sed quas parts
habet Consul in Senatu, ut referret de negotijs, sententtias roget; consulendo,
monendo, hortando, alijs praeeat, authoritate sua totam actionem regat, and
quod decretum communi consilio fuerit, exequatur: id muneris sustinebat
Episcopus in Presbyterorum caetu; atque id ipsum pro temporum necessitate
fuisse humano consensu inductum fatentur ipsi veteres. And then he quotes
Hierome, asserting a Bishop and a Presbyter to be all one. We wonder very much,
where your modesty and ingenuity, nay common honesty was, when (being you could
not but take notice of these things in Calvin in this second Section, else you
read him very negligently) yet you say, as you here do, that according to
Calvin's representation of the Government of the ancient Church, the Bishops
did all; make and publish Canons, a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in
the Church. Whereas you see Calvin says; the Bishop had no dominion over the
rest of the Presbyters, whom he here calls his Colleagues; that he had but only
that Office, which the Consul had in the Senate, and is no more then what the
Moderators have in our Assemblies, as is clear from what he here particularly
recites, and further shows, that he was only to execute what was decreed by
common counsel: and further says, that even this that did belong unto him,
the Ancients themselves confess was introduced by humane consent, and that in
regard of the necessity of the times. And as touching what was appointed by the
Council of Nice, touching Archbishops and Patriarchs, and whereof he makes
mention in Section fourth, we have told you before, what you may find in Calvin
himself in that place, where he says, they were rarissimi usus, of very
seldom use, and that their use was chiefly for the assembling of Synods. But
thus we believe all men will see, that Calvin is so express and full for the
Presbyterian Government, and no patronizer of the Episcopal, that they will
conclude, such as represent him otherwise, are either very weak, or make little
conscience of falsifying the Authors which they cite; and that you have taken
off our Calvin no otherwise, then by misinterpreting and grossly wronging him,
as after the same manner you took off Beza before; and both whom, however you
in scorn call Modern Doctors, yet are such Doctors as both you and we may learn
much from.

4. And thus we are brought to the Authors, which we quoted; for Fathers (you
say) we have none, though that also is not true; we having, in our Answer to
your second Paper, produced clear testimonies out of Origin, Ambrose,
Augustine, Optatus, giving in clear evidence for the being of the ruling Elders
office in their times. But as touching our modern Authors, the Assembly of
Divines, the London Ministers in their Jus divinum, the Provincial Synod of
London in their Vindication, Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Gillespie, however you
despise them again, as before, as being but of yesterday; yet they are such,
who as in regard of their known and approved piety and learning, as they are
deservedly in high esteem in the Church, so they are such as we reverence, and
are not ashamed to cite, though this you count but a painting of our margent
with them; and further say of them, they may serve our turn amongst the
ignorant and vulgar sort, who measure all by tale and not by weight: whereby
you pour forth such scorn and contempt upon so many reverend and glorious
lights, as we believe all moderate spirited men, though in their judgments for
the cause which you profess to love, will be ashamed of, and will disown in
you. And however you say, that others, that know what, and who, many of them
are, will (sc. for our referring you to them) conclude, we draw very near the
dreggs; yet you had approved your selves to have been far more profound
persons, if, being sent by us, to consider what arguments they urged for the
Jus divinum of the Presbyterian Government, you had in your reply to our Answer
answered them, and so rather discovered their weakness, then by such
expressions as you here use, to have branded, either us, for referring you to
them; or them, by saying, that others know what, and who they are; who yet, do
neither know any thing by them, nor can by their detracting pens, publish any
thing touching them to the world, that will ever lessen their esteem with
learned, godly, sober and judicious persons, that are acquainted with their
learned Labors. And however you may please your selves in your v^lifying them,
and us for referring you to them, yet this is that, which you should have
remembered, must be accounted for one day. But why did not you (who tell us of
drawing very near the dregs) here take notice, of what in our answer
immediately followed, you having in your first Paper enquired of us, why we had
called our Government, the present Government; and then demanded, is there no
present Government in any Church or assembly of Saints, but where our
discipline is erected? are all the rest at present without Government? or where
has ours been this fifteen hundred years past till this present? etc. unto all
which, and that which followed there in your Paper, we returned you our Answer:
yet you take not notice of it: though if we had dealt thus by you, and yet had
made a show to have answered you, as you do pretend to answer us, we should not
have thought you had wronged us, in your telling us here of drawing near the
dreggs.

5. And now to conclude this Section: whereas you here again tell us, that as
for such lawless persons, whether drunkards, swearers, etc. as will not subject
themselves to the present Government of the Church, they are only punishable
by the civil Magistrate; and that we cannot exclude them the Church by any of
our censures, this is as easily by us denied, as it is by you asserted; and we
leave it to be judged of by the Reader, upon his perusal of what has been
said by both, whether you or we have the better reason for what is herein
maintained by us. But we must again mind you, that notwithstanding in our
answer we had here told you, that however we did not judge all those to be
lawless persons, that do out of conscience not come up to the observation of
all those rules, which are or shall be established by Authority for regulating
the outward worship of God, and Government of his Church; yet both you and we
might well remember, that such as should have refused, to have subjected
themselves to the late Prelaticall Government, would have been accounted in
those times lawless persons: yet to this also you do here say nothing, although
it was one of your queries in your first Paper, whether all that subjected not
themselves to our present Government, must be taken for lawless persons? and
which was a matter more considerable to have replied to, then to have put us
off, as you do, with that which is not at all here to the purpose: your querie
to which we answered, not being about our power to censure the persons, that we
counted lawless, but who those lawless persons were.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. IX.
To our next Quaere (viz.) How far you extend this Saintship, this Church and
Assembly of Saints: You answer, As far as the Apostle did, when writing to
the Church of Corinth and Galatia, he calls them Saints, and Churches,
notwithstanding the gross errors of many members in them; and therefore though
there may be sundry of the like stamp in your Assemblies, you do not un-church
them; or make your Assemblies not Assemblies of Saints, because of the
corruption of such Members, etc. But by your leave, you answer not our
question, which was not, Whether all your Assemblies were called assemblies of
Saints? for no question, you will not un-church your selves, or un-saint your
Assemblies, notwithstanding the corruptions in them. But whether none else but
you were accounted Saints, none Brethren and Sisters in Christ, but such as
stand for your pretended discipline? If so, then the Donatists crime may be
imputed to you; and we say with St. Augustine, O Impudentem Vocem! Nay, but this
cannot be laid in your dish, whose principles and practices are so manifestly
against the practices and opinions of the Donatists of old, it may more fitly
be charged upon such as have rent themselves from your Churches. But who are
they that have rent from your Church? we hear but of few that ever admitted
themselves members, or prosessed themselves of your association, that ever rent
from it. Those that are out, say, they were never of you, never had sworn
obedience to, or subscribed any Articles of yours, as you or many of you had
sworn Canonical obedience to the Government by Bishops, and subscribed the 39
Articles of the Church of England: Here is a rent indeed, a Schism in the
highest, which is not satisfied, but with the utter overthrow of that Church,
from whom they rent and rasing out those Articles of Religion, they had
formerly confirmed by their own subscription, saying, Illa non est, etc. O
Impudentem Vocem! this saying does not concern you.

But still we are unsatisfied in the word (Public) what you mean thereby, to
which you Answer, Such as you by your profession and practice do own for
public, such as you do constantly frequent, and stir up others to frequent
also where are also the public Ordinances of the word, Sacraments and Prayer
dispensed. But here again you come not home to our Question, Whether none are
public Assemblies, nay public Assemblies of Saints, but such as you
constantly frequent, or whose discipline you own; however public yours are.
And then your Order is, Notice shall be taken of all Persons that forsake the
public Assemblies. Notice of all Persons in order to censure; so is your
meaning, and purpose, as a little before you have said we may gather from your
Paper, to censure all Persons, that maintain private meetings in opposition to
public, whether out of conscience, or out of a principle of carelessness,
sloth, worldliness, etc. All Persons that cry down your Churches, Ministry,
etc. is your purpose and meaning by that order. And you say further, Neither do
we transgress any Laws of the Land, which have made no Proviso to exempt any
man, that we meddle with, etc.

Here sure you are mistaken; for you can no more proceed to censure such as
forsake the public Assemblies, by virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament, or
rule laid down in your form of Church Government, then you, or any other
Minister, or Magistrate civil or Ecclesiastical can punish them by an Act of
1. Eliza. entitled, An Act for Uniformity of Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments; or by an Act of 35. Eliza. Entitled, An Act, for punishing of
Persons, obstinately refusing to come to Church, etc. Or an Act of 23. Eliza.
against such as refuse to come to Church: All which with your Ordinance, are
repealed by an Act made September. 27. 1650. Entitled, An Act for relief of
Religious and peaceable pcople from the rigor of former Acts of Parliament in
matters of Religion. By which these are not only repealed, but it is enacted
further, That all and every the branches, clauses, Articles, and Proviso's
Expressed, and contained in any other Act or Ordinance of Parliament whereby,
or wherein any penalty or punishment is imposed, or mentioned to be imposed on
any Person, for not repayring to their respective Parish Churches, etc. shall
be, and are by the Authority aforesaid wholly repealed and made void. None by
this Act shall be censured or punished by virtue of any former, Act or
Ordinance, for refusing to come to their Parish Church, etc. though they
obstinately refuse; And if by no former, then not by that you pretend to. Now
to the end no profane and licentious Person may take occasion by the repealing
of the said Laws (intended only for relief of pious and peaceable minded
people from the rigor of them) o neglect the performance of Religious duties:
It is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Person and
Persons, within this Commonwealth, and the territories thereof, shall (having
no reasonable excuse for their absence) upon every Lords day, days of public
thanksgiving and humiliation, diligently resort to some public place, where
the service and worship of God is Exercised: or shall be present at some other
place, in the practice of some Religious duty, either of Prayer, Preaching,
reading or Expounding the Scriptures, or conferring upon the same. And be it
further declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person, and Persons
that shall not diligently perform the duties aforesaid, according to the true
meaning thereof (not having reasonable excuse to the cootrary) shall be deemed,
and taken to be offenders against this Law, and shall be proceeded against
accordingly.

Can you say now that you have power to censure such as forsake the public
Assemblies, by any Ordinance of Parliament, or rules (as you call them) of your
Church Government, when not only the pious and peaceable minded people, but the
obstinate also are exempted from the rigor of former Laws and only taken to be
offenders against this Law, and no other, and shall be proceeded against
accordingly? Dare you yet proceed to censure notwithstanding this Act? If you
do you are very bold, and may run into a Praemunire; Though you say you are not
to be blamed for any mistakes, Cl. cop, is
that may arise ab ignorantia juris, whether simple or effected: A strange
saying, we have heard it said Ignorantia facti excusat, but Ignorantia juris
non excusat, no not a simple ignorance much less an affected one.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. IF you had weighed what we had answered, you could not with any color have
said, that we answered not your question: you might have observed, that we
spoke of our Assemblies, as they were parts of the Church of England, and of
the same constitution with her; and whom, though those of the separation do
un-church, in regard of the mixture, or the scandalous persons in them, denying
our Church in that respect to be true, or our assemblies to be the assemblies
of Saints, yet we justified in our Answer, from the examples of the Church of
Corinth, and the Churches of Galatia, to whom the Apostle writes as to Saints,
and calls Churches, notwithstanding such corruptions in them: though we did not
deny, but the scandalous in our Church and assemblies were the spots thereof.
And seeing we acknowledged such assemblies were true Churches, notwithstanding
those scandalous persons that were found in them, you had no reason to imagine,
that none else besides our selves were by us accounted Saints, none brethren
and sisters in Christ, but such as stand for our discipline: which you cannot
mention, but you must brand, in calling it pretended: you might from our answer
have gathered, that all other assemblies in our Land, where the word of God and
Sacraments are dispensed, were taken into the number of those assemblies we
spoke of, they being parts also of the Church of England, as well as our own;
however they may some of them differ from us in point of discipline. We told
you in our Answer particularly, that in the Church of Corinth there were some
that denied the resurrection, others made rents and schisms, and sundry grossly
scandalous, and yet it was a true Church. And therefore how should we be
conceived, to have denied such assemblies in our Land, that are parts of the
Church of England, and of the same constitution with her, for the substance,
not to be the assemblies of the Saints, if they stand not for our Discipline?
Yet you would make the world to believe, we meant no further in that Answer we
gave you, then not to un-Church or un-Saint our selves or assemblies, because
of the corruptions of them; which yet we must tell you, might have been the
fewer, if you and others, who are members of these assemblies, had showed your
selves more pliable to good order and discipline, and to have been furtherers
and not hinderers of their reformation.

2. We spoke in our Answer of some, that had of late rent themselves from our
Churches, because of the scandalousness of the corrupt members, and said, that
seeing our principles and practices are manifestly known to be utterly against
them, as against the opinions and practices of the Douatists of old, you had no
reason to apply that of Augustine unto us, when he cried out against them, o
impudentem vocem! But now you will not have any to have rent themselves from
our Church, excepting such, who having admitted themselves members, or
professed themselves of our Association, have rent themselves from us; and who,
you say, are but a few, so far as you have heard. But here you do not approve
your selves good disputants, against those of the separation, who being by
their birth members of the Church of England (whereof our assemblies are but
parts, and of the same constitution with her (as we said before) and have rent
themselves from it, or from our Assemblies, that are parts of it, are justly
chargeable with schism; they having hereby rent themselves from a true Church,
whereof they were members, and whose membership is argued from their being born
in gremio Ecclesiae, not from their admitting themselves members of it
afterward, or their professing of themselves to be thereof members. We had in
our Answer to your first Paper, hinted to you this ground of their membership;
when in Answer to what you had to the like purpose there suggested, as you do
here, we told you that the several Congregations See S^ toward te rend^
within this Land, that make a profession of the true Christian and Apostolic
faith, are true Churches of Jesus Christ: that the several members of these
Congregations are by their birth members, as those that were born in the Jewish
Church are said to be by the Apostle, Jews by nature, Gal. 2. that this their
membership was sealed to them in their baptism, that did solemnly admit them,
as into the universal Church, so into the particular wherein they were born.
But as in this Paper, where you should have replied to these propositions, if
you approved not of them, you answered nothing to them: though in your first
Paper you would have exempted your selves from being subject to our Government,
because you had not admitted your selves members of some one or other of our
Congregations, or were any associates of ours, as you there expressed your
selves; so here you come over again with the same unsound principle, and yet
say nothing to make it out: intimating, that none are to be accounted, to have
rent themselves from us, but such as have admitted themselves members, or
professed themselves of our association: whereas if being members by their
birth of the Church of England, they after rend themselves from any of our
assemblies, or others that are parts and members of it, and of the same
constitution with it, they are guilty of schism; and which you must say, or
whatever you cry out against it, you do not upon any sure principle, oppose it.

3. But this blot of schism you would fasten upon us however, though it be
neither upon your own principles here laid down, or any other whereby you can
prove us guilty. And to make this out you say, that, we or many of us had sworn
Canonical obedience to the Government by Bishops, and subscribed the 39
Articles of the Church of England, and hereupon, because we are not now for
Episcopacy, you conclude us guilty of a rent indeed, a schism in the highest.
But herein you were contradicted by Mr. Allen himself, in the presence of
others of you, that subscribed this Paper, in a full Class, to which he and
several of you resorted (which makes us the more to wonder, how he could
subscribe this Paper) who looking about him upon the Ministers that were
present, said they were free from that, with which we are here charged, there
being none there, that had sworn Canonical obedience, etc. although here you
say, we or many of us did so: as hereupon it will follow from your own
principle laid down, that we, who according to Mr. Allens own confession, never
associated with the Episcopal Hierarchy, or swore any obedience to them, are
quit from that guilt of schism, with which you here charge us. But because we
have already hinted, that you do not argue well against those of the
separation; to acquit our selves and all the Ministers of this Land, who now
disown Episcopacy, to which they formerly submitted, or to which any of them
might have sworn Canonical obedience, from the guilt of schism in this
respect, we refer the Reader to the grounds we have laid down for that
purpose, in our Answer to your second Paper; and which, whosoever will but
impartially consider, he will find, that it is not we, but your selves that do
make the rent; although to heighten the charge against us, you here tell us,
that our schism is so great, that it is not satisfied but with the overthrow
of the Church (which yet in our Answer to your second Paper we have
sufficiently refuted) and rasing out those Articles of Religion, we had
formerly confirmed by our own subscription: as if it were an Article of the
faith of the Church of England, which all the Ministers thereof had subscribed,
that the Prelaticall Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. must stand for
ever; or if it were at any time taken away by the Parliament, and disowned by
the Ministers of England, they had rased out those Articles of Religion, that
they had once confirmed by their own subscription. But you must pardon us, if
we be not so credulous, as to conclude the same with you, who in your great
heat for Episcopacy do so far overshoot.

4. Unto that wherein you were unsatisfied, sc. what we meant by the word
public, our answer was full and home; but either you minded it not, or though
you saw your doubt was resolved, yet being desirous to quarrel, you would not
take any notice of it: for we did not only tell you, that by public Assemblies
we understood the Assemblies, where the public Ordinances were dispensed,
which we our selves did own, and constantly frequent; but also said expressly
(as is to be seen in our answer) that we do not meddle with the censuring of
those, who, being godly and sound in the faith, in the main points of Religion,
do yet differ from us in judgment in matters of Discipline and Government, and
have their Assemblies for Gods public worship distinct from ours; as we are
barred from it by the rules of our Government, as we have often said before.
These were the very words of our answer, and therefore, but that we see you are
resolved to be satisfied with nothing, and find fault with that which is
expressed never so plainly, we should have wondered, that you should here have
said, that we come not home to your question; whenas it is manifest from the
words of our answer, that though these Assemblies owned not our Discipline, or
we their^, yet we denied them not to be the public Assemblies, or the
Assemblies of the Saints; as we expressly professed, we never meddled with the
censuring of them, or to take notice of their members (being sound in the faith
and godly) in order unto censure, as the forsakers of the public Assemblies of
the Saints. But we here told you, we were heartily sorry, that you
understanding our meaning, as was manifest from what you after said, should
only move this doubt, to give a lash at our private meetings, which in our
answer we justified; but notwithstanding the lash you gave us, you do neither
acknowledge your fault, nor reply one word to what we had said for our own
defense.

5. Whereas we said in our answer, that seeing in the Paper which we had
published in our Congregations, we said notice should be taken of all those
that should forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints, you might thence have
gathered, our purpose was to observe and censure, those that did maintain and
hold up p^i^ate meetings in opposition to the public, that did cry down
Ministry and Ordinances, and which we showed were censurable by the rules of
our Government, and that therefore we were not altogether silen^, concerning
either the sin or punishment, of those that did err in Doctrinals or
Discipline, so as to make dangerous rents from the Church, and for which
silence you seemed to tax and blame us in your first Paper; yet now you mention
this our declared purpose, to take notice of such forsakers of the Assemblies
of the Saints, thus characterized, as a fault: and so with you we are worthy of
blame, if we be silent touching either the sin, or punishment of such, and
censure them not; and we are also worthy of blame and punishment too, as
transgressors of the Laws of the Land, (as you will have us to be here) if we
shall proceed to censure such. And so let us neglect our duty or perform it,
we are either way (as you will have it) blame worthy. Yes and which were yet
the more to be wondered at, were it not manifest from what principle it
proceeds, you that cry out of schism and separation, and blame us for our
silence, touching either the sin or punishment of those that err in
Doctrinals, or rend themselves from the Church; yet here are become advocates
to plead the cause of those, that cry down our Church, public Assemblies,
Ministers and Ordinances. For you will have these to do all this out of
conscience, these being your own expressions and not ours, we declaring our
selves plainly concerning those only, that cry down our Churches and public
Assemblies, Ministry and Ordinances, as meant by those persons, that we said,
held up private meetings in oppofition to public, and whom we purposed to
observe and censure. But these you will have also to be exempted from being
censured by us; as also all those, who out of a principle of carelessness,
sloth, worldliness, or manifest profaneness, do on the Lords day, either idle
out the time, or else are worse employed, when they should be at the public
Assemblies, and whom in our answer we said we purposed to take notice of, as
such as did forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints.

6. But seeing you have undertaken to plead the cause of both these sorts, and
will have us to be sure mistaken, when we said, we did not transgress any Laws
of the Land, which had made no proviso to exempt any of these from being
censured by us; we are willing to examine the utmost you have to say for them;
which is but only this, that we can no more proceed tocensure such as forsake
the public Assemblies, by virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament, or rule laid
down in our form of Church Government, then they may be punished by an Act of
1. Elizabeth, or an Act of 35. Elizabeth, or an Act of 23. of Elizabeth; all
which, with our Ordinance, (as you say) are repealed by an Act made September.
37. 1650. The title whereof you give us, as you had done before: By which (you
say) the former are not only repealed, but tell us what is further enacted. But
the strength of this allegation has been tried before, and found to be as weak
as water. This Act of 1650. that you insist on, repealing only the Statutes or
Ordinance, that inflict civil punishment, upon those that repair not to their
respective Parish Churches, etc. and meddles not at all, with repealing of the
Ordinance, authorizing the censuring of offenders with Church censures; and
which we have in our answer to the fourth Section of this Paper sufficiently
demonstrated. And therefore all that you say for those, you here undertook to
exempt from being censured by us, is but what has been discovered before to
have no strength, and so therefore is of no force at all; except we must
believe, that by your repeating it, and coming over with it again, and
paraphrasing upon it, it had gained some new strength, that it never had. And
so all that follows now, to the conclusion of this Section, is of no weight.
For we cannot, against manifest reason to the contrary, judge it to be any
great boldness in us to censure those, as forsakers of the public Assemblies
of the Saints, who falling under the character that we have given of them, are
made censurable by the Ordinance, establishing the form of Church Government.
Neither can we hereupon be brought, to fear any danger of running thereby into
a praemunire, which you again mind us of. There are only two things more we
desire might be taken notice of, before we pass from this Section. 1. That the
Act of 1650. which you quote, does so far discountenance those, who out of a
principle of sloth, worldliness, or profaneness, frequent not the public
Assemblies, that it leaves them to be punished with civil punishments, as
offenders against the Law, notwithstanding its taking off the civil penalties
from some, that are mentioned in it, and as is manifest from what you recite
out of it; and it not speaking one syllable, that may carry any show of a
repeal of the Ordinance for Church Government, does both leave these, and all
other offenders against that Ordinance, to be censured by the censures of the
Church, as there may be cause. 2. That you, having told us, if notwithstanding
this Act, we should proceed to censure, and might run our selves into a
praemunire, and then imputing to us such a gross assertion, as if we should
have said, we were not to be blamed, for any mistakes that might arise ab
ignorantia juris, whether simple or affected, do hereby plainly discover, you
matter not much with what you charge us, so you can but render us absurd
enough. For our sense is clear, from the whole tenor of our discourse, where
we used any such expressions, that we said, we were not to be blamed, for any
mistakes in you, that might arise, ab ignorantia juris; whether simple or
affected we determined not, but left you to examine; and which is so plain,
that when you your selves recite our words in the beginning of the fourth
Section of this Paper, you represent that; which does plainly show, that there
you understood us as we have declared, and of which we minded the Reader in our
second Animadversion on that Section. But now we are the persons that affirm a
thing so absurd, as if we were not to be blamed for our ignorance of the Law,
whether simple or affected; and then you cry out, a strange saying, and tell
us, that you have heard it said, that ignorantia facti excusat, but ignorantia
juris non excusat, etc. But how faithfully and sincerely you have herein dealt
with us, the Reader may judge, and we wish you in the examination of your
consciences to consider.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. X.
To our next Quaere, Whether those that forsake the public Assemblies of the
Saints in the 2d, Order may not be taken for scandalous Persons, and so
comprehended in the 3d? You Answer, We, conceiving your meaning to be such, are
not mistaken. For they are really, and indeed scandalous, and so justly merit
to be censured by you. And although we be not mistaken in our conceits of you,
yet we must tell you, you are mistaken in your own, to think you may bring in
any that forsake your public Assemblies, under that notion of a scandalous
Person, and so proceed to censure accordingly, for the reasons we have given
before. Nay, nor yet can you proceed to censure the more known scandalous in
life, such as you instance of Drunkards, swearers, and whore-masters, they
being all punishable by the civil Magistrate, as by the several Acts made for
that purpose appears; And not by any Ecclesiastical, much less by your
Elderships short and blunt sword of Excommunication, by any Laws now in force.

We are not so sensible of the Multiplicity of Canons, and burdensomness of
Ceremonies, under which, in the time of Episcopacy, any truly conscientious
did sigh or groan, but if we may judge, ex pede Herculem, by the number of
Canons already made in your Provincial Assemblies, and elsewhere in this short
usurpation of Presbytery (many urged necessary de fide) what they would amount
to, had you lived the Age of Episcopacy 1600. years, and upwards we might well
cry out, Quare oneramini ritibus? and censure you as Dr Andrews does
Bellarmine in behalf of our English Church. Nobis non tam Articulosa fides quam
vestris hominibus, qui ad singulas Theses crepant est de fide. Vobis, quibus
datum est vestra omnia in eodem lumine videre, quibus vestra omnia ab eodem
proponente infallibili habere, abundare licet Articulis ad Arthritim usque, etc.

The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. HEre, you having nothing to object against the reason we had given you in
our answer, why, though such as forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints,
being indeed scandalous (and so such as might be comprehended under the
latitude of that expression) we did notwithstanding mention them distinctly, in
a distinct order, from that wherein the scandalous were mentioned, have no
further thing to tell us, but what you had said before, that we were mistaken
to think, we might proceed to censure under the notion of scandalous persons,
such as forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, for the reasons which, you say,
you had before given: whereas all the reasons you gave us (and which here the
Reader, if he will take the matter upon trust from you, must think had been
several, you telling him here of the reasons you had before given) were but
only one, sc. in regard of what you recited out of the Act of 1650. (and which
was the only thing insisted on in the foregoing Section) which yet in the
examination thereof, we have discovered to be none at all.

2. But it is not sufficient for you to be advocates for those, that forsake
the solemn Assemblies of the Saints; but also for such as are the more known
scandalous in life, as Drunkards, Swearers and Whore-masters. For you would
exempt these also, from being censured* by any Ecclesiastical censure, whereby
you contradict what you had granted, both in your first and second Paper, as we
before have noted; and overthrow all Church censures quite, by whomsoever
inflicted; and that upon this ground, because these offenders are punishable by
the civil Magistrate; the weakness though whereof, we have also fully
discovered, as the Reader may see in our Animadversions on the seventh Section
of this Paper. But hereupon you will much less allow us any power to censure
these offenders, with the censure of Excommunication, which in a disgraceful
manner you call ^ur blunt and sharp sword, though through the blessing of God,
a means to recover and bring home the lapsed offenders, and which we hope,
would not be without its e^ficacy, if there should be occasion for us to make
use thereof, for the recovery of any obstinate sinner.

3. You are not (you say) sensible of the multiplicity of Canons, and
burdensome Ceremonies, under which, in the time of Episcopacy, any truly
conscientious did sigh and groan. But herein you suficiently discover your
spirit, and that your great zeal for Prelacy has taken away that sense, that
should have been in you, not only as Christians, but as men. For what though
you were persuaded in your consciences, touching the lawfullness of all the
Canons that were made, and all the Ceremonies that were enjoined by the
Bishops? Yet you might have known, that even the old Ceremonies, the Cross in
Baptism, the Surplice, and kneeling at the Lords Supper, were born as a burden
by sundry godly conformable men, Ministers and private Christians, however they
judged they might submit unto them, being otherwise not to enjoy their liberty.
But as touching the new Ceremonies that were imposed, as bowing at the Altar,
and at the name of Jesus, if you were so unsensible that you savv no evil in
them, yet you could not (one would think) be ignorant, that some The of Irela
Bishop colne, th of Carli
Bishops, and generally the godly conformable men throughout the Land, were so
startled at them, that they chose rather to run the utmost hazards, then to
swallow down those things: Besides, the Canon for the taking the Oath to uphold
the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. did so awaken the Ministers
generally throughout the Land (and we think Mr. Allen was in the number of
such at that time, and are sorry he should be less sensible of the
burdensomenesse of that Canon now, then he was then) that they not only
complained of it, but appeared against it. And as touching the sufferings of
the old Non-conformists, because they could not subscribe, and submit to the
old Ceremonies, being for those things suspended, silenced, and excommunicated
many of them; it seems you never had hearts to pity them; else you would have
been sensible on their behalf, of the burdensomenesse of the Canons and
Ceremonies, that were imposed on them, during the continuance of Episcopacy,
which yet were never attempted to be proved by any (that we have seen or
heard of) to be in themselves necessary, (however the lawfullnesse of them was
defended by sundry) and to which they could not yield with peace of their
consciences, though others could not. But here we observe, you are guilty of
double uncharitableness. First, In that you raze out of the number of persons
that are truly conscientious, all those that did sigh and groan under the
burdensomenesse of the Ceremonies, that were imposed in the time of
Episcopacy, whether new or old. Secondly, In that you express your
unsensiblenesse of their sufferings, because they could not yield unto those
Ceremonies. And by this we may gather, what might be expected from you, if
Episcopacy were up again, and it were in your power to have all on foot, that
was imposed on the Church of God in former times. But you hereby sufficiently
lesson, not only us, but all throughout the Land, into whose hands your Papers
come, for to bevvare

4. You that here speak of the number of Canons, already made in our
Provincial Assemblies and elsewhere, in that short space since Presbytery has
been set up in the room of Episcopacy, (though you cannot mention Presbytery,
but you must give a blow at it, calling it an usurpation, though yet you have
not proved it to be so) and many urged necessary de fide, might have done well
to have mentioned particularly what those Canons are, that the Reader might
have judged, both of the number and burdensomeness of them, if there had been
cause of complaint in either respect. But because this you could not do, you
thought to make a strong accusation, some blot, at the least, being likely to
adhere by that means (as you might think) though you proved nothing. But it is
well known whose rule it was, Fortiter calumniare, aliquid adhaerebit. You
should have also told the Reader, what those many Canons are, that you here
speak of, that have been urged necessary de fide, we knowing of none that have
been so urged, that were Canons, only made by our Provincial Assembly, and not
held forth in the Canon of the sacred Scripture. And therefore till you
acquaint the Reader particularly, what these are, we hope he will number this
amongst the rest of the slanders, that you have raised of us in this Paper. He
may discern from what we have declared fully to this purpose, that,
notwithstanding our own persuasion touching the divine right of the ruling
Elders Office, yet we are far from imposing the necessity of this opinion
touching them upon others; and therefore how we should urge any things, as
necessary de fide, that are but Ecclesiastical Orders and Constitutions, we
leave it to the Reader for to judge; who will hence easily gather, what
likelyness there is of any truth in such a charge: whenas he may also further
observe, that we have declared our selves concerning these, that they are
changeable, and in their own nature variable. But yet you say, if you may judge
ex pede Hereulem, (others that had spoken of the multiplicity of Canons and
burdensome Ceremonies, imposed in the times of Episcopacy, might have better
said, if they might have judged ex ungue Leonem) by the number of Canons
already made in our Provincial Assemblies, (you yet particularizing none) since
Presbytery was set up, what they would amount to, had we lived the age of
Episcopacy, 1^00. years and upwards; (though the reign of Episcopacy is, as we
have showed, of a far younger date, and especially Episcopacy in the height
of it) hereby intimating, that they would have far exceeded in number, all
the Canons that ever were made, during the whole space of time, wherein
Episcopacy has been on foot. For answer unto this, we shall here only mind
you, of what you, (who are well acquainted with the Book of Common Prayer) may
find therein, after the Preface of it, entreating of Ceremonies, why some be
abolished, and some retained, where you have these words.

Some (speaking of Ceremonies) are put away, because the great excess and
multitude of them has so increased in these latter days, that the burden of
them was intolerable, whereof St. Augustine in his time complained, that they
were grown to such a number, that the state of Christian people was in worse
case concerning that matter, then were the Jews. And he counseled that such
yoke and burden should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it. But
what would St. Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late days
used amongst us? whereunto the multitude used in his time, was not to be
compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of
them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and set
forth Christ's benefits to us.

And yet all this that is here spoken of, your selves will say, must needs have
been during the standing of Episcopacy. When you can bring forth such a
testimony as this, complaining touching the number and burdensomeness of Canons
and Ceremonies, whilst Presbytery has been on foot any where, by either the
friends or enemies to it, (if they will but speak the truth) there may be then
some reason to give credit to what you would here suggest; but on this we shall
give you leave to breath. And in the mean season we cannot but take notice,
that such is the charity that you have toward us, that you compare us with the
Papists, for the burdensomenesse of Rites and Ceremonies, imposed by us on the
Church (though your first Paper wherein you cried out, Quare oneramini Ritibus,
referred only to those few orders mentioned in that of ours, that was published
in our Congregations, some whereof your selves acknowledge there, to be the
orders of Christ) and censure us as Dr. Andrews does Bellarmine in behalf of
our English Church. Nobis non tam articulosa fides, etc. Though if Dr. Andrews
had been now alive, he would have been ashamed of those, that should have made
use of his words, with such an application of them, as you do here make.

The Gentlemen's Paper.
Sect. XI.
And now we are come to our last charge (as you call it) which as it is high,
so (you judge) it has little reason in it for the bearing it up. But how take
you it off? Why first you observe, That we omit to mention the first part of
this Order, and unto which that which follows in the two next Orders does refer.

We grant it does, but we say not that only, but to the latter branch of that
Order also touching the Catechized Persons, and therefore we say if they refuse
to present themselves before the Eldership, by this your Order the Minister
must exhort and admonish them.

But that is wholly of our adding, you say, and say it again, Is wholly our
own, and none of yours. Why will you thus boldly averr so manifest an untruth?
Is not the Order express, That the Minister, when he Catechiseth the several
families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he finds to be of competent
knowledge, and are blameless of life; that they present themselves to the
Eldership, etc? And do not your selves confess, that you said the Minister was
to exhort, and that was all? But we add, and say, He shall exhort and
admonish. How can these words then be wholly our own, and none of yours?
Because we add the word Admonish, therefore must the rest be none of yours,
but wholly ours?

But oh the learned Critics of our age! To exhort and to admonish, are two
different things which we confound together, taking them for one and the same,
which is in us a radical, and grand mistake.

What? every admonition a kind of Church censure, or in order (as you call it)
thereto, no exhortation so? We confess our ignorance of such a distinction, not
having as yet learned it either from Scripture, Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen,
or any known approved Author: find it us in Scripture, you that are for the
word of God alone. But in the the mean time we must tell you, (if our
Translators err not) they are promiscuously used in Scripture; Read Acts 20.
32. I ceased not to admonish every one of you with tears; Is this more then to
exhort? Was it in order to Church censure? Again, Romans 15. 14. (...), i. e.
able to admonish one another, say some Translations, able to exhort one
another, say others; is this a radical and grand mistake in them? Again, Col.
3. 16. (...), i. e. admonishing your own selves. Is this in order to
Church-censure? Is it more then exhorting? Again, Titus 3. 1. Admone illos,
says Hierom, Admone illos says Calvin, upon the place: Our English Bibles,
some render it Admonish others (Warn) them to be subject, etc. Is this in
order to Church censure? is it more then an Exhortation? Again, Titus 2. 14.
These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, Is to exhort,
Cum omni imperio, with all Rule and Authority, less then to admonish? Nay more,
Is private admonition a part of, or in order to Church censure according to
Christ's rule, Mat. 18. or St Paul's, Titus 2. 10. Post unam and alteram
admonitionem, Is that private admonition (we say) mentioned in the first part
of your 4th Order, against only the scandalous, and forsakers of public
Assemblies; (and not the exhortation of the Minister, to such as are of
competent knowledge, and blameless of life, that they present themselves before
the Eldership) in order to Church censure? Censure? to which only the Relative
(They) in the 5th Order is limited? Apage!
Apage! Calvin is clear against you upon that text of Titus 3. 10. saying,
Admonitionem Cl. cop.
Intelligit, (nempe Paulus) non quamlibet vel privati Hominis, sed quae fit a
Ministro public a Ecclesiae authoritate. So not every private admonition is in
order to excommunication in Calvin's judgment: then what more then an
exhortation? thus have not Scripture, nor Calvin noted this difference 'twixt
an exhortation and admonition, nor can you (we believe) produce Fathers or
Schoolmen, those Critics speaking for you; nor has Mr. Leigh in his Critica
Sacra noted such a difference, nor any we have read of; and yet it is in us a
radical and grand mistake.

Yes, and the Relative (They) is as grand a mistake and error in us to apply
it to the nearer, when as it must of necessity be referred to the remoter
Antecedent; when the subject matter spoken of does necessarily require it, as
Cl. cop.
in this case it is clear it does Ha, ha, hae.
.

The fourth Order runs thus (viz.) That they shall be privately admonished
according to the order prescribed by Christ, Mat. 18. once or twice to see if
they will reform (thus far is in order to Church censure.) And the Minister
when he Catechiseth the several families, shall exhort [The Ministers
exhortation is not so much as private admonition] such persons in them as he
finds to be of competent knowledge, and blameless in life, that they present
themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Lords Supper.

The 5th Order runs thus, viz. (That if they will neither hearken to private
admonition, nor, etc.) The question is now, to whom this Relative (They)
refers. Your answer is; Not the to the last [they,] nor last but one: not to
the blameless in life, or competent of knowledge; but to two other [They's,] in
two Orders mentioned long before: It Is not to the nearest, or ^earest but one,
but to the remoter, yea to the remotest Antecedent: And those amongst us that
are Scholars, know this well enough. This must be the construction, nor can
any other be made of it, either from the rules of Grammar, Logic, or common
reason. Satis hoc Magisteraliter, We understood (as we do still) that the
Relative (they) may refer to the remotest (viz.) to those that forsake the
public Assemblies in the 2d Order, and the scandalous in the 3d Order
mentioned, but not excluding the nearest Antecedent (viz.) men of competent
knowledge, and blameless life in the 4th Order mentioned. And then our note of
Attention (as you call it) stands good. Mark, men of competent knowledge, and
blameless in life, must be warned before all to reform.

But here your Critiscism fails you in calling (Mark) a note of attention not
distinguishing so accurately betwixt Mark and Hark, as in the former business
betwixt Exhortation and Admonition. For Hark, is of attention properly, Mark,
rather a note of observation; But this by the way; We return to the Relative
(they) and to whom it refers in your construction; that is to those that
forsake the public assemblies of Saints, and turn their backs on the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper in the 2d Order mentioned, and to the scandalous persons
mentioned in the 3d; to these, and none but these, your censures extend. Such
as the Minister finds knowing and blamlesse in life, shall not be debarred the
Sacrament; though they present not themselves to the Eldership. This you say,
because very shame will not suffer you to affirm the contray. But where is your
practice all the while? or how observe you the rules you walk by? laid down as
you tell us in the form of Church Government, to which you refer us for further
Information; wherein is given power to the Congregationall Eldership, as they
shall see just occasion to inquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of
any member of the Congregation, to admonish, rebuke, suspend, excommunicate,
etc. And you tell us this power of judgment and examination, of such as are
knowing, and blameless in life, is not to any one Minister, but in the
Eldership, by virtue of this Ordinance, or form of Church Government, which not
only justifies (you say) all that is practiced in that case by the several
Elderships, but also shows what ground you had for that was mentioned in your
Paper, touching both what is therein appointed to the Minister about Catechizing
families; and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such as in the several
families he should find to be of competent knowledge, and knew to be of
blameless life, that they should present themselves to the Eldership; the
trial and judgment in this case, not belonging to any one Minister alone, but
to the Eldership.

Must they not present themselves by virtue of this Ordinance before the
Eldership (who have only the power of judging, who are knowing and blameless
in life, and not any one Minister) before they can be admitted to the
Sacrament, notwithstanding the Minister finds them, and approves them as
knowing and blameless? and is not your practice accordingly? why the^ do you
thus mince your matter, and seek to color over your actions with a seeming
denial of all, with so many weak senseless and unheard of descants upon nouns
and pronouns, to evade what still you practice, but are ashamed to own? either
speak out and say (as the truth is) that all knowing and blameless in life, as
well as the ignorant and scandalous, are to be debarred the Sacrament, unless
they present themselves before the Eldership, who only have the power to
inquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of all, to admonish, to
suspend, etc. by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid, which is the rule you walk
by, or else wave it (as we do) as repealed, and of no force and strength at
this day: and then must you say with us, all you have heretofore said
concerning the civil Sanction of your Church Government, is nothing at all to
purpose. And this our Charge, as it is high, so it is weighty, to the
depressing of the Presbyterian Government, and well may be called the last,
being the Summa Totalis, and upshot of all.

Subscribed by us whose names are underwritten, by the consent and on the
behalf of many others, Ferdinando Stanley, Nicho. Moseley, Isaac Allen, Thomas
Prestwich, Leonard Egerton.

Manchester the 13th of April, 1658.
The Animadversions of the Class upon it.
1. WE said your charge was very high; and it is manifest from what you
concluded with, when in your first Paper, you had driven it up to the height,
and squeezed our words to the drawing of blood, you made your inference from
all your several descants, upon that part of our order in our Paper, that
there you pitched on, and said; So that in brief, all wilfully ignorant (though
we spoke nothing in our Paper at all of their censure) and scandalous are to be
excommunicated; and not only they, but the knowing and blameless in life, if
they present not themselves to the Eldership. This is that, you would make us
to have declared in our Paper, that was published in our Congregations; which
as it is a severity which we abhorred, so it is that which malice it self
cannot charge us with to have practiced. Though we told you what was exercised
in this kind toward such in the times of the Prelates, for whom you have not
one word here to say, in way of justification of them in that respect; and for
which we blame you not, as we had reason to do before, touching that little
sense you expressed touching the sufferings of those, that did sigh and groan
under the burdensomeness of the Bishops Ceremonies. But why do you here go
about, to fasten that upon us still, with which you had charged us before,
after we had dissavoured such a sense as you had put upon us, and after we had
been at some pains, to evidence to you the grosseness of that mistake, as well
as the heaviness of the charge? Common ingenuity would have prompted you
otherwise, if that might have taken place. But you thought at the first you had
some great advantage against us, when in your first Paper you endeavored to
have rendered us so odious. And notwithstanding our Answer given, you
apprehended you could make out your charge, and therefore you were resolved to
adhere unto it, and do the utmost you could for that purpose. And so it seems
if we have need of it, we must not find any mercy at your hands; and seeing it
is thus we shall try what justice you here discover, and what you have to say
to prove us guilty, or that our Paper held forth any such a matter, as you have
striven tooth and nail to fasten upon it.

2. We said, as your charge was high, so it had as little reason in it for the
bearing it up: and this we say again. But you hereupon demand; but how do we
take it off? your selves return the answer to it, and say, that first we
observe, that you omit to mention the first part of this Order, and unto which
that which follows in the two next Orders does refer. This indeed we said,
and with this we begun; but our work here in the first place, was chiefly to
give an account, how you had represented us, and to note by the way briefly,
what was true in it, and what was false, and wherein it was defective; and the
deficiency which we took notice of, was that which you mention. And this
however it tended to take off your charge, (as sc. it served to clear up our
meaning) yet we proceeded farther, and gave you our reasons, why that could not
be our sense, which you had put upon our words. We told you, our practice did
speak the contrary; that neither from the rules of Grammar, Logic, or common
reason, such a construction could be put on our words, as you had given; that
it was an exhortation only that was to be given to the persons catechized, to
present themselves before the Eldership, and no more: not so much as an
admonition in order to further censure, in case not hearkened to, and which two
we proved unto you were different things: we also told you, that that which
follows this order which you thus wrest, is so limited, that it could not with
any color be applied to those, that being exhorted by the Minister to present
themselves to the Eldership, should still refuse. For we said, it spoke
expressly of such, that should neither hearken to private admonition nor the
admonition of the Eldership, that their Names should be published openly in the
Congregation; and therefore of those only, who had been appointed to be
admonished, according to Christ's rule, Matthew. 18. in the fourth Order, and
which were only such, as did forsake the public Assemblies, and the
scandalous, who had been mentioned in the foregoing order. And yet to make the
matter more plain, we added, that the persons that were to have their Names
published, and upon obstinacy to be proceeded against unto excommunication,
were such as were sit to be admonished by the Eldership, and reject that
admonition, before they were further to be proceeded against; which could not
be conceived from any thing in our Paper, to be the case of those, who being
exhorted by the Minister to present themselves to the Eldership, refused to
come before them. These several reasons the Reader may find in the last
Section of our Answer, however not laid down altogether in this very form and
manner, unto which yet you answer not, (according to your usual practice in
this Paper, passing over the arguments that we urged, and saying nothing to
them) and hereby it was that we endeavored chiefly to take off your charge,
and thought it was the fairest way to do it, the rendering you our reasons to
clear it up unto you, what the true sense of our words was, being the most
rational way we could take therein. We likewise, on these and other grounds
mentioned in our answer, proceeded to answer the reasons, that we apprehended
might induce you, to put that construction upon our expressions which you did,
and which the Reader in our answer may see particularly, and to some of which
you here say something, the strength whereof we shall examine anon. And then in
the close of all, we said, we had thus far removed all imaginable grounds in
our apprehension, for this your groundless charge, that our purpose was to
excommunicate all knowing and blameless persons, if they presented not
themselves before the Eldership. And then we further added, and said, that we
should now proceed to examine what you produced for the supporting of your
selves in it, and which we did accordingly, as the Reader may observe. And thus
we endeavored to take off your charge, and of which we give the Reader an
account, that so he may discern the better how groundless it was. But now as to
what you here begin with, hence it is clear, that upon what account soever it
was, that we mentioned your omitting of the first part of our Order, unto which
we said, that which followed in the two next Orders did refer, it was not any
fair way in you to do so; that your omission, being of what tended to clear up
our sense and meaning, which was thereby darkened and obscured. But this though
we had complained of in our answer, and that justly, yet herein you answer
nothing for your selves, and so still remain unacquitted from that blame, we
had in this respect laid upon you.

3. And now whereas you grant, that, that which follows in the two next
Orders, refers to the former part of the fourth Order, which you omitted, but
then say, not to that only, but to the latter branch of that Order also,
touching the catechized persons, This is that which we must constantly deny.
And however you assert it, yet seeing you neither answer our reasons to the
contrary, which we gave you, and have here briefly recited, nor bring forth
here any thing to make good your assertion, you cannot reasonably expect, that
all men will believe, what you affirm in this particular, although you your
selves, notwithstanding all that has been or shall be said, should still have
such a faith. And therefore it will not follow, by that our Order, that if the
catechized persons refused to present themselves before the Eldership, the
Minister must exhort and admonish them in order to the publishing of their
Names in the Congregation, and excommunication in case they should persist in
such refusal, and which is the sense that you put upon, that which was
appointed to be done by the Minister toward catechized persons; all that was
appointed to be done by the Minister, being only to exhort them, that were
found to be competent in knowledge, and blameless in life, to present themselves
to the Eldership; without the least hint of any further process that was to be
against them, in case they hearkened not unto that exhortation.

4. In your first Paper (as we have told you) you recited (omitting the former
part of our fourth Order) only the latter, and that in these words, viz. That
the Minister when he catechiseth the several families, shall exhort such
persons in them, as he finds of competent knowledge, and blameless in life,
that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the
Lords Supper. Then you come in with your comment upon it, and say; But what if
they will not present themselves before the Eldership? the Minister (say you)
must exhort and admontsh. This, we said in our Answer, was wholly of your
adding, and after we had rendered our reasons, why that part of our Order could
not be understood, as you represented it in your Paper, and had answered all
imaginable objections, in our apprehensions: we said this again. And here we
desire it might be took notice of, that we did not only say this, but gave our
reasons for it; and must, after so long time of consideration, say so still.
But that it might here appear upon what ground we said this, though the Reader
might of himself find it in our Answer, we will recite so much out of it, as
may make this evident. We coming to examine, what you produced for the
supporting of your selves in what you had charged us with, said; we found
something in your comment upon our words, which was not in our text. For you
said, what if after the Minister has exhorted them, they shall not present
themselves before the Eldership? the Minister, say you, must exhort and
admonish them. But this (we said) as we told you, was wholly your own and none
of ours. And then we added our reasons, in these words;

For first, though we do not deny, that if upon the first exhortation they do
not present themselves to the Eldership, it being in order to their regular and
orderly admission to the Lords Supper, the Minister may exhort, and exhort them
again, because they continue in the neglect of that, which is their duty, yet
there was no such thing said by us.

But then to make the ground of your charge something more colorable, you
added another word, which was not at all used by us. We said the Minister was
to exhort, and that was all. But you add and say, He shall exhort and admonish.
But (we said) we had told you before, to exhort and admonish were different
things. But here without ever so much as attempting to say any thing to these
reasons, you fall foul upon us and say; why will you thus so boldly aver so
manifest an untruth? But if you had considered how many untruths, you had your
selves boldly asserted in this Paper, you would have been more sparing, then
here again thus groundlesly to have charged us with asserting of untruth. We do
not deny, but the Order is express (as you say,) That the Minister, when he
catechizeth the several families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he
finds to be of competent knowledge, and are blameless in life, to present
themselves to the Eldership, etc. as we do also grant, as you do also here
hint, that we did confess that the Minister was to exhort, and that was all
(and which is all the reason you here bring to make out the charge against us
of asserting a manifest untruth) But yet we must still say, that the comment
upon our words by you made, both the question moved by you (sc. what if after
the Minister has exhorted them, they shall not present themselves before the
Eldership) and your Answer by your selves given to it (sc. The Minister must
exhort and admonish) is wholly your own and none of ours; both because there
was no such a Question moved by us, or any such an Answer given to it; and also
because you adding in your Answer made to that Question, the word [admonish] to
the word [exhort] saying, He must exhort and admonish, did deprave and corrupt
the sense of the word [exhort] in which it was taken by us; and by that
addition made it equivalent to an admonition in order to further censure, which
was spoken of in the beginning of the fourth Order; and to which the two
following Orders touching publishing Names, and excommunication in point of
obstinacy did refer. These reasons (to which you here make no reply) we gave
you in our Answer (as by what we have recited out of it the Reader may
perceive) whence it is manifest, that that comment you made upon our words
(however the word [exhort] be found therein, which is perverted by you from the
sense, in which it was taken by us) is wholly your own and none of ours.

5. But upon this you return your wonted flouts, and say; But oh the learned
Critics of our age! to exhort and admonish are two different things, which we
confound together, taking them for one and the same, which is in us a radical
and grand mistake. Unto which we say: You had approved your selves to have been
the more learned men, if you had replied, to what we had presented to you in
our Answer, proving the difference betwixt an admonition in order to further
censure, if not hearkened to, and an exhortation only. But according to your
ordinary practice in matters of this nature, when you should return your answer
to an argument, you come not to this at all, but pass it over, putting it off
with a scoff. And here, that it may appear to the Reader, that we did not
without some reason distinguish betwixt an admonition in order to further
censure, and an exhortation only, and that therefore your scoffs are
reasonless, we are forced to recite something further out of our Answer. Having
told you, That it was an exhortation only, that was appointed to be given to
the persons catechized, to present themselves to the Eldership, and no more;
not so much as an admonition in order to any further censure, if not hearkened
unto: we added and said. And here we observe, that this is one main ground of
your mistake; that you do not distinguish betwixt an admonition that is in
order to a further censure, if it prevail not (and which was mentioned in the
first part of the fourth Order, and which you wholly omit) and an exhortation;
but confound these together taking them for one and the same, and which is here
a radical and grand mistake. For doubtless in a thousand cases, that might be
instanced in, there may be place for an exhortation, when (though ineffectuall)
there is not place for an admonition, that is in order to a further Church
censure, in case of obstinacy, as it is taken by us here. Men may be exhorted
to examine and prove themselves, whether they he in the faith: to
self-examination, before they come to the Lords Table: to grow in grace and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to keep their hearts with
all diligence: and to infinite more things of the like nature; and which are
duties they should apply themselves unto, when yet there is no room for an
admonition, in order to any Church censure, in case it be not obeyed. Nay when
men may perceive, there is not that care, that should be in persons, in regard
of some of their words and carriages, there may be place for an exhortation,
and yet for no admonition in order to any Church censure, in case the
exhortation be not hearkened unto: if there be not any further scandalous
outbreakings of corruption, that may merit it. Church censures are not to pass
upon men for every fault, nor against such as be guilty of such sins of
infirmity, as are commonly found in the children of God; as in that case by the
rule, of our Government it is provided against. And yet an exhortation to
righteousness and watch fullness in such cases is not useless. And so it may be
well appointed by us, that the Minister should exhort such, as are found by him
to be persons of knowledge, and are in conversation blameless, to present
themselves to the Eldership, that so they might be regularly and orderly
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (an Ord^nance that is not to be
slighted, as it is by many, but upon too slight grounds, as they will be
found to be, when they are to be tried in the day of account) and yet no
proceedings by Church censures against such persons, in case an exhortation
prevail not. Thus far we have recited, what we answered; but now what is it,
that is replied to all this? not one word, but only a bitter scoff, as if that
were sufficient to answer every argument. But we believe all sober persons will
see, you have not therein very learnedly answered us; however scornful men
(whose censures we matter not) may therein applaud you. But yet to clear up the
matter further, (however we judge all ingenuous persons will be fully satisfied
with the bare recital of the Answer, that had been given) because we see, you
have put our words upon the rack and stretched them upon the tenters, till they
have quite lost their sense, in which we used them, and that you are resolved
to deal as strictly with us as you can, where you apprehend you have any
advantage. We must here open this matter a little more fully. And first, We
shall not deny, that the word [admonish] is sometimes taken so largely, as that
it is the same with the word [exhort,] and so some of the Texts you urge, may
prove, etc. Acts 20. 31. Romans 15. 14. Col. 3. 16. in which Texts the greek word
(...), that does properly signify to admonish, is used. And yet we shall not
contend, but the sense of it there may be the same with the word, that does
properly signify to exhort: as also when the Apostle in another of the Texts
cited by you, viz. Titus 3. 1. says, using another word (...), put them in
mind, though it should be rendered [admone illos,] that word may imply an
exhortation. And again we shall as readily grant, that the word [exhort] is
sometimes taken so largely, as that it may comprehend, under the latitude of
it, that, which is usually understood by the word [admonish] strictly taken, as
in Romans 12. 8. (...), he that exhorts on exhortation. In which words the
whole office of the Pastor is held forth, who was not only to exhort, but to
admonish, reprove and comfort also, as there might be occasion. But yet though
these words are sometimes used thus promiscuously, they are also distinguished.
To admonish taken strictly and especially in an Ecclasiasticall sense, is to
reprehend in regard of some fault, and so it is taken 1 These. 5. 14. (...), i.
e, warn or admonish them, that are unruly; and is there distinguished from the
word [admonish] taken in a more large sense, as appears from ver. 13.
immediately going before: Know them that are over you in the Lord and admonish
you, (...): and likewise from the word [exhort] taken strictly, as appears from
the same ver. 14. (...) etc. we exhort you brethren; and yet doubtless the
Apostle did not by that exhortation admonish those he writes unto, to warn or
admonish the unruly in that sense, as he would have those unruly ones to be
admonished. But to make the matter more plain, we may here distinguish
concerning admonition. There is a mere charitative admonition; and an
admonition in order unto further censure if not hearkened unto. This latter, as
we have told you, is not to be given for such infirmities, as are commonly
found in the children of God, no nor yet for smaller faults or injuries, which
Christian prudence, love and peaceableness require an overlooking and passing
by; and of which Mat. 18. 15. is not to be understood: but the offense there
grounding the admonition is a greater evil, endangering the soul of the doer,
scandalizing the brother seeing it, and lying as a stumbling stone in his
Christian course; and such a sin, that for the nature of it, is fit, in case of
insuccessefullness of admonition, to be brought before the Church, as herein
our reverend brethren, the associated Ministers of the County of Essex, do very
well deliver themselves in their late Agreement, page 14. n. 5. This
admonition, that is in order to Church censure, is either of private members,
and which may be also called brotherly and charitative; or else it is of the
Officers of the Church; and which is either given by any one, or more of the
Officers severally, which yet in them is authoritative; or else by them all
jointly, and which is the admonition of the Church spoken of Mat. 18. ver. 17.
(which is another of the Texts you here mention) although it is most orderly
that this admonition be given by the Minister, (or one of them, where there be
two or more) in the name of the rest of the Church Officers, that give the
offender this admonition. But besides this admonition, that is in order to
Church censure, in case it prevail not, there is also a mere charitative
admonition, that may be for lesser faults, that yet are not to be censured with
Church censures in case there be not reformation. Although there are to be
endeavors to redress such offenses; and which kind of mere charitative
admonitions may be comprehended under the latitude of that rule laid down Gal.
6. 1. You your selves do not here deny, but there may be a private admonition,
that is not in order to Church censure, when upon your quoting Calvin's words on
Titus 3. 10. you say (seeming to approve of what you take to be his meaning,
though you misinterpret him, as we shall show anon) not every private
admonition is in order to excommunication in Calvin's judgment. And this was
necessarily implied in the words we used in our Answer, when we opposed an
admonition in order to further censure unto that, which is but an exhortation
only; intimating plainly enough thereby, that there was besides an admonition
in order to further censure, a mere charitative admonition, which was not to be
followed with any Church censure in case it prevailed not. This is that
likewise, which our forementioned Reverend Brethren of Essex, in their
Agreement do also speak of, having given their sense upon Mat. 18. 15. they
further say in their Agreement page 15. n. 6. Besides this Ecclesiastical
admonition, we yield there may be other charitative admonitions, which must not
preceed to Ecclesiastical censure.

But from all that has been thus far spoken touching admonition, its very
clear, that admonition taken strictly and properly, is a reprehension in regard
of some evil, or fault done. Though we do not deny, but there may be an
admonition by way of caution, warning to take heed of some sin, that one may be
in danger to commit. We shall now proceed to show what exhortation is taken in
a strict acceptance. To exhort strictly is to excite or persuade, and stir up
unto that, which is good, and is distinguished from admonition taken properly,
as is manifest from the Text before quoted, 1 These. 5. 14. Now we exhort you
brethren (...)* warn them that are unruly, etc. The Thessalonians are here
exhorted only or stird up to perform their duty toward the unruly, etc. and
are not at all blamed by the Apostle: but the unruly that were to be warned or
admonished, were to be reproved and blamed by the Thessalonians for their
unruliness. And there is place frequently for an exhortation, when there is not
to be any reprehension or admonition given in regard of any thing amiss. But to
make this matter yet more plain, we may here distinguish of exhortation, as
before of admonition. For exhortation also is either charitative or of private
Christians, and of which Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day: and Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, etc. or
authoritative and of the Minister; and which may be either public or private;
and of which there is often speech in the new Testament: As 1 Timothy 2. 1. I
exhort therefore that first of all supplications and prayers, etc. be made for
all men. 2 Cor. 9. 5. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren.
1 Timothy 6. 21. These things teach and exhort. So in one of the Texts alleged
by you, Titus 2. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. Where exhortation may well be distinguished from rebuke, though both
be authoritative, and are to be joined with Doctrine, such applications of
Doctrine being very useful and necessary. So 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are
among you I exhort, who am also an Elder. By these Texts it is clear, that as
an exhortation properly is an excitation, or persuasion unto something that is
good, so it is distinguished from admonition taken strictly, and which is a
reprehension for something amiss; and that in many cases it may be useful,
when there is not the least intimation of any neglect or sin committed, for
which the parties so exhorted are reproved. Unto which we may further add,
Acts 27. 22. where Paul saish to those in the ship with him, And now I exhort
you to be of good cheer. This exhortation was not doubtless in order to any
Church censure, and therefore must needs be distinguished from such an
admonition. So when it is said of Barnabas, that when he had seen the grace of
God, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would
cleave to the Lord, Acts 11. 23. This cannot be with any color understood of
any admonition in order to Church censure: The best of men, that walk never so
blamelesly, may be exhorted, when yet there is no reason, why they should be
admonished in order to Church censure, except men must be admonished and
censured for such common infirmities, from which no men on earth are wholly
free.

But by this that we have said, it is sufficiently evidenced, that in Scripture
language an exhortation taken strictly and properly, is, notwithstanding your
scoff, a different thing from an admonition in order to further censure, if it
prevail not. And we think, however you may account of us, you had showed your
selves to have been more learned, if you had not so causelessly quarrelled with
that, which is so manifest to any, that are versed either in Scripture, or any
other approved Authors. But we shall not examine what you oppose to what we had
herein asserted. 1. And first you begin with us sharply, and say; What? every
admonition a kind of Church censure, or in order (as we call it) thereunt^, not
exhortation so? You confess your ignorance of such a distinction, not having as
yet learned ^t either from Scripture, Fathers, etc. But here you charge us with
what we never said, etc. That every admonition is a kind of Church censure, or
in order to it, and no exhortation so. Our distinction intimated, that besides
the admonition, that was in order to Church Censure, there might be a
charitative admonition, as there may be a charitative exhortation, yea an
authoritative by the Minister, when yet there is no place for censure, in case
the exhortation be successeless. This we have showed you from Scripture, though
you twit us again with being for the word of God alone, for which we are not
ashamed to profess our selves to be. And thus you have very learnedly in the
first place opposed us, by imputing to us, what we never said. 2. But it may be
your next is of greater strength; and therefore we shall hearken to what you
have to tell us, sc. That the words admonish and exhort, are promiscuously
used. And who ever denied this? Here therefore you have put your selves upon
the pains to prove what we never gainsayed: nay you prove by could not be the
catechized persons mentioned immediately before, who were to be exhorted only:
But these only, in the beginning of the fourth Order, that were to be privately
admonished according to the Order prescribed Mat. 18. once or twice, to see if
they would reform; But this reason, because you could not answer, you do
warily pass it over, and never meddle with it. 2. But notwithstanding this
reason rendered, you hope to bfnde us to your absurd and uncharitable
construction, you had put upon us. But when we examine with what Arguments you
do it, you again discover therein your wonted deficiency. And therefore,

1. In your reply, as it was presented unto us, for want of reason, wherewith
to oppose us, the first thing, that we meet with, in answer to our assertion
and thereason of it, was a scornful laughter, ha, ha, he. But this answer was
so light, that when you Printed your Papers, it seems you were ashamed of it,
and therefore thought good to admit it. 2. In the next place you write our
Orders, and having mentioned the former part of the fourth, that speaks of the
admonition, that was to be given to the forsakers of public Assemblies and the
scandalous; you express that, which indeed was our sense there, and say thus
far is in order to Church censures, which we grant was our meaning. Then you
come to mention the other part touching the Ministers exhorting of the
Catechized persons and say of this, as if we had therein asserted some absurd
thing. The Ministers Exhortation is not so much as private Admonition. But we
are not ashamed of this Assertion, it being that we still own. And here it had
become you to have opposed it with some Arguments; but this (it may be) you
thought you had done sufficiently before, when you had told us, and took the
pains to prove that, which we never denied, viz. That to admonish and exhort
are presumptuously used. But we have proved unto you, that these two taken
properly are distinguished; Admonition properly being a reprehension in regard
of some fault; whereas an exhortation is a more gentle way of proceeding, and
used in the exciting or persuading unto duty; and for which there may be place
as (we have told you) in a thousand Cases, where there is not to any admonition
in order unto censure in case of unsuccessfullness, and in which sense
admonition is taken here.

And now we go on to what follows, Though here we observe, that you having
recited the fourth Order at large, when you should come to recite the fifth, do
it not only in part, and therefore that the matter here may be the more clearly
understood (that though your imperfect recital of it may be darkened to an
undiscerning Reader) we shall mention it fully. The Order was thus. That if
they will neither hearken to private adminition, nor the admonition of the
Eldership, their names shall be published openly in the several Congregations,
and they warned before all to reform.

The Question now is (as you here say) to whom this Relative [they] refers. It
is indeed now a question, because you have made it one; though it was at first
clear enough to any ordinary understanding, where there was not a spirit of
opposition, and a desire to cavil; but if there had been any doubt, yet in our
Answer we cleared it, by declaring our sense, and giving our reasons, why our
words were to be so construed. But notwithstanding we had so done, because you
are not willing to be satisfied, you will have it to be a question still. And
seeing with you it must be so, let us see, what you can make of it.

1. You would seem to return what our Answer to this question was, but you
deface it, and when you have done giving your censure of it. But here we desire
the Reader to observe. 1. That you would by this answer, which you say we give,
make the persons diverse, that are spoken of in the latter part of the fourth
Order, (viz. Such as being found competent in knowledge and blameless in life,
were to be exhorted by the Minister, to present themselves to the Eldership in
Order to their admission to the Lords Supper) because of the double
qualification there mentioned, as requisite to make them capable of the
Ordinance; which is here your first error.

2. Having distinguished the persons, that we made one, and expressed that
disjunctively (not to the last [they] as you are pleased to express it, nor
last but one; not to the blameless in life, or competent in knowledge) which we
expressed it copulatively (such as are of a competent knowledge and blameless
in life.) You in the next place tell of Persons mentioned in two Orders long
before, to whom (as you would have us to say) the Relative [they] referres, and
not to the nearest, or nearest but one. Whereas the Persons, to whom we say,
this Relative [they] in this fifth Order referres, are those mentioned in the
former part of the fourth Order immediately before, viz. Those who were to be
privately admonished according to Christ's order, Mat. 18. And who were either
the scandalous or forsakers of public Assemblies; and which though they had
been mentioned in the second and third Orders, yet were the same persons, that
were still spoken of in the beginning of the fourth Order, and to which the
Relative [they] by us there used, did refer Here then is another error. And
yet we denied, and do still, that the Relative [they] in this fifth Order, did
refer to the nearest Persons mentioned in the fourth Order. (which yet you
will still have in regard of their twofold qualification to be diverse Persons,
which error we noted before) viz. the Catechized Persons, but to the Persons
mentioned in the beginning of the fourth Order only. 3. When you tell of this
Relative [they] mentioned in that fifth Order, referring not to the last [they]
but to two other [they's] these expressions being your own and none of ours;
you do not herein approve your selves to be very good Grammarians; the Relative
not referring at any time to another Relative, but to an Antecedent, if men
will speak properly; however the Antecedent, to which it refers, may be spoken
of, and employed in a Relative going before, and as in this place it is. Here
then is your third error. It is a wonder to think that witty men, and such
as had triumphed over us as poor illiterate Persons but a little before,
should in so few words have erred so much. And yet we cannot judge, that the
Reader will imagine, you have in any of your Papers discovered any such depth
in other Learning. As that (if you had been so wholly taken up therein, that
you had thereby forgot your Rudiments) you were to be thereupon excused. 4.
When we said the Relative [they] must refer not to the next, but the remoter
Antecedent (and which was that only, that was asserted by us) we did not
Magisterially assert this, but gave our reasons for this Assertion; though you
indeed Magisterially reject it, not returning any answer to the Argument we
gave you for that construction given of our words. And therefore your censure
of us (Satis haec magisteraliter) may well by us be slighted, being without
all reason. 2. We have noted, what we thought ours fit to be observed in the
answer, you would represent us to have given to the question; we shall now see,
what it is, wherewith you oppose our Assertion.

1. And first you tell us, You understood (as you do still) that the Relative
[they] may refer to the remotest, viz. to those that forsake the public
Assemblies in the second Order, and the scanaalous in the third Order
mentioned, but not excluding the meanest Antecedent, viz. men of competent
knowledge and blameless in life (Here you express your selves, as we did,
Copulatively, and take these persons for one and the same, though considered
under this twofold qualification, and to be one Antecedent, which even now you
would have had to be two.) in the fourth Order mentioned. Thus you assert,
Satis magisteraliter, as we may say for sure; for you answer not to the rule,
we had laid down, viz. That the Relative is often referred to the remoter
Antecedent, and must be so of necessity, when the subject matter spoken of does
necessarily require it, as in the case, it is clear it does. We here also
said, that those of you, that were Scholars, did well know thus much; but
seeing you do here deny this rule, and upbraide us anon, with senseless and
unheard of descants upon Nouns and Pronouns, for no other reason, but in regard
of what is therein Asserted by us, we must confess, we looked on you to have
been better Scholars, then in this we have found you to be. But we shall first
make good the rule by us laid down, and then leave it to the Reader to judge,
whither it be not fitly by us applied to the Case in hand. That the Relative
not only may, but must of necessity, refer to the remoter Antecedent, and not
to the next, when the Subject matter requires it, is manifest from these
examples. It is said Genesis 10. 11, 12. Out of the Land went forth Ashur, and
builded Nineveh, and the City Rehoboth and Caelah, and Resen between Nineveh
and Calah, The same, (...) viz. Nineveh not Calah, is a great City, where the
Relative, etc.
(...) (that or the same) is refered not to the nearer Antecedent, [Calah] but
to the remoter Nineveh, that being the great City there spoken of, being so
called by God himself, Jonah 1. 2. and 3. 2. and 4. 11. and us that; which is
here understood by Interpreters on this Text. So also Psalm. 99. 6, 7. Moses and
Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name, they
called upon the Lord and he answered them, he spoke unto them (...) in the
cloudy Pillar. Which words, viz. he spoke to them in the cloudy Pillar, as
Junius in his parallels does well observe, may be rightly expounded of Moses
and Aaron; but of Samuel, Non nisi praeter veritatem fidemque Historiae. i. e.
Not but besides the truth and faith of the History. And therefore the Relative
[them] in the seventh Verse must refer not to Samuel, which is the nearer
Antecedent, but to Moses and Aaron, which are remoter. More instances might be
given out of the old Testament, concerning which the learned may be consulted;
we shall instance in some in the new. In 2 These. 2. 8, 9. It is said, And then
shall that wicked be revealed, w^om the Lord shall consume with the spirit of
his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: whose coming
etc. (...). Where the Relative must of necessity be refered, not to the Lord,
who was the person spoken of immediately before, and so the nearer Antecedent,
but to the remoter, unless we will confound Christ and Antichrist. And
therefore our Translators, to make the matter more clear, add in the beginning
of the ninth Verse, [even him] which words are not in the Original. But from
this Text our rule is undeniably made good. We shall only give one instance
more. It is said Heb. 9. 3, 4. And after the second veil, the Tabernacle which
is called the holiest of all, which had the golden censuer, and the Arc of the
Covenant, overlaide round about with Gold, wherein (...), was the Golden Pot,
that had Manna, and Aarons rod that budded. Where the Relative^, being
Feminine, as it cannot with any good sense refer to gold, that is the next
Antecedent, and of a different gender, so neither to (...), the Arc, though of
the same gender, and the nearer, but to (...), Tabernacle, the remoter
Antecedent. We confess Interpreters do here vary, but when we consider, that it
is said expressly, 1 Kings 8. 9. and 2 Chronicles: 5. 10. that there was nothing in
the Arc, but the two Tables, we do with sundry others upon this Text conceive,
that the Relative must here refer not to the nearer, but to the remoter
Antecedent. This interpretation of this Text, which we have given, is followed
by Junius in his parallels, who there lays down this very rule, that we gave
in our Answer: Haec autem omnis dubitatio tolli evidentissime potest, (nisi me
animus fallit) unica observatione Grammatica, quod Relativum Pronomen, in
utroque Testamento, pro ratione locorum, modo ad proximum nomen, modo ad
longinquius pertinet: quod ex argumenti and Historiae veritate demum
dignoscitur. And then he gives instances hereof, and mentions some of the
places, that we have instanced in. See also Mr. Palmer, and Mr. Cawdry, See
part 1. page 51, 52.
vindicating this Text in their Sabbathum re divivum, where they interpret it
as we do, and do also expressly approve of our rule. Our large English
Annotations differ from us some thing in the expounding the word [wherein,] but
yet upon this Text they approve our rule, when they say; Some refer [wherein]
to Tabernacle v. 3. and it is true, that sometimes the Relative has relation
unto the more remote Antecedent. But by this time we hope it is clear, that
you had little reason to make such an outcry against us, as you do anon,
telling us of senseless and unheard of descants upon Nouns and Pronouns,
because we said the Relative [they] in the fifth Order refered not to the next,
but the remoter Antecedent, mentioned in the Order immediately before; the
Subject matter here spoken of necessarily requiring it, being it is limited to
such, as should neither hearken to private admonition, nor to the admonition of
the Eldership, which were only the scandalous and forsakers of public
Assemblies, appointed to be admonished in the beginning of the fourth Order:
and not the persons catechized by the Minister, to whom no admonition was
appointed to be given, but an Exhortation only to present themselves to the
Eldership in order to their regular admission to the Lords Supper; and for
which Exhortation to be given by the Minister, we judged there might be a fit
reason, when he catechized the Families, and tho rather (as we had told you in
our Answer) because having the opportunity of conference with them at this
time, if they had any doubts about this matter, or he saw that it was prejudice
only in them against the Elders, that hindered them (and as it is in most) he
might endeavor to remove them. With this we judge all ingenuous and impartial
Readers will be satisfied, and will not conceive, that the rule, we laid down,
touching the Relative (...), being referred to the remoter Antecedent, where
the Subject matter required it, was misapplied by us; there being plain reason
from the expressions we used, why it ought to be thus referred. But you having
only opposed our rule by laying down a contrary assertion, without any reason,
do now make your inference, that then your note of attention (as you say, we
called it) stands good. Mark men of contempt knowledge and blameless life,
must be warned before all to reform. But all Candid Readers, by what has been
said, will see this was a forced and uncharitable construction put upon us by
your selves, only to render us odious, and yet still, after we had in our
Answer declared our selves to the contrary by you imputed to us, without and
against reason; and of which, however you may judge your selves, we think
others will count it to proceed from too much will and pertinacy. But here you
have a profound ground of quarrelling with us, for that we distinguished not
betwixt [marke] and [harke,] hark as you say being a note of attention
properly; mark rather a note of observation; as if the attention and
observation of the mind were two different things; or as if Schoole-Boyes (who
are never blamed by their learned Masters for calling en and ecce, notes of
attention) would not be ready hereupon to tell you, that according to your
learned distinction betwixt [mareke and harke] these must not be notes of
attention, but observation properly, because they are rendered behold. But you
till us this is but by the way; though all serious persons will see, you were
here out of the way in being so light in a serious business. And now you
return to the Relative [they] and to whom it refers in our construction, that
is, to those, that forsake the public Assemblies of Saints, and turn their
backs on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the second Order mentioned, and
to the scandalous persons mentioned in the third, to these and none but these
our censures extend. And this we say still; neither have you urged any thing,
that can have any color of making good against us to the contrary; you having
hitherto not argued, but only without reason laid down your opposite assertion,
the groundlesnesse whereof has been sufficiently discovered by what has been
said.

2. But perhaps you would be thought to perform this in the next, when you
further represent us to say, that such as the Minister finds knowing and
blameless in life, shall not be debarred the Sacrament, though they present
not themselves to the Eldership, and that this we say, because shame will not
suffer us to affirm the contrary; and then do ask us, but where is our
practice all the while, or how observe we the rules, we walk by, laid down, as
we had told you, in the form of Church Government? But for answer here we say;
1. That you have lost your Question, which was not, whether such as the
Minister finds knowing and blameless in life, shall be debarred of the
Sacrament, though they present not themselves to the Eldership. But whether the
Relative [they] in the fifth Order referred not to these; and which was the
Question your selves had propounded to be discussed; and so therefore, whether
those, whom the Minister having catechized and exhorted to present themselves
to the Eldership, ought not to have their names published, and they warned
before all to reform, if they harkened not to the Exhortation? where we must
deny, that ever any such a thing was held forth by us in any of the Orders, we
published (however it was that which was by you imputed to us, but have not
proved, though to make the matter somewhat more colorable, you alter the state
of the Question) nor can any such a thing be made out against us, either from
our practice, or the rule we walk by. And further we say, that if ever we had
practiced any such a thing, or had professed to walk by any such a rule, there
had been reason, why we should have been ashamed. 2. But we must further add,
what we have formerly asserted, that we do not refuse to admit any to the
Sacrament, merely upon this ground, because they present not themselves to the
Eldership, if they be such as are of competent knowledge and blameless life,
the Eldership condescending (as has been said) to admit upon the Testimony of
the Minister and one Elder, or of two Ministers, such as have been by them
examined and approved. Neither is this practice repugnant to any rule laid down
in the form of Church Government. For however it give a power to the
Eldership to inquire into the spiritual estate of any member, as they shall
see occasion, yet it does not strictly oblige them, to debar or reject every
one, that present not themselves before them; although if it be out of mere
obstinacy of spirit, that they refuse, and a desire to overturne the
Government by their opposition, there is the greater reason, why Ministers and
Elders are in such Cases to beware, as it is requisite for the securing of the
Elderships just power, and to prevent the danger and irregularity of the
exercise of solitary jurisdiction, that none be admitted but by the juridicall
act of the Eldership, and which, as it is that which we practice, so it is that
power which is granted to the Eldership, by the Ordinance appointing the form
of Church Government; The examination and judgment of such persons, as shall
for their ignorance not be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being
by that Ordinance to be in the power, not of any one Minister, but of the
Eldership of every Congregation; and which as it justifies (as we told you)
what is in that kind practiced by the several Elderships, so it also shows,
what ground we had for that, which was mentioned in our Paper, touching both
what is therein appointed to the Minister about catechizing Families, and also
concerning the Ministers exhorting such, as in the several families he should
find to be of competent knowledge, and knew to be of blameless life, that
they should present themselves to the Eldership. And therefore that we may
Answer to what you here urge us with, out of the Ordinance, we say, it is one
thing not to admit any to the Sacrament, but by the juridicall act of the
Eldership; and another thing to say, that none is to be admitted, except they
present themselves before the Eldership. The power mentioned in the former is
granted by the Ordinance unto the Eldership, and is that which by us is
constantly practiced. In the latter there is a liberty to do, as the Eldership
shall see occasion, and which is in several Cases with us dispensed with,
where the Elderships are otherwise satisfied touching the fitness of the
persons, that are to be by them admitted. And yet notwithstanding this, it is
not the Question (as we have already said) that is now discussed betwixt you
and us, whether the knowing and blameless be to be kept off from the Sacrament
by any Order of ours, except they shall present themselves to the Eldership.
And hereupon your urging us with the Ordinance for Church government, or our
own practice, is not at all to your purpose; neither does it (if it had been as
you represented, which yet we have showed you is otherwise) prove what it
concerned you to have made good, viz. That those that present not themselves to
the Eldership, upon the Exhortation given by the Minister to that purpose, were
according to our Order to have had their names published in the Congregations,
and they warned before all to reform. Which yet was your high charge, and
accusation of us, but wanting support of it self falls to the ground.

And hereupon it is manifest, that it is not we, that go about to mince the
matter, or that seek to color over our actions with a seeming denial of all;
or to evade, what we still practice, but are ashamed to own, as you here
without the least shadow of proof affirm of us; neither is there any thing to
be found in our Answer, that has any tendency this way, we there professedly
defending and justifying all that we practiced. But it is you, who having laid
grevious things to our charge, which you could not prove, would now represent
us, as if we did, as you say; that so you might seem to say some thing, though
when it comes to be scanned, it is nothing, but a plain discovery that though
your accusation was loud and strong, your proof is low; weak, and empty, and
such as vanishes into Air. For all the descants (as you call them) that we
made on either Nounes or Pronouns, was to show, that the Relative [they] in the
fifth Order could not refer to the Catechized persons, who being found knowing
and blameless by the Minister, though they should not according to the
Exhortation of the Minister present themselves to the Eldership, yet were not
to have had their names published to the Congregation, nor for that warned
before all to reform; and which because you saw you could not make out, do
therefore (having changed the state of the Question) fall upon our practice,
and tell us, we mince it; or are ashamed of it; though this be also untrue, and
that which you do not prove against us neither, and so are doubly guilty in
this one particular of false accusation. But when to clear up the sense of our
words, we had told you in our Answer, that the Relative did often refer to
the remoter, and not the nearer Antecedent, and must do so, when the matter
spoken of did require it, and this you here call a weak, senseless and
unheard of descanting on Nounes and Pronouns. You do hereby proclaim your own
ignorance; the like descanting (if it must be so called) on Nounes and
Pronounes being observed by the Learned, (as we have showed you) to open and
expound the sense of Scripture, and which you your selves must acknowledge, or
you shall never be able rightly in some places to understand them, as from the
instances we have given, is manifest. And you do hereby further discover your
impotent passions, else you would not have given us such language as we here
(as but too often throughout your Paper) meet with. As touching what follows to
the conclusion, we have already said, what is sufficient for our own
vindication. We have spoken out and owned what is in truth our pactice, and
which we have told you is to admit of none to the Sacrament, but by the
juridicall act of the Eldership; this being that which is requisite and
necessary to be observed (as we have told you) or the Government is endangered
to be quite overthrown. And yet none are debarred by us from the Sacrament,
that are knowing and blameless, because they present not themselves before the
Eldership, (which is that you would gladly fasten upon us, though herein you
labor in vain) but the ignorant and scandalous only. Although we here must
mind you, of what we told you even now, viz. That this is not the Question
that is now disputed betwixt us. Neither do we need upon any practice of ours,
or any other account whatsoever, wave the Ordinance we act upon as repealed;
and which however you do, yet we must not, nor be persuaded thereunto, either
by your threats or entreaties, having proved sufficiently, that this Ordinance
is of force and strength to this very day, that and what we have heretofore
said concerning the civil sanction of our Government, is so much to the
purpose, that it makes this forth.

And so to conclude, we do not question, but whatever your conceits may be to
the contrary, others will determine, that your high charge having not been
supported by reason, is of no weight to the depressing of us, much less the
Presbyterian government, and which (though we had fallen not having been
able to have vindicated our selves from what we had been accused with)
would notwithstanding have been far above any depression of yours. However we
believe it was the summa totalis, and the u^shot of all, that you chiefly
aimed at in all your Papers; though how you have therein acquitted your selves
will be manifest enough to the attentive and impartial Reader, who will
easily discern by what has been said, that you have no otherwise endeavored
to depresse this Government, but by aspersing it, when you vvanted Arguments,
wherewith to oppose it; by taking no notice of the reasons we urged, when
you could not Answer them; and passing over many things in our Answer in
silence saying nothing to them; by betaking your selves to the Popish
principles and practices, refusing to have the controversy touching Church
government determined by the Scriptures, and railing on us as Scripturists,
for contending to have the matter tried by this Judge; by asserting several
manifest untruths, and sometimes palpably contradictng your selves; by
falsifying and abusing approved Protestant Authors, who favored not the cause
you plead for; and aspersing others, by perverting our words and mangling them,
when you had a mind to render us absurd; by many uncivil and unchristian
expressions, which you have used toward us, to the reproaching of us; by your
several bitter and reasonless scoffs, jeeres, uncharitable censures and
slanders, laying to our charge several things, for which you bring no proof,
and venting your distempered passions against us only, because we are for
Presbyterian and against Episcopal government; and to sum up all in a word,
by hard words, but soft and weak Arguments. But all wise and sober persons
will conclude, you fighting against us and the Presbyterians government, with
such weapons as these, took not the way either to depress it or us; but have
greatly hereby depressed your selves; and which we mind you of, that you seeing
your manifold errors herein, might be humbled for them, and prevent that, by
unfeigned repentance, which otherwise you have cause to fear, and whereof we
have all along in faithfullness warned you, as there has been occasion offered
throughout your Papers, though thereby what is now presented to the public
view, is swelled to the greater bulk. If this our pains, that has been
designed for the ends even now mentioned, as well as for the necessary
vindication of our selves and the Government, the truth and ways of Christ,
shall be so far blessed by God, as to bring you to a sense of what you have
much offended God and the Church in, and to be ashamed thereof, we shall much
rejoice. But if otherwise, we shall yet have comfort in this, that we have
discharged our duty toward you in laboring to reduce you, and shall commit
what further work may be called for from us, unto Him, who will own his
servants in the management of whatsoever he sets them about.

And thus having finished our Answer to your two last Papers, and been at the
pains once more to spread before you, what (however you esteem thereof) others
we hope will judge sufficient for the satisfaction of those, that are willing
to be satisfied: we shall now apply our selves to what concerns us to practice
in pursuance of what we published in our Congregations, and is now made known
to the world; not questioning but all wise and sober persons will judge, that
if to take us off our work and business, you should assault us again after
the same manner, as hitherto you have done, it will not be fit we should
hereafter interrupt our more necessary and profitable employments, in the
returning any further Answer to you, who may perhaps be ambitious to have the
last word; but that rather it will be prudence in us, to slight that which
having no weight in it, will of it self vanish away.

Signed in the name and by the appointment of the Class by Robert Constantine
Moderator.
At the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, at Manchester, November.
the 23. 1658.
A brief taste of the spirit the Gentlemen discover in their Papers, in these
following expressions, amongst many others.
In the Preface. QUi unam patitur injuriam, invitat novam; It Is a certain rule
with the men of this persuasion, if you take a blow from them on one cheek, you
cannot be Christians in their Calendar, unles you turn the other also. The
Giant of Presbytery -- The Palladium that would preserve the City of God. It Is
a trouble to us, that men who impropriate to themselves the name of Saints, and
would have the world to think them the only Christians. They are still of the
old legal spirit, to radicate and destroy all that are not of their way.

In their third Paper. Such godly and sober, such moderate spirited men, as you
pretend to be. Sect. 4. You wheel about and are come to the pole you started
at, like a Horse in a Mill, that traviles all day, and is no further at night,
then he was in the morning. Ibid. For this all parties hiss you, and laugh you
to scorn. Sect. 5. Have you two hearts, and not one forhead? Ibid. Who can
forbear laughter, to see Scripturists under the Gospel, (as those under the
Law, Templum Domini, Templum Domini,) cry verbum Domini, verbum Domini, nothing
but Scripture, the word of God being there the only rule of Faith and manners.
Sect. 6. -- Void of all modesty, and showing thereby no great store, either of
learning or honesty. Ibid. You wrest the Scriptures (which St Peter complains
of) with expositions and glosses newly coined, to make them speak what they
never meant -- This wresting of Scripture Dr. Andrews taxes the Papists
withal, saying, Malus hic Cardinalium mos, and we as truly, Malus hic
Presbyterorum mos -- rem facias rem, si possis recte, si non quo cunque
moderem. Sect. Ibid. 6. The London Ministers, the Provincial Synod at London,
Rutherford and Gillespie, they call modern Authors of yesterday, and add,
they may serve your turns amongst the ignorant and vulgar sort, wbo measure
all by tale and not by weight, when others, that know what and who many of them
are, will conclude you draw very near the dreggs. Sect. 8. Your Elderships
short and blunt sword of excommunication. Sect. 10. But oh the learned Critics
of our age! Sect. 11. Apage! Sect. 16. Ha, ha, he. Ibid. Thus you say, because
very shame will not suffer you to affirm the contrary. Ibid. Why do you seek
to color over your actions -- with so many weak, senseless and unheard of
descants upon Nouns and Pronouns, to evade what still you practice, but are
ashamed to own. Ibid.

This (even this) is the modest examination of the dissenting Christians
mentioned in their Title Page.

FINIS.

