A Brief APOLOGY IN Behalf of the PEOPLE In Derision Called QUAKERS.

WRITTEN For the Information of our Sober and Well-inclined Neighbors in and
about the Town of Warminster in the County of Wilts.

BY Will. Chandler, Alex. Pyot, I. Hodges, And some others.

By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet
true, as unknown and yet well known, as dying and behold we live, 2 Cor. 6. 8*
9. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-yard in Lombard Street, 1693.

A Brief Apology, etc.
IT is not that we love Contention, or desire Controversy, or are impatient in
bearing Reproaches, that we appear thus public, but such have been the
repeated high Charges, and smart Lashes that our Adversaries (more especially
some of the Presbyterian Assembly) have of late taken a liberty, liberally and
lavishly to bestow upon us* that we find ourselves concerned to Clear and
Vindicate the Truth and Innocence of our Christian Profession, from those black
aspersions that have rendered it so frightful and formidable, as though 'twere
only a mere complication of pestilent Errors, as well as to satisfy the minds
of such of our piously-inclined Neighbors, as may be desirous to hear us speak
for ourselves, as also for the information of those who may have been imposed
upon, by that dress wherein our Opposers have represented us. And although
these can Object nothing material against us now that has not been long since
over and over offered by some of the same Persuasion, and have as often
received Answers from some or other of our Friends, (some of which have never
yet been by them replied unto) yet forasmuch as those may not have come to the
view of many of our Neighbors, for whom this is chiefly intended, we thought
fit briefly to say so much as we think may be accommodate to the present
occasion; and which perhaps with unprejudiced minds may bespeak our Creed not
so unsound and erroneous Esth. 3. 5.
as our somewhat different deportment has rendered us obnoxious and
contemptible, as well as distasteful to those who either ambitiously affect
honor Joh. 5. 44 Mat. 23.
and respect, and love greetings, or think a complaisant compliance to the
fashions, customs, and complements of the Age, to be one of the chiefest
felicities of this Life, and best expression of their Civility and good Manners.

We therefore desire our well-disposed Neighbors, heartily to weigh what we
have to allege against the Clamours of those, who to be sure will not set us
out to our best advantage, and to receive an Account from ourselves what we
are, and what we believe and hold for Christian Truths, who certainly must
needs know better our own Belief than those who perhaps never examined it, to
any other end than to find fault, if ever they did it; and also that you will
not think it strange, that we express not our Belief in some particulars, in
the affected Terms of other Professors of Christianity, but think it more
reasonable and safe to content ourselves with that Dress of Language, in which
the Holy Ghost thought fit to hand them to us in the Holy Scriptures; those
most Excellent and Divine Writings, which above all others in the world,
challenge our reverence and most diligent reading, those Oracles of God, and
rich Christian Treasury of Divine saving Truths, which were written for our
learning, that we To. 15. 4.
through patience and comfort of them may have hope, and are profitable for
doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction 2 Timothy c. 3. v. 15, 16, 17.
in righteousness, to the perfecting and thoroughly furnishing of the Man of
GOD to every good Work, making him wise unto salvation through Faith which is in
Christ Jesus; containing all Christian Doctrines necessary to be believed for
salvation, and are a sufficient external standard and touchstone to try the
Doctrines of men* and we say with the Apostle, whosoever shall Gal. 1. 8.
publish, and propagate any other Gospel and Faith than is therein testified of
to us, by those inspired Penmen who were the first Promulgators thereof,
though he were an Angel let him be accursed; all which, and whatsoever is
therein contained, we as firmly believe as any of you do; and as it is the duty
of every sincere Christian, we are heartily thankful to God for them, who
through his good Providence has preserved them to our Time, to our great
benefit and comfort.

We Believe in that Great Omnipotent God, that made and created all things, and
gave us our Being, whom in sincerity of heart we fear, reverence and worship,
being seriously concerned for our souls welfare to eternity. We believe that
Great Mystery, that there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7.
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that these Three are One in Being and
Substance: And as do ye, so do we also hope for and expect Salvation, only and
alone through the Son of God our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST of
Nazareth; believing that God the Father has ordained him for Isa. 49. 6. Act.
13. 47 and 4. 12.
salvation to the ends of the Earth; and that no other Name is given under
Heaven, by which men shall be saved; who being conceived by the Holy Ghost, in
the Womb of the Virgin Mary, was born of her at Bethlehem; as also his Holy 1
Pet. 2. 21, 22. Heb. 4. 15.
and Exemplary Life, perfectly free from sin; his Doctrine, Miracles,
Sufferings, and Death upon the Cross, without the Gates of Jerusalem; his
Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven, To. 8. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 5,
6. 1 Jo. 2. 1. 2.
where he is at the Right Hand of God the Father, perfect GOD and perfect Man,
and the alone Mediator between GOD and Man, and is our Advocate with the
Father, and ever lives to make Intercession for us; and also shall judge both
Quick and Dead: Act. ^0 42
All which, and whatsoever else is recorded of him in the Sacred Scriptures, we
firmly believe.

This Jesus, in whom dwelt the fullness Col. 2. ^.
of the Godhead, we believe offered up himself according to the Will of the
Father, an acceptable sacrifice to Ephesians. 52. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 10. 12
God, and became a Propitiation for the sins of Mankind, to the end of the
World, and dyed for all Men, as all dyed in Romans 5. v. 12. 18.
Adam; through whose Blood God proclaims Redemption and Salvation to 2 Cor. 5.
19.
Man, and offers to be reconciled, and freely for his Sons sake to remit,
forgive To. 3. 25.
and pass by all past offenses to as many as shall truly and heartily repent of
their Luke 24. 47. Acts 10. 43. and 26. 20. Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. To. 8. 3. 4. 2
Cor. 5. 15. 17. Tit. 2. 14. Joh. 14. 15. 21. 23* 24. and 15. 10 2 Timothy 2. 19. 1
Pet. 4. 1, 2, 3. Jam. 2. 12. to the end.
sins, and turn from the same, and shall so believe in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and love him as for the future to live a holy Circumspect Christian life, and
obey his commands, thereby continuing in his love.

Which holy life so much Celebrated and strictly kept to in the Primitive Ages
of Christianity, that whosoever named the name, or took the name of Christ upon
them were to depart from iniquity, we believe ought to be inseparable from a
true and faithful Christian as ever accompanying a true living and active
Faith; and it seems was thought no less necessary by those who composed the
promise that should be made in behalf of infants before they were admitted into
that once sacred Catalogue, (to wit) that as they Tit. 2. 11, 12.
came to years of discretion, they should forsake the devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the
Luke 1. 75
flesh, and keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the
days of their lives: This we believe To. 6. 18, 19, 22. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Ephesians. 4. 24
These 3. 13 and 4. 7. Heb. 12. 10. 14. 1 John 4. 4.
to be the bounden duty of mankind, and though our Opposers have scoft us, and
branded us with error for holding perfection, because in pleading for a holy
righteous life as that which is well-pleasing to God, and avouching his power
to be stronger in man, as man cleaves to it, and believes to rescue him from
under the power of Satan, than is that of the devil to retrain him in Thraldom,
we have sometimes made use of the words of Christ and his Apostles, as be you
perfect as Mat. 5. 48 Col. 4. 12. 1 John 3. 3.
your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, he that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, etc. Yet have we never pretended to a
moral perfection beyond what is contained in the above promise, which is sound
and true in it self, and is that which God requires of us; and therefore it is
that we frequently press it is necessity, and fervently exhort people to its
performance. And notwithstanding we have hence been falsely accused that we
expect to be saved by our own works as being Meritorious, yet we don't
acknowledge a holy life as the Efficient and procuring Cause of our Salvation;
which we no less than you totally refer to the free Grace, and mercy of Ephesians. 2.
8.
God in Christ without any merit in Man, but we esteem it as a constant
companion James 2. 18. to the end.
thereto, and a necessary condition on our part in compliance with God's
gracious offer, without which we may not obtain it, being inseparably annexed
Heb. 11. 6. To. 12. 1. 2.
to that Faith which only pleases God, and is but our reasonable duty.

And we believe that although Christ Heb. 2. 9. and 10. 12.
thus offered up himself once for all, for the sins of all men to the end of
the world, thereby rendering repentance and amendment of life prevalent with
God; yet that the Traditional Belief of that alone is not sufficient to entitle
us to that common Salvation that comes by him, but that it is of necessity that
we truly repent and be converted from Act. 3. 19
the evil to the good, and therefore it is no less necessary for us now than
'twas for believers in the Apostles days, that and 26. 18. 20.
we be turned from darkness to light, or in otherterms, from the dark power of
Satan, to the power of God who is light, that thereby we may every one know the
work of Redemption and Salvation, wrought in and for our selves: For it is not
enough to believe that Christ dyed, if we feel not the blessed effects of his
death, who came to save us from our sins, and bless us by turning Mat. 1. 21.
Act. 3. 26. Tit. 2. 14.
us from our iniquities, and gave himself for us that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

For we believe such to be the natural Genesis 2. 17 To. 5. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Genesis
6. 5. To. 7. 5.
State of Man in the fall, that by nature we are dead as to God, at a distance
from him prone to evil, and to gratify the desires of our sensual* minds,
swayed by the corrupt and sinful Ephesians. 2. 2.
lusts of the flesh, and under the power of a strange King, ruled by the 2 Timothy
2. 26.
Prince of the Power of the air, so that our inward man being thus dead from
God, we cannot exercise our spiritual senses toward him, nor can this natural
1 Cor. 2. 14.
man perceive, know, or savor the things of God, which only arc spiritually
discerned; wherefore, notwithstanding our Savior dyed for us, we are yet by
nature in a miserable undone condition, in Captivity to our souls Enemy, except
we know the second 1 Cor. 15. 45. 47. Ephesians. 2. 1. 5 Col. 2. 13. To. 8. 11. Ephesians.
5. 13. 14. Joh. 1. 9.
Adam the Lord from Heaven, that quickening spirit, to quicken our souls, and
make us alive to God again, that being restored to the use of our inward
senses, we may by the assistance of his Divine Light (wherewith for that end he
has blessed all the Sons and Ephesians, 2. 3. and 5. 6.
Daughters of Men) see our selves in this sad and lost state under the wrath of
God, and abhor our selves therefore, and under this living sense (wherein
things will appear with another aspect than before) cry to God for deliverance
therefrom, with such and inward 2 Cor. 7. 10.
hearty sorrow as works a true repentance for the same. It Is not our being
sprinkled, when infants, that will make us true Christians, convert us from
Joh. 1. 12. 13. To. 8. 14.
being children of wrath to become children of grace, and Sons of God, and
members of Christ's Church, and invest us in an interest in him; it is not
learning our Catechism and subscribing to certain Articles of Faith, though
never so Orthodox, and being educated in a historical belief of what Christ did
for us above sixteen hundred years ago; it is not this only that will administer
a sufficient, true, and saving knowledge of Christ, and really interest us in
his death and sufferings, all which people may talk of and please themselves
withal, and yet continue as fast bound under the dominion of Satan (who still
rules where disobedience is) as those less perfect in that lesson, but the true
and saving knowledge of Christ is to know our selves Act. 26. 18
turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to the power of Col. 1.
13.
God, that by it we may be delivered from the power of darkness, and be
translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, to know his saving power really to
rescue and redeem us from Joh. 8. 32. 36.
under the power of him that has enthrald us, and leads Captive at his will
Mar. 3. 27
those who lives in the vanity of their minds, to know him bind this strong
man, to spoil his goods and dispossess, Mal. 3. 2. 3
and cast him out, to know Christ to sit in the soul as a refiner, to burn Luke
3. 16, 17. To. 15. 16. Joh. 13. 8. 1 These. 5. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 2 John 14. 23 Heb.
13. 21
up, consume and destroy, to purify and thoroughly to purge out whatsoever is
contrary to him, to wash us and make us clean that we may have rightto a part
in him, that being cleansed and sanctified, he may take up his abode with us
exercising his Kingly power, and working in us both to will and to do of his
good pleasure. The mind being thus disentangled, and having cast off its former
yoke, the old things being done away, all things now become new; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Ezekiel. 36. 26.
a new tender heart of flesh according to the promise, new thoughts, desires,
inclinations, affections, words, actions, this new inside producing a new
outside also, even throughout a new Creature, Mat. 23. 26.
now in Christ indeed, and really entitled to those benefits that accrue to men
through him; that living faith that pleases God and gives victory, Jam. 2. 18,
to the end. Heb. 12. 2
and is ever fruitful to him in good works, being begotten, and this work of
Redempton and Regeneration thus wrought in the soul by Jesus Christ, together
with that most precious sacrifice he offered up, when his Precious Blood Shed
upon the Cross for us, we believe compleats the salvation of every soul that is
thus awakened, and made alive, and set free, by the power To. 6. 11. 13. Joh.
8. 36
and spirit of him that is the way, the truth, and the life of every soul that
truly lives to God, to walk in that holy way of life, truth, and peace, that
was prepared of old for the ransomed Isa. 35. 8, 9.
and redeemed to walk in.

And we believe that he graciously waits with exceeding great kindness, and
long suffering, that men may repent, knocking at the door of every Rev. 3. 20
man's heart, freely offering, but not imposing his assistance to this most Mat.
23. 37.
concerning work and change in the minds of men; so that in the day wherein
God* will judge the world by Jesus Christ, and every secret thing will be made
manifest, God will be justified and clear of the Blood of all Men, and every
mouth will be stopped, and every Man's Condemnation will be of himself for
having rejected the day of his visitation, wherein God calls to Man, and offers
to be reconciled to him for resisting the strivings, and slighting the reproofs
of his spirit, Neh. 9. 20.
which in matchless mercy he has given man to instruct him, and show, and lead
him in the way of life and peace.

We believe, that though the pravity of man's nature in the fall, is such, that
the Natural or Carnal Man, that is enmity against God in the state of mere
nature, minds only the things of the To. 8. 5. 7. 8.
flesh, and naturally brings forth the works thereof, and cannot please God,
nor keep and observe his Laws, but is prone to evil; yet that those who embrace
the visitation of God, and are 1 Pet. 1. 23.
really regenerated and born again of incorruptible seed, by the word of God
Heb. 4. 12.
that lives and abides forever, that ingrafted Jam. 1. 21*
word that is quick and powerful, and able to save and sanctify the Joh. 17.
17. 19.
soul, are born into a new life, and invested with another and higher power,
and becomes spiritually minded, and by the spirit are set at liberty to walk
after Joh. 3. 6.
the spirit, and bring forth it is fruits, and receives ability from the spirit
to serve God acceptably, being now led To. 8. 14. 15.
by the spirit of God and become his Children, taught of him, and through the
spirit of adoption received into their hearts, have right to call God Father, 1
Cor. ^2. 3. To. 8. 13. and 6. 6. Ephesians. 4. 22 23. 24. Gal. 5. 24 Col. 3. 9. 10.
and Jesus Lord, for having through the spirit mortified the Old Man or first
Nature, with his corrupt and depraved inclinations and evil deeds, and put him
off, having crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, they put
on the New and Heavenly Man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, and being renewed in the spirit of their minds, they now walk in
To. 6. 4. and 7. 6.
Newness of Life, and are really in Christ, and therefore are changed and
become new Creatures, and now thinks and acts under the conduct of a principal
Superior to that which formerly governed them, having their minds raised to a
Region above that of fallen Nature, so that now the stream of their thoughts,
desires and actions, runs in another current, and the bent of their affections
are after those things that are above where Christ is; that eye being Col. 3.
1. 2.
now opened that sees a more transcendent beauty and desireableness in the
invisible and durable treasures of him, than all the transcient felicities of
this world can afford.

And we believe that whosoever expects the blessed imputation of Christ's To.
13. 14.
righteousness, ought thus to put on the Lord Jesus, and to be thus clothed
upon, and covered with his righteousness, and in measure have his Holy Life
brought forth in and through them, and and know him to enliven and influence
their minds, and to work in and for Isa. 26. i2. Phil. 2. i3. Phil. 4. 13. Joh.
i5. 5.
them, and that without him they can do nothing, but through him that strengthens
them, they can do whatsoever he commands them, that as they abide living
branches in him, through that sap and virtue they daily receive from him, Joh.
15. 5, 8.
they are made able to bring forth fruits well-pleasing to God, whereby he is
glorified. For though God the Father accepts us in Christ, and for his sake;
yet is the New Birth the indispensible Qualification, and true distinguishing
Mark of those that are really in him. He 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. i5. 1 John 2. 6.
and 30. 7. 8, 9.
that is in Christ is a new Creature, Old things are past away, behold all
things are become New. John says, He that says he abides in him, ought
himself also, so to walk even as he walked. We ascribe nothing to Man, as
having any power or ability in or of himself to please God, but attribute all
power to do that which Joh. 15. 4, 5.
is good to Christ alone, in whom only the Father is well-pleased. It Is through
him that men so love and fear God as to eschew evil, and work that
Righteousness Acts 10. 34, 35.
which is acceptable to him; upon whom therefore man's dependence ought to be
daily, to receive from him such suitable supplies, as through a constant
watchfulness may enable them so to walk, as to continue in his favor and enjoy
his smiles: For it is not as too many seem either to imagine, or would gladly
have it to be, that they may live in sin and disobedience here, and indulge
their corrupt inclinations; and yet hereafter 1 Pet. 4. 18.
have Christ's Righteousness imputed to them: For though we are not under the
Mosaical Law, so as to be obliged to its Ordinances, diverss Washings, and
Levitical Priesthood, Christ our High Priest having offered up himself Mat. 5.
20.
once for all, and abolish't it; yet are we not so under Grace, as to be
discharged from living well, though we are not tied to its Rites and
Ceremonies, yet are we obliged to fulfill its Righteousness, which Christ came
not to destroy but to establish: For though To. 3. 31. and 8. 3, 4.
God be gracious and merciful to forgive us our Trespasses through the
mediation of Christ, upon our true and hearty repentance, and turning from Isa.
55. 7.
them; yet it is not that we should take a libertyto go on in sin and rebellion
against him. We are not to sin because he is gracious, that his Grace may
abound; To. 6. i. 2.
if so, Where is the straitness of this way? If this be to take up a daily
Cross to our own Wills that we may perform his, Pray where is the liberty of
the flesh? Those that are vertually in Christ, which renders us acceptable to
the Father, and completely espoused to him, must needs have resigned their
Wills, as an effect of true love, and requisite to so strict a union, opposite
Wills being inconsistent therewith, whence Obedience necessarily follows. The
Apostle John, after having signified that God is Light, and that those that
would know the blood of cleansing, and true fellowship 1 John 1. 5. 7.
with him, and one another, ought to walk in the Light as he is in the Light,
tells the young and weak in the Faith, whom he calls Children, that he writ
those things that they should not sin; but yet if any through weakness or
inadvertency should sin, and so fall under Chap. 2. and first 6 Verses.
the Fathers displeasure, he tells them that Christ the Righteous is both a
Propitiation and also an Advocate that interceeds with the Father; and that
their keeping his Commands was the surest evidence of their knowing and being
in him; but of the strong, whom therefore he calls young men, he says, That the
word of God abode in them, and that they had overcome the evil one.

These things may soon be spoken and comprehended in the Understanding, but to
experience them fulfilled in ourselves, is our highest interest, and only can
make us sharers in them. The essence of Christianity and happiness of
Christians, don't consist in having our heads stuffed with knowledge, only to
lodge there and feed upon it, but to have our hearts filled with divine love,
which animates Joh. 14. 21. 23.
us to diligence, and inspires us with courage and vigor to observe and perform
the Will of God, who looks not at what people profess only, or by what name
they are called, but regards the heart, and what principle governs there:
People may make a profession of the best things; and yet continue alive to
themselves, they may alter Opinion or Persuasion, and yet not turn from
darkness to light, from the power of satan to God. There has not been wanting
a very large and splendid Profession of Christianity, adorned with curious,
elaborate, and elevated Notions, polished with Rhetoric and Oratory; but that
power and life that reaches the heart, and gives victory and dominion over its
lusts and affections, which war against the soul, is that which too many are
yet strangers to; when yet to know our lapsed souls restored from their first
fallen state in Adam, and raised to a station where we may both perceive the
things of God, and receive power to work his Will, to know our minds redeemed,
and that power vanquished which led us captive, and we leavened by the Heavenly
Gift, into its own nature; as it is the very life and marrow of that Religion,
about whose exterior parts the world is filled with Noise; so it is the proper
and most concerning-business of our lives, to find this great salvation
accomplished in us; the experimental working out whereof in the heart, by the
saving Grace and Spirit Gal. 6. 3, 4.
of God, that is given to man to profit with, will yield more satisfaction and
true contentment to that soul that sincerely seeks the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Righteousness thereof, in whom it is begun and carrying on, than to hear or
read all their days of what God has done through all Ages, for those that
truly love and fear him; for want of which it is that the profession of
Christianity is generally so empty and barren in producing a real pious life,
attended with the fruits of the spirit, and a due Obedience proceeding from the
birth of the spirit, without which the most refined methods of Worship and
Devotion will not recommend us to God, who is inaccessible by the birth of the
Flesh: Nor do we believe that it is acceptable to God for people to sing before
him those Songs and Psalms, that were the experiencies and spiritual exercises
of holy men in times past, without having some living experience of the same
things in themselves; or that People can properly and truly speak more or
farther of the things of God, than what they have known and experienced. Where
amongst all these sound Gospel-Scriptural-Truths, is lodged that latent Venom
so much feared and talked of by our Adversaries, that is so dangerously
contagious, and apt to infect the minds of those that shall incline to converse
with Us, or our Books, touching our Belief in these necessary Points of
Christianity? Which of them is it, that being imbibed, is more mortal and
destructive As said Tho. Vincent.
to the soul, and defiles it more than drinking a draught of Poison, or going
to a Bawdy House? Where are those damnable Opinions and Heresies wherewith you
have been terrified? Which of them is it, that being persisted in, does
necessorily lead to damnation, and for which the T. R's unsavory and
uncharitable Expression.
Devil must needs carry us a pick-pack to Hell? Is it in that we holdforth the
infinite Love of God to mankind, in not only freely of his mere Grace and
Favor, providing a Sacrifice, through which an Atonement is made for the past
Transgressions of man, who was never at all in a capacity to make any for
himself, which is applicable to Joh. 3. i5. 16. Act. 10. 43 1 Cor. 12. 7.
every one who shall believe, repent and return; but has also afforded to all
the means of Faith, Repentance and Conversion, for God requires not
impossibilities of men, but expects they should improve those talents
distributed to them, in not only sending forth the Son of his love to dye for
their sins, that they should not longer live therein, but also in sending Joh.
14. i6, i7, 26. and i6. i3. Tit. 2. ii, 12.
forth his Light and Spirit of Truth into their hearts, to lead and guide them
into all Truth, and causing his Grace that brings salvation, to appear to all
men, to instruct and teach them to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, to
forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, to rescue and save them from living in the sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
and help and strengthen them to return to their Obedience, and live a sober,
righteous and godly Life, to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of their Lives.

Which gift from God to man the Holy Scriptures plentifully testify to, under
various denominations, as Spirit, Light, Word, Grace, Seed, Leaven, Anointing,
etc. By all which we understand that Spirit or Heavenly Talent with which Mat.
25. 14, 15.
God has endowed Mankind in some degree or other that he may profit with it;
in the improvement whereof by a diligent Co-working therewith, to the answering
those holy ends for which we receive it, we doubt not but to be happy in
rendering a good account of our Stewardship, and entering finally into the Joy of
our Lord. Our opposers themselves also pretend to the spirit and grace of God,
or else what means their praying for its assistance, and those plausible
finespun discourses of it, wherewith they sometimes entertain their Auditory:
We Charitably hope it is more real, than only to beautify and recommend them to
the hearers, as what they cannot well avoid, for that the Scriptures are so
full of that Language, and if indeed it be real, why is that a fault and error
in us which is so sound and ornamental in them? And we think it very strange
that they should apprehend any incongruity in granting this Divine Principle to
be a Divine Light to the mind; since its proper Office is to teach and
Instruct, to manifest and point to us our duty, as well as to dispose and
enable us to perform it; and ought to be our leader and governor. If the Tit.
2. 11, 12. Joh. 14. 17, 24. and 16. 7, 8, 13, 14. 1 John 2. 27.
godly admonitions, and exemplary lives of good men were rightly called lights
to the world, surely much more properly may this, whose fountain is light, and
does more nearly illuminate and inform the understanding, and renders those
effectual, justly challenge that necessary, and acceptable appellation. If then
the Grace and Spirit of God be in the hearts of men, surely it is not wholly
unactive there, but will be making some attempts toward accomplishing the end
for which it is placed there; 'twill be at times attacking the enemies, and
endeavoring to supplant its contrary, which being holy and pure in its nature
is never reconcilable to sin and evil, but ever strives against it, and may,
as men regard, it be infallibly known by the nature of its efforts. And we dare
appeal even to all mankind, whether they find not something placed in their
minds and Consciences, which though perhaps not regent there, yet never mingles
with, nor Consents to their evil deeds, but always remains undefiled, and
testifies against them, and convicts, reproves, and Joh. 3. 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.
13.
condemns them for it, and also oft-times in the cooler temper of their
spirits, manifests their states to them, and as 'twere reasons with them,
discovering the evil of their ways secretly calling to them to come out of it,
begetting desires and inclinations, sometimes to seek after God, and to make
their peace with him. Now since man in his mere natural State, is Totally dead
and fallen from God, that he cannot as of himself think a good thought; and
that God only is essentially good, and as that which is truly, so must needs
proceed from him; this principle in us that ever convicts us Joh. 16. 8, 13.
for vice and evil, whether in thought word or deed, and disposes us to
consider of our latter end, and often makes Prove. 14. 13.
men sigh in the midst of laughter, reminding them, that for those things they
must give an account, that draws us heavenward and inclines us to virtue and
goodness, to do to all men as we would be done unto, to be just, sober,
merciful, temperate, etc. Must needs be something that is not of us, but is
pure and immaculate, and of a divine nature, ever aspiring and raising the mind
toward its Original.

Whence it cannot be a Natural Light or mere light of Nature, as very many
would have it, who yet talk of the spirit of God being in Man, for it is an
undoubted truth, that no agent can act beyond its own sphere, and raise its
object to a state more noble than it self, nor produce effects of a nature more
sublime Job, 21. 17. Psalm. 18. 28.
than its own Original. Besides it is very clear and evident from Scripture,
that the mind of man is often lighted by a light, Superior to that of mere
reason, and that man by the utmost power and extent of human reason and
speculation, (though he may arrive to implicit knowledge that there is a God,
yet) can never attain to a true, spiritual and saving knowledge of God, without
the Concurrence of a Divine To. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Prove. 20. 27. Luke 24. 45.
Joh. 1. 9. Ephesians. 5. 13, 14, 17.
and supernatural Agent: For though the mind of man as a rational Being, be
that Capacity or Candle that is to be Lighted, yet it is Christ that must so
enlighten it, as to give us a true discerning of those things, that appertain
to him and his Kingdom, and by adhering and yielding obedience to its
discoveries, we shall know an Accession of more Light. Psalm. 369 Prove. 4. 18. 1
Cor. 2. 10. to the end.
And the Apostle speaking of what God by his spirit had revealed to them, says
expressly, that the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God; and
that as none knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him,
so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God: That the natural man
neither knows nor receives the things of the spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, and to that end they had received the spirit which is of
God. The Light of Nature is occupied about natural Objects, those things that
are within its own Region, acting within its own proper Orb, but reaches not to
that knowledge of God which is life eternal, except our natural powers or human
capacity be illuminated by the rays of divine light, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
for the world by humane wisdom knows not God. And Christ says very plainly
and possitively, that none knows the Mat. 11. 27.
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him.

That these strugglings in us should be the suggestions of Satan, that he
should disquiet and disturb people for their sins, for serving him, and put
them upon endeavoring to be freed from their vassalage under his power, were
absurd to imagine; no, our Savior puts that beyond a question, when he asks,
Can a Kingdom divided against it self stand? Mark. 3. 24. 27.
And by and by says plainly, that whilst the strong man armed keep the house
his Luk 11. 21
goods are at peace, till a stronger than he comes to bind him, etc. So that
it is clear it is not the devil, but the approaches of a superior power, that
breaks the peace of people for sin, and that follows and condemns them for
Disobedience and Trangression, and is the same that would, and only can redeem
their minds out of that miserable state, and bind that strong man, and break
his power and cast him out, would they but join thereto, and accept of
deliverance by it.

Nor does its being Extended to all men, through all Ages from their youth
upwards, bespeak it to be therefore natural or contemptible, but on the
contrary, of the greater moment to all men; 1 Cor. 12 7.
for besides that the Apostle says a manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man to profit withal, the blessings and gifts of God are free and
valuable from their intrinsic worth; God in nature ordained nothing in vain,
but by how much any thing is of the greatest use to us, for sustaining and
accomodating our natural life, the more common it is, as the Sun that gives
Light to all through all Ages, etc. It Is we fondly rate things according to our
fancies, and esteem and prize them more for their rarity and curiosity, than
usefulness; but God bestows most universally that which is of the absolutest
necessity to man. Are not all men that are born, strangers and enemies to God,
in the dark, and at a distance from him in the State of Nature Io. 3. 3. 5.
and must therefore be enlightened, converted, and born again, and made
spiritual before we can be reconciled to him; 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
shall not God then, that would have all repent and be saved, cause the Light
of the Son of Righteousness to shine upon all, and give a measure of his grace
and spirit to all, to assist them in the accomplishment of that in themselves
which they cannot do of themselves, and yet is of indispensible necessity to
our Salvation? Wherefore God by his spirit strives with man so long as his day
of visitation lasts. Since then our opposers acknowledge the spirit and grace
of God, which also is Light to be in Man, unless they can show it, by its
manifestly different and superior nature, tendency, and operation, to be
contradistinct from that we have been speaking of; we see neither absurdity nor
error in concluding it to be one and the same grace and free-gift of God to
all, which is always the same in nature, though it differs in degree, and is
that Heavenly Treasure, which God has committed to our trust; and blessed will
they be who rightly employ and improve it, and gives place and room to this
seed of the Kingdom in Mat. 13. 31. 32.
their hearts, where, though it may appear at first contrary to the expectation
of man, little, mean and contemptable, scarcely regarded amongst the stuff,
wherewith men's minds are filled, yet join but to it, that it may exert its
power and force, and 'twill grow and increase; let but this leaven have its
perfect work and 'twill leaven the whole lump into its Mat. 13. 33.
own nature.

Be pleased to consider, whether we have justly merited the invidious
invectives of our adversaries, in believing that the Lord searches the heart of
man, and Luke 13. 21. Jer. 17. 10. To. 8. 27. Rev. 2. 23 Amos. 4. 13. Jer. 31.
33, 34. Ezekiel. 36. 26. 27. Joel, 2. 28, 29. Act. 2. i6, 17, 18. Isa. 54. i3 Mat.
11. 27. Isa. 42. 7. and 61. 1.
shows him his thoughts, that he has and will remember this latter age of the
world, and has not forgotten to be gracious in performing those bountiful
promises made in times past to the offspring of the Gentiles, in placing his
Law in our Hearts, and putting his truth in our inward parts, in pouring out of
his spirit upon all the Sons and Daughters of men, in becoming our teacher, and
giving us the knowledge of himself, through the Revelation of his Son Jesus
Christ, who is come to open our blind eyes, and to bring us, that were bound in
darkness, out of the prisonhouse, who has promised to be with his people to
the end of the World, in believing that God has sent Joh. 14. 16, 17, 26. and
16. 3.
us the Comforter, the spirit of Truth, to be our Remembrancer, and to guide
and direct us in the way of Truth; in attesting the sufficiency and utility of
the 1 John 2. 20. 27.
Teachings of this Holy Unction, sent into our hearts, in believing that though
Christ be in his glorified Body in Heaven, yet that he is present also in the
hearts of his People, who is King of Saints, and shall he not then rule in Joh.
14. 17, 20, 23 and 17. 23, 26. Isa. 57. 15. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Prove. 8, 31.
them? The High and Holy One that inhabits Eternity, has promised to dwell
also with the Humble and Contrite, to revive and comfort them, shall not he,
whose presence fills Heaven and Earth, be present in the Heart of Man? Shall
not he that rejoices in the habitable parts of the Earth, and delights in the
Sons of Men, reside in his People? Are they not Members of him, and he their
Joh. 15. 4. 5.
Head? Can there be a more intimate Union and Communion than between the 1 Cor,
6. 15, 17, 19.
Head and the Body, the Vine and the Branches? The same Spirit of Life that is
in the Head, is the Life of the Body also, and acts it; he that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit, does not the Life that is in the Root pass to the
Branches also, and preserves them living? Are not all dead Branches, in whom
this Life is not? Whosoever has the Son of God, and feeds on him, has Life by
him; and Joh. 6. 56, 57. 1 John 5. 13.
those that have not Christ, who is the Life of his Saints, has not Life: How
could his People in all Ages partake of him, if he were not present in them?
Surely this Doctrine does not deserve to be scoft, but is most comfortable to
those To. 10. 6, 7* 8. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 2. 20
who are sick of Love, and thirst ardently after the Enjoyment [not Hear-say]
of him.

Consider seriously these things which are agreeable to Scripture, and with
what reason People have derided us for our Belief herein; terming it the
Quakers Christ, as though his manifesting himself in our Hearts were another,
or distinct from Jesus Christ of Nazareth, that is glorified with God the
Father in Heaven, which we deny: For though he be ascended into Heaven, and
sits at Col. 1. 16. Ephesians. 1. 23. and 3. 9.
the right hand of God, far above all Principalities and Powers; yet is not he
so circumscribed, but that (as by him all things were made and created) he is
the life, and fills all in all in his Church and People. Is the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ divided? Is not their inseparable Union the true and entire
Christ? Can then his Godhead be present, and he who is the Heavenly Man be
absent? What think you of him that appeared to John, and gave him his
Commission to the Seven Churches? whom he describes, Rev. chapter 1. who says,
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
Rev. 3. 20. and 2. 23.
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. The same
says, I am he which searches the reins and hearts, and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works: Was not this Acts 17. 31. Romans 2. 16. John
1. 16.
the true Christ the Mediator, by whom God will judge the World? And can he
make this near Inspection into the innermost part of the Minds of Men, so as no
Thought can escape his notice, if he be not present there? What made Paul
desire that our Lord Jesus Christ 1 John 4. 13.
might be with Timothy's Spirit, if he thought it impossible? Do not all
acknowledge the Spirit of Christ, who is the Anointed, to be in his People, and
is he then absent? Is its being a Mystery, far beyond our comprehension to
conceive how it can be a sufficient Argument that therefore it is not so? Ought
we not in such cases to exercise Faith? and acquiess in the Testimony of the
Holy Ghost, expressed in the Sacred Scriptures, rather than interpose with our
nice and curious Subtilties? prying unnecessarily into things that are too high
for us; remembering that Secret Things belongs to God; and that those that know
most here, know only in part the things that are invisible; 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12.
and see them but as through a Glass. Shall Men that neither know themselves,
nor have any intuitive knowledge of the Essences, even of the meanest things,
wherewith Nature everywhere presents us, which are obvious to our Senses; yet
aspire to those more abstruce, and undertake to account for that which is
beyond the reach of the most pregnant Wits to penetrate.

We hope it is no Error to avouch the Power of Christ to be stronger than that
of the Devil, that he is able really to Genesis 3. 15.
bind him, to bruise his Head, and break his Power, to dispossess and cast him
out, to fulfill to the uttermost the end of his coming, to destroy the Works of
the Devil, and to save those from their sins who shall have true Faith in his
Name and Power: Surely it is not inconsistent with Christianity to believe that
Christ can, or will, thoroughly purge his Floor; that he can indeed deliver out
of 1 These. 5. 23.
the Prisonhouse, and restore Man out of the Fall to God again, and give him
power to forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc.

We find it consonant to Scripture, and the Gospel Dispensation, to believe
that those who are regenerated and Romans 6. 6, 7, 11. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
born again of the Spirit, have through the Spirit mortified the first carnal
corrupt Nature, which cannot please God, and if dead, and slain, and buried
too, Ephesians. c. 4. v. 22, 23, 24. Colos. c. 3. v. 9. 10.
surely then it no longer lives, but the mind is at liberty, and restored to
act in a new Life, to walk after the Spirit, and fulfill the Righteousness of
the Law; the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Romans 8. 2, 4.
Jesus, having set them free from the Law of Sin, and Death which is its Wages.
It Is for want of Peoples experiencing this real Birth of the Spirit brought
forth, and knowing Freedom in themselves by it, which no Duties or Performances
in the Will of Man, nor entertaining of the most resined Opinions in Religion
can administer, short of the Law of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts; it is
for want of this, that People are so very apprehensive, of difficulty, even to
impossibility, of living a Holy Righteous Life; which yet is so necessary to
our Salvation, that without Mat. 5* 8. Heb. 12. 14.
it we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, nor see God. Nor is the way broader,
or its passage less strait and difficult than they imagine; nay, it is
absolutely impossible for them to walk therein, while they are immerc'd in
their first corrupt unbridled Nature, which cannot keep the Law of God, while
their Lusts and Passions are rampant, their Affections inordinate, and Wills
unsubjected, and follows the desires and evil inclinations of their Minds
without restraint. But if they come to know another Principle and Power to
govern their Minds, to create in them new clean Hearts, to regulate and subject
their Wills, to subdue and tame their Passions, to limit their Desires, and
direct their Affections and Inclinations wholly after that which is good, to
meliorate their Spirits throughout, and make them heavenly minded, having an
aversion to all Evil, and a great love to Virtue and Goodness: Being thus
perfectly transformed* where is the extreme difficulty now, for the good Man,
out of the good treasure of his Mat. 12. 35.
Heart, to bring forth good things? Will not this new well-inclin'd inside,
that now detests Evil, and loves and delights in Righteousness, as naturally
follow after, and bring forth that which is Good, as before he did Evil? Here
is no force upon Peoples Natures, but they are converted, and thoroughly
leavened in another Nature, and are in their measures Partakers of the Divine
Nature, which only can work the Will 2 Pet. 4.
of God. We request our piously-inclined Neighbors, well and seriously to
weigh and consider, the absolute necessity there is for every True Christian
thus to know; their minds molded and Col. 1. 13*
fashioned anew, by the Power and Spirit of Christ, working mightily in them,
in order to their pleasing God by a Holy Righteous Life, having escaped the
corruption that is in the World through Lust; and considering that it is not so
soon attained, as apprehended in the understanding to be necessary: That with
all diligence they address themselves to the performing that which is the main
and proper business of our Lives. Wherefore as it has pleased the Divine Power
to give us all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, so let 2 Pet. 1. 3.
Tit. 2. 11, 12. Phil 2. 12, 13.
us with a vigilant attention to, and coworking with that Grace, which to that
end is given, work out our Salvation with a reverend fear; since a good degree
of attainment herein is soon lost, except there be a constant sedulous
watchfulness upon the Mind amidst all business and concerns, to have a check
upon our words and thoughts, and a diligent pressing forward: For while Mat.
26. 41.
we live in this World we are liable to temptations, and may enter thereinto
also, without a strict care and watchfulness; our Senses presenting many baits
to our Minds on every hand, which Satan makes use of to beguile* and many
provocations offer themselves in 2 Cor. 12. 9.
our Pilgrimage; against all which God's Grace is sufficient Armor; as our
Minds are seasoned by it, so that where any shortness is, it is through
Insincerity, Negligence, or Inadvertency

Or is it a dangerous heinous Heresy that we with very many Professors of
Christianity, believe the Universality of Ps. 145. 9.
the Love of God to all Mankind; that God who is good to all, whose Mercies
extends to all the Works of his Hands; is sincere in his Intention, and
Attestation thereof, and does not design to delude Ezekiel. 33. 11. and 18. 23.
us, when he affirms, That as certainly as he lives he desires not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he would return and live; that God, whose Love and
Mercy is unlimited, does graciously and John c. 3* v. 14 15, 16, 17. Isai. 55.
1* Rev. 22. 17. Romans 5. 18*
generously offer Salvation, through Jesus Christ, (upon certain Conditions to
be performed on our part) to all Mankind, to every individual Man and Woman
upon the face of the Earth, which is the true Gospel-message, good Tidings Luke
2. 10, 14.
of great Joy, which shall be to all People, Peace on Earth, and good will
toward Men; good cause indeed to rejoice, that all are within the verge Isa.
55. 7. Ezekiel. c. 18* v* 21* 22, to the end.
of Mercy and free Pardon; that God is indeed no Respecter of Persons, but
among all Nations and People, he or she that fears him, and works Righteousness
is Acts 10. 34, 35. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 2. 9.
of him accepted; and that Christ dyed for the sins of the whole World, yea,
for every Man; surely then all for whom he dyed are thereby put into a capacity
for Salvation; that saving Tit. 2. 11.
Grace has appeared to all Men, and a 1 Cor. 12. 7. See Pro. c. 1. from v. 20.
to the end.
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. And that
none are reprobated, but those that continue to be deaf to the Calls of this
Grace, and resists the Spirit, and hides and neglects their Talents till the
day Mat. 23. 37.
of their Visitation be over; and Christ so withdraws himself, as to cease
longer to strive with them; so that the Neh. 9. 20, 26.
means being taken away, they are left to themselves, and given up to Hardness
Isa. 63. 10. Psalm* 81. v. 11, 12, 13.
of Heart; that being absent that should prepare, tender, and mollify it, that
now they cannot Repent, Believe, and be Converted.

If thus to believe be a dangerous and pernicious Error, we confess we are
Guilty, and not like to be otherwise; for we cannot persuade ourselves to
embrace that Anti-evangelical Opinion, That God from all Eternity has
personally and conditionally, without respect to their accepting or rejecting
the Salvation offered in Christ, elected some and reprobated others by an
immutable Decree, so that those who are so elected shall certainly be saved,
let them do what they will, for God's Decree cannot be reverss'd, let the
unstable Mind of Man vary as it will: and those that are reprobated were in
effect damned thousands of Years before they were born, so that their Salvation
is put beyond all hope, let them seek it never so earestly and diligently, and
be never so desirous to serve and please God. For besides, that this sad
Tidings instead of glad Tidings, if it were really true in itself, puts an end
to the whole business of Religion, by rendering all Worship and Devotion, all
Preaching, Praying, Assembling together, and Holy Living as 'twere useless, by
invalidating all whatsoever on Man's part, as nothing contributing (as a
necessary Condition on his part to be performed or neglected) toward his
Salvation or eternal Destruction. We dare not take up an Opinion so
diametrically opposite to the very Attributes of God, and his repeated
Protestations to the contrary, and with some Men thus presume to arraign his
Justice, Mercy and Goodness; we cannot believe that God who is Love itself, and
Goodness itself, and has always manifested a wonderful Care and Concern for
Man as his darling Creature, Wis. 12. 15* 16.
it being disagreeable to his Power, to condemn those that have not deserved to
be punished, and having no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. 18.
22. Wis. 11. 23, 24.
should yet make the major part of Mankind with design to damn them, unprovoked
thereto, without ever tendering them Salvation; or that he would make the far
greater number wholly incapable of accepting the Salvation tendered them, by
putting it out of their power to perform those Conditions and Terms upon which
he offers it, and then condemn them to eternal Misery for not complying with
those Conditions that 'twas impossible for them to observe: For he don't only
call to all the ends of Isai. 45. 22.
the Earth (which implies all Mankind) to look to him and be saved, but he has
given to every one a Portion of his Spirit to enable them so to do, he has not
only sent forth the Son of his Love Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16.
to shed his Blood for every Man, to be lifted up as Moses lifted up the Brazen
Serpent, that whosoever believes in Joh. 6. 44, 45.
him should not perish; but he also draws them, and as they will receive it,
touches them with that Divine Magnet that only can incline and empower them
effectually to turn to that Pole in which all our true Happiness centers.

But this is the condemnation, that Joh. 3. 19, 20.
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because
Ephesians. 5. 13.
their deeds are evil; and hates the light, and will not bring their deeds to
it, lest it should reprove them; for whatsoever is reprovable is made manifest
by the light, but men love their own broad ways, to pursue the sight of their
eyes and desire of their minds, and Eccl. 11. 9.
therefore hate to be controlled therein and reformed. The Apostle stirring up
the Ephesians to Purity of Life, and to avoid several Evils there mentioned*
says expressly, Let no man deceive you Ephesians. 5. 6, 7.
with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience. And in another place, That Romans 8. 13.
those who live after the flesh shall die. So that it is for want of Peoples
embracing the Means, and bringing their Deeds to the Light of Christ in their
Hearts, and heeding the Reproofs of Instruction, Prove. 6. 23. Gal. 6. 8.
which is the Way of Life, for want of sowing to the Spirit, and by it
mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh, that People are lost and sentenced to
Perdition, and not because they were personally and inconditionally reprobated
from all Eternity. God who is Lord of all, is 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
gracious unto all, and would have all Men to be saved; but they disobey the
Call of God, and reject his Offers, and resist the Strivings of his Spirit, and
are deaf to those Knocks of our Savior for Reception and Entertainment in
their Rev. 3* 20.
Hearts, and choose and prefer the present World, and will not deny themselves
to follow Christ. It Is not as these Men say, because Salvation was never within
their reach: if 'twere not, what must we think? Were those feigned Tears then
that our Savior shed over Luke 16. 41, 42. Matthew. 23. 37.
Jerusalem, when the Day of its Visitation was over? Saying also, How often
would I have gathered thee as a hen gathers her chickens, but you would not;
not you could not.

If any Men can be so hardy as to entertain an Opinion so derogatory to the
Justice, Mercy, Love, and Paternal Care of God, and repugnant to the
Gospelmessage, we cannot but admire what should induce them to obtrude it upon
others, and urge it as though 'twas a necessary Point to be believed in the
Christian Religion; for we cannot apprehend how this begets love to God,
increases Faith in Christ, and raises our Veneration for him, excites to
Diligence, and encourages Piety, which is that which advances true Religion;
but on the contrary, that it tends to the indulging some in a Security, and
procure in others a slight Esteem of the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, as
being partial, and casts them into Despond, and probably may encourage both to
gratify the Desires of their Minds to the full extent, since nothing can alter
such a supposed Decree of God one way or the other: Yet we deny not the
Prescience of God, who fore-knows all things, things past, present, and to
come, being at once present to him; so that it may be said, such who believe in
Christ with that living active Faith that works by Love, and excites to
Obedience, and persevere therein unto the end, and so knows Salvation by him,
are in him in whom the Election is before the World began; and that those who
so believe not, but reject the Tenders of his Love, and by persisting in
Disobedience, neglects so great Salvation, are condemned already. Nor do we
deny such a Preference as that some are made Stewards over more, and some fewer
Talents, according to which their Improvement ought to be: Where much is given
much is required, and where less is given less is required; for God is just and
equal in all his Ways, he is not a hard Master, that he should exact Matthew. 25.
14, to the 28.
or expect more than the Improvement of his own: Had he that received but one
Talent, employed it, and made it two, we doubt not but it had been accepted;
for we believe that none are from Eternity absolutely excluded without any
Talent, and that a Day also is afforded wherein it is possible for them to
improve it. So that though the Grace may work more powerfully in some than in
others, yet are all left without Excuse.

There is yet another Opinion dependant on this, which we cannot receive
neither, as they state it, for which our Opposers think very ill of us; that
is, once in a state of Grace and ever so; that there is no total or final
falling away from Grace. How this Doctrine promotes true Zeal and Piety, and
improves Christianity, we cannot understand, nor see no other reason why its
Votaries should be so fond of it, but because it is concordant to that of
Personal Election and Reprobation; so that those who embrace the one, are bound
to believe the other: But otherwise, certainly it tends rather to slacken than
spur on People to that care and diligence, and constant unwearied watchfulness
to Prayer, which our Lord so much exhorted to, and the Apostles so solicitously
presses the Saints everywhere to be found in, as of absolute necessity. What
else means those Promises of Reward in the Revelations, to those who should
overcome and hold out to the end, but to engage them to a constant
Perseverance? Or what needed it, if 'twere impossible for them to fall short;
who I suppose none will deny to have been in a state of Grace? And the Church
of Ephesus was threatened to Rev. 2. 5. 3. 16.
have their Candlestick removed, if they repented not, and did their first
works; and that of Laodicea to be spewed out of his Mouth. Who can say those
foolish Virgins in the Parable were not once in a state of Grace, whose Lamps
were once lighted and burning, as well as trimmed, or else they could not
properly be said to be gone out; Or that those were not called by Saving Grace,
Mat. 25. 8.
in whose hearts the Heavenly Seed sprung up, and for a time prosper'd, Luke c.
8. v. 7, 8, 14, 15.
'till the Briars and Thorns, the overcare and concern about the things of this
Life, choked it; 'twas not that they had no day of Visitation from God,
wherein they might have wrought out their Salvation, had they continued to make
the Kingdom of Heaven, and its Righteousness, their first and chiefest Choice,
and placed their treasure there* and disentangled themselves from those
unnecessary Cares; the Seed that was sown and sprung up, was the very same with
that which in the honest heart brought forth fruit abundantly.

Surely Paul that Great Apostle was not of these Men's Opinion, when after he
had long labored in the Gospel, takes care to keep under his Body, least 1
Cor. 9. 27.
while he Preached to others he himself should be a Castaway, whom yet we
doubt not, but they will grant was then effectually called, and in a state of
Grace. And the Author to the Hebrews writing in the third Chapter, to those he
calls holy Brethren, and Partakers of the heavenly Calling, Verse the 12th,
exhorts them to take heed lest there was in any of them an evil Heart of
Unbelief in departing from the Living God. And again, Chap. 4. 1. Let us
therefore fear lest a promise being left us of entering his rest, (surely then
not eternally reprobated) any of you should seem to come short of it. Verse 12.
Let us labor therefore to enter that rest, lest any man fall after the same
example of unbelief. Again Chap. 6. Verse 4, 5, 6. speaking of those who had
been enlightened, and had tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and that had tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of
the World to come, (showed signs that they were effectually called, and in a
State of Grace) that if they should fall away 'twould be impossible to renew
them again to Repentance; not because they were eternally reprobated, but
because they crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, because they
grieved his good Spirit, Ezekiel. 18. 24, 26. and c. 33. v. 18.
and rejected the Means: Has not the Lord said, If a righteous man turns from
his righteousness, he shall die: Who can be righteous without the assistance of
God's Grace? No Man can make himself so; it is not in Man to direct his own
Ways; and yet it seems it is possible for him to fall from it, after he has
lived so long under its conduct as by it to be made righteous, and one would
think should then be sanctified too. Our Savior says of himself, I am the
true vine, ye are the branches; John 1* 1, 2, 5, 6.
my Father is the husbandman, every branch in me that bears not fruit he
takes away. Again, If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and
is withered. Surely those who are Branches in Christ, while so, are accepted of
the Father; and yet it seems it is possible for them to fall away and be cut off
as withered Branches; whence he often repeats this Condition if ye abide in me;
and presently he says John 15. 10.
the way to continue in his Love was to do his Will, as he had that of his
Father's, and continued in his Love. But though we cannot embrace their Opinion,
for their Reasons, and as they state it, but that it is possible for People to
make a considerable Progress in Grace, and yet for want of a careful and
constant Watchfulness to that Grace they may fall away: Yet we believe such a
State and Growth in Grace throw a vigilant Attention thereto, and such a degree
of Faith attainable, as that there is no more going forth.

But that which seems to be our capital Error, and the top of all their Charge,
and that which is to silence all Plea's in our behalf, is our omitting the use
of the Ordinances (so called) of Baptism and Bread, and Wine. John indeed as
the next immediate Forerunner of Christ to prepare his Way, gave an Alarm to
the Jews that were so secure under the Law of Moses, and proclaimed the Kingdom
of Heaven at hand, and Mat. 3. 2. Acts 17. 30.
the time come wherein, God commanded the Jews, as well as others everywhere to
repent; 'twas not sufficient for them to go on in sinning, and then offer those
respective Sacrifices which the Law enjoined them for the same, but now the
Wrath of God was near Romans 1. 18.
to be revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteonsness of Men:
'twas not sufficient to deek and make clean the outside of the Cup and Mat. 23.
25, 26. and c. 3. 10.
Platter, but the inside was to be cleaned, and then the outside would be clean
also. The Axe was now laid to the root, and every Tree that brought not forth
good Fruit was to be hewn down. The Law of Moses took hold on exterior Acts and
could not make perfect as pertaining Heb. 9. 9. 2 Cor. 10. 5. James 1. 15.
to the Conscience, but now that Dispensation was about to be established that
comes nearer home, and takes cognizance of the very Thoughts, that Sin be not
so much as conceived by the Will's joining thereto. Wherefore John was sent to
administer the Baptism of Repentance as a lively Figure of that which was
presently after to follow; for John's Baptism was not capable to produce this
Effect upon the Mind: and he himself testifies, That though he baptized them
with water, yet he that came after him, that was before him, and more
honorable than he, should baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and Matt. c. 3. v.
11* 12.
with fire, that his fan was in his hand, and and that 'twas he should
thoroughly purge his floor. Which is the great Work that is to be done under his
Gospel Dispensation, to take away the Sins of the World, and destroy the Works
of the 1 John 3. 8.
Devil, to purify Peoples Hearts, and make them spiritually minded; this is
the proper Effects of Christ's lasting Baptism, not the washing away of the
Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a 1 Pet. 3. 21.
good Conscience toward God, to purge our Consciences from dead Works, to
serve the Living God in Newness of Life. The Baptism of Christ is but Ephesians. 4.
5. Rom* 6. 3. and v. 6, 7, 8, 11.
one, and those who by it are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his
Death, and their old Man crucified with him, that the body of Sin may be
destroyed, and they no longer serve Sin, because they that are dead with Christ
are freed from Sin, and made alive to God, to live a holy righteous Life: These
are the blessed Effects of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and Fire, and Benefits
that redound to those who are in truth washed by Christ in that holy Laver
which entitles us to a part Zech. 13. 1.
in him; it is our chiefest Concern to know this inward spiritual Baptism of
Christ, that our Hearts may be washed, 1 Cor. 6* 11.
purified, and sanctified by the Spirit of God; and that we really put on
Christ, and are in him who is the Substance, in whom the Types ended. John knew
and foretold himself that he must decrease, but Christ must increase; he John
3* 30.
does not say, I shall cease presently at once, so soon as Christ's Baptism
takes place; but I must decrease, but were Water Baptism to continue always
amongst Christians, then would not John decrease: Nor will it solve this
Allegation, That 'twas abolisht as John's, and instituted anew as Christ's, for
then has Christ his different Gospel-baptisms, which is erroneous.

We grant that some of the Apostles did use Water Baptism for a time, but we
believe 'twas rather in compliance with the Circumstances of Time than of
Necessity, and in condescension to the Weakness of Believers in the very
Infancy of the Church, and even the same Age wherein John baptized, who was not
only a true Messenger of God in his time, but had gained great Credit among the
People, and his Memory and Message could not soon be forgotten; nor was it
easy to draw them from a Practice that but just before was acknowledged to be
of Divine Authority: for we find the Apostles tolerated the believing Jews to
live in certain Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, notwithstanding the
Messiah was come in the Flesh and abrogated them; so difficult it is to
disengage People from those things wherein they have been educated, and to
which their Minds are once glewed, and some of them would have had the
believing Gentiles come under that Yoke and be circumcised, which Paul their
great Apostle withstood, seeing beyond all those things, knowing that the
Kingdom of God was not Meats and Drinks, but Righteousness, Romans 14. 17.
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost* and not in Word but Power, 1 Cor. 4. 20.
not diverse Washings and carnal Ordinances which were Shadows and to Colos. 2.
v. 14 and 16, 17, 22, 10. Heb. 9. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 2.
perrish, but the Body is of Christ, and those that are in him, are in him
complete, believing that if they were circumcised, Christ should profit them
nothing; and yet we see such was his Condescension, that he himself
notwithstanding circumcised Timothy, and when he was at Jerusalem shaved his
Acts c. 21* v. 20, to the 28.
head, etc. behaving himself as a Jew, for the sakes of those who saw not so
far as himself. And notwithstanding he was such a labourious and zealous
Publisher of the Gospel, yet we find 1 Cor. 1. 14.
he baptized but very few, and thanks God that he baptized no more, (surely
'twas not then essential to the Gospel) but says plainly, That he was not 1
Cor. 1. 17. Colos. 1. 13.
sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, to turn People from Darkness to
Light, from the Power of Satan to God, who had delivered them from the Power of
Darkness, and translated them into the Kingdom of his dear Son; it is this that
is of absolute Necessity to our Salvation: he did not then baptize because some
others did it, which yet is as large a Commission as perhaps any pretend to
nowadays Of which we say as he did of Circumcision (though we do not grant
it is the Seal of the Covenant, and introduced in room of Circumcision as some
will have it, but without Scripture-authority) Baptism or no Baptism avails
any thing short of a new Creature, which is the truest Sign of possessing the
inward spiritual Grace, and of being in Christ, and is beyond all visible Signs
whatsoever: The Apostles having thus indulged it, it is no wonder that 'twas
continued, and since got footing under the Degeneracy, for as Corruption entered
the Church, and was increased, the Spirit and Life of Christianity was more and
more eclipsed, and the minds of its Professors grew darker, and then adhered
more to external Performances; and not only continued that which had been used
by their Predecessors, or at least something in its stead, but by degrees added
more Rites and Ceremonies; and at length began to trim and deck that Religion
that in itself was plain, simple, and homely, and consisted more in Power and
Divine Love than outward Observations; which in process of time was so dressed
and garnisht, that its August Splendor became inviting to others. Under this
Degeneracy in degree sprung up Infant Baptism, a mere Humane Invention, without
any Scripture-authority either by Precept or Practice; wherefore for those who
do not use Baptism, as 'twas instituted under its proper Dispensation to
upbraid us for neglecting it is abfurd and unreasonable.

But that which makes the loudest Outcry of all, is our Disuse of the
Sacrament, so called of Bread and Wine, it is this is that pestilent mortal
Error that in our Opposer's Account, renders us worse then the Papists,
whatever it is that makes us the Spawn of the Jesuits, which with several
others are Epithets, that to be sure were calculated though unjustly to render us
as odious as may be to the People, and carry a great deal of Rancour in them,
and savours of too much Gall, to proceed from the meek Spirit of Christianity,
2 Timothy 2. 22.
that teaches to be at Peace with, and have Charity for all that call on the
Lord out of a pure heart: But whether upon the whole Matter we deserve this
severe bitter Censure, or whether those that so liberally bestows it upon us,
have a just right to cast the first Stone, is what we desire our sober
Neighbors to consider, and not judge us also by wholesale, from an implicit
Belief of what others say of us. We are not ignorantof the great Noise and Stir
there has been about this in Christendom, to the scandalizing Christianity
among both Jews and Turks: the Papists have improved it to downright Idolatry,
affirming it is the real Body and Blood, and as such adores it, (one would think
'twere better let alone) others, that Christ is in it, though they know not
how: one says it is this, another it is that; while they all seem to expect that
from it which it does not necessarily administer; for want of distinguishing
between that Bread of Life that John 6. 51, 56.
came down from Heaven, that Flesh and Blood of Christ, which gives Life to
all that feed thereon, by which they dwell in him and he in them, and that
Supper which was eaten by the Primitive Christians in Commemoration of his
Death and Sacrifice; which are not so connext, as that the one necessarily
includes the other, as Experience abundantly testifies, would People but be
true to themselves herein; how many are there that receive this from Year to
Year, who yet complain all their lives of Deadness, Dryness, and Leanness of
Soul, and want of Power, not receiving that renewing of Life and spiritual
Strength that is proposed in it, and so but an empty Shadow indeed: for how can
they in truth expect to feed on John 14. 20, 21, 23.
Christ spirituallyin their Hearts who will not admit that he really dwells in
his Saints, but esteem it an Error in those that do; however, we believe all
People ought to be well persuaded in their own Minds, and seriously considerate
in these and other religious Practices, and not take up things merely
tradititionally because others do it; nor ought they to be vehemently pressed to
or against things not absolutely essential to Salvation, in which their
Understandings are not clear: nor should any be scoft or reproacht for those
things which to them are Matter of Conscience, and therefore Sacred, though to
others it may appear of less moment; a Practice that is a great Shame among
People professing Christianity. Nor do we judge and condemn those that are
found in the Practice either of this or Water Baptism as 'twas primitively
used, whose sober, Christian, circumspect Lives witnesses to their sincere
Intentions herein, who may be conscientiously tender in it, and fearful to omit
it, till they are otherwise fully persuaded: But for us, to whom the barrenness
and emptiness of these outward visible Things are manifest, we cannot continue
therein, yielding no true Soul-satisfaction, nor administering any inward
spiritual Grace to us. Wherefore having tasted that 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3.
the Lord is good and gracious, we wait for the sincere Milk of that Word by
which we have been begotten to God, that we may receive strength thereby, and
grow in Grace, and the Knowledge 2 Pet. 3. 18.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a greater Acquaintance with that true inward
Spiritual Communion and Fellowship Rev. 3. 20.
with him, wherein he sups with his Saints, and they with him; and receives
Life by him, who dwells in them, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and they in him; as the Members are joined to the Head, and partakes of its
Life, and lives by it; or the Branches to the Vine, which receives Joh. 15. 5.
Life, Virtue and Nourishment from him, whereby Fruit is brought forth to the
glory of God, and well-pleasing to him. It Is not sufficient that we participate
hereof once a Month or Quarter, but as the Jews had their Manna, Exodus 16. 21.
fresh every Morning, so ought we to receive a daily supply, and renewing of
strength in our inward Man, by eating that Heavenly Bread, that nourishes up
to Eternal Life, and drinking plentifully of that Well of Living-Weter, Joh. 4.
14.
which in the Saints springs up to Life Eternal; for as in God we live, move,
and have our very being; so is Christ the true and proper Life of the inward
Man by which it truly lives to God, nor can it live but by him. Those that are
begotten to God by the Word of Life, and are born again of the Spirit, are
privileged thus to feed on Christ, and enjoy him, which none can do that are
not first quickened and made alive by him; none can receive Life, Sap and
Virtue from him as Head and Vine, that are not first joined to him as Members
and Branches of him; nor is it sufficient to make People Members of Christ, and
give them admittance to feed on him, in that they were sprinkled when Infants,
etc. as we have already expressed, though they should eat Bread and drink Wine
all their days.

Since then we no less enjoy the Substance without the Sign, why may we not
omit it, as either being but temporary, or not of absolute necessity, as well
as our Opposers do that which was instituted (to use their own term) at the
same time, and with as great solemnity, and greater formality, and was no less
positively commanded under the same pretense? Why may not the same Authority
absolve us from the use of this, and excuse us from being chargeable with the
breach of a Command of Christ, as release them from washing one another Feet,
and secure Joh. 13. 4, 5, 8, 14, 15.
them from the like censure? As also that of the Apostles, cencerning things
strangled and Blood, and that of James Acts 15. 20, 29. Jam. 5. 14, 15.
anointing the Sick with Oil? Why should they be thus partial? Have we not good
reason to conclude, that if these had not been long since laid down, they would
have cleav'd as close to them; and that had those of Baptism, and Bread and
Wine been then discontinued also, they would be now as easy under its
omission? For Tradition, Custom, and Education, makes greater impressions on
Men's minds than perhaps every one may be sensible of; nor is it an easy task
at first to move them from those things to which they have been fastened by it.
Would but People wholly relinquish these Prejudices, and consider it
impartially, it is probable there may appear no such real difference, as justly
to omit the one, and yet with equal reason to continue the other; since it is
not that Bread that gives life to the Soul, nor does necessarily include it,
but that Christ may be, and is received, and sed on without it. Nor that those
can be thought to forget his Death and Sacrifice who sensibly partake of the
Benefits thereof, Tit. 2. 14.
and pursue its Ends; who are taught and assisted by him to live a godly Gal.
1. 4.
righteous Life, and bears about in them the Marks of the Dying of our Mat. 1.
21. 2 Cor. 5. 15.
Lord Jesus; who died for all, that those who live should no longer live to
themselves, fulfilling the desires of their minds, but to him that died for
them; that through the power of his Resurrection Phil. 3. 10.
they may mortify the Deeds of the Flesh, and have Fellowship with his
Sufferings, in whom his Life is made manifest; neither can those who
acknowledge his Death and Sacrifice, and partake from time to time of this
Bread and Wine in memory of it, and yet are not by him redeemed from a vain
Conversation, and made conformable to his Death, and so feed on him as to
participate of that Life that comes by him, in anywise escape Damnation, let
their Pretensions be what they will.

Since then God has replenisht our Hearts with his Grace, and has not with*
held his heavenly Manna from us, but daily owns us by his comfortable Presence,
to our great satisfaction, under the Omission of these things, supplying our
Wants and Necessities as we have recourse unto him, in that which ever has
access unto him, having our continual Dependancy on him, who enables and
strengthens those of us For we intend not to Apologize for those who though they
may be called by our Name, yet live loosly and walk disorderly, and are
Blemishes and a Grief to us; which yet ought to be imputed to their Insincerity
or Unwatchfulness, and not to the In-sufficiency of the Prin-ci-ple they
pretend to.
that retain our Primitive Sincerity and Integrity, to lead a Sober, Pious,
Christian Life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, which is the certain Product
of Spiritual Grace; and forasmuch as our Opposers acknowledge it to be but an
outward visible Sign, and dare not say that the inward Spiritual Grace is tied
to it, nor that it is of absolute necessity to Salvation; with what Reason do
they Unchristian us, and so load us with Calumnies and Accusations on this
Account, using it as an Instance to blacken us, and condemn in gross our whole
Christian Profession, principally from hence, as though 'twere the chief thing
that constitutes a Christian, and entitles him to the Benefits that come by
Christ.

What shall we think then of perhaps more than two parts in three of their own
Assembly, who no more practice this than do we, and yet are many of them as
sober People, and if we may know (as Christ directs us) by their Fruits, are
doubtless as near the Kingdom, and no less in a State of Grace, than are those
who so exult in, and value themselves upon this Performance; which however it
may bound and distinguish particular Societies and Communions, it is certain no
Observations nor Performances short of being ruled and governed by the Spirit
of Christ, as Head, can entitle us to a Membership in him; we may make a
specious Show, and carry a System of Divinity in our Heads, but if he rules not
our Hearts we are none of his. 'Twere well they were as thoughtful to fulfill
all Righteousness in every respect, and as zealously careful and concerned to
observe and punctually perform all the Commands and Injunctions to which the
Christian Religion obliges them, and to qualify themselves to be rightful
Inheritors of those Blessings and Promises pronounced by our Savior, as they
tenaciously adhere to this, as though 'twere indeed the Sum both of Men's Duty and
Enjoyments, and that their Salvation turned upon this very Pin; which yet
People may perform while their Wills are unsubdued, and Lusts unmortified. But
we find that Men have been apt enough to be busily employed about Mint, Annis,
and Cummin, whilst they neglect the weightier Matters, to run into, and cry up,
and maintain those exterior parts of Religion, that are reconcilable to an
Unconverted State.

If the Professors of Christianity were less taken up about Signs and Shadows,
and nice and unnecessary Scrutinies and Distinctions wherewith they perplex it,
and more devoted to observe the weighty, important, and indispensable Precepts
of Christ, and demonstrate the Power that Christianity has over their Minds,
by affording signal Instances of their being his true Disciples, and righful
Heirs of his Kingdom, being in measure invested with his Divine Virtues and
Graces, we should have less Envy, Variance, Backbiting, and Detraction, which
weakens the common Interest of Piety, and gives our common Enemy an advantage
over us; and more Christian Love, Peace, Concord and good Neighborhood amongst
us. If all that means well did but pursue Virtue, love it, and encourage it
wherever it appears, and hate Vice and Evil in all, and discountenance it
every where, and make these the Measure of their Christian Charity, rather than
Parallel Opinions in lesser Matters, 'twould bring us nearer together, and more
advance True Piety, than all their contending about different Apprehensions in
things far less essential. God, who regards not Names, but Natures, knows among
all Nations and People who are his; and the Rule he left us to know also was
their Fruits, their Actions being the exertion of their Wills; all Mankind are
either under the Power and Conduct of the Spirit of God, or else of the Devil;
all are either Carnal or Spiritual - minded, and as is the spring and bent of
their Desires and Affections, so is their Actions; each Birth have their proper
Products, which are contrary to each other. So that let what Notions or
Opinions soever possess Men's Heads, they live according to that Spirit and
Principle that governs their Hearts. We cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor
Figs of Thistles; no Fountain sends forth bitter Water and sweet at the same
time. It Is an Evangelical Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
Truth, Those that live in Envy and Strife, and bring forth the Fruits of the
Flesh, are of their Father the Ephesians. 5. 9.
Devil; and those who by the Spirit mortifies those corrupt Lusts and
Affections, and bring forth the Fruits of of the Spirit, adorning the Doctrine
of God our Savior, by a sober, godly, righteous Life, are of God; for herein 1
John 3. 10.
the Children of God are manifest from the Children of the Devil.

Thus have we heartily, though briefly, expressed our real Opinion and Belief in
those Points in which we apprehend our Adversaries have endeavored most to
expose us, which we hope may prove satisfactory to those who are not resolved
to think ill of us: but to speak fully to every critical, trifling Objection,
were a tedious Task, as well as vastly beyond the Extent of our Design. We
request our ferious Neighbors to hear and see for themselves, and not take
things upon trust from others, and to judge the things they know not, but
condemn us by hearsay; don't be imposed upon by those whose peevish humors
would have all do like themselves, who either look not at all, or but very
coyly into the Books of those they have taken a Pet against, whose Persuasion
in some things differs from what they have pronounced Orthodox, as though Truth
were their peculiar enclosure, which yet certainly argues either a great deal
of Prejudice, or a feeble and fleeting Judgment, that dares not trust it self:
Were our Books stuffed with such palpable Errors as is suggested, surely 'twere
not so dangerous reading them: Who fears to read the Alcharon? But on the
contrary, it is a strong indication that they contain much truth; for as it is
the proper Object of the Understanding, so where it appears with a clear
Evidence, answering to Peoples own Experience, it is very forcible and prevalent
upon the Minds of those who diligently seek it for love of it, and willingly
deposit all preingagements of Mind in its disquisition. Be then so just to us,
and kind to your selves, as to relinquish all Prejudice and Prepossessions, and
impartially examine the truth of these things; search the Sacred Scriptures
diligently, with an inclination rather to find and embrace Truth, than to
support a received Opinion; try whether it is so or not, comparing it with your
own Experiences and the Witness of God in your own Hearts. Though our Belief in
some of these Particulars don't exactly quadrate to that of our Opposers, it
don't therefore necessarily follow, it is not agreeable to Truth and Scripture;
nor can they give us any infallible assurance, that their Conceptions are a
true Standard of Truth, notwithstanding they vend their Apprehensions as the
only Orthodox, yes, and are displeased too with those that cannot be decermined
by them.

We have no Design carrying on behind the Curtain, howsoever our Sober
Demeanor may be uncharitably (not to say maliciously) insinuated, as only a
Cover of Sheeps Cloating upon the Wolves Nature; and our most Solemn
Declaration of our Belief in several Religious Points (being undeniable Truths)
construed, and suggested by some Men as only a fair Cover wherewith we guild
over our Poison, that it may pass the less suspected, and be the more glibly
swallowed. What think you, is not this the height of Prejudice and Envy in the
abstract? Would they themselves be content to be thus interpreted? We have no
intent to decoy and trapan People, that we should walk under a disguise, which
Intreagues usually have interest at one end of them, which cannot be our case*
who neither give nor take Money for Preaching; so that the increase of our
Numbers will not fill our Coffers. We have no other Interest to promote, but
the Advancement of True Piety and Christianity: and having Love and Good Will
to all People, more especially to those whose Minds are awakened, and Hearts
warmed, having true servent Desires, and living Breathings toward God,
thirsting after a nearer and more satisfactory knowledge of, and acquaintance
with him, than barely a profession and hearsay of him, and therefore what we
have found advantageous, assistant and satisfactory to us, in our unwearied
pursuit after Peace with him, that we recommend to others. We call People home
to the Gift of God in themselves, which only can do them good, that every one
may know the good Shepherd and Bishop of Souls for themselves, and hear and
know his Voice in them, from that of a stranger, and learn of him and follow
him, who is pure* and ever leads to Purity and Holiness, that so his offering
up of himself for them, may be of benefit to them, and they experience the
great Salvation of God; for impress this upon your Minds, and take it along
with you, That notwithstanding our Savior has paid a Ransom for us, and made
an Atonement through the precious Blood of his Cross; yet if we experience not
the end of his Coming, and Death effected, and answered in our selves, it shall
avail us nothing; except we know him a Savior and Supporter near; except we
know a Principle of Divine Light and Life, to illuminate our Minds, to revive
and warm our languishing Hearts, to beget and increase true Love to God, and
the living Faith, that gives victory to convert us, and govern our Thoughts* to
renew and regulate our Wills* and limit our Desires, and bridle our Tongues, to
excite holy Inclinations, and keep up a due Heat in our Christianity, and
strengthens our Minds in that which is good and well-pleasing to God: Except we
know these things in and for our selves, all our outside show of Religion is
but vain, and our profession of Christ shall profit us nothing, but we shall
lie down in sorrow at last; for none are Christ's, but those that Romans 8. 9, 14*
have his Spirit, and are influenced by it; nor are any Children of God, but
those that are led by the Spirit of God; which begets in the Mind a detestation
of Sin and Evil, and a love to Purity, Goodness and Virtue; wherefore, laying
aside all Strife and Animosities, all Envying and Evil-speaking, let us abhor
that which is Evil, and cleave to Romans 12. 9.
that which is Good, and address our selves with a due and humble Application
to the accomplishment of that most concerning and important Affair of our
Lives, the working out our Salvation. And let every one follow the Lord
faithfully, according to what is made known to them* knowing that we shall be
judged according to our Knowledge, and that 'twill be happy for those whose
Wills and Performances correspond with their Understandings, in that Day when
all must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and give an Account of their
Deeds done in the Body* and receive a Sentence thereafter, either, Come ye
blessed, or, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. It will not be then of what
Congregation or Confession of Faith, or of what Persuasion amongst the many
wast thou: among all which there will then be but two sorts, the Sheep and the
Goats; those that heard the Shepheard's Voice and followed him, who were guided
and governed by the good Spirit of God in their Hearts; and those who wrapping
their Talent in a Napkin, stifled Convictions, and neglecting the Day of their
Visitation, continued under the dark Power of the Evil One. One may go a great
way, and make a fair show of Religion and Piety* and yet be turned to the left
hand; it is not having our Heads filled with curious sublime Notions, though of
never so fine and elevated a Speculation; let us trim and garnish our Lamps
never so finely, 'twill not administer an entrance without the Heavenly Oil,
without that Holy Divine Unction fills our Hearts, enlightens our Minds, and
inflames our Affections to a due Watchfulness and Obedience to its Teachings*
which are the most assured Marks of our being really in Christ, in whom only
our acceptance is.

That you with us, and we with you, may so circumspectly live up to Light that
and Knowledge given by Christ, as that our Consciences may not condemn us; but
that, having finished our Days here with comfort, we may lay down our Heads in
Peace, with a well-grounded Hope of a Joyful Resurrection, and have Boldness in
the Day of Judgment, is our Hearty Desire.

If what we have Written for your Information, may find some place with those,
who, being impartial, and inquiring, have room to receive it, and that it
Contributes to their Benefit and Satisfaction, we have our End: But for those
who are full, or are critical, and ready to Carpe at every Word or Sentence
that is not placed to their Mind, if not also pre-judge it, as it is not
intended for them; so we don't suppose 'twill Prove to their good Liking, nor
meet with a Reception amongst them. For we don't propose to reconcile our whole
Belief and Persuasion in Religious Matters to that of our Opposers, who
notwithstanding, what we have writ, we expect will yet accuse us of Error.
However, having thus far declared ourselves in the most necessary Points of
the Christian Religion* we don't think ourselves farther oblidged to answer the
Cavils and Criticisms of such who may appear contentious, and will never want
something to object against those that comes not up in all things exactly to
their Level: whom yet we advise, rather to be quiet, and study to know and
govern themselves, according to that Religion that is pure and undefiled before
God, and leads to visit and assist the Fatherless, and Widows in their
Affliction, Jam. 1. 27.
and to keep themselves from the Spots and Defilements of this World. Were this
(as it ought) our Principal Care and Concern in our Conduct, we should have
little mind or leisure to differ about Matters of less moment: and while we
seem zealously to contend about Religion frustrate its end. We should not be
taken up in disputing what that Principle is which God has placed in us to do
us good, and in mean time neglect its assistance, and obstruct its Operation
upon the Mind, but be given up to be leavened and changed by it, that we m^^
partake of the Blessings thereof; a^^ 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.
with it build on the Foundation whi^^ God has laid, that which may abi^^ the
fiery Trial. To which we reco^mend you, and remains your peaceab^^ and loving
Neighbors,

W.C. A.P. J.H., etc.

THE END.

