THE CHARACTER of an ANABAPTIST.
As it was presented to some Lords of His Majestys Right honorable Privy
Council, for His Majesty, upon Thursday the 24 of Janua^y, 1660.
AN Anabaptist is so called, for being baptized according to the Scriptures,
Mat. 3. 6.16.
and as the Rubric and Catechism of the book of Common Prayer commands and
instructs: For the Rubric commands Dipping, not Sprinkling, nor pouring on
Water, but on weak conditions, both in public and private baptism. Acts 8.38,
39.
And the Catechism requires Faith and Repentance, which the same Catechism
acknowledges Infants cannot perform. And this book is owned by the Bishops and
Church of England. If Bishops then, John 3.23.
and the Church of England do as they command, and are command, as they
instruct, and are instructed; Gal. 3.27.
are not the Bishops and Church of England all Anabaptists? Romans 6.3.4. etc.


OH THAT MEN WOULD WALK BY THEIR OWN RULE, OR MAKE A RULE BY THEIR OWN WALKING.
Col. 2.12.

The Anabaptist's ONLY RULE for all they endeavor to think, say, or do, are
the SCRIPTURES: 1 Cor. 15.29.
Nor dare they allow themselves or others, in any thing not allowed and
appointed by Scripture: So that their Character is in Print, legible to all the
World: And whosoever reads the Scriptures, reads their very heart. And this
Rule the Assembly of Divines, both of England and Scotland assert for their
only Rule; against and above all Decrees, Councils, Opinions, Chap. 1 Act. 7.
Ancient Writers, and Doctrines of Men, etc. If then the Assembly of Divines,
both of England and Scotland be men of their word, are they not all Anabaptists?

OH THAT MEN WOULD DO AS THEY SAY, OR SAY AS THEY DO. Pet. 2.17.

The Anabaptists have particular commands from God in Scripture (far above all
Oaths, Covenants, Statutes, Romans 13.1, 2
and Proclamations) to fear God, and honor the King: To be subject unto the
higher Powers, Ioh. 19.11.
acknowledging there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be, are
ordained of God. And to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; 1
Pet. 2.13, 14.
whether it be to the King AS SUPREME, or unto Governors, as unto these that
are sent by Him; for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them
that do well; and not to despise Dominions, nor speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet.
3.10.
nor of the Ruler of the People: But to honor all men, to do good to all men,
to pray for all men, for Kings, and all in Authority, Jude 8.
to follow peace with all men, to do as they would be done by, to pay tribute
to whom tribute is due, Acts 23.5.
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor; and to owe
no man any thing but Love. Exodus 21.28.
If then both Judges and Magistrates, Courtiers and Lawyers concur with the
Anabaptists in all these Principles, may we say that Judges and Magistrates, 1
Pet. 2, 17.
Courtiers and Lawyers are all Anabaptists. Oh that His Majesty never had worse
Subjects nor Courtiers! Gal. 6.10.
Oh that Magistrates never had greater Opposites, nor more Refractory people to
deal with, 1 Timothy 2.1,
unless they forbid and hinder them the Worship of God; and then the
Anabaptists have these special Rules:

To obey God rather then man. Nor to Fear them that are able to Kill the Body:
Heb. 12.24.
but to Fear Him who is able to Destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Therefore
to be Holy as He is Holy. Mat. 7.12.
To keep the Commandments of God and the Faith of Jesus. To render to no man
evil for evil: nor Railing for Railing: nor yet to resist evil; but to Love
their enemies. To. 13.7, 8.
To bless them that curse them, to do good to them that hate them, and to pray
for them that despightfully use them, Act. 4.19.5.29.
and persecute them. To rejoice and be exceeding glad when they suffer for
righteousness sake. And to suffer for well-doing rather then for evil, but not
to suffer as a Malefactor. Mat. 10.28.


OH THAT ALL ANABAPTISTS WERE PERFECT IN THESE RULES; Lu. 12.4.5.
For then should the Spirit of Glory and of God rest upon them. 1. Pet 1.14.

But every one is not an Anabaptist that is so called. 16. Lev. 11.44.19.2.20.7.


Nor, if they once have been, are they still so, unless they continue in the
Truth, as it is written, They went out from us, because they were not of us,
etc. For it is nor the outward washing away the Filth of the Flesh, that makes
an Anabaptist; but the inward Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Apoc. 14.12
In doing whatsoever the Lord has commanded. And so far as any man comes short
of all these Rules, or any other written in the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 3.9.
so far comes he short of being an Anabaptist; Mat. 5.39.44.
For the word (though given or used in Derision or Malice) yet whether it be
compounded of Ana and Baptistes, or Ano and Baptistes, The first in a
Distributive sense, as each Anabaptist is singly baptized, or in an Augmenting
sense (like the Hebrew Dagesh) as each Anabaptist is thoroughly and perfectly
baptized. 1 Cor. 4.12.


The second as relating to a Baptism from Above, joined to that of Water here
below: Mat. 5.10.11.12.
They do all excellently set forh the Transcendency of that Ordinance of being
Baptized or Dipped in Water, INTO the NAME of the FATHER, of the SON, and of
the HOLY GHOST. 1 Pet. 2.21.3.14, 15, 16 18, 18.4.15


But there was a Judas amongst the Apostles, a Simon Magus, an Alexander, a
Demas, an Hymeneus, a Philetus, an Hermogenes, etc. amongst the First
Christians.

False Christ's, and False Apostles, 1 Pet. 4.14.
and False Prophets and Ministers of Satan transforming themselves into the
Ministers of Christ were all long since foretold. 1 John 2.19.


Yet it is worth the Noting, that the Profession of an Anabaptist is of that
excellency, 1 Pet. 3.21.
that if any that do but come near Profession of an Anaabptist suffer as
Malefactors, through mistake or neglect of their Rule, or as really guilty,
Joh. 14.15.15.14.
they cause more noise then All the Papists, Episcopal men, and Presbyterians
that have dyed, or suffered these 500 years, except the Book of Martyrs.

This Use may be made of All. Mat.


Let Names be less odious and Sins more. And amongst whom their are fewest
Drunkards, Whoremongers, Swearers, Acts 8.
and Blasphemers found; Let that Profession be esteemed to have the greatest
Power of godliness and Christianity, 1 Timothy 1.20
which Holy Emulation, if once in voge, would stifle (in time) all false
Witnesses and Tale-bearers, who are the very bain of Magistrates, 2 Timothy
4.10.14.
and Ruin of Nations, From which Pest the Lord deliver his gracious Majesty,
that his Throne may be established in Righteousness, to the Peace and Comfort
of all his good people, Amen. Mat. 24.11.24. Mar. 13.22.2 Cor. 11.13.15. Matt.
7. 15. Luke 6. 26. 2 Pet. 1.2. 1 John 4.1.


LONDON, Prinred by J. Clowes, for P. C. 1666.


