ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. WILLIAM DELLS Book Entitled The Crucified and Quickened
Christian.

BY HUMFRY CHAMBERS, D. D. Pastor of Pewsy in the County of Wilts.

2 JOHN 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ,
has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the
Father and the Son.

Saepe sub diversis verbis idem tenetur sensus. Attamen qui novas phrases,
terminos, definitiones rerum excogitant, etiam nova dogmata moliuntur. Nolunt
enim loqui cum aliis, ut supra alios sapere videantur. Simul indicat (sc.
Apostolus) remedium quo schismata caveri, and curari possint, si idem loqui
studeamus, hoc est, phrases ecclesiae proprias, perspicuas, consuetas studiose
teneamus. At non debemus esse jurati in cujusquam verba, nec admittere aliquid
extra scripturas.

Pareus ad 1 Cor. 1.10. November. vicessimo, 1652.
Imprimatur

JOHN OWEN Vicecan. OXON.

London, Printed by R. N. for Sa. Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard.
M.DC.LIII.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General CROMWELL.
My Lord,
I Trust it shall not be adjudged overdaring presumption in me (seeing Mr. Dell
did adventure to Dedicate his book to you) that I take the boldness to follow
him into your presence, and to lay down these Animadversions on his book at
your Excellencies feet: If you please, and the multitude of your important
affairs will admit you to cast an eye upon them: I hope you will discern in
them, amidst many weaknesses, a heart studious of keeping the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, and desirous to speak the truth in love. I have
great assurance given me, that your Excellency expressed a real distaste of
some of the Doctrines contained in Mr. Dells book, when he published them in
your hearing, and I believe it, being convinced that there are many positions,
and expositions in Mr. Dells book, which cannot but afford matter of just
offense to a pious and judicious spirit: But I will not presume any farther to
trouble your Excellency. The God of power, wisdom and mercy, make you
Instrumental to promote his truth, kingdom and Glory, which is and shall be the
hearts desire and prayer of,

My Lord, Your Excellencies servant in the truth and service of Jesus Christ
HUMFRY CHAMBERS.

To Mr. WILLIAM DELL, Master of GONVIL and CAIUS College in CAMBRIDGE.
Mr. Dell,
NOt out of any itch which I have to put my self under the scratching of this
way-ward wrangling age, nor out of a desire to be seen at this time wherein
(were it not for conscience of duty) I should prefer a Cave in a wilderness
with bread and water, above any palace and provisions which I know in this low
world, nor out of a conceit of sufficiency duly to manage points of difference
and difficulty in matter of Religion, wherein no man knows more of my
weakness then my self: But out of love to the everlasting truth of God, which
if I much mistake not, is generally clouded, and I fear in some places
contradicted in your book; I have been induced in the face of many
discouragements to expose these Animadversions on the same to public view. In
so doing I do not know that I have given you any just cause of offense, seeing
you, and I, and all that pretend to be the servants of Christ, have warrant
upon no other terms in word or writing to tender doctrines unto others, then as
unto wise men who are to judge what we say, and proving all things, to hold
fast that which is good. 1 Cor. 10.15.
A faithful servant of God now at rest, lying upon his sick, and as it proved
his death bed, being much disquieted with your book, put it into my hands, who
before had never seen it or heard of it, and desired me to make some short
notes upon it, and communicate them to him who was then by reason of his bodily
infirmity unable to compose his own thoughts. Mr. Henry Scuddar.
I answered his desire in part before he died, since which time, considering as
you testify that several good men desired the publishing of your doctrine, and
being assured that the ultimate doctrine of your book which seems to me very
contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, namely concerning the
subsisting of believers spoiled of all proper personality in themselves, in the
nature and person of the Son of God, has been lately preached by another in a
large congregation, in words much like yours, if not the same; and seeing how
ready many high professors of Religion in our days are to swallow novelties
without chewing, which breeds strange crudities, and causes such stupendous
putting of darkness for light, and light for darkness; of bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter: I resolved through the strength of God, to go through
your book, and weigh it at the balance of the Scripture, with a firm purpose
to give all the allowance to your words which reason and charity could call
for; and if I found them consonant to the word of God, then to sit still, if
otherwise, to give public warning to Gods people, to try before they trust
your new doctrine: In prosecution of this resolution, I have now published
these Animadversions on your book; If you or any other, shall show me that I
have erred in them from the rule of truth or love, I here bind my self to make
a thankful, and (if it be desired) a public acknowledgement of so great a
favor, conceiving it a great mercy when God brings any one unfeinedly to the
honorable duty of a just retractation, and knowing that error in print
unretracted, may do unspeakable mischief to succeeding generations, when the
Author thereof is dead and rotten. Sir, I thought fit thus far to give you an
account of the true reason of my undertaking, in the composing and publishing
of those Animadversions on your book. The good Lord reduce us where either of
us err, and confirm us where we go aright; and teach us to triunph in our own
lessnings, whilst the truth of God is exalted. So prays he who is

Desirous to meet you in the truth, love, life, and kingdom of Jesus Christ,
Humfry Chambers.

To the Christian READER.
THe word of God is truth, and that truth everlasting. John 17.17. (...) Psalm.
119.160
All divine truth is, in it self, and as to Gods manifestation of it in his
word, old, though much of this truth is as to us, and our apprehension of it
from the word, new; but whether new or old what ever appears unto thee by
Scripture evidence to be truth, embrace and honor it as an irradiation of the
God of truth; Adversus universas haereses jam hinc praejudicatum sit id esse
verum quodeunque primum. Tertul.
Let the holy Ghosts counsel impartially prevail with thee: buy the truth, and
sell it not. Prove. 23.23.
By perusing of the ensuing Animadversions on Mr. Dells book, which out of love
unto the truth I have now made public, thou will find many positions laid down
with greatest confidence by him called into question by me as concerning their
truth, such as these. 1. That all the powers on earth have no power to protect
the truth being brought forth, Epist. Dedicatory. (A) 2. That believers do work
out of justifying righteousness. Section 1. (E) 3. That a believer is wholly
dead to the law, and as a dead man has no more to do with the law, as to the
giving of laws to him. Sect. 1. (F) and Sect. 2. (B) 4. That the law of the
spirit makes a believer truly dead to the law. Sect. 2. (D) 5. That Libertines
and licentious persons are to be restrained by the Civil Magistrate, when they
transgress wickedly and presumptuously against their neighbor and civil
society, but in other things, concerning the things of God, they are to be left
to the immediate judgment of God only. Sect. 3. (C) 6. That the humanity of
Christ knew no law but the presence of the Godhead in it. Sect. 3. (F) 7. That
God himself is the new law according to which believers walk. Sect. 3. (G) 8.
That our Lord Christ owed nothing to the law of Moses by way of debt. Sect. 4.
(A) 9. That the living word and spirit which dwelt in the flesh of Christ, was
the true crucifying of him. Sect. 4. (B) 10. That Christians are dead to
whatsoever is not God himself. Sect. 4. (D) 11. That Christ was crucified
before his cross, and that his outward crucifying was but a sign of what done
before within. Sect. 5. (C) 12. That the divine nature of Christ was the
constant cross of his humane nature, and his humane nature was fully crucified
in his divine. Sect. 5. (E) 13. That the man Christ lost all his own things in
God, through immediate union with God. Sect. 5. (F) 14. That the living word
and spirit is the glorious cross of the Church the body, as of Christ the
head. Sect. 6. (D) 15. That the word which faith receives, is the word of
righteousness and life (in opposition to the outward word) which is always
accompanied with the spirit. Sect. 7. (C) 16. That their own life is
extinguished in believers, by the living word and spirit. Sect. 7. (I)
And yet 17. That sin has its full power in the humane life of believers.
Sect. 7. (M) 18. That the Devil can find nothing in believers to do them harm.
Sect. 7. (P) 19. That the flesh crucified in believers, is Christ's own flesh.
Sect. 7. (Q) 20. That the flesh crucified in believers, is the only temple and
habitation of God. Sect. 7. (S) 21. That the flesh crucified in believers,
keeps the true Christian sabbath. Sect. 7. (T) 22. That the flesh crucified in
believers, is able to endure the will of God, and to suffer for his name. Sect.
7. (W) 23. That the flesh crucified in believers, has the very glory of Christ
upon it. Sect. 7. (Y) 24. That the flesh crucified in believers, is the only
subject of the glorious resurrection. Sect. 7. (Z) 25. That the humanity of
Christ was deprived of its own proper life, through the word and spirit that
dwelt in it. Sect. 10. (A) 26. That instead thereof, it had the life of the Son
of God communicated to it. Sect. 9. (A) 27. That the son of man parted with his
own proper life, out of himself. Sect. 9. (A) 28. That he did yet live truly in
the same soul and body, the life of the eternal word. Sect. 9: (A) 29. That the
whole Church is conformed to the pattern of the humanity of Christ, in point of
living the life of the eternal word. Sect. 9. (A) 30. That the son of man was
so crucified, that nevertheless he lived whilst he was crucified. Sect. 9.
(A) 31. That in a believer the soul and body live in the life of the son of
God, as was done in the flesh of Christ our elder brother. Sect. 10. (E) 32.
That no man should think that the life which Paul lived after his crucifying,
was only his own humane life purified and refined. Sect. 11. (A) 33. That a
christian is so crucified with Christ, that in this crucifying he loses not
only his own proper life, but his personality also. Sect. 11. (B)
And so 34. That through faith, a believers soul and body live no more any
proper life of their own, but are taken up into the nature and person of the
son of God. Sect. 11. (B)
And so 35. That a believer subsists in Christ's person, and is no more a
distinct person by himself. Sect. 11. (C) 36. That Christ in a believer is to
him instead of all created habits of grace. Sect. 14. (B)
And so 37. That Christ who lives in a believer, is all grace to him. Sect. 14.
(B) 38. That the created habits of grace in a Christian, are nothing but empty
notions, and vain speculations of carnal and unbelieving hearts, ignorant of
the true mystery of the Gospel. Sect. 14. (B) 39. That Christ himself is the
only grace that is acceptable to God. Sect. 15. (C) 40. That this is the only
grace against which the gates of hell cannot prevail. Sect. 14. (D) 41. That
true justification is to be so one with Christ by faith; that Christ himself
may live in us, and we in him, that he may communicate his nature unto us, and
our nature may be taken up into his. Sect. 14. (H)
And so 42. That we are justified before God by Christ's living in us his own
life. Sect. 14. (H) 43. That Christ and a Christian are made so much one, that
what one does the other may be truly said to do. Sect. 15. (A) 44. That as it
is between God and Christ, just so it is between Christ and believers, who are
as nearly united, as God and Christ. Sect. 15. (B) 45. That the true nature of
Faith is nothing but this, the Fathers laying hold of us by his Spirit, and
drawing us to the Son, and inabling us to receive the Son; and so making us one
with the Son, to abide and live in him for ever. Sect. 17. (A) 46. That as the
Word or Son coming into the humanity of Christ, gave it authority and power to
become the Son of God, so the same Word coming into us through Christ, gives us
power to become the Sons of God in him, as the fire gives the iron in which it
dwells power to be light and hot. Sect. 17. (B) 47. That right faith carries a
believer into all the perfections and excellencies of the Son of God, into his
nature, and life, and righteousness, and power, and glory, and into all the
fullness of the Son of the living God. Sect. 17. (F) 48. That right faith is
infinite and everlasting righteousness, the first and last, and all in all in
the kingdom of the Son. Sect. 18. (C)


These, and diverse other Positions, many of which respect not barely the
circumference, but (as it seems to me) lie very close to the heart and center
of Christian doctrine: Thou will see, good Reader, very peremptorily tendered
by Mr. Dell in his book, and brought to a charitable trial in my Animadversions
on the same, and upon trial, if I am not mistaken, wherein I humbly and
heartily submit to scripture judgment, found guilty of swerving from the rule
of divine gospel truth. I have not willingly misreported one of Mr. Dells
positions, or picked a quarrel with any part of his book, making it worse then
it is, by a forced interpretation of it, or inference from it; yet I see that
evil practice so commonly prevailing, that I suspect it in my self, and shall
be ready to crave pardon if it appear that I have, though unwittingly, offended
in that kind: My Animadversions, though very short, yet are large enough, I
hope, as I intended them, to put the points in difference between Mr. Dell and
my self under thy judgment. And let me beseech thee to be an impartial judge
between us for thine own good, and with the noble Boereans, bring every
doctrine to the Scripture, and be not swayed on either side, to presume above
that which is written. Acts 17.11. (...). 1 Cor. 4.6.
I do not make it the foundation of my faith in what I tender; yet I confess
it is a strong buttresse of my belief, in the points under debate between us,
that I adhere to those old apprehensions which holy and judicious divines, who
have been before us, have with full consent, embraced as the truths of God, and
whereby they have guided many thousand souls into Gods everlasting rest. But my
last appeal is to the holy Scriptures, those I make conscience to make my final
judge, or rather God in them. Dear Christian, hearken to the voice of thy God,
when he speaks plainly in the Scriptures, Psalm. 119.130
and so doing, with humble and faithful prayer to God for understanding, doubt
not but thou may be able with a judgment of Christian discerning to
distinguish, in points more difficult, what is consonant to, or disagreeing
from the same, and so discover what has or has not the stamp of divine truth
upon it. I will make no apology for my appearing in public at this time, for
though I am very conscious of mine own weakness, and (as I think) am not
naturally litigious, yet my conscience provoked me, seeing none of my much more
able, and worthy brethren have, for ought I know, appeared in this cause,
publicly to call Christians in our unsettled times to a serious trial of those
doctrines which Mr. Dell had publicly tendered to them, and laid down with
highest confidence in his book, which notwithstanding seem to me utterly unable
to stand before the light and truth of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. If in any
particulars I have erred, as I know I may, and am jealous I have; Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, let them reprove me, it shall be
an excellent oil which shall not break my head. It is truth, I love, and seek,
and prize, the truth of Christ; the Lord clear it, and lift it up amongst us
daily; If what I have now done may have any tendency to that end, I shall
desire my self, and earnestly desire thee also, to glorify the God of truth in
that behalf: Afford a share in thy prayers, I beseech the to

An unworthy servant of Christ and his Church, who desires thy establishment
in the truth of the Gospel, and true way of life. Humfry Chambers.

ANIMADVERSIONS.
(A) He that is first in his own cause seems just, Prove. 18.17. (...), Romans
12.16.

(B) Mr. Dell, by entituling himself [minister of the Gospel] seems to
acknowledge the Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel, as a peculiar, distinct,
and distinguishing office in the Church of God, whereunto if he will be
constant, in our unconstant times, he shall do well. And since Mr. Dell sets
forth himself as Master of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge; I hope he
holds himself engaged to appear a real friend to Learning and Universities,
when so many declare themselves real enemies against them: He knows what has
long been received for a tried truth, Scilicet, scientia non habet inimicum
nisi ignorantem. May I not add, and Julianum, which spiteful apostate from
Christ, to effect the subversion of Christianity, attempted the suppression of
learning amongst Christians, Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 10.

The Crucified and Quickened CHRISTIAN.
SECTION I.
GAL. 2.20. I am Crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me.


IN this Chapter, we have one Apostle contending against another, Paul against
Peter, and that about the truth of the Gospel, in a very chief point. For
Peter, in the absence of the Jews, lived amongst the Gentiles, after the manner
of the Gentiles, for outward conversation, wholly laying aside the Mosaical
Rites and Ceremonies. But when certain Jews came from James, Peter did withdraw
from the Gentiles, and from the use of that freedom and liberty of the Gospel,
wherein he had walked with them, and lived again with the Jews, after the
manner of the Jews, in the use of the Jewish Ceremonies.

By which practice of his, he laid a stumbling block before the believing
Gentiles, giving them occasion to think and judge, That Christ alone, received
by Faith, was not enough to Justification and Salvation; unless they did also
come in to live as the Jews, after Moses Law.

Hereupon (A) Paul (who had a very clear knowledge in the mystery of Christ and
the Gospel) did exceedingly blame Peter for this his un-even walking, (B) and
tells him, that by thus doing, he committed a greater error then he was aware;
for hereby he made Christ the Minister of sin. For, if Christ received by
Faith, be abundantly sufficient and enough to all Christians, both for
righteousness and life, and that without the Law; why does Peter bring the
Gentiles that had believed on Christ, back again to the Law? Is not this (says
Paul) to argue Christ of weakness and insufficiency, and to make him the
Author and Teacher of a Doctrine that leaves men still in sin, it not being
able to conser upon them, by it self alone, full, perfect, and sufficient
Righteousness.

And by reason (C) of this gross mistake of Peter, of so dangerous a
consequence, Paul according to the wisdom of the Spirit, takes occasion to
discourse of that great point of Justification, which is the very marrow and
substance of the Gospel: (D) and he shows, that we must not do the works of the
Law, thereby to be made righteous: but we must first be made righteous, ere we
can do aright any work of the Law. For, as it is not good fruit can make a good
tree, but it is a good tree that must bring forth good fruit; (E) so neither
are we made righteous by working righteousness, but by receiving
righteousness, out of which afterward we work. And so the Law, that commands
Righteousness, but does not communicate Righteousness, can never justify us;
But faith, that makes us righteous before we can work righteousness; it is
that which justifies us in the sight of God.

Now to this Doctrine, Paul adds his own Experience to make all clear: which
kind of arguing, though it will not satisfy the reason of the World, yet it
will satisfy the faith of the Saints.

Now says Paul, for mine own part, I must profess to the Jews themselves, and
to all the world besides, (F) that I am so far from seeking Righteousness by
the Law, that I am wholly dead to the Law, and as a dead man, have no more to
do with the Law, as that has no more to do with me. I through the Law am dead
to the Law, that I might live unto God, verse 19.

ANIMADVERSION I.
(A) ANd had not Peter too a very clear knowledge in the mystery of Christ? He
stands indeed charged with dissimulation, in the Text, Gal. 2.13. but not with
ignorance or error in any degree, which yet Mr. Dell seems closely to fasten
upon him in this place.

(B) No such thing appears to me in the text, as is here affirmed by Mr. Dell.
The Apostle, Gal. 2.17,18. showed that if professed believers give way to
themselves in sin, or are by the light of the Gospel discovered to be sinners,
their sins are not to be charged on Christ, as the minister of sin, or upon his
Gospel, but on themselves as transgressors in conformity to his own doctrine,
Romans 6.1,2,3,4. This has nothing to do with any personal error of Peter,
greater or less, whereby he made Christ the minister of sin, whereof Mr. Dell
causlesly, yet confidently, proclaims himself guilty.

(C) I read of no gross mistake, but of a sad miscarriage of Peter, of a
dangerous consequence indeed. Christians should be tender of casting the
reproach of a gross mistake upon an Apostle without clear evidence. In suam
ipsius conscientiam peccabat, aliud intus sentiens, aliud foris simulans,
Pareus ad Gal. 2.12. He sinned against his own conscience, apprehending one
thing inwardly, feigning another thing outwardly.

(D) Let this then stand and be held for a truth, that they who are first made
righteous, can do aright the works of the Law, which I think is enough to
prove, that righteous believers are in some sense alive to the Law, since they,
and they only can do aright the works of the Law; yet Mr. Dell afterward seems
very unwillingly to allow so much for truth.

(E) Do we work out our justifying righteousness as these words import? Is not
this to confound justification with sanctification? The righteousness of God
whereby were are justified, is in Christ, for us, Romans 3.24,25. The
righteousness out of which we work, is from Christ, in us, through his spirit,
Ephesians. 4.24. These two kinds of righteousness are inseparably joined together,
yet not to be confounded, as they are here by Mr. Dell; And of the two, it is
evident that believers work not out of justifying, but sanctifying
righteousness. Phil. 1.11.

(F) Wholly, is not in the text, and were it there, it would only show that the
Apostle was excluded wholly from seeking righteousness by the Law, Gal. 2.21.
and 3.21. And this is the acknowledged doctrine of Protestants, who generally
profess, that as to the seeking of righteousness by the Law, we are wholly
dead to it, through the faith of the Gospel, which holds forth Christ as the
end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. In
this sense there is no question but every believer may say with the Apostle, I
through the Law am dead to the Law, that I may live unto God. But Mr. Dells
wholly in this place is of a much larger extent, transcending, as I conceive,
the limits of the Scripture.

SECT. II.
I (Says Paul) through the Law, am dead to the Law: that is, The Law it self,
makes me dead to the Law. For the Law with its wrath, and curse, and
punishments, has slain me: it has through my sin delivered me up to death and
hell, (A) without showing me any way of escape or deliverance; it has done
against me what ever it could do; it has fully killed and slain me. And
therefore, how can the Law any more give Laws and Commands (B) to a dead man,
yea to one whom it self has slain? or how can it expect obedience from such an
one? And this sense Chrysostom gives of these words.

But secondly, (C) we conceive these words, in another sense, after this
manner, I through the Law am dead to the Law, that is, I through a new Law am
dead to the old Law; I am dead to the old Law, (which was the Law of the
Letter, written in Tables of stone) by a new Law, which God has written in my
heart, and inwardparts. (...)
And this is the Law of Grace, or the Law of the Spirjt of Life, that is in
Christ Jesus, which is not a Law consisting of Letters, words and sentences,
but is the living word of God, written in our hearts by the living spirit of
God; according to that of Paul, touching Believers, 2 Cor. 3.3. Ye are the
epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God;
and the living Spirit writes a living Law. (D) And this Law makes us dead to
the Law: and a man is never truly dead to the Law of the letter, till the Law
of the Spirit of life be writ in his heart by the finger of God. But when we
have the Law of Grace, which is a living and almighty Law in our hearts, we are
then safely dead to the Law of the letter.

The Law commands all flesh that has not the living Word or Law of life within
it self; (E) but when a Believer has in him the Law of the Spirit, the Law of
the letter has no more power over him: that is, so far as he is taken up into
that other Law of the Spirit, (F) but no further.

And there is no danger at all in this Doctrine, That the new Law makes us dead
to, or delivers us from the old, as ignorant and carnal Christians think there
is; inasmuch as this new Law, imprints in our souls the love of righteousness,
and hatred of iniquity: (G) And he that is thus freed from the Law, is the only
man that keeps it and fulfils it, through the law of love put into his heart by
the Spirit. And this Law of love, does fulfill the other Law, but never break
and violate it. Wherefore, says Paul, I through the Law, am dead to the Law.

ANIMADVERSION 2.
(A) THe Law taken comprehensively for the whole Law of Moses, or strictly for
the legal Covenant of works, shows a sinner no way of escape from death and
hell in it self, without Christ. But the Law in the Ceremonial part of it, did
show the true way of escape from death and hell by Christ, Romans 3.21. Heb.
10.1. Mr. Dells unlimited position therefore in this place, needs some
limitation, or explication, that it may obtain a general approbation.

(B) The Law cannot give commands to a dead man, as far forth as he is dead,
that is in the case before us, to a believer, as to the seeking of
righteousness by the Law: But notwithstanding this death, yet believers are
alive as to the doing of righteousness according to the will of God expressed
in his law, Romans 6.11. Mark 3.35. 1 John 3.7. 1 These. 4.2,3. Yea, they alone
can do aright the works of the Law, as Mr. Dell has before acknowledged; And
therefore as to divine direction, the Law of God can give commands to
believers, as to living men.

(C) This is a voluntary sense of those words, having no footing in the text;
The former interpretation of the words given by Mr. Dell, is sound and proper,
being not overstrained; Quum exitium nobis minitetur, nihil nobis relinquat
praeter desperationem, hoc modo nos expellit a sui fiducia, Calvin. Seeing it (
scil. the Law) threatening destruction to us, leaves nothing but desperation for
us, by this means it drives us from all dependence on it self: The new Law
mentioned here by Mr. Dell, is never under the name of the Law spoken of in
this Epistle: it seems therefore very unwarrantable to force that sense of the
Law upon this text only.

(D) What? does the Law of the spirit make men dead to the Law without all
distinction? Was David as to all intents dead to the Law when he wrote, The law
of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.72.
or Paul, Romans 7.22. yet had both these the Law of the Spirit of life in them?
Me thinks Mr. Dell should have some exceptions from this general position here
laid down by him, if he pleased to express them: or else if this must stand
unlimitedly for true, that which Mr. Dell has before affirmed, will prove
unquestionably false, namely, that they who are first made righteous, can do
aright the works of the Law.

(E) It is true, that when a believer has in him the Law of the Spirit, the
Law of the letter has no more power over him, as to 1. malediction, Gal. 3.13.
2. Condemnation, Romans 8.1. 3. Slavish compulsion, 1 Timothy 1.9. 4. Powerful
irritation of sin, Romans 7.5. 5. Justification to life, Romans 10.4. 6. In the
time of the Gospel, carnal and temporary commands, Heb. 9.10. Col. 2.20. but
not as to divine regulation and direction in perpetual duties of righteousness
and holiness, Luke 1.75,76. 1 Cor. 9.8,9,21, Ephesians. 6.1.2. Prove. 6.23. which
last and lasting use of the Law, Mr Dell here confidently affirms believers
to be dead unto, through the Law of the Spirit; and fastneth the reproach of
carnal and ignorant Christians upon all those who shall dare to say, that there
is any danger at all in this his Doctrine; but of this let understanding, and
spiritual Christians judge by that word of Christ, by which we shall be all
judged, Persons, and Doctrines, at the last day. John 12.48.

(F) But no further? Then belike a believer is in some degree under the power
of the Law still, which Mr Dell seems to deny earnestly throughout this book.

(G) If he that is free from the Law, keeps and fulfils it through the Law of
love, as is here affirmed, and I fully believe; then can I not see how there
can be any danger at all in this doctrine, That believers are the only men on
earth dead to the Law, as to justification, and alive to the Law as to the
outward regulation of them thereby, according to the inward rule of love, which
is in their hearts from the spirit of Christ, Romans 13.8,9,10. James 2.8,9. And
this I believe upon trial will be found all which they teach, or believe whom
Mr Dell afterward reproves, or rather reproacheth, as Jewishly zealous of the
honor of the Law.

SECT. III. That I might live unto God.
THat is, He that through the Law of Grace is freed of the Law of the letter,
is not set free from the Law, that thereby he may have opportunity and liberty
to live to sin, and himself, but that he may thereby live unto God: And when a
man is born of God, (A) and lives the life of God, from the nature of God,
there is no danger at all, in declating this man to be free from the Law of
Moses, by the Law of Christ. (B) For how otherwise should he come to know the
high privilege of the Gospel, and the excellent prerogative of the sons of
God, and the glorious liberty, and freedom, into which Jesus Christ has
exalted him?

Now this One Thing rightly understood, does administer to us just cause to
reprove two sorts of People, who swerve from the truth in this particular.

The first sort are they who would be dead to the Law, that they might live
unto sin, and not unto God: who would have no Law, that all things might be
lawful, though never so wicked and abominable, and never so contrary both to
the light of Grace and Nature. And these are the true Antinomians and
Libertines, who would be free from the Law of Moses, they not being under the
Law of Christ; who would take away and quite abolish the Law of the letter,
they not being under the Law of the Spirit; and so would be free from all Law,
both Old and New, both of Moses and Christ, that they might live as they list,
and take their full swinge in all their lusts. Now such Libertines and
Licentious persons as these, are to be restrained and punished by the Civil
Magistrate, and the Powers that be of God in the world, when they transgress
in any matter wickedly, and presumptuously against their neighbor, and against
civil society: (C) and in other things, that are more secret and inward, or
that are of their own notions and apprehensions, though concerning the things
of God, they are to be left, with other unbelievers, and misbelievers, to the
righteous judgment of God, who is always present in the world, and immediate
Moderator and Governor himself, in all such affairs as immediately concern
himself and his Kingdom.

2. The other sort to be reproved from this point, are such, who are so Jewish,
and so zealous of the honor of the Law, that they will by no means endure to
hear, that the Gospel of the Son of God, comes to abolish it, or that the new
Law is given us, to make us quite dead to the old. For they think, that such
Doctrine as this, will open a flood-gate to all manner of wickedness and
licentiousness. (D) For such men, being carnal themselves, and knowing no
restraint from sin, but the Law of Moses, do verily think, that if that curb be
taken out of the jaws of men, they must needs rush headlong into all manner of
evil; as the horse into the battle: and this is true enough, where men free
themselves, or are freed by others from the old Law, before the new be written
in their hearts. (E) But this they understand not, that when the new law comes,
it is a sufficient discharge from the old; since the Law of Grace within us, is
infinitely more powerful to keep us from sin, then the Law of Moses without us;
and the love of righteousness, and hatred of iniquity, put into our hearts by
the Spirit, is infinitely more able to make us do righteousness, and avoid
sin, then any outward commands and threatenings whatsoever. And so where the
Gospel prevails in truth and power, men need not fear the taking away the Law
from such men, seeing they through the new Law are dead unto the old, that they
may live unto God. (F) That, as the humanity of Christ knew no Law; but the
presence of the Godhead in it, was unto it instead of all Law, and it lived
unto God by living in God, through union and communion with the divine Nature;
so the Saints, God dwelling in them, and they in God, do by this means live
unto God: (G) and God himself, who dwells in them, is the new law according to
which they live; they doing all in God, and for God, and so live unto God
indeed.

And now it follows,

ANIMADVERSION 3.
(A) THis being a Scripture expression cannot be excepted against, if it be not
racked to speak contrary to the plain and general tenor of Scripture doctrine.
It is very considerable what two worthies have written concerning partaking of
the divine nature; namely, Naturam non vocat (...) sed certas ut ita loquar
qualitates, quas dei virtus in nobis efficit ut hactenus dei imago simus. Nam
and hoc ipsum postea indicat, quum definit naturae divinae participem fieri
idem esse atque mundi corruptionem effugisse. Itaque non modo impii sed and
plane etiam ridiculi sunt qui ex hoc loco Divinae essentiae in nos
transfusionem imaginantur ut impius ille Servetus praefracte ad mortem usque
defendit. He calls nature not the very essence, but certain qualities (as I may
so speak) which the power of God works in us, that thus far we may be the
Image of God. For this very thing he afterward declares, when he defines to
be made partaker of the Divine Nature to be the self same thing, which having
escaped the corruption of the world. Therefore they are not only impious, but
altogether ridiculous, who from this place raise an imagination of the
transfusion of the divine essence into us, as that wicked Servetus obstinately
defended even unto death, Beza, in 2 Pet. 1.4. Notemus ergo hunc esse Evangelii
finem, ut aliquando deo conformes reddamur, id vero est quasi deificari ut ita
loquamur. Let us observe, that this is the end of the Gospel, that we should be
at last made conformable unto God, that is, that we may so speak, to be in a
kind deified. Calv. in Locum.

(B) Gospel liberty from the Law, according to the Scripture, is doubtless to
be declared as an high privilege and prerogative of the sons of God, and I
hope it is so declared by them whom Mr Dell in contempt calls ignorant and
carnal Christians, in the former page, Romans 2.1. Freedom of heart unto the Law
as a divine rule, is (as I take it) a great part of Gospel liberty from the Law
as a yoke of bondage. Do not these Scriptures teach as much, Romans 6.14,15,16.
and 7.22. Psalm. 119.45. James 1.25. It is an high privilege of the Gospel, and
an excellent prerogative and branch of the glorious liberty of the sons of God,
to be set free from sin, and made the servants of God, to have their fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.21. The sons of God,
established with his full spirit, cannot but speak in David's language, I will
run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32.

(C) It is dangerous and unwarrantable distinguishing upon the Scriptures,
without the Scriptures. If that liberty be indulged unto men, they will have a
bridle in the mouth of Scripture to make it turn, and speak at pleasure. Evil
doers, without distinction, are made the objects of Magistratical restraint,
Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.14. And the corrupters of Gods truth and worship are
expressly called evil doers, Phil. 3.2. When therefore men manifestly appear to
be such, they cannot plead or expect exemption from magistratical restraint by
Scripture authority. The Parliament has lately published an Act against
blasphemy, and revived and enlarged some Acts for the due observation of the
Lords Day; and I think therein have discharged a duty which belongs to
Christian Magistrates. Should any attempt to introduce surcisme, Paganism,
Judaisme or Socinianisme into our Land, would the governors thereof do well,
like Gallio, to sit down and care for none of these things? would they be able
to satisfy their conscience, that they did satisfy their duty toward God, in
case they should look on, stand still, and cry God help. I think there are few
who would have a face, though it be much to be feared, that many have a heart
to profess so much, which is the necessary result of Mr Dells principles:
Blessed be God that the present heads of our State in Parliament, by what they
have lately done about the Turkish Alcaron, and the Sociman Catechism, toward
the suppressing of them, have declared themselves to be of more sound
judgment. I cannot yet otherwise apprehend but that they who hold, that
Magistrates may not at all Judge, and do justice, in case of manifest immediate
injury done to God, are not through strength of reason, but by reason of the
Magistrates strength only held to an acknowledgement, that they may Judge and
do justice in point of injury toward men. For the reason taken from Gods being
always present in the world as moderatour, and governor himself, to prove
that he is the immediate Judge in all things that immediately concern himself
and his kingdom, being pressed home will prove him to be immediate Judge also,
in all things pertaining to Judgment and Justice amongst men, seeing his
throne is in the heavens, and his kingdom rules overall, and so a fair way will
be made to an utter extirpation of Magistracy from the very foundations.

And as for tenderhearted Magistrates, who may be staggered at the use of
their power, for the suppressing of such, as in the judgment of their
conscience, regulated by the word of God, are manifest and pernicious offenders
in such affairs as immediately concern God and his kingdom; I would offer these
things briefly to their judicious consideration.

1. That the tenderness of good Magistrates to act for God, will breed no
tenderness in evil Magistrates to act against God, when they have power in
their hands.

2. That the abuse of Magistratical authority by evil men, does not make that
authority void in the hands of good men, else all authority of Magistrates, in
things relating as well to men as God, would be extinguished.

3. That whilst Magistrates, not only neglect but refuse, and that out of
conscience to act for God in all such affairs, as immediately concern him and
his kingdom, they may provoke him to set up others in their stead, who will
make conscience to be zealous and valiant for him, his truth and worship upon
earth, against manifest offenders. Ezech. 34.7,8,9,10. See Buroughs on Hosea,
chap. 1. verse 11. And Phil. 1.29. 1 Pet. 4.19.


4. That it is a fruit of carnal wisdom in Gods people to project, and folly to
expect freedom from persecution for truth, and righteousness, when wicked men
are exalted, specially considering that suffering patiently and joyfully for
righteousness, when God calls them thereunto, is a part of the peculiar
happiness and honor of Gods servants upon earth.

5. That the nourishing of the open corrupters of Gods truth and worship, by
Magistrates in any state, is not only by way of provocation in regard of God,
but preparation also in regard of men, a very ready course to ripen such a
state to the hottest persecution for truth and righteousness; He that
nourishes a serpent is likely to be bitten thereby.

6. That the Law of God is open to the consciences of Christian Magistrates, as
well in things immediately concerning God as men, and they are deputies for God
toward men, in relation to his whole Law.

7. That no godly governor of a family holds himself bound to permit such to
abide unrestrained under his roof, who are openly corrupt and corrupters of
others, in things immediately concerning God and his kingdom, Josh. 24.15. and
that oeconomical and political governors are to proceed by the same rules in
their several administrations, as we are plainly taught, from that much to be
regarded Scripture, Psalm. 101.

8. That Christian Magistrates are in the same manner to seek the happiness of
their states, as of their own persons, even by seeking first the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. Neque enim aliunde beata civitas, aliunde
homo, cum aliud civitas non sit quam concors hominum multitudo, as Austin truly
speaks: A society is no otherwise made happy, then a man, seeing a society is
nothing else but a combined multitude of men. De civit. dei lib. 1. cap. 15.

9. That it would greatly sadden the hearts of many of God; people, who have
often, and earnestly, in public and private, importuned the Lord by prayer,
happily to carry on in the Land the work of a Scripture reformation in the
things of God, by and under Godly Magistrates, ruling in the fear of the Lord,
and who did, and do still hope that the spirit it self did then make
intercession in them, according to the will of God, to see all these prayers
buried in the grave of a sad resolution, that Christian Magistrates must make
conscience to do nothing for God in things immediately concerning himself, and
his kingdom; how much soever they are corrupted by corrupt pretenders to light
and conscience.

10. That amongst all disputers against Magistrates power in the things of God
and his kingdom, never any one of them, for ought I know, have pretended to
show Magistrates a plain discharge from that part of their duty, to look that
sound and nourishing food be afforded to Gods people, Isaiah 49.23. in open
words under the Lords hand. I know the parable of the ta^es has been much
insisted upon by some, and as often and fully answered by others; But (to say
no more of that at present) methinks Christian Magistrates should be afraid to
adventure the neglect of so great a part of their trust, in relation to God,
upon the disputable, and (to say the least) doubtful interpretation of a
parable; the main scope whereof (for certain) is not to set out the limits of
Civil Magistracy: I humbly conceive that those words uttered by the wisdom of
God, which is God, Prove. 8.15 16. By me kings reign, and princes decree
justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth, are
a fair and full commission granted by the Lord, as it were, under his hand and
seal, to all Magistrates, both Jewish and Gentile, to decree and act according
to their place from him, and for him in all righteous ways, for the good both
of the bodies and souls of those who are subject to them; and for the execution
of this divine commission; I believe that all Magistrates, specially Christian,
when they that seek to word and woo them out of the most honorable part of
their charge, have spoken their last, shall be called to an account before the
Lord of lords, at his appearing and his kingdom; verbum sapienti: I know
Christian Magistrates of tender spirits, who have tasted of the grace of the
Gospel, know a wide difference between rigor and righteousness, Christian
zeal and antichristian severity, and will be as they ought to be, duly careful
not to grieve the w^ak in things questionable, whilst they restrain the wicked
in things unquestionably evil, and opposite to the word of God. Must such as
are professed libertines, and all other misbelievers (as Mr Dells words are),
be left by Magistrates to themselves, according to their own notions to speak
and act as they list, immediately against God and his kingdom, provided they
act not wickedly and presumptuously (of which a Magistrate can very hardly, if
possibly judge in any case) against their neighbor, and civil society? Must
Christian Magistrates let spiritual Jezabels alone to seduce and corrupt as
many of Gods servants as they can, in all things immediately concerning God and
his kingdom, and make conscience not to restrain them? Should this be their
duty, they would prove poor healers to the people committed to their charge,
Esaias 3.7. having not so much power, or liberty of conscience, as to make use of
Gods sword in their hand, to restrain such as have spiritual plague sores
running upon them, from maliciously intermixing themselves with, and
desperately infecting of those that are sound, 2 Timothy 2.17. I would but propose
one question in the fear of God, to the serious thoughts of such as would clip
the wings of civil Christian Magistrates, as to all affairs and offenses, how
open and odious soever, immediately relating to God and his kingdom. Why should
it be thought more unsuitable to Gods goodness, greatness, all-filling presence
in the world, and zeal of his own glory, in the time of the Gospel then of the
Law, to have Christian Magistrates whom he makes his substitutes, in the
government of such a people, amongst whom his Name is professed, employed for
him, and under him in the judicial suppressing of manifest corruptions and
corrupters of his truth and worship, and so in the well managing of such affairs
as immediately concern himself and his kingdom? It is certain that with the
Lord is no shadow of turning; he is still as truly and as much the author of
peace and righteousness, of purity in doctrine and worship amongst such as are
called by his Name, as in the days of old. And it is most evident that the
godly Magistrates of Judah laid out themselves with Gods special approbation in
the suppressing of open corruptions, and corrupters in point of divine worship,
and acted zealously as Magistrates, for the well ordering of affairs
immediately concerning God and his kingdom amongst the people, the histories of
Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and Manasseh after his repentance plainly
evidence so much: And who can show when God razed that branch of the divine
commission by which these servants of God were guided and warranted in their
actings, out of the grant which Christian Magistrates have now from him for
their authority? Doubtless, neither Great Constantine, and those other
Christian governors whom the Lord made glorious in the Primitive times, by
being instrumental to introduce and settle Christianity in the world, who
oft-times called, and presided in councels for the well ordering of matters of
religion, both in doctrine and practice, nor any of those Christian Princes, by
whom the Lord has in later times graciously demolished Antichristianity, and
restored Gospel truth and worship in several places of Europe, ever heard of
any such thing; which had it been discovered unto them, would have bound up
their hands from that blessed work wherein they traveled as Gods vicegerents
upon earth, for the good of his Church, and the glory of his Name. And I
confidently believe, that his eyes will fail, whosoever looks after it, before
he find it in the book of God. Whereas some go about to put off the argument
which is taken from the actings of the Magistrates of Judah, in things
immediately concerning God and his kingdom, from concluding a like authority
upon Christian Magistrates, by saying that those magistrates were types of
Christ, and therefore that their actings in the things of God are to be looked
upon as typical, and determinable at the death of Christ. Before such men boast
much of, and rest in this their answer, they should well consider, 1. Whether
admitting the Magistrates of Judah, as the Magistrates of that peculiar people,
to have been types of Christ to come, reigning over the house of Jacob for
ever: Magistracy in general became thereby legally typical, and determinable at
the death of Christ; for if it did not, as all knowing men acknowledge; but
Magistracy retained the nature of a perpetual ordinance in the hands of typical
Magistrates, so also their Magistratical actings might and did retain the
nature of perpetual moral duties in general, though in the particular discharge
of them by such persons, they were some way typical. 2. Whether those
Magistrates of Judah, who unquestionably were types of our Savior in his regal
sovereignty, as David, and Solomon, were not representative figures of him, as
well in their righteous actings toward men, as in their religious actings
toward God; The Scripture is most plain that they were, Psalm. 72,1,2,3,4. Esaias
32.1. Jer. 23.5. and therefore their being types of Christ does no more take
them off from being a cloud to conduct Christian Magistrates in their
righteous, eminent, exemplary actings in the things of God, then in those which
appertain to men, wherein all of understanding look upon them as obliging
presidents to Christian Magistrates. This being considered, shows, that their
answer who would not have Christian Magistrates obliged by the divinely
approved practice of Godly Magistrates amongst the Jews, to mind and act for
God, according to the mind of God revealed in his word, in all things
immediately concerning him and his kingdom; when they say that the Magistrates
of Judah were types of Christ, and therefore are not to be looked upon by
Christian Magisrrates, as presidents to which they are to conform themselves in
their Magistratical actings, is but a blind put before the eyes of the weak,
who are not able to discern a moral duty, under a typical use and application
of the same, which understanding Christians may easily do. Upon the whole, I
cannot but apprehend that Christian Magistrates in their place, have a special
part belonging to them in the honorable discharge of that command of our
Savior for the good of his Church, Song 2.15. Take us the foxes, the little
foxes, which spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes. And I believe
that if any prevailingly entice or terrify Christian Magistrates by fair or
menacing words, from the conscience of yielding obedience to this command of
Christ, they will not be their sufficient advocates at the bar of the Lord
Jesus, when they shall be there impleaded for sinful neglect of that their duty
toward God, to his dishonor, and the damage of his people. I can therefore as
yet judge no otherwise of their attempt, but as very pernicious, and
antiscriptural, who that they may not seem to idolize Magistrates, stick not to
make mere idols of them, as to all things immediately respecting God and his
kingdom, not suffering them, though they have eyes, and ears, and feet, and
hands, to see, or hear, or stir, or act any thing magistratically for God in
such affairs as immediately concern himself, and his kingdom: If such studious
obstructers of magistratical administrations in the things of God according to
truth, charity, and righteousness, do look for thanks from God or men, for
their attempt; I am greatly mistaken if they be not greatly disappointed of
their hope, when they look with strongest expectation to have it accomplished
unto them. Besides, if as Mr Dell here affirms the Lord is always immediate
moderatour and governor himself in all such affairs, as immediately concern
himself and his kingdom; then not only civil magistrates, but all Churches and
Church officers whatsoever are discharged from attempting, under God, in
Ecclesiastical ways, to protect the truth and worship of God, and endeavoring
the suppression of what is contrary to the same, which is certainly very
dissonant from the judgment, and practice of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. verse.
3, 4. and verse. 19, 20.

(D) It is a known maxim, Calumniare audacter. They who are zealous of the
honor of the Law, as an outward divine light unto the feet of Gods people, do
certainly know other restraints from sin, then the Law of Moses, even the love
of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. the grace of God, Tit. 2.11,12. the spirit of life,
Romans 8.2. their love toward God, 1 John 5.3. the hope of heavenly glory, 1
John 3.3. and the like. Mr Dell therefore should have bethought himself of a
truer charge to lay in against those who are so zealous of the Law, that they
love not to hear that the new Law is given us to make us quite dead to the old,
if he would needs be their accuser.

(E) It is understood (how confident soever Mr Dell be of the contrary) and
believed by those who are zealous of the honor of the Law of God, as an
outward divine light unto our feet, that the law of grace and of the spirit
within us, is infinitely more powerful to keep us from sin, then the Law of
Moses without us; and that the love of righteousness put into our hearts by
the spirit, is infinitely more able to make us to do righteousness, and avoid
sin, then any outward commands or threatenings whatsoever; which yet have their
subordinate place in this work: If this be all Mr Dell contends for, he will
not find an enemy amongst his despised brethren. But if by saying that the
coming of the new law, is a sufficient discharge from the old, he intend that
all who receive the spirit, to be in them the root of obedience, are
sufficiently discharged from taking the outwardly revealed Law of God to be
unto them the rule of obedience: It is true, that the brethren whom he glanceth
at, do not understand, or at least do not believe that; but are very confident,
that when the Law of the Spirit comes into the heart, the heart is brought to
delight in the outward Law of God, and to choose it for a light to a man's feet,
and a lamp to his path, Psalm. 119.97. and 105.

(F) Our Lord Christ in his humanity did know and acknowledge the written Law
of God, for a law and ^ule unto him, and did fulfill it, Mat. 4.4,7,10. and
5.17. how confident soever Mr Dell ^e of the contrary.

(G) That is not the tenor of the Covenant, according to Mr Dells words, I
will be in their hearts for their law, but I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. It is dangerous tampering with
the Covenant of God, when the words thereof are plain. That the Lord is the
Lawgiver I have often read, Esaias 32.22. but that he is the law of his people,
I never saw affirmed in Scripture.

SECT. IV. I am Crucified with Christ, etc.
I Am crucified with Christ, who through this new Law, was dead to the old. For
Christ our brother, of the same flesh and blood with us, having the living
word, and law of God within him, (A) he owed nothing to the law of Moses by way
of debt, neither was he justified by the works of the Law, but by the
righteousness of the eternal Son or Word of God that dwelt and wrought in him,
and he again in it. (B) And this living Word and Spirit of God, that dwelt in
the flesh of Christ, was the true crucifying of his flesh; and in this
crucifying of Christ's flesh, all his Saints partake with him, as Paul here
says. I am crucified with Christ.

(C) Now this cannot be understood of Christ's outward crucifying upon the
material Cross; for thus, Paul was not crucified with him, neither are all the
Saints. But this is to be understood of Christ's inward and spiritual
crucifying, through the Word of righteousness and life that dwelt in him: and
according to this, all the faithful, through all ages, are crucified with him
indeed*

And now here it will be needful to speak something more fully, both touching
Christ's own crucifying, and the crucifying of all his Saints with him, on the
same cross. And the rather, because as men generally in the outward Church,
have a carnal understanding of all the things of Christ, so also of his Cross
and Death. And not the Papists only, but many among our selves, who greatly
adore the outward cross, and crucifying of Christ, are yetignorant of the true
cross and crucifying of Christ and his Christians with him, whereby they are
truly crucified and dead to themselves, to sin, to the world, (D) and to
whatever is not God himself: And so under the open profession of the outward
cross and death of Christ, do live in all manner of sin and wickedness,
equally with the very heathen, amongst whom the Name of Christ has not been
named. Wherefore to remove this gross ignorance from all that love the light, I
shall speak something first of Christ's own crucifying, and then of our
crucifying together with Christ.

ANIMADVERSION 4.
(A) What? did not Christ owe something to the Law so much as for us? How then
was he made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. Did not his submitting of himself to
Circumcision, make him a debtor to do the whole Law? Gal. 5.3. Did not our Lord
Christ by submitting himself to the state of a servant, in relation to his
Father, become obliged to fulfill all his righteous commands? It seems to me
that those two Scriptures joined together, prove so much, Esaias 42.1. Mat. 3.15.
Again, did not we owe to God perfect obedience to his Law, and full
satisfaction for our disobedience against his Law? And did not our Savior as
our surety, transfer and take upon himself our whole debt? It would be ill with
us if he had not done so: me thinks Dr. Vshers words in his Sermon of the
Incarnation, has much light and strength in them, namely, Our Mediator took
upon him the part of an advocate, to plead full satisfaction made by himself,
as our surety, unto all the debt wherewith we any way stood chargeable. Now the
satisfaction which our surety bound himself to perform in our behalf, was of a
double debt, the principal, and the accessory. The principal debt is obedience
to Gods most holy Law: if this stand true, as I believe it will, then Christ
did owe the debt of obedience to the Law at least in our stead.

(B) Where does the Scripture speak this language? Does not that Scripture
speak otherwise? 1 Pet. 3.18. which ascribes not the crucifying, but quickening
of Christ to the spirit.

(C) Why may not the Apostle when he wrote that he was crucified with Christ,
be understood of Christ's outward crucifying on his material cross? Is not the
virtue of Christ's outward crucifying applied to all believing Saints? is not
the flesh in the Saints crucified through the power of that redemption which
our Savior finished on his material cross, and by participation of that
redemption finished on the Cross, are not all believers crucified and dead
with him? what else do those Scriptures teach, Romans 6.5,6,7,8,9,10,11. 1 Pet.
2.24. and 4.1,2. Tit. 2.14. It is very strange to me, that Mr Dell should here
so peremptorily deny, that Paul's crucifying with Christ, could be understood in
relation to his outward crucifying, since in Sect. 5. (K) he confesses very
truly that there was an infinite worth, excellency, and efficacy in our
Saviors outward crucifying, which unquestionably is imparted to those who
believe, and was imparted to the Apostle Paul, who might therefore truly write,
as he did, that he was crucified with Christ in reference to Christ's outward
crucifying on his material cross.

(D) Are Christians dead to the Scriptures, both to the Law and Gospel, and to
all Gods outward ordinances, of none of which it can be affirmed that they are
God himself? I hope Mr Dell has some limitations in store, to make this
strange assertion of his, that believers are dead to whatsoever is not God
himself, passable, or else --.

SECT. V. 1. Of Christ's own crucyfying.
NOw Christ's true crucifying, I mean his inward and spiritual crucifying, in
which all his Saints, without any exception, have their fellowship with him, it
was this. (A) It was the taking up his humane nature into his divine nature, or
the taking up his flesh into the Word; in such sort, that (B) the flesh of
Christ, did not live the life of the flesh, in the reason and understanding,
and wisdom, and will, and affections, and desires, and delights, and ends of
the flesh; but the flesh or humanity of Christ, being crucified and dead to all
these things, did live in it self the life of the eternal Word, in the nature,
righteousness, life, mind, will, and in all the things of God. And this was
the Full and perfect crucifying of the flesh of Christ indeed.

And thus you see, th t the Living word, and Spirit of God, which dwelt in the
flesh of Christ, did truly Crucify and destroy the proper will and affections,
and the whole life of his flesh.

(C) And thus was Christ crucified before his cross; and his outward
crucifying, was but a sign of what was done before within; (D) and if Christ's
flesh had not thus been crucified before his Cross, he had not after given it
up, so freely, cheerfully, and desirously, to be crucified so shamefully,
painfully, and bleedingly on the Cross.

(E) The Divine Nature of Christ, was the constant cross of his Humane Nature;
and his humane nature was fully crucified in his Divine; in such sort, that the
Humane nature of Christ, had not the least freedom of its own proper will lest
to it self; but when it was to undergo the heaviest and bitterest things, that
any creature was capable to undergo, even Death and Hell, and the sense of the
whole wrath of God: yet even then he said, not my will, but thine be done:
Which was the most full and perfect crucisying that could be. (F) For the Man
Christ, lost all his own things in God, through immediate union with God, and
was filled again with all the things of God in his humanity: which took away
his humanity wholly from it self, to God, to be, do, and suffer all in the will
of God; and this was his crucifying.

(G) And this now, is the most excellent and glorious crucifying of Christ,
that is to be preached to all Nations for the obedience of faith. (H) For to
preach the outward crucifying of Christ barely and alone, without this inward
and Spiritual crucifying of him (which is not only the original and the cause,
but also the perfection and glory of the other) is no great matter, neither
will it make the world much in love with him, seeing two Thieves were thus
crucified with him, at the same time, outwardly as he was. But to preach Christ
crucified by the living Word and Spirit of God that dwelt in him, through which
he was wholly dead to himself and the world, and lived wholly in the will of
God, so that though he were the Son of God, yet he made himself of no
reputation, but gave up his flesh and outward man to be crucified among
thieves, at the will of his Father. (...)
This I say is the glorious crucifying of Christ, which the Gospel preaches in
all the world, even the crucifying of Christ's flesh by the Spirit and Divine
nature. (I) For Christ's dying had been nothing, if the life of God within him
had not offered up his humane life; (K) and his crucifying had been nothing, if
God in Christ had not humbled his humane nature to the death of the Cross, and
he had not offered up that flesh of his to God without fault by his Eternal
Spirit, as Paul speaks, Heb. 9.14. But this did put such an infinite worth,
excellency, and efficacy on his outward crucifying; and thereby he is said to
redeem us unto God, even by his blood; and by that one offering of himself, to
perfect for ever them that are sanctified Heb. 10.14.

And thus much touching Christ's own Crucifying; the next thing, is

ANIMADVERSION V.
(A) Where is any Scripture that speaks thus, and gives us such a
description of our Saviors crucifying. To the Law and to the testimony, Esaias
8.20. It is I confess, beyond my knowledge, if ever any Christian, ancient or
modern, did define the crucifying of Christ, to be the taking up of his flesh
into the word, before Mr Dell.

(B) If the humanity of our Savior did live in it self the life of the eternal
word, in the nature of God, then it will follow, as I apprehend, that our Lord
Christ had no humane life distinct from the life of the eternal word in him,
from the very first instant of his assuming of our humanity, and so could have
no humane will to deny, or life to lay down for us: And where is the doctrine
of the Cross then? If Mr Dell has any reserved sense of his words, and does
not mean as he speaks, which I a mind ned to believe, he should do well to
speak as he means. Whereas Mr Dell writes that the flesh of Christ did not
live the life of the flesh in the reason and understanding, and wisdom, and will
and affections, and desires, and delights, and ends of the flesh, if he means
thereby that our Savior was not in the course of his life, guided by the
reason, understanding, and wisdom of his humane nature, to will, affect,
desire, delight in, or pursue any humane ends suitable to the liking of flesh
and blood, but did altogether resign himself to the will of God his Father,
that it might be perfectly done by him, and upon him, how cross soever it was
to his humane will and wisdom, in the native propensity thereof, this is a very
clear and sound truth; and I should so understand Mr Dell, and put such a sense
upon the following words, sc. that the flesh or humanity of Christ did live in
it self the life of the Eternal word, in the nature, righteousness, life,
mind, will, and in all the things of God, as that they should import no more,
but that our Savior obedientially ordered himself in the whole course of his
life, in doing, and suffering according to the mind and will of God his
Father, which is very good Gospel doctrine, generally acknowledged: Did not the
laying of the present words to those which follow in this book, seem plainly to
put a more sublimate interpretation upon them, and to evidence that Mr Dell
intended in them, to set himself above the pitch of the old ordinary Christian
Doctrine, sc. That our Lord Christ in his humanity, lived a humane life,
ordered wholly according to the divine rule of the will of God his Father. Yet
if Mr Dell will so interpret himself in his high-flown expressions, as to come
down to the plain, naked, known truth of the Gospel, concerning our Saviors
obediential living and dying too, according to the will and wisdom not of his
humane nature, but of God his Father which sent him; I shall most gladly so
understand him for the future, and shall say of him, as Austin once wrote of
another, Linguam corrigat sententiam teneat, Let him correct his expression and
retain his opinion.

(C) Where does the Scripture speak of our Saviors crucifying before his
cross? or so slight our Lords outward crucifying, as to call it but a sign of
what before was done, as Mr Dell here does. I think the Scripture gives no
countenance to such new doctrine; but ascribes far greater honor to our Lords
outward crucifying, then to be but a sign of somewhat else; and sets it forth
as an effectual means of the healing of Gods people, 1 Pet. 2.24.

(D) That our Lord Christ did deny himself in his humane will, wholly resigning
himself to the will of the Father, and thereupon did freely give up his flesh
to the cross, is most certain. John 5.30. and 6.38. But where is this, or the
taking up of Christ's flesh into the word, which Mr Dell speaks of, called or
made the crucifying of Christ's flesh? A proof for that.

(E) That our Saviors Divine nature was his cross, and that his humane nature
was crucified in his divine, are bold, strange, and peremptory affirmations,
for which I know not any show of proof in the Scripture, which speaks of no
other proper cross of our Savior, but the tree on which he suffered, Phil.
2.8. 1 Pet. 2.24. nor crucifying, but that which is charged upon the Jews as
the Authors of it, by the Apostle Peter, Acts. 2.36.

(F) Did the man Christ lose all his own things in God, through immediate union
with God? What, his humane life too? This indeed is fully accordant with Mr
Dels former words, if not with his meaning, that the humanity of Christ did
live in it self the life of the eternal word. And what life then did our Lord
give for his sheep? John 10.11. Certainly not the life of the eternal word.

(G) This crucifying of our L rds humane nature in his divine nature, here
mentioned by Mr Dell (for all his confidence) was never, as I think, read of in
the Scriptures, or heard of unto this day, amongst those nations, who by the
preaching of the Gospel, have been brought to the obedience of Faith: And I
trust he would not have men now to take up any new gospel.

(H) The outward crucifying of Christ, is not preached barely and alone, as Mr
Dell here intimates; but together with his self-denying obedience, as the
original, and the glory of it, by those who never learned from the Scriptures,
to call his inward prostrating of his will, at the feet of his Fathers will,
his crucifying. Though two Thieves were outwardly crucified with our Lord
Christ, yet is his outward cross most glorious before the eyes of all that
believe the Gospel, Gal. 6.14. And it seems very strange and derogatory to the
honor of our Saviors death, that a Christian should judge of the loveliness
of the outward cross of our Mediator, by the cross of malefactors, though
crucified with him.

(I) These words show that our Lord Christ had a humane life distinct from the
life of God in him, which seems directly contrary to Mr Dels former doctrine,
if his meaning be according to his words, and proves that the man Christ did
not lose al his own things through immediate union with God, but after that
union retained his own humane life to be offered up for us; which is good and
Gospel truth, steadfastly to be embraced by all true Christians.

(K) What is here asserted is very true, but has no affinity with Mr Dels
foregoing words. Our Saviors crucifying had been nothing, if God in Christ had
not humbled his humane nature to the death of the cross, and he had not
offered up that flesh of his to God without fault, by his eternal spirit, as
Paul speaks, Heb. 9.14. These words, and those which immediately follow, are
sweeter then honey, and the honey comb: They express the constant Doctrine of
those men whom Mr Dell despises, as grossly ignorant of the cross of Christ,
and they show that the humanity of Christ did not live in it self the life of
the eternal word, but that life which appertains to the nature of man, which
he gave for the life of the world.

SECT. VI. Our crucifying with Christ.
I Am (says Paul) crucified with Christ, that is, with that Humane nature of
his that was taken up into the Word. Now as the most excellent crucifying of
Christ, was through the Word and spirit that dwelt in him: so likewise the true
and glorious crucifying of all the faithful, is through the same Word and
Spirit of Christ dwelling in them. (A) For to have the Word and Spirit of
Christ, that is, the Word and Spirit that is true God, dwelling in us, is the
greatest crucifying of flesh and blood that can be. And when we are thus
crucified with Christ, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in us, then afterward,
the body will be ready and willing to suffer the cross, or fire, or Lions, or
racks, or torments, or any thing, as we see in the blessed Martyrs, who if they
had not been first crucified with Christ, through the Word and Spirit, had
never delivered up their bodies so readily as if they had not known them, to
suffer so many grievous and intolerable things for Christ. For that flesh that
is truly crucified by the Spirit, is fitted for all sufferings, though never so
grievous and intolerable to it self.

Wherefore let us learn, (B) That no outward sorrows, or tribulations, or
prisons, or rackings, or killings, are such real crucifyings to a believer, as
his faith, hope, and love, the fruits of the Word and Spirit in him, which will
not suffer him to live in himself, or in the creature, but do carry him with
great force out of all these things to live in God; which thing is the greatest
mortification and crucifying of the flesh that can be.

And as Christ's outward crucifying on the cross, without his inward crucifying
by the Word of God, had been nothing worth; no more would all the sufferings
and Martyrdoms of all the believers in the world, be of any worth in
themselves, or of any account with God, without this inward, spiritual, daily,
and constant crucifying, suffering and Martyrdom of theirs. (C) Seeing nothing
does so truly and thoroughly restrain, hamper, mortify, crucify, kill, and
destroy the flesh, and all the corruptions, lusts and affections of it, as the
living Word and spirit do. (D) And this is the glorious cross of the Church,
the Body, as well as of Christ the Head; without which, all Martyrdom is
nothing; and of which, all the bodily sufferings and torments of the Saints,
have been but a demonstration to the world for the glory of God, and for the
comfort, support and encouragement of other Christians. And where this inward
crucifying has not been first wrought and accomplished, Christians could
suffer nothing outwardly: as has been very evident in many Christians, who
having in times of persecution been called forth to witness the truth with
their lives, have at first, for fear and dread of the outward cross, abjured
the truth to save their lives. But afterward when the Word and Spirit within
them, had truly and fully crucified them, they would then come forth again of
their own accord, and willingly offer up their bodies to fire and death.

And thus also I have declared what is our crucifying with Christ, (E) Paul
saying here, I am crucified with Christ; because his sins were subdued, and his
nature conquered through the living word and Spirit of Christ dwelling in him.

(F) Now that both these things are so in truth, and that they are no fond
notions, speculations, and glosses of mine own devising, I will yet make it
more evident by some few other plain Scriptures: as by that of Paul, in Romans
8.10. where he says, If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin;
that is, the presence of Christ that is the living Word of God within us, is
the killing and crucifying of the body to all sin. And in Gal. 5.24. The same
Apostle says, That they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts of it: and ver. 25. he shows, that this crucifying of the
flesh of Christians, is not brought about by any outward sorrows and
sufferings, but by the presence of the Spirit in it, saying, if we live in the
spirit, let us also walk in the spirit: and verse 16. of the same chapter, he
says, This I say then, walk in the spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh; and Romans 8.13. If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live. So again, Romans 6.5. If we have been planted together in
the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection. Now all believers, without exception, are planted with Christ
into a likeness of his death; which is not so to be understood, as if all
should be crucified on a material Cross, as he himself was: but that all of
them are buried with him by Baptism into his death, that is, by the baptism of
the spirit; and the baptism of the Spirit, is the death of the flesh; it is the
death of our flesh with Christ's: for thus was Christ's flesh made dead to it
self, to sin, and the world, to wit, through the Baptism of the spirit; and
thus also is ours: wherefore Paul adds, verse. 6. Knowing this, that our old man
is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin: So that it is plain, that the destruction of sin in
our bodies by the living Word and Spirit of God, is our crucifying with Christ.
And verse 11. the Apostle would have those that are thus crucified with Christ,
to reckon themselves dead to sin, for as the Word and Spirit of God in Christ
made him wholly dead to sin, and sin had no place in him: So likewise, as far
as the same Word and Spirit of Christ prevail in us, they will make us dead to
sin for the time past, and present; and for the future will preserve us from
sin.

And now we shall make some Use of this point.

Use 2. (G) First, Then let us know that it is not enough to Salvation to
believe, That Jesus Christ according to his humane nature, was outwardly
crucified on a cross for us at Jerusalem, except we also our own selves be
crucified with him, through his living Word and Spirit dwelling in us: through
which we must be powerfully planted into a true likeness of his death, in such
sort that we must be dead unto all sin whatsoever, even to all our own
corruptions and lusts; and to all the Corruptions that are in the world through
lust; and we must be dead to our selves; to our own fleshly reason,
understandig, will, desires, ends, and to our whole humane life; and we must be
dead to the world, and to all that is in it, and of it; to all the pleasures,
profits, and honors of it: we must thus truly be dead with Christ, ere we can
live with him. And with this kind of crucifying must whole Christ be crucified,
from the Head to the lowest members: and thus also must we be crucified with
him, if we will have any part in him; I say, we must have fellowship with him
in his sufferings, and be made conformable to him in his death, ere ever we can
attain to his Resurrection from the dead.

ANIMADVERSION 6.
(A) I Take it, that by the word of Christ is here intended the Word, the Son,
or Godhead of our Savior which was made flesh: If so, I demand a Scripture
which teaches that the Word or Godhead of our Savior is otherwise in his
people then in and by his Spirit, the holy Ghost which dwells in them: As for
the holy Ghost, the spirit which without measure of operation was in our
Savior as the head of his Church, John 1.33. and 3.34. called therefore the
spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. that it is in several measures of operation shed
forth by, and through our Lord Christ upon all his, who are by faith united
unto him, 1 Cor. 6.17. Gal. 3.14. and that it is in them the powerful and only
root of mortification or crucifying of the flesh, Romans 8.13. is very well known
and acknowledged by those whom Mr Dell slighteth as ignorant of the mysteries
which he has discovered; were so much spoken in usual words, it would appear
no unusual doctrine. But if Mr Dell decline this sense of his words, I believe
the doctrine comprised in them has no footing, at all in the Scripture.

(B) That faith hope and love, together with other fruits of the spirit of
Christ in believers are real crucifyings, that is, real originals of the
mortification or crucifying of the flesh in them, is a plain truth of it were
plainly expressed. Neither do these fruits of the spirit suffer a believer to
live to himself, or the lusts of men, 1 Pet. 4.1,2. which is, no doubt, the
true crucifying of the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof. This
Scripture doctrine is full of comfort, and is neither new nor strange.

(C) The Scripture ascribes the mortification or crucifying of the flesh, to
the spirit of Christ which dwells, and whereby he dwells, in believers;
This is plain and old truth: But where is this spoken of as the work of the
living Word or Godhead of Christ, any otherwise dwelling in them th^n by the
Spirit. That Scripture would be showed.

(D) Where is the living word and spirit in believers called their cross?
Scripture language is most proper for Scripture doctrine, 1 Cor. 2.13. the
sufferings of Christians are in the Scripture called their cross, Mat. 16.24.
But the living Word and Spirit in them is never expressed by that name, that I
know. And how should we dare to speak of the things of God, otherwise then as
we are taught by the word of God?

(E) That Paul was crucified with Christ because his sins were subdued, and his
nature conquered through the spirit of Christ dwelling in him, is a very sure
truth generally acknowledged, yet is not this all the truth: but Paul further
intended in saying, that he was crucified with Christ, that his sins were
subdued through the redeeming virtue of the outward cross or suffering of
Christ, both as to the condemning and commanding power of them, of which here
is altum silentium, though the Scriptures speak much of it, 2 Cor. 5.15. Tit.
2.14. Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.18.19.

(F) Mr Dell here professes to prove both these things by plain Scripture: By
both these things, he means, both that Christ was crucified, by the being of
the eternal word and spirit in him, and also that believers are crucified by
the same word and spirit dwelling in them: But he fails evidently of his
word, for the Scriptures produced, may seem to speak something toward the
proof of the second position, yet they say nothing toward the confirmation of
the first. And as to the second position, they only prove, that the spirit of
Christ, or Christ by his spirit, does work to the mortifying of the flesh in
believers, which is a well known and acknowledged truth: But that the living
Word, or Godhead of our Savior, otherwise then as in and by the Spirit,
dwells in believers as a root of mortification, not one of the Scriptures
produced do affirm. That by Christ in us, Romans 8.10. we must understand the
living Word within us, as Mr Dell glosseth those words: I cannot believe, since
the Apostle, in the verses immediately before and after that text, does plainly
expound the being of Christ in us, by the being of the Spirit of God in us, in
full consent with all the other Scriptures here produced by Mr Dell.

(G) This use which Mr Dell makes of his doctrine, if the words be taken in
Scripture sense, is sound and consonant to the sense of all true believers, and
needs no new doctrine to enforce it.

SECT. VII.
NOw if any desire to know how we may attain to be thus Crucified with Christ?

I answer, that the true faith of Gods Elect, is the only way through which we
can attain to this crucifying. (A) For through faith we receive the living Word
of God to dwell in us; and in this Word we partake of the Spirit; and this Word
and Spirit dwelling in us, do (as has been declared) crucify us with Christ.

(B) Indeed Hypocrites and carnal Christians, receive and profess a word that
will not crucify them with Christ, but do receive a word and doctrine that
will still suffer them to live their own lives, and after their own lusts. For
the word they receive, is only an outward word, consisting of diverse questions,
opinions, and Doctrines; and is also without the Spirit, and so it leaves them
as it found them in reference to their Natures and corruptions.

(C) But the word that faith receives, is the Word of righteousness and life;
a word that is always accompanied with the Spirit: and when this is ingrafted
into the soul, and abides in it, it presently mortifies and crucifies it, and
destroys a man's self out of himself. (D) And therefore in 1 Cor. 1.18. it is
called (...), The word of the cross; and that not only because it exposes us
to afflictions in the world, but also because it dwelling in our hearts by
faith, does crucify us. And this crucifying word in the same verse, is called
also (...), the power of God: for that Word that crucifies our flesh, subdues
and destroys the whole strength of corruption out of us, must be such a Word
as is also the Power of God: and so it is not only in tse^f, but also because
the Spirit of God dwells in it. And this Word thus apprehe^d^d, will crucify us
with Christ.

Now this word of faith, which is the word near us, even in our hearts, will
crucify us*

1. Thoroughly; It will crucify the whole man throughout, and that according to
his mind, will, and affect^o^s; (E) for this Word of God is quick and powerful,
and sharper then any two edged sword, and is piercing to the dividing asunder
both of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a curious
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, etc. And all the
Tribulations and Torments in the world, yea, all the sorrows and pains of Hell,
cannot so crucify and subdue our evil natures and lives, as this Living Word
in our hearts, with whom we have to do. This will crucify us till we be dead
with Christ, as Christ was dead (which was the fullest and compleatest death
that ever was) that is, till our outward and inward man be wholly and fully
subject to the only Will of God.

2. (F) This word of faith will crucify us daily and constantly, as Paul
witnesses, 1 Cor. 15.31.
saying, (...), I die daily: for the word of righteousness dwelling in us, is
clean contrary to our corrupt nature, and all the operations of it, and does
without intermission put forth its strength and efficacy against both. That as
in the first break of day, the light is still mortifying the darkness, till it
have wholly dispelled it; so the Word of righteousness deals with our
corruptions till their place shall be no more found.

Now because this our crucifying with Christ is so contrary to the flesh, that
the flesh is always mourning under it, and murmuring against it; therefore for
our encouragement in so difficult a work as this, I shall propound some choice
and excellent advantages that believers have by being truly crucified with
Christ. For by this means

1. We are freed from the Law. (G) For as the humanity of Christ being
crucified by the Word and Spirit, by this means became dead to the Law, and the
Law lost all its power over him; (H) so all the faithful that are thus
crucified with him, are through this crucifying set free from the Law; (I) for
their own life being extinguished by the living Word and Spirit, and they
living in that word and spirit, a life not their own, but Christ's, are as truly
freed from the Law as Christ himself was. (K) And this Paul does plainly teach
us, Romans 7.1. saying, that the Law has Lordship over a man all the time he
lives, and no longer. But when he is once crucified with Christ, and dead with
Christ, the Law has no more Dominion over him. So then as long as we live our
own life, the Law has power over us; but when we are dead to our selves
through the Life of Christ, we are set quite without the reach of the Law, and
the Law has no more to do with us the Members, then with Christ the Head.

2. (L) By being crucified with Christ, we are freed of sin. For one of the
chief ends of the indwelling of the Word and Spirit in Believers, is to free
them, and save them from sin: (M) and though sin has its full power in our own
humane life, yet it has no power over Christ's life in us, which we live
through Faith. Wherefore says Paul, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man
is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin; and verse 12. says he, Let not sin therefore reign
(...), in your mortal or dead body; which he calls dead, not in reference to the
common mortality of the world, but in reference to our crucifying with Christ;
and in the body that is crucified with Christ, sin is not to reign. And so you
see, that through our crucifying with Christ, we are dead to sin also. (N) For
it is impossible that Christ and sin should live together in strength, in the
same flesh; but if sin live in our flesh, it will crucify us to Christ; and if
Christ live in our flesh, he will crucify us to sin.

3. By being crucified with Christ, we are freed from death, that death that
arises of sin, and carries the wrath of God in it: For through the death of the
second Adam, we are set free from the death of the first Adam, and through that
death to die unto life Unbelieving flesh is the fuel of death, as wood is of
fire; and death reigns and has its full Dominion in the flesh of all
unbelievers; (O) but when we by faith are made members of Christ's body, of his
flesh and bones, then life reigns in Christ's flesh, as death in ours. And so
being crucified with Christ, death has no more dominion over us.

4. By being crucified with Christ, we are also freed from the power of the
Devil, The Devil ha^h power over our flesh, or humanity whilst it is our own,
and under the Law, sin and death. But when our flesh is united to Christ, and
is crucified by the Word and Spirit, then Satan comes, and has nothing in it,
as he came to Christ, and had nothing in him. (P) The devil then can find
nothing in us to do us harm, or whereby he may prevail against us, when we are
truly crucified with Christ.

5. (Q) The flesh that is crucified with Christ, is only Christ's own flesh. For
whilst we live our own lives in unbelief, we are only the flesh of the first
Adam; (R) but when the living Word and Spirit dwell in us and crucify us, then
our flesh becomes the flesh of the second Adam; and so far as it is crucified
through the Word, it is Christ's flesh more then ours.

6. (S) This crucified flesh, is the only temple and habitation of God, wherein
he dwells and manifests himself in this world: For as God dwelt in Christ's
flesh, which was thus crucified, and made it his temple, so he dwells in the
crucified flesh of Believers, and makes that his Temple, as Paul says to
Believers, Ye are the temples of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them. And God dwells in none of the flesh of all the sons
of men, but only in that which is crucified with Christ; and that flesh that is
not thus crucified, is not Gods Habitation, but the Devils.

7. (T) This crucified flesh only, keeps the true Christian Sabbath, or the
everlasting rest of the new World, which is to cease from our own works, and to
do the works of God. Whereas that flesh that is alive to it self, and lives its
own life in it self and the creatures, never enters into the true rest, nor
keeps the true Sabbath, but it always works its own works, and does all things
from it self, and for it self, and so long God will not use it. (V) But when
the flesh is crucified through the Word, then God does all in it, and takes it
out of its own life and works, into his life and his works. And the more any
flesh is crucified with Christ, the more does God delight to use it, and to
work his own excellent works by it; for such flesh will render no resistance to
God in his working, and also it will do the works of God merely for the glory
of God and good of his brother, being dead to all self ends and interests.

8. (W) This crucified flesh only is able to endure the will of God and to
suffer for his Name. For till the flesh be crucified with Christ, and killed by
the Word, it will suffer nothing for God, but will by all possible means avoid
the cross; but when it is truly crucified, it will endure the greatest evils
that can be inflicted on it, either by men or devils, or by the Lord himself,
and that with much willingness and cheerfulness. As we have seen in Christ
the Head, and Believers the Members: what grievous things they have suffered
for the name and truth of God in their crucified flesh; And as this crucified
flesh will suffer any thing for God, so it will suffer it aright, that is,
First, In obedience to God, as Christ laid down his life, not by necessity but
willingly. Secondly, In meekness and patience, as Christ, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
his cause to him that judges righteously. And thirdly, In Love, and that to
very persecutors, so as to pity them and pray for them: This is glorious
suffering indeed, and no flesh can suffer thus, but this crucified flesh.

9. (X) This crucified flesh, as it is able to suffer all things, so also to
overcome all things That flesh that lives its own life, is soon certainly
conquered by all the evils that assault it; but when it is crucified with
Christ, it is also quickened with him to overcome all things. So Christ, who
was thus crucified by the Word, though he seemed to the world in his death and
cross to be quite vanquished, yet even then he spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and triumphed openly over them; yea, and overcame all things in that
crucified flesh of his. For that flesh that is crucified by the Word and
Spirit, is thereby made Superior to all things in that exaltation and might,
which the Word and Spirit communicate to it.

10 (Y) This crucified flesh has the very glory of Jesus Christ upon it; and
no flesh is so glorious in the Church, as that which is most crucified with
Christ: for in that, you shall see little of it self, and most of Christ;
little of the first Adam, and most of the second. Look among all the sons of
God and you shall see them that were most crucified with the Word, most
glorious; the clear beauty of holiness being seen upon them: whereas, that
flesh that lives much in it self. in its own wit, will, reason, prudence, mind,
affections, and the things of its first nature, though there may be something
of Christ in it, yet all these things are so much uncomeliness and deformity
upon it, and are nothing but a thick vail and covering to obscure Christ
himself. But that Christian that is most dead and crucified to these things, he
it is that shines most gloriously in the Kingdom of Christ.

(Z) Lastly, this crucified flesh, is the only subject of the glorious
Resurrection: For as the living Word and Spirit that crucified Christ's flesh,
did again raise up that crucified flesh of his from death, and set it at the
right hand of God; and thereby did plainly manifest him to be the Son of God;
so the same Word and Spirit that crucify our flesh, shall as certainly raise
it up with Christ into the fullness of the life and glory of God. And this time
the Apostle calls the day of the manifestation of the sons of God. For the Word
and Spirit whilst they dwell in us and crucify us, they make it only known to
us, and to them that live in the same faith and spirit with us, that we are the
children of God: but when they shall raise up this flesh of ours (which they
have first crucified) from death and the grave, into the life, glory and
eternity of God, then it shall be manifest to all the world that we are his
children.

And so our crucifying with Christ, is a certain pledge of our Resurrection
with him: and this the Apostle testifies, Romans 8.11. saying, He that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells
in you: and Romans 6.8. If we be dead with him, we believe we shall also live
with him. If we be dead with him, that is, through the Word and Spirit, first
crucifying our flesh, and then offering it up to death. (A) We believe we shall
live with him that very life which the Word and Spirit of God did communicate
to his flesh, when it raised him from the grave, and fully translated him into
the immediate Kingdom of God. And for this cause, Col. 1.18. Christ is called
the first born from the dead, that is, the first whom the Word and Spirit did
raise from death and the grave, and did carry into the Immediate presence of
God, as the first fruits and pledge of their Resurrection, who have the same
word and spirit dwelling in them.

ANIMADVERSION VII.
(A) I Find no such thing affirmed in the Scripture, that through Faith we
receive the living Word to dwell in us, understanding thereby precisely, the
Godhead of our Savior: But it is plain that through Faith we receive Christ
the Son to dwell in us, and the Father also by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. 1 John
4.12,13. John 14.23.

(B) Indeed the word of God in the Scriptures, and the Gospel preached
according to the Scriptures, is an outward word, consisting in doctrines, which
hypocrites and carnal christians may have, and professionally receive, and still
live their own lives, and after their own lusts. But that this word is without
the spirit unto believers (not now to dispute how far the Spirit may work in
the word, to the co^viction of unbelievers) to deny that it is a means whereby
they receive the Spirit, and whereby the spirit crucifieth the flesh in them is
plainly to deny the Scriptures, Gal. 3.2. Ephesians. 6.17. 2 Cor. 10.4,5. And to give
up those who by faith receive and make use of this outward word of God to dwell
in them, for the crucifying of their flesh, for hypocrites and carnal
christians, is certainly to condemn the generation of Gods children, Psalm.
119.11. Col. 3.16.

(C) It is as clear as light from the text, that by the ergrafted word ( James
1.21. where this phrase is only found) is meant the word of the Gospel
outwardly dispensed; In these words, therefore Mr Dell seems unwarrantably to
confound the Godhead of our Savior with the Gospel outwardly dispensed, or to
put one for another, which is a very strange mistake: And certain it is, that
the word which faith receives is the Gospel outwa^dly preached, which is not
always accompanied with the spirit in those that hear it, Mark 16.16. Heb.
4.2. Romans 10.8.

(D) If here be not a president of racking the Scripture to purpose, I am much
mistaken; The Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.18. called the word which he preached (which Mr
Dell names an outward word) the word of the cross, not for either of the two
reasons here mentioned, because it exposes men to afflictions, or because it
does crucify us, but plainly because it held forth Christ crucified to the
world, as is most apparent, verse 23. of that chapter; and 1 Cor. 2.2,3,4. And
yet Mr Dell, with much confidence, brings forth the words of the Apostle, as if
they had been undoubtedly written, not of the word preached by him, but of the
living word or Godhead of our Savior; to which for certain the Apostle had no
eye in that place.

(E) The words found, Heb. 4.12. are here by Mr Dell confidently applied to the
living word of God, or Godhead of our Savior, which by the general consent of
almost all interpreters, and by the argument of that place appears to concern
the word of God outwardly administered; which though Mr Dell makes light of it,
yet as it is made effectually by the spirit of God, has all that testified of
it in the Scripture, which Mr Dell here affirms of the word of God in his
sense, 1 Cor. 14.24,25. 2 Cor. 10.4,5. John 17.17.

(F) If the word of the cross be as it is, and is here called by Mr Dell, the
word of faith, then it is the word of the Gospel preached, Romans 10.17. which Mr
Dell sleightingly calls an outward word; and leaves to hypocrites and carnal
christians. And to as those words, 1 Cor. 15,31. here alleged; I find no
expositor, understanding them of an inward dying to sin. The context plainly
imports that the Apostle by dying daily, intended a daily apprehension and
expectation of death, together with a daily exposure of himself to deadly
afflictions for Christ and his Gospel sake, 2 Cor. 4.10,11. The dying therefore
mentioned in this Scripture, is altogether different from the dying which Mr
Dell here speaks of.

(G) The Law had a regulating power over our Lord Christ in the days of his
flesh, Mat. 5.17. Mat. 3.15. and therefore lost not all its power over him at
that time, as is here peremptorily asserted by Mr Dell.

(H) So also (how boldly soever Mr Dell affirms the contrary) the Law has a
regulating power over all the faithful, who keep it, and fulfill it through love
wrought in their hearts by the spirit, Psalm. 119.1. 1 John 5.3.

(I) Believers own life, if that be their humane life, is not extinguished by
the living word and spirit, Mr Dell being judge, whose words very soon after,
are these, though sin has its full power in our humane life. But in this case
there needs no appeal; Res ipsa loquitur. All the world sees and knows that
believers retain their own humane life, the faculties and actings thereof,
after they live the life of Christ through the Spirit. I would gladly therefore
understand Mr Dell in this place, of the extinguishing only of the life of sin
in believers, and the then refining, purifying and spiritualizing of their
humane life and faculties, by the spirit of Christ, unto a new life of
holiness, wherein Christ may be truly said to live in them, and they to live
to God; but that the native intent of Mr Dels words here looks to a much
higher, and his after words in this book contain a plain and peremptory refusal
of so low a sense.

(K) Paul in the place here alleged, Romans 7. teaches that the condemning and
sin irritating power of the Law cease, toward those who are spiritually dead
with Christ, which is no doubt a branch of their true freedom from the Law
acknowledged, and joyed in by those whom Mr Dell sleights, as Jewish zelots:
what more Mr Dell fetches from that Scripture is of his own putting into it,
as I think.

(L) It is an acknowledged truth, that they who are crucified with Christ are
freed from sin, and the indwelling of the Gospel, Col. 3.16. James 1.18.
together with the spirit of Christ, carries on this blessed freedom in them:
If this would content Mr Dell he might have the company of his brethren in the
old way of truth: But if this seem too low for him, he must not think strange
that he obtains not general applause amongst men of understanding in his
sublime notions.

(M) Sin has not its full power in the humane life of believers (as is here
affirmed by Mr Dell) and this the texts here produced by himself, do infallibly
prove, which teach that the old man of sin is crucified in believers, to be
destroyed, and the dominion of it removed from them, and therefore it does not
retain its fulpower in their humane life in any sense.

(N) If Christ and sin cannot live together in strength (which I believe) Then
sin has not its full power in their humane life, in whom Christ lives, which
yet Mr Dell in this same paragraph has affirmed, Ipse viderit.

(O) Has a believer two fleshes then, one Christ's, another his own? I take it
that the Scripture teaches the direct contrary; namely, That a believer has
but one flesh or body in property of speech, which is a member of Christ, the
temple of the holy Ghost; and as to right of possession not his own, 1 Cor.
6.15,19,20. Colos. 2.1.5. In which body or flesh of a believer, death reigns
not in any sense, though as an enemy, bodily death shall for a while imprison
it in the grave, 1 Cor 15.25,26.

(P) The Devil finds so much corruption in Christ's crucified ones, that he too
often prevails by temptation, to lead them into sin, Gal 6.1. 1 John 2.1,2.
Now sin is very hurtful to the people of God, at least in point of comfort,
Psalm. 51.8,12. the Devil therefore, whatever Mr Dell says, can do Christ's
crucified ones harm, though not destroy them.

(Q) This is plainly opposite to Scripture doctrine; namely, That the flesh
which is crucified with Christ, is the old man, Romans 6.6. which lusts
contrary to Christ and his spirit, Gal. 5.17. and therefore cannot possibly be
Christ's own flesh, as Mr Dell here affirms.

(R) Let Mr Dell show one Scripture which teaches, that the flesh which is
crucified in believers, is the flesh of the second Adam: Believers themselves,
not the flesh which is crucified in them, are intended by the Apostle, when he
writes that we are of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.

(S) Mr Dell should produce that Scripture, which calls the flesh which is
crucified in a believer, the temple and habitation of God: As to the text here
alleged it speaks to, and of the persons of believers themselves, not of the
flesh crucified in them, which are things of a very different consideration; as
all know who know any thing of Scripture doctrine.

(T) That flesh which is crucified in believers, does never keep the true
sabbath, understanding thereby, as Mr Dell does, a ceasing from our own works
of sin, but it opposes the keeping of that sabbath continually, Gal. 5.17.
Ephesians. 2.3.

(V) Let Mr Dell show a Scripture which speaks any of these things, of the
flesh crucified in believers, which are in this place heaped together by him;
Indeed all that is here said, is true of believers, in whom the flesh is
crucified; But believers and the flesh crucified in them, are things as much
different, as Saints and the body of death in them, which I think no rational
Christian can mistake for the same thing.

(W) In direct opposition to this position, it is as apparent as the
noon-light, that the flesh which is crucified in a believer, in the relics of
it, which are daily to be mortified, Col. 3.5. does by all possible means
oppose suffering for Gods name, Romans 8.7. and a believer, so far as he is
enabled by the spirit of God, to mortify the deeds of the body, and resist the
lusts of the flesh which is crucified in him, so far he is carried on in
cheerful readiness to bear the cross of Christ, and no further; Is it
possible that Mr Dell should all along mistake the flesh crucified in
believers, for believers themselves, in whom the flesh is crucified? If that
may be imagined to be his meaning, contrary to his words; I would then say of
the difference between Mr Dels strange positions concerning the crucified
flesh, and the doctrine of other Divines; what Austin spoke ( de
predestinatione Dei, cap. 5.) in another case: If the book be his, His
oppositionibus in literatura nulla est reconciliatio, in intelligentia, nulla
est repugnantia. There is no reconciling of these oppositions in word, no
repugnancy between them in deed.

(X) If Mr Dell had minded the old language and doctrine of the Scriptures, he
would never, I think, have broken out into these new and strange commendations
of the flesh crucified in believers; A little Scripture proof amidst this
confident affirming would do well.

(Y) Mr Dell should show a Scripture which affirms, that the flesh crucified
in believers, has the very glory of Jesus Christ upon it; which is a position
so new and strange, that it needs to be well proved before it be received. The
flesh which is crucified in believers is called the old man, and the body of
sin, Romans 6.6. which has no part nor portion in the glory of Jesus Christ.

(Z) This position of Mr Dell is clearly opposite to the form of Scripture
doctrine, which teaches that the flesh in believers is crucified with Christ,
to be more and more mortified in them till it be utterly destroyed; and
therefore it cannot possibly be the subject of the glorious resurrection: And
to take the mortal body of a believer, which shall be the subject of the
glorious resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.44. for the flesh which is crucified in him,
and in reference whereunto, he is said to be crucified with Christ, seems to be
such a mistake, as no man could be subject to, who takes any heed to the old
language of the Scripture.

(A) If we be dead with Christ, we believe we shall also live with him
spiritually in this life, gloriously in that which is to come, Romans 6.8. But
that believers shall live with Christ that very life which the word and spirit
of God did communicate to his flesh, when it raised him from the grave, and
fully translated him into the immediate kingdom of God, is a position raised by
Mr Dell to a very high pitch, wherein yet I shall not oppose him, if he admit
(as I hope he will) a preheminency of life unto our Savior, as being the head
of the Church, anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb.
1.8,9. For whilst our Savior has his peculiar pre-eminence of degree allowed
him as the head; I take it we may safely believe that his members shall be
sharers with him in that very life of blessedness and glory which is
communicated to his flesh, or humane nature, since the Apostle teaches us that
God has raised us up together, and made us sit togother in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. and again, that if whilst we live we are delivered to
death for Jesus sake, the life also of Jesus shall be made manifest in our
mortal body, 2 Cor 4.11. for when Christ who is our life shall appear, we also
shall appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.4.

SECT. VIII.
WHence it is evident, that all that flesh which the Word and Spirit do
crucify with Christ, they shall also rise up together with him, and sit in the
same heavenly places in him: which is the sure hope of all Believers*

Now seeing all these things are truth, and are no lie, let us willingly give
up our selves to be thus crucified, how bitter and grievous soever it be to the
flesh.

Quest. (A) Now if any man shall say, How shall I know that I am thus crucified
with Christ, that I may have interest in all these advantages?

Answ. I answer, There are many Trials of this, some of which I will name very
briefly, and so conclude this matter.

As First, If though find thine own Nature truly subdued and changed by
another Nature that is from God; and if thou find thy own life put to an end
by another life, that is from God; then art thou crucified with Christ indeed.
2. If thou can deny thy self in all things of flesh and blood, and find a
new self within thee, to have power over thy old self which is daily withering
and decaying at the presence of the new creature: then art thou crucified
through the Word. 3. If thou art dead to sin, even to all those corruptions and
lusts which have delighted themselves in thee, and thou again in them; if thou
find thy self dead to them, and they killed in thee, then art thou crucified
by the Word. 4. If thou art dead to the world, and to the things of it, which
are the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, then
art thou crucified by the Word. 5. If thou do not mind the praise and
applause of men on the one hand, nor their reproaches and indignities on the
other hand, but art truly dead to both, then art thou crucified by the Word. 6.
If thou at deceased and departed from thine own will and works, and can do
and delight to do the will and works of God: then is his Law within thy heart,
and thou art crucified by the Word. 7. If thou art ready prepared to bear and
endure any sufferings and persecutions for Christ with patience, and over and
above with willingness and joy, and do not draw back for any evils, but
do stand to them, and overcome them; then also art thou crucified by the
Word, and that is, crucified with Christ.
(B) Now this our crucifying with Christ, is the chief and greatest matter that
we are to mind in this world; wherefore Paul says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
2.2. (...), I did not judge it worth the while to know any thing among you (or
to behold any thing in you) but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Seeing in this
present state of ours, this is our chief business to be crucified with Christ,
and to be taken out of our selves, and all our own things, till we be
altogether reduced to nothing, that we may receive our selves and all things
anew in Jesus Christ. This is the chief work of God by his Word and Spirit upon
the faithful here in this world, as it was also his chief work upon Christ in
the days of his flesh: For though there were in Christ many clear
Demonstrations of the presence of God, through which he wrought many of the
great works of God; (C) yet our main business that concerned Christ's life in
the flesh, was daily and thoroughly to crucify him by the Word and Spirit which
dwelt in him, and thereby to prepare him, and make him fit for the outward
cross, and for that sad hour and power of darkness that was to overtake him.
(D) And so this also is to be the chief business of our lives, after we do
believe, even to be daily crucified, and mortified, and killed by the Word and
Spirit of Christ, till our will be perfectly subdued to Gods, and by this means
we be fitted and prepared for that tribulation and cross whatever it is that
the Lord shall please to appoint unto us, either in life or in death.

And thus having spoken something of the Crucified Christian, we proceed to
speak in the next place of the Quickened Christian, from the following words.

ANIMADVERSION VIII.
(A) ALl these notes of trial whether a man be crucified with Christ, laid down
by Mr Dell, are very good and found, and fully to be discovered in those who
are crucified with Christ, through the Word of the Gospel and the Spirit of
Christ, according to the old Scripture doctrine of Protestant teachers. Great
pity it is that so good words as these wherein Mr Dell has laid down these
notes of trial should ever be misplaced.

(B) The Apostle in the words here alleged, spoke of Christ's being crucified
for us, as the main subject of his Gospel doctrine, which he preached amongst
the Corinthians, as appears by comparing the 23. verse of the former chapter
with this text: Here is therefore no intimation of that our crucifying, which
Mr Dell speaks of, for all his admirable confidence in the strange allegation
and interpretation of the place now before us.

(C) If the Printer have done his part in these words, they are extremely
obscure, if at all intelligable, otherwise then by guess.

(D) These words of Mr Dell I understand, and in plain Scripture sense, yield
full assent to them, as to their main intent; praying that the Lord would pour
out more abundantly the spirit of mortification and self denial on his people,
that we may indeed live the rest of our time in the flesh, not to the lusts of
men, but to the will of God, both by doing and suffering with cheerfulness
according to his good pleasure: The old Protestant doctrine of mortification,
teaches men freely to say Amen to this prayer.

SECT. IX. Nevertheless I live.
EVery true Believer is as well quickened with Christ, as crucified with him; I
am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live. (A) So that as the humanity of
Christ (which is the first Example and Pattern, to which the whole Church is
conformed) being deprived of its own proper life through the Word and Spirit
that dwelt in it, had instead thereof the life of the Son of God communicated
to it: and that Son of man having parted with his own proper life out of
himself, did yet truly live in the same soul and body, the life of the Eternal
Word; and was so crucified, that nevertheless he lived; so also it is with all
Christians: And therefore Paul says out of his own experience, I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live: as if he had said, I am not crucified to
death, but to life; my crucifying with Christ is my quickening; for by this
means I am so killed that I live the more; yea now only I do truly live, being
formerly dead. My own proper life in my self was my death, but Christ's life in
me is my true life. For I was dead with the worst death, to wit, in trespasses
and sins, but now I live in the best life, even the life of righteousness.

(B) Whence it is manifest, that the living Word and Spirit of Christ in a
Christian do so kill the life of his flesh (which is a life of sin and sorrow,
and darkness, and death) that at the same time they communicate to the same
man, to the same soul and body, a true, and spiritual, and holy, and heavenly,
and eternal life.

(C) For no man is crucified with Christ, but he also lives with him: seeing
the same Word that kills our life, communicates Christ's: and Christ crucifies us
with himself, not that he may kill us, but that he may quicken us: and our
quickening is the end of our crucifying, and our crucifying is the way to our
quickening.

(D) Indeed the killing of the flesh by the sword or famine, or the Law, or any
way else is death indeed, or death unto death; but the killing of the flesh by
the living Word and Spirit, which is its crucifying with Christ, is death unto
life.

And here again we may note this also, That the true life of a Christian,
begins from his crucifying and dying with Christ; and also the true crucifying
and dying of a Christian begins from his life in Christ. For both these
inseparably go together, to wit, our crucifying and our quickening with Christ.
But our crucifying with Christ is named first in order, because it is first in
manifestation, seeing after we believe, Christ's death is first manifested in
us, before Christ's life; though Christ's life be first in us in order of nature:
the crucifying of our flesh, flowing from the life of his Spirit

This then is the sum of this matter, (E) That the living Word dwelling in us,
destroys the proper life of the flesh, and takes up the flesh into the life of
it self and the Spirit. And so a man in union with Christ, has his own life
destroyed out of him, and Christ's own life communicated to him. So that in the
true Believer, the soul and body of man live in the life of the Son of God, as
was done in the flesh of Christ our elder Brother.

And thus the flesh lives a life that is not of the flesh; yea thus the
creature lives in it self the life of God. For as that eternal life that was
with the Father, was manifested in the Son, that is in his flesh or humanity,
and all Believers have seen and known it; so also that very life of the Father
and the Son, is both communicated to the Saints, and also manifest in them, as
faith very well knows. (F) And this is the great mystery of the Gospel; let
them receive it, that can receive it.

ANIMADVERSION 9.
(A) IN these words, Mr Dell has couched together six strange positions, to
which I would say more in this place, but that the matter of them is discussed,
and the error of them, as I conceive, discovered in my Animadversions on other
passages of this book.

1. That the humanity of Christ was deprived of its own proper life, through
the word and spirit that dwelt in it. 2. That in stead thereof, it had the life
of the Son of God communicated to it. 3. That the son of man parted with his
own proper life out of himself. 4. That he did yet live truly in the same soul
and body, the life of the eternal word. 5. That the whole church is conformed
to the pattern of the humanity of Christ, in point of living the life of the
eternal word. 6. That the Son of man, was so crucified, that nevertheless he
lived whilst he was crucified.
If Mr Dell can produce one Scripture in proof of any one of these Positions, I
am utterly unacquainted with it: I think it may be truly said of them,
recitasse est refutasse, the reciting is a sufficient refuting of them.

(B) That the spirit of Christ in a Christian does so kill the life of his
flesh, that is, of his body of sin, that at the same time it does communicate
to the same man, to the same soul and body, a true, spiritual, holy, heavenly
and eternal life, is a known truth, acknowledged by those, whose souls have not
entered into Mr Dels secrets: If this be all he means and minds, he should
but use old plain words, and he should find consent of judgment in all his
brethren. Me thinks the words of the Lord to Job, should sound loudly in the
ears of some men in our days, who are of a deeper language in matters of
Religion, then that their brethren can well understand them; Who is this that
darkens counsel with words without knowledge? Job 38.2. It is the glory of the
Ministers of the Gospel, not to be veiled like Moses, but to use much
plainness of speech in their doctrine, seeing the Lord shines in their
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.

(C) All this in a sound sense, is sound doctrine; If the words be not put upon
new tentors, they do not outreach the old apprehensions of Gods servants
amongst us.

(D) Is it the same flesh (as these words import) which is killed by the sword
or famine, and which is killed by the Law and Spirit of Christ, and so
crucified with him? Me thinks no Christian which ever looked into the
Scriptures, should upon second thoughts say so: The one is evidently the
material body, and the other the body of sin, which are things vastly different.

(E) That Christ by his Spirit in believers destroys the proper life of the
flesh, understanding thereby the old man, is very true; but then it is utterly
false, that Christ takes up that flesh into the life of the Spirit of God. And
in these words, if Mr Dell understand by flesh, the nature, or natural body of
man, then they carry in them a falsehood throughout; for neither does Christ
dwelling in us by his Spirit, destroy the proper life of our humane nature, or
natural body; neither is our humane nature or natural body taken up into the
life of the Word and Spirit, as is here confidently affirmed: And to say, that
in the true believer the soul and body of man live in the life of the Son of
God, as was done in the flesh of Christ our elder brother, is to make believers
the sons of God, and partakers of the divine nature, in the same manner as our
Lord Jesus was, which cannot be mentioned without trembling; and me thinks
should not be the judgment of any Christian. Doubtless the Apostle Paul
understood that God was manifested in the flesh in the person of our Savior,
in a special, peculiar, and incommunicable manner, when describing the mystery
of Godliness, relating to our Savior, he made the first branch of it God
manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.

(F) This is the great mystery of the Gospel: for certain? would it be a degree
of infidelity to doubt, or deny that this is Gospel? It seems Mr Dell thinks
so, by adding, Let them receive it who can receive it. But who gave him warrant
with such absolute peremptorinesse to impose his notions upon others as Gospel,
the great mystery of the Gospel? I cannot but stand amazed at the strange
confidence of some men, who dare assume unto themselves our Saviors authority,
or at least, the boldness to make use of his authoritative words, without any
preface, in pressing of their new and strange doctrines, to say no worse, upon
others, as high points and great mysteries of the Gospel. Such high confidence
in points wherein men may possibly be brought to an after conviction of their
error, I take to be one of the most dangerous pinacles upon which men are
liable to be tempted to cast themselves down through the medium of scepticisme,
into the bottom of Atheism; wherein we have many sad examples before our eyes.
Who can but love and reverence the learned Christian modesty of aged Austin?
who wrote thus of himself, Lib. de bono perseverantiae, cap. 21. Quamvis
neminem velim sic amplecti omnia mea, ut me sequatur, nisi in it is in quibus me
non errare perspexerit. Though I would have no man so to embrace all that I
affirm, as to follow me in any other points, but such only wherein he
perceives that I do not go astray. And again in the same chapter, Quandoquidem
arrogantius loquor quam verius si vel nunc dico me ad perfectionem, ut sine
ullo errore scriberem jam in ista aetaete venisse. I shall speak more
arrogantly then truly, if I shall even now say that I am at this age arrived to
that perfection that I do write without all error. How happy would it be if
such a spirit were more commonly to be discerned in our days.

SECT. X.
NOw this new and Spiritual life which a crucified Christian partakes of;

He has it, 1. In Union. 2. In Manifestation.


First, (A) A Christian has this life in Union, when through Faith of the
operation of God, he is really knit unto Christ, and ingraffed into him, and
made one with him. For before we are united to Christ, we are without life; but
as soon as we are united to him, we have life from him, as John says in his
Epistle, He that has the Son has life (even that life which the Son has) and
he that has not the Son has not life. Now this life and union which a
Christian has through faith is more hidden and secret, as that life is that
proceeds from the first real union and compliance between the Stock and sience
or graft: and this is the life of Justification. (B) For as soon as ever we are
by faith made one with God in Christ, the righteousness of God is made ours
truly and everlastingly, and in this we are justified even before God.

2. A true Christian, has this life of Christ not only in Union, but also in
Manifestation. For when a Christian partakes of Christ's life by faith, this
life will not be idle in him (which is against the nature of all life, but
especially of this) but most active and operative, and it will manifest it self
especially two ways, viz.

Both in Holiness and Comfort.


1. (C) This life will manifest it self in Holiness, in the very holiness of
Christ, which is the holiness of the Divine Nature, communicated to the Humane
Nature; the Spirit it self which is given to a Believer as the outgoing of the
life of God within him, works its own works of grace and sanctification in
him, and communicates the same holiness to him a Member as to Christ the Head,
though in a far different degree.

2. This life of Christ in a Christian will manifest it self in comfort as well
as in holiness. And this is the life of our life, and the next and necessary
result of holiness; wherefore it is said, that the Kingdom of God stands first
in righteousness, and then presently in peace and joy: and the same Spirit
that is given for a Sanctifier, is also given for a Comforter; and Paul says,
Romans 8. That to be spiritually minded, is not only life, but life and peace.
(D) For when a Believer finds in himself a new nature through a new birth, and
the Law of God within his heart, and some strength to obey God, and to do his
will, then he begins to find also a sweet and heavenly peace within him, and
many times, joy unspeakable and glorious. And thus is a crucified Christians
new life manifested both in holiness, and also in Spiritual peace and joy.

And now (to speak one word by way of Application) let us each one seriously
consider, whether he do indeed partake of such a life as is risen to him out of
death? whether he find that he has parted with his own life, and gotten
another life then his own, in his own soul and body? and whether the life of
the first Adam be crucified in him, and he live the life of the second Adam?
that is, not a natural, but a spiritual life; not a humane, but a divine life;
not an earthly, but a heavenly life; not a temporal, but an eternal life: for
thus do all live that are truly crucified with Christ. (E) And I desire we all
would the rather mind this, because if we part with this life ere we partake
of that, the second death which is everlasting death in sin, and the wrath of
God, must needs swallow us up: and because if we do not partake of Christ's life
here, we can never live with him in his Kingdom: and also because we can never
have true and immediate communion with the Father, but in the life of his
Eternal Son: Wherefore let all such whose hearts God has touched by his Word,
make it their business to seek from God in Christ another life then their own;
a life infinitely better and stronger then their own; and a life which at the
will of God will offer up their own; that we may say in our experience, as
Paul, in his, We are crucified with Christ, yet nevertheless we live.

Now the Apostle having named this blessed life, does further enlarge himself
on this matter in the words following, saying,

ANIMADVERSION 10.
(A) THat a Christian is by faith really knit to Christ, and engraffed into
him, and made one with him, and so has eternal life from him, as the sience
from the stock, is old scripture doctrine, acknowledged by all Protestant
Divines: But that this life which is received through union unto Christ is the
life of justification, as Mr Dell here affirms by way of eminence at least,
if not exclusion, and does not equally carry in it the life of sanctification
also, out of which a believer brings forth fruits of righteousness to the
glory of God, seems not to hold accordance with John 15.4,5,8. or, if Mr Dell
in his notion confound Justification and Sanctification, me thinks the Apostle
plainly teaches another doctrine; ascribing Justification to Faith, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus; and Sanctification to the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6.11.

(B) If by Union with God in Christ, the righteousness of God be made ours
truly and everlastingly, and therein we be justified, How then are we made
righteous through the obedience of our one mediator Jesus Christ? Romans 5.19.
yea, how are we justified freely by Gods grace, through the redemption which is
in Christ Jesus? Romans 3.24. I fear this passage of Mr Dell inclines too much
toward the preaching of another gospel. For the Lords acquitting of a sinner
from his sins, through the forgiveness of them, is plainly laid down by the
Apostle, as an act of justification, Romans 4.5,6.7,8, which according to the
Gospel, the Lord who justifies, does not pass upon men in relation to their
being one with God in Christ, or the communication of his righteousness
everlastingly to them, or (as he afterward speaks) Christ living his own life
in them; but in relation to the ransoming death of Christ for them, only and
wholly. This is the Gospel which the Apostles have preached to us, which also
we have received, and wherein we stand, by which also we shall be saved; how
that Christ died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 1,2,3. and in him we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7. and by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. Seeing our Lord Christ was delivered
for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. Romans 4.25. Christians
should have their hearts and ears closly stopped up against the hearing and
receiving of any other Gospel or Doctrine of Justification whatsoever; yea,
though brought by an Angel from heaven, Gal. 1.8,9.

(C) How can they which have the divine holiness, the same holiness of the
divine nature in the same manner (though not in the same degree) as Christ had,
and has, not be in their degree God as he is? I profess my present inability
to answer this question, and absolve Mr Dels words from being very dangerous,
and derogative from the peculiar honor of our Savior. Was not the holiness
of the divine nature, or which is all one, the holy divine nature by personal
union, so communicated to the humane nature in our Savior, that though he was
man, yet in his holy divine nature he was also God blessed for ever? Will he
affirm so much of any believer? I hope not.

(D) These words of Mr Dell are so pure and precious, that every believer
cannot but embrace them for truth; And methinks they do so plainly show that
the will of God which a believer does obey, that is to say, his revealed will is
the law of God within his heart, put into his inward parts by the spirit, as to
the knowledge and love of it, and strength in some degree to fulfill it, that I
can hardly believe that such words should proceed from him, as we find in the
3. Section of this book viz. God himself which dwells in them, is the new Law
according to which they live. For is the will of God which a believer has some
strength to do, God himself? It is very strange if any understanding man should
so apprehend, seeing the will of God which believers are strengthened to
observe, and obey, is only his will of command made known to men as the rule of
their sanctification, which is a different thing from God himself, as a Lord,
and his law differ, 1 These. 4.2,3.

(E) The former words in this paragraph, I conceive, in a sound sense may be
admitted; But these words seem to carry in them an incredible mistake: for if
by this, and that life in these words, be meant the life of the first Adam
which is crucified in believers, and the life of the second Adam imparted to
believers, according to what immediately goes before; they then speak thus
much; to wit, that the life of the first Adam crucified in believers, is the
natural life of man, of which he is deprived in corporal death, and with which
a man may part ere he partake of the life of Christ; whereas there is nothing
more clear in the Scriptures, then that the life of the first Adam crucified in
believers, is the life of sin, with which no man can possibly part ere he
partake of the life of Christ; and which is a very different thing from that
life with which a man parts at the hour of death; in relation to which life
alone it is true, according to Mr Dels words, that if we part with it ere we
partake of the life of Christ, the second death must needs swallow us up.

SECT. XI. Yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
(A) ANd this he speaks, lest any one should think that the life he lived after
his crucifying with Christ, was only his own humane life purisied and refined.
I say, lest any one should think he lived now the life of his own refined and
spiritualized reason and judgment, and prudence, and will, etc. distinct and
apart from Christ; therefore he adds, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And
each of these Clauses are very considerable.

Yet not I. (B) I live, yet not I. By which words it may appear, that a
Christian is so crucified with Christ, that in this crucifying he loses not
only his own proper life, but (which must needs follow) his personality also.
For through faith his soul and body live no more any proper life of their own
as before, but are taken up into the nature and person of the Son of God; and
in him he subsists, lives and acts as a Member in the Man, and as a Branch in
the Vine; and so can truly say after faith is come, Vivo ego, non amplius ego,
I live, yet no more I, but it is another that lives in me, and I in him: so
that a true Christian, through true faith does lose his personality, not his
humanity; for his nature lives, but not in his own person, but in the person of
Christ.

(C) Indeed every man by nature, and according to his first birth, is a
distinct person by himself and lives a proper life of his own, in and by
himself, till faith comes and knits him unto Christ; and then he subsists in
Christ's person, and is no more a person distinct by himself, so far as he is
gathered up into Christ through faith and the Spirit, and lives and acts in
him. For then Christ is made so one with a Christian, and a Christian with
Christ, that there is no more distinction between them in this Unity, then
there is between the head and a member.

Now the knowledge of this point, through the Experience of faith, is of
excellent use to a Christian in the matter of his salvation.

(D) In as much as each man, as he is a distinct person by himself, is under
the Law, and appertains to the Kingdom of the Devil, and is within the reach
and power of death and hell: but as he is taken into Jesus Christ by faith,
that is, as he is taken into his Person as his member, and loses his own
person, so he is free from the law, sin, and death, as Christ is free. So that
if the law, sin, death, or the devil come to a believer, to accuse, terrify,
or condemn him, he (because of this most real and near union with Christ) may
reply in truth, and say, It is not I; I am not I, I am through faith become a
member of Christ, and I am he, and he is I; and if you have any thing to say,
say it to the Person himself, for I am but a Member, and do live in his person.

The clear and spiritual knowledge of this matter, would be a great support to
us in all times of temptation, and in all deep sense of sin and wrath: seeing
we commonly in such sad and painful hours, do look upon our selves as persons
by our selves, and distinct from Christ: and then we do truly both fear and
feel sin, and death, and hell within us; and then also the Devil, and our own
evil consciences are too mighty for us, when we consider our selves in our
selves. Wherefore at such times we must needs prevail by faith; and know that
we through faith are not persons by our selves, but that we are Parts and
Members of Christ, and live in his Person, and consequently in so near union
with him, that Christ cannot be saved without us, nor we perish without him.
And so none can lay any thing to our charge, but what Christ has taken upon
himself, and overcome for us: and so the Law, Sin, Death, Hell, and Devil, can
as soon prevail against Christ, as against us who are so joined to him, that we
are one flesh and Spirit with him.

(E) It is true, if we were persons by our selves, these evils and enemies
would be too hard for us; but being drawn unto Christ by the Father, and being
by him also implanted in Christ, and made Branches of that Vine, and Members of
that Person, we thus become one with him who is conqueror of all things, and
we our selves also are more then Conquerours in him.

Wherefore let us all know that in the matter of our Adoption, Justification,
Sanctification, and of our whole Salvation, (F) Prorsus abjicienda est persona,
as Luther says, We must wholly cast away our own person, and be united into
one person with Christ, yea, and lose our person in his: seeing out of this
union Christ profits no body, either to the escaping sin and death, or to the
obtaining righteousness and life.

(G) Wherefore for the escaping these eternal evil things, and for the
obtaining these eternal good things, we must necessarily be so taken up into
Christ, that we must say with Paul, It is no more I.

ANIMADVERSION XI.
(A) IT is such plain Scripture doctrine, that our humane reason, judgment,
prudence, will, etc. is refined and spiritualized in us, through the spirit of
Christ, and that in the strength of that renovation through the spirit we live
unto God in our humane life, and native faculties refined and spiritualliz'd,
that to endeavor to take men off from thinking so is a very anti-scriptural
attempt: See Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 4.23. 1 These. 5.23. If Mr Dell thinks he has
left himself a starting hole in these words [distinct and apart from Christ.]
He may know that all understanding Christians acknowledge, that the refining
and spiritualizing of our humane faculties to a heavenly disposition, and life
proceeds only and wholly from union to Christ through his spirit, and cannot
possibly be enjoyed distinct and apart from him. These words therefore,
distinct and apart from Christ, are not of sufficient virtue to secure Mr Dels
present Paradox from appearing very heterodox to judicious observers: If Paul
had but one humane life in him, and were but one and the self same man, as to
his native faculties, before and after Christ lived in him, which I think is
undeniable; then it will necessarily follow (or I am much mistaken) that the
life he lived after Christ lived in him, was only his own life purified and
refined; the life of his own reason, judgment, prudence, and will, etc.
refined and spirituallized through the spirit of life in Christ Jesus: the
Apostles writing of such in whom Christ lives, set them forth as the self-same
persons in respect of their humane life and faculties, but purified and
refined, to be very different persons from what they were formerly: God be
thanked that you were the servants of sin, but you (the self-same you) have
obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine which was delivered you, Romans
6.17. And again, seeing you have purified (not any other, but) your souls by
obeying the truth through the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. And again, Every man that
has this hope in him purifies himself (not any other) as he is pure, 1 John
3.3. It seems to me most evident, that the nature of regeneration, renovation,
vivification, and sanctification, necessarily require that the subject of them,
the man which is begotten again, renewed, quickened from the dead, and
sanctified, be the self-same as to his humane life and faculties, before and
after this blessed change be wrought in him: for if the subject in this change
be not identically the same, what can be imaginably said to be changed? The
words of Zanchius on the 23. verse of the 4. chapter to the Ephesians, seems to
me to carry much light and reason in them; who showing why the Apostle
expressed the renovation of believers by the putting off of the old, and
putting on the new man, writes thus: ut significaret, sicut vestis res est
diversa ab eo qui eam induit etc. The Apostle used this form of speech, that he
might show, that as a garment is a different thing from him that puts it on,
so also the old and new man are different things from us who put off one
wherewith we were clothed, and again put on the other which before we had not
upon us. I take it that Austins words are fully consonant to Scripture
doctrine: Sit igitur in primis positum atque firmatum virtutem qua recte
vivitur ab animi sede membris corporis imperare, sanctumque corpus usu fieri
sanctae voluntatis: Let this be in the first place laid down, and firmly held
unto, that the virtue whereby a man lives well commands over the members of
the body from the throne of the mind, and that the body is made holy by the
use of a holy will, Aug. de civ. dei lib. 1. cap. 16.

(B) By the words of the Apostle it does appear, that a Christian crucified
with Christ, as to the life of the old man, lives not unto God from a
principle of life which is properly his own or from himself, but from a
principle of life which he has from Christ, and in Christ; namely, from the
spirit of Christ which dwells in all his. But that a believer loses his
personality by being crucified with Christ, it appears not from this or any
other Scripture that I know, That [through faith a believers soul and body live
no more any proper life of their own, but are taken up into the nature and
person of the Son of God] understanding these words according to Mr Dels
explication Sect. 13. (D) that Christ in a believer is not the flesh of Christ,
for that being a creature, can be but in one place at a time, but this Christ
is the Eternal Word and Son of the living God, the power, wisdom, and
righteousness of God and the true God and eternal life, seems to me a very
dreadful position; For if a believers soul and body be taken up into the nature
and person of Christ the Son of God in distinction from his flesh, then he must
needs in nature and person be the Son of God, and the true God, as our Lord
Jesus Christ is; which I am not willing to believe that Mr Dell will positively
and plainly affirm, though his words evidently speak so much: Whereas it is
here further asserted by Mr Dell, that in Christ a believer subsists, lives,
and acts as a member in the man, and the branch in the Vine, that is
acknowledged in a Scripture sense, sc. that a believer has his spiritual life
wholly in Christ, and from Christ as his head and mediator, through his
spirit, as a member has its life from a man, and a branch from the Vine; but
from hence to conclude that a believer through faith does lose his personality,
and lives in the person and personality of the Son of God, is utterly
inconsequent; for though a believer does retain his humane nature and
personality, and does truly live and subsist in the same, yet is it likewise
true, that that person subsists, lives, and acts in Christ, as to the life of
God in him, as a member in the man, or as a branch in the Vine.

(C) This assertion here reiterated by Mr Dell, that a believer after faith
comes, is no more a person distinct from Christ, needs not again to be proposed
peremptorily, but to be proved sufficiently by Scripture, and me thinks those
words, so far as he is gathered up into Christ, do utterly overthrow the former
assertion, and prove that a believer in some degree or respect, is not gathered
up into Christ, and therefore must needs be a person distinct from Christ: If
here be not contradictio in adjecto, a contrariety in the end, to the beginning
of this sentence, I am much mistaken.

(D) I utterly deny, and doubt not but the Scripture will bear me out in it,
that a believer though admitted to be a distinct person from Christ, is within
the reach and power of death and hell; for the humane person of a believer
being by faith, and the Spirit united unto Christ, as his member, truly and yet
mystically is through Christ as his head and mediator, fully put out of the
reach of death and hell, and of the Law and sin as binding over thereunto, so
that if the law, sin, death, or the Devil come to a believer, to accuse,
terrify or condemn him, he, by reason of his most real and near union into
Christ, may reply in truth, and say, It is not I, I am not I, I am through
faith a member of Christ; I am in him, and of him; If you have any thing to
say, say it to Christ my head and mediator, for I am a member of his, and do
live in him. And this doctrine I doubt not, is as full and effectual as what Mr
Dell here suggests, to bring on that conclusion in regard of believers, that
none can lay any thing to their charge, but what Christ has taken upon
himself, and overcome for them, and so the law, sin, hell, and the Devil, can
as soon prevail against Christ, as against them who are so nearly joined to
him, as to be one flesh and spirit with him, in a Scripture sense; much
different from the mind and meaning of Mr Dell in this point.

(E) Those words being not overstrained beyond Scripture meaning, are very true
and good, and conformable to the judgment of those who judge Mr Dels doctrine of
a believers having no personality, but in the person of the Son of God, to be
very unsound and dangerous. Indeed if we were persons by our selves, that is,
persons not united unto Christ as our head and mediator, we should be very
miserable; but blessed be the Lord, though we know believers to be distinct
persons from Christ, yet we also know them to be persons spiritually and
mystically united unto, and even into Christ as their head, being made parts of
that body which is his fullness who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. and that is
unto them matter of everlasting and invincible rejoicing.

(F) Where to look this place in Luthers works, I know not; but upon what I
know of the general tenor of Luthers doctrine, I dare adventure the reproach
of a gross mistake, if the words being duly weighed, do import more then this;
that all personal works, worth, merit, and righteousness, is to be wholly
disclaimed, by those who partake of the spiritual benefits of Christ: And this
is very sweet Gospel doctrine assuredly, which has no affinity with Mr Dels
new paradox.

(G) Agreed, if these words be taken in the plain Scripture sense of them;
there is no doubt but for the escaping of eternal evils, and obtaining eternal
good things, believers must be taken up into Christ; and found in him not
having their own righteousness, but that which is through the faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. at what time they may
in their particulars, comfortably and confidently say with the Apostle, It is
no more I.

SECT. XII. Yet not I.
ANd here I must needs note one thing more, e're I conclude this matter, and
that is this,

Note. (A) That a believer must be so much taken up into Christ by faith, that
as Christ must work all in him, so he must attribute all Christ's works unto
Christ, and none to himself, still saying in the midst and exercise of all
Graces and Virtues, It is not I, It is not I that live, but Christ himself that
lives in me this life of Grace, Righteousness, Wisdom, Meekness, Goodness,
Humility, Patience, Power, Love, etc. It is not I that live it in my self, but
Christ that lives it in me; as he says elsewhere, I labored more abundantly
then they all; yet not I, but the Grace of God that dwells in me.

After the same manner, as every Christian must keep his Rest in Christ, and
must suffer Christ to work all his own works in him, so he must still attribute
all Christ's works unto Christ, and be still saying, It is not I, but Christ in
me that has done these works, that has endured and overcome these evils.

(B) And thus we must keep our Sabbath in Christ, as Christ kept his Sabbath in
God. For Christ was so taken up into God, and filled with him, that he said of
his humanity, I can do nothing of my self; and again, the Father within me he
does the works; and again, the words that I speak are not mine, but his that
sent me; and so Christ in all great works said, not I, but the Father in me; so
we in all our works that are truly spiritual must say, not we, but Christ in
us. (C) And this only a mortified Christian can truly perform: for others
will be attributing the works of Christ to themselves, rather then to Christ,
and be glorying in themselves more then in him.

It follows,

ANIMADVERSION 12.
(A) A Greed, agreed, if as Mr Dell speaks Scripture language, so he will hold
to the plain Scripture meaning of the words. Christ by his spirit is
questionless the fountain of all good in his members, and they must and will
attribute all Christ's works unto Christ, and none to themselves; still saying
in the midst of the exercise of all graces and virtues; It is not I, but Christ
himself that lives in me this life of grace.

(B) Though this be besides the main point now in hand; yet I would see a
Scripture which calls our Saviors universal submission to his Fathers will,
or if Mr Dell likes not this explication, then to use his own words; his being
taken up into God, and filled with God, his sabbatisme, or sabbath-keeping. If
Mr Dell do here glance at the conscionable observation of the weekly sabbath as
unnecessary, as it is doubtful likewise whether he does under the name of the
sabbath, Sect. 7. (T) and under the name of the Lords day, Sect. 15. (C) he
should do well to speak out, that his mind may be known; and his judgment in
this point considered of by the word of God.

(C) To my certain knowledge, very many who find no sweetness in Mr Dels new
doctrine of no distinct personality in believers from the Son of God, are by
this mark, which he makes infallible, to be judged mortified Christians, for
they dare not attribute the works of Christ unto themselves, and therefore
glory not in themselves but in Christ; acknowledging that without him they can
do nothing and joying in this with the Apostle, that they can do all things
through Christ who strengthens them, Phil. 4.13.

SECT. XIII. But Christ lives in me.
(A) FOr least any should think that Paul had a new habit of life created in
him, he adds this, that we must know it was Christ himself within him that was
his life, even that Word of life, and Son of God that made the world, and no
created habit of life. That as that Word that was with God, and was God, and
dwelt in the humanity of Christ, was that very life of his humanity; So the
same Word of God dwelling in us through Christ, is also our life as it was his.
And as the body has no habit of life in it self distinct and apart from the
reasonable soul; but the soul it self that dwells in the body, is the life of
the body; and when the soul withdraws the body is dead, and has no habit of
life in it self afterward; so the life of a Christian does as immediately flow
from Christ, as the life of the body from the soul; and if Christ should
withdraw, all Spiritual life would leave him, and the Second death would
swallow him up. And as the very presence of the soul in each member, is the
Life of it, so is Christ's presence in all his Members their true and very life.
Wherefore says Paul here, Christ lives in me, as God lived in Christ, and as
the Soul lives in the Body.

And so as Paul had affirmed before, That it was not he that lived, so here he
shows Who it was that did live in him, and that is Christ; Christ lives in me.

(B) Indeed the Soul and Body were Paul's, but Paul did not live in his own Soul
and Body, but Christ himself did live in them; and so Paul lived the life of
another in himself, the life of Christ in his own soul and body: and the soul
and body of Paul were but a Temple in which Christ lived more then himself, as
the humanity of Christ was but a Temple in which God lived more then himself.

(C) So that it is Christ himself that lives in a true believer, and he is, and
does, and suffers, and overcomes all in him.

(D) Now that we may not mistake in this great matter, we must rightly
understand, What this Christ is that lives in a believer: now this is not the
flesh of Christ; for that being a Creature, and in all things like unto our
flesh, sin excepted, can be but in one place at a time; but this Christ is the
Eternal Word, and Son of the living God, the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness
of God, and the true God, and Eternal life. This is the Christ that lived in
Paul, and lives in every believer.

ANIMADVERSION 13.
(A) HOw Mr Dell will expound these words of his, sc. That as that word that
was with God, and was God, and dwelt in the humanity of Christ, was that very
life of his humanity: So the same word of God dwelling in us through Christ, is
also our life as it was his: How, I say, he will expound these words, and not
confess that the Godhead dwells in us as it does in Christ, and so that we
are God as he is, I see not: Yet I am willing to hope that he does not so
apprehend, although his words (as far as I can judge) import so much. But I
very much doubt that in this paragraph, he puts asunder those things which God
has inseparably put together, sc. A new habit of life created in a believer by
Christ, and Christ himself dwelling in a believer by his spirit; for I take it,
through the Spirit of Christ dwelling in a believer; he is born again to a new
habit of a spiritual life, which is called the spirit born of the spirit, John
3.6. I see no cause therefore why we may not think that Paul had a new habit of
life created in him, and yet that Christ lived in him by his spirit as the
fountain of that life. The Philosophy whereby Mr Dell illustrateth his
divinity, seems as strange to me, as what he intends to explain by it: for
though the body has no habit of life in it apart from the soul, yet I think,
it has a habit of life in it distinct from the soul, even that habit of life
which flows from the soul, even as the habit of spiritual life flows from
Christ, dwelling as the fountain of this life in his believing people by his
spirit.

(B) I take it that in these words those things are made to clash which do
sweetly accord, sc. Paul's living a natural and personal life in his own soul
and body, and Christ's living in Paul by his spirit as the fountain and (as I
may say) the soul of a spiritual life. I conceive that this position has no
self contradiction in it, Christ by his spirit lived in Paul, whilst Paul
lived in his own soul and body a natural and personal life. For notwithstanding
Mr Dels confidence (I take it) it will hold for truth, that when Christ lived
in Paul, Paul then lived in his own soul and body: that text assures so much,
2 Cor. 4.11.

(C) These words of Mr Dell are very sound being not overstrained; for
questionless Christ himself, by his spirit, lives in a true believer, and by
reason of the spiritual and mystical union of a believer, as a member to Christ
as his head; the Lord Christ is originally, as to the being of the new
creature, and does, and suffers, and overcomes all in him.

(D) Does not Mr Dell in these words, too much divide the Godhead from the
manhood in our blessed Savior, whilst he makes the eternal word and Son of
God, in opposition to his flesh, that Christ, which lived in Paul and lives in
believers. Me thinks it is evident that the Apostle spoke not of Christ under
the notion of the eternal Word alone, but as the word made flesh, when he wrote
that Christ lived in him, and that he lived by the faith of the Son of God;
seeing he immediately added, who loved me and gave himself for me; for it is
clear that it was Christ's flesh which he gave for the life of the world, John
6.57. And though the flesh or humane body of our Savior in the Capernaits
sense carnally partaken of, could profit nothing, John 6.63. yet our Lord
Jesus, as the word made flesh, is the mediator, head and savior of his
people, who dwells in them, and acts in them by his spirit, as the fountain
of their spiritual life. And therefore our Saviors flesh is not to be put by
in the matter of believers vivification through him, as if it had no part or
place in that work; for the flesh or humane nature of our Savior, having an
incomprehensible worth put upon it, and power into it by his Godhead or divine
nature united to it, became in and through these sufferings, which it
sustained, the effectual means of eternal life to all those who believe on the
name of the Lord Jesus, as our Savior himself has fully testified, saying,
The bread that I will give, is my flesh which I will give for the life of the
world, John 6.51. And again, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you have no life in you: who so eats my flesh and drinks
my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day; for my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him, verse. 53, 54, 55, 56. upon the
last of which verses, Calvin has thus written; Neque enim ad Christum Deum
unquam perveniet qui Hominem negligit; quare si tibi vis cum Christo aliquid
esse commune, cavendum inprimis ne carnem ejus fastidias. He shall not come to
Christ as God, who neglects him as man: wherefore if thou would enjoy any
communion with Christ, thou must especially beware that thou despise not his
flesh.

SECT. XIV.
Uses. NOw if we rightly understand this point, we may learn from it many
excellent things.

4. (A) And first we may perceive the mistake of those who look for all the
life of Christ in that humanity which was born of the Virgin, whereas Christ
truly lived in Paul, and lives in all the faithful, and his very life is to be
seen in them, as the life of the Soul is not confined to the Head, but
disperses it self through all the Members, and is manifest in them in measure,
as in the head in fullness.

5. (B) We may learn that Christ in a believer, is to him instead of all
credted habits of Grace. Christ who is the true God, is all in all in a
Christian; and so a Christian partakes of that righteousness which is Christ;
of that wisdom, which is Christ; of that power, truth, goodness, etc. which is
Christ; and Christ that dwells in believers, is truly all Grace to them. And
herein they are like unto Christ's humanity, unto whom the fullness of the
Godhead that dwelt in him, was instead of all created Grace. Wherefore let us
know, that the created habits of grace in a Christian, which the Schoolmen have
invented and taught, and others have received from them, are nothing but the
Empty notions, and Vain speculations of carnal and unbelieving hearts, ignorant
of the true mystery of the Gospel. For Christ that lives in a believer, is all
Grace to him; and thus the Apostle Paul expressly teaches in 1 Cor. 1.30. where
speaking of Christ, he says, He is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption; and so a Christian has that Wisdom,
Righteousness, etc. which is Christ himself. And this grace which is Christ
himself, is infinitely more high and holy, then all created habits of Grace,
(C) and this is the only Grace that is acceptable to God, and that makes us
accepted in it self, (D) and this is the only grace against which the Gates of
hell cannot prevail; and the only grace that can make us meet for the Fathers
Kingdom. And thus you see that Christ that lives in a believer is all grace in
him, and all-sufficient grace for him.

3. (E) If Christ live in believers, then certainly whatever evils, and
tribulations, and persecutions are brought upon believers, by the World and the
false Church, for the word of faith, they are brought upon Christ himself, and
Christ himself is still persecuted in the flesh throughout all Ages and
Generations: and the faithful in all Ages are filling up the remainders of the
sufferings of Christ in his body. For believers have all along suffered, and do
still suffer from the World, because God is in them of a truth; and the evil
done to them is against God himself, who dwells in them. And against this Rock
have all the unbelievers dashed themselves in pieces all along.

4. Christ who lives in believers, lives in them like himself, that is, like
the Son of the living God, and so those in whom he lives, 1. He frees them from
their own evil things, and 2. He confers upon them all his own good things.


1. He frees them from their evil things: And in reference to these, he lives
in them as their Redeemer and Savior; and so Christ within them abolishes the
Law, takes away sin, and destroys death; for none of these things can dwell in
his presence, in that soul wherein he lives. (F) For he is our new Law, to make
void the Old; and he is our new Righteousness to take away sin; and our new
life, to destroy death; and the Law, Sin, and Death can have no place nor power
where Christ our new Law, Righteousness, and Life dwells and lives.

2. Christ living in believers, confers upon them his own good things (G) For
Christ the Son of God has nothing in himself, that is, in his Divine nature,
which he will not communicate to our flesh, as he has done to his own,
according to our place and use in his body; and so he communicates to all those
in whom he dwells, of all the things of God, till at last he fill them with all
the fullness of God. And thus is Christ glorified in his Saints, and admired in
them that believe.

5. (H) If it be Christ the true God that lives in believers, then we learn
hence what true justification is; and that is, to be so one with Christ by
faith, that Christ himself may live in us, and we in him; that he may
communicate his nature to us, and our nature may be taken up into his: for we
cannot be Justified before God by our own living, but by Christ's living in us
his own life; and his righteousness which is the righteousness of God, must
dwell in us e're we can be Justified before God.

(I) Lastly, seeing Christ himself lives in all true believers, let us all who
profess our selves to be such, so live that Christ may be seen to live in us,
more then our selves; that they that have known us may know us no more, but may
know Christ in us; and that they that have communion with us, may acknowledge
Christ himself speaking, working, and living his whole life in us, in all
self-denial, humility, holiness, love, resignation of our selves to the will
of God, and in all diligence to do the work of God, and readiness to suffer
the will of God: for thus Christ lived in his own flesh; and thus also he will
certainly live in ours, if he live there at all: and when Christ lives in our
flesh, as he did in his own, something of his glory will be seen upon us.

Now such a Christian in whom Christ lives, and he lives not himself, how
amiable would he be in the spiritual Church? but how unlike would he be to all
the men in the world, yea, to the most Professors in that which is called the
visible Church? but I proceed to that which follows.

ANIMADVERSION 14.
(A) MAster Dell should do well to name the men, who look for all the life of
Christ in his humanity, and do not acknowledge that Christ lived truly in Paul;
and does live in all the faithful by his spirit. If none such appear, as I am
confident there will not, amongst knowing Protestants; he might have saved his
use of rectification, at least wise in respect of them.

(B) That Christ the true God, is instead of all created habits of grace, yea,
that he is truly all grace unto believers, seems to be a position very
dissonant from Scripture doctrine, and which, to my best remembrance, I never
saw Printed, nor heard uttered until now. Paul fully distinguished the spirit
in believers, from the sanctifying graces of believers, which he calls the
fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22,23. and in diverse places he teaches, that the
graces flow by way of creation from Christ through his spirit, 2 Cor. 5.17,
Ephesians. 2.10. and 4.24. Might the Scriptures be heard, I think, created graces
and Christ in believers, would not be opposed or confounded; but Christ
dwelling in believers by his spirit be acknowledged, not to be all grace, but
the fountain of all created graces in them; for of his fullness have we all
received, and unto every one of us is grace given, according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. That the Godhead which dwelt in our Savior,
was in him instead of all grace, as Mr Dell confidently affirms, needs proof
before it be believed. The fear of the Lord, fiducial hope in God, and other
holy graces, seem plainly, according to Scripture doctrine, to have been
wrought habitually in our Saviors humane nature by the Spirit, which was given
him without measure, Esaias 11.2. and 61.1. Acts 10.38. It is quickly affirmed
that created habits of grace in a Christian, are empty notions and vain
speculations of Schoolmen, and of carnal and unbelieving hearts. But
doubtless, men of holy and believing hearts, have conceived that God in the
Scripture, makes mention of the habitual grace of righteousness, wrought by
the Lord Christ in his people, Phil. 1.11. Ephesians. 4.24. as also the habitual
graces of faith and love, 1 Timothy 1.14. Acts 18.27. and of patience, James 1.4.
and the like, flowing all from the Lord Christ, as the vine which has the sap
of all grace originally in himself: But that the Lord Christ is all grace to a
believer, I never yet read in any Scripture. As to the place here produced by
Mr Dell, as expressly teaching the same, sc. 1 Cor. 1.30. I find it not there
said, that Christ is all grace to a believer; nor do I imagine how it should be
convincingly argued from that text; which as far as I yet see, only sets
forth our Savior as made by God to his believing people, the author and object
of saving wisdom, the treasure of Gods righteousness unto justification, the
root of sanctification through his spirit, and the worker of the full redemption
of his people; All which may be granted, and is believed of those who yet
believe that there is habitual operative grace, wrought by christ through his
Spirit, in his believing people, enabling them in some measure, unto every good
work, acording to 1 Cor. 15.10.

(C) It is certain that our Lord Christ is the only ground of acceptance with
God unto believers; but that he is the only acceptable grace to God, as Mr Dell
here affirms, is never, as I know, said in Scripture. Love acting toward the
Saints, is pointed at as acceptable to God, Heb. 6.10. and called a grace, 2
Cor. 8.7. which yet certainly is not Christ.

(D) Questionless there is the grace of Gods eternal love, whereby we are
saved; against which the gates of hell cannot prevail; which though believers
are partakers of in Christ, yet is not the Lord Christ this grace, but the
chief gift of it, John 3.16. and the 4th 10.

(E) The third use made here by Mr Dell of his doctrine, stands in full force
for the comfort of believers, upon the ground of the doctrine, of Christ's
living in his people by his spirit; as it is taught by those who see no footing
for his doctrine in the Word of God; for they all know that Christ is afflicted
in his members according to the Scriptures.

(F) If Christ being himself our new law within us, makes void the law of God
without us, as old, as Mr Dels words in this place seem to import, then both
the law of works and faith too, as it is outwardly dispensed; yea, the whole
Scripture, as to the mandatory legislative part of it, is made void to
believers; which whether Mr Dell will nakedly affirm, I know not; If he do, I
doubt not but it will appear an anti-scriptural affirmation, and an open road
to a state beyond ordinances, and above duties; in which men are apt in a mist
of imaginary perfection to lose their way to that real perfection of
righteousness and blessedness which believers enjoy in Christ Jesus,
according to the Gospel, Col. 1.28.

(G) These words, as I conceive, in a sound Scripture sense may be admitted:
for it is certain that our Lord Christ does communicate himself wholly to
believers according to their place and use in his body; and will do so, till at
the last he fill them with all the fullness of God: yet is it not to be
admitted for truth, that the divine nature is communicated to our flesh as it
was to his own; that is to say, after the self same manner: If Mr Dell decline
this sense of his words, I will not press it, or the dangerous consequences of
it upon him: If he own it, I see not how he can avoid the avowing of believers
to be God, even as our Lord Christ is God; which I hope he will not affirm.

(H) It seems to me by these words, that Mr Dell either has not learned, or
(which I rather think) does not like the Protestant doctrine of justification;
justified by so many of our worthies against Popish advocates. Protestant
Divines generally (having learned from the Apostle Paul, that Justification is
verbum forense, a word taken from humane judicatories, and opposed to
comdemnation, Romans 8.33,34.) Do teach that we are justified freely by Gods
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. But Mr Dell here
teaches, that we are justified by Christ's living in us his own life, and by
his righteousness, even the righteousness of God dwelling in us; which as I
know it not to be downright Popery, so I am sure it coasteth much nearer upon
Popish, then upon Protestant; which I trust I may call Scripture doctrine,
since it acknowledges the righteousness whereby believers are justified, to
be resident in their own persons; which is a position very wide from the
apprehension of Protestants, who believe that we are justified freely by Gods
grace, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.

(I) This exhortation directed to believers, as to the matter of it, is very
sound and good: But I would ask, to what persons Mr Dell intends to give this
exhortation? If to the persons of believers, he would persuade us that there
are none such, for he teaches, that believers have lost their own personality,
and are taken up into the nature and person of the Son of God, Sect. 11. (B)
(C) And I believe M Dell does not look upon the person of the Son of God, as
one that needs his exhortation.

SECT. XV. And the life I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God.
(A) ANd here note in the first place, That Paul sometimes says, Christ lives
in him, and sometimes that He lives; I live, says he; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me; and again, The life I live. The life I live (says he) of that
very life which Christ lived in him. All which shows the near Union and
Communion betwixt Christ and a believer; Christ and a true Christian being so
much one, that what the one does, the other may be truly said to do.

(B) So that as God and Christ were so united, that the very works of God in
Christ sometimes were attributed to God, and sometimes to Christ, (as is
manifest in diverse places in the Gospel) and it made no difference whether they
were attributed to God in Christ, or to Christ in God. Just so it is betwixt
Christ and believers, who are as nearly united as God and Christ, as Christ
himself (whom we may safely believe) affirms in Joh. 14.20. saying, In that day
ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.

(C) In that day, that is, when the Spirit is given, and comes into the heart,
which makes the true Lord's Day in a believer; in that day when the Spirit is
the light whereby we see and know aright all the things of God; in that Day, Ye
shall know this great mystery, which the World and the Worldly Church cannot
know, but will be greatly offended at it, when they hear it; to wit, that I am
in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. (D) And in John 17.21. Christ who
was heard in all things, in his last solemn prayer for his elect Church, in the
days of his flesh entreats his Father, that this may be accomplished in all
the Believers; praying, that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and
I in thee; that they also may be one in us. From which Scriptures we may see
and perceive, that as Christ is in the Father, and the Father in Him, so
Believers are in Christ, and Christ in Them; And hereupon, the works of
Believers are sometimes attributed to Christ, and sometimes to Them; And it is
no matter, whether they be attributed to Christ in them, or to Them in Christ;
seeing it is Christ in believers that is all, and does all, and has the Glory
of all.

(E) Now this Use, we who are believers may make of this; to wit, that it is
our Duty so to live in Christ, that every part of our life may be attributed
to Him, and may be such that Christ may not be ashamed to own it, but that it
may be a praise to Christ, He doing all in us, and we doing nothing but in him,
and of him, and for him.

ANIMADVERSION 15.
(A) THe former part of this paragraph, in a sound sense is true; but that
Christ and a Christian are made so much one, that what the one does the other
may be said to do, being laid down by Mr Dell as universally and without all
limitation true, is an anti-scriptural, and anti-evangelical position: For do
not believers find a law in their members rebelling against the law of their
mind, and leading them captive to the law of sin, which is in their members?
Does Christ so too? Do not believers groan in their earthly tabernacles,
desiring to be clothed with their house which is from heaven? Does our Lord
Christ so too? Does not our Savior ever live to make intercession for his
people, and to save all those to the uttermost who come to God by him? Do all
believers so too? I cannot but believe that Mr Del has limitations in store
for this boundless position, though he omitted to express them at the
publishing thereof.

(B) That it is just so between Christ and believers, as it is between God the
Father and Christ; and that believers are as nearly united to Christ, as God
and Christ, cannot be truly affirmed, unless Christ the eternal Word and Son
of God and believers, be one God essentially, or that God and Christ be not one
God essentially; neither of which positions, I hope, Mr Dell will adhere unto
upon deliberation. The words of our Savior, whom we may safely, nay, whom we
must surely believe, which are here alleged by Mr. Dell, speak not home to his
affirmation. For we may know and believe that Christ is in the Father, as being
together with him one God blessed for ever: and that believers are in Christ,
as members of his mystical body; and that Christ is in them by his spirit which
dwells in them, and yet neither know nor believe that it is just between
Christ and believers, as between God and Christ; and that Christ and believers
are as nearly united as God and Christ; which are high affirmations, and very
strange and dangerous.

(C) Whether this be not close girding at the conscionable observation of the
weekly Lords day, let Mr Dell judge.

(D) In John 17.21. it appears that our Savior prayed, and was no doubt
heard therein; that all believers might be brought into a blessed unity amongst
themselves in God, and the Lord Christ through the Spirit of God which is given
unto them, 1 John 3.24. By the inhabitation of which Spirit of God in
believers, it comes to pass, that as the Father is in the Lord Christ, and
Christ in the Father, in a divine unity; so believers become one amongst
themselves in the Father and the Lord Christ in a blessed spiritual unity, and
so united, they are one, as to the truth, though not to the manner and degree
of unity, as the Father and the Lord Christ are one. This is all, for ought I
see, which can be perceived from the Scripture alleged by Mr Dell, which
falls very short of his purpose and doctrine, or if our Saviors words, John
17.21,22. be to be understood of that celestial unity which is between the
Father, the Son, and Believers, through the reciprocal actings of special love;
to which sense the 23. verse seems to give countenance; our Lords words admit
of a clear interpretation, without the least intimation of the same, or as near
a union through the Word or Godhead of our Savior between him and believers,
as is between him and the Father.

(E) Does not Mr Dell here forget himself, whilst he minds believers so to
live, that Christ may not be ashamed to own every part of their lives; for this
intimates that believers may possibly so live, that Christ may be ashamed to
own some part of their lives; and then in those parts of their lives, at least
believers must needs be distinct persons from the eternal Word and Son of God,
which is plainly and confidently denied by Mr Dell, Sect. 11. (B) (C).

SECT. XVI. And the life I live ((...)) in the flesh.
This Paul speaks, to show that the life he lived after he was a Believer, was
not out of the flesh in the Religion of Angels, in strange Raptures and
Revelations, and in high and wonderful things above himself, but that the life
he lived in Christ, and Christ lived in him, was in the flesh (that is) in his
humane soul and body. (A) There are a sort of People (which also have been
Professors of the Gospel) so deluded by the Devil, that they say they live the
life of Christ, yea a life far above Christ in the Spirit, and that they live
immediately in God, and have often visions of, and intercourse with Angels,
whilst yet these very people live the life of sin and Satan, in the flesh, in
all manner of filthiness, and uncleanness, and looseness, and abominable
profaneness.

(B) Wherefore (says Paul) I live the life of Christ in the flesh, in this
soul and body of mine: I live in the flesh, but not after the lusts and
requiring of the flesh; but I live Christ's life in my own flesh, in all
righteousness, holiness, cleanness, purity, meekness, goodness, love,
patience, heavenlinesse; this is the life I now live in the flesh.

2. Note hence again, That the life of Christ is to fill a Christian; not his
spirit only, but his flesh; it is to fill his soul, and his senses, his inward
and outward man; his thoughts, words, works, and his whole conversation; the
life of Christ is to fill them all.

(C) The life of Christ is first communicated to the spirit of our mind; there
it is first kindled and rooted; and from thence by degrees it spreads it self
into the flesh; and to this the flesh is most unwilling; but at last the Spirit
overcomes the flesh, and leads it forth into its own righteousness and life.

Use 1. (D) And hence we may learn, that our present natural life does not
hinder us, but that we may live a spiritual and heavenly life, or the very life
of Christ in our flesh, if we be true Belivers: Wherefore Paul elsewhere
speaking of Believers, says, the Father has quickened us with Christ, and
raised us up together with him, and set us in heavenly places in him, and that
whilst we live a Natural life according to the body.

(E) So that here in this present world, we may partake of eternal life, and
may live (not in notion but in deed) the life of the Spirit in the flesh, and
the life of heaven on earth, and the life of the Son of God in our humanity, if
we do not deprive our selves of so great happiness through unbelief.

Use 2. (F) Again, we may learn hence, That the life of the Son of God, is not
to be confined only to that Humanity that was born of the blessed Virgin, which
was the Head of the Elect, but that it extends it self to all true believers,
in whom Christ lives as in his own flesh; as Paul says, Christ lives in me,
even in my flesh; which through this life of Christ in it, became Christ's more
then Paul's. So that the life of the Son of God is communicated truly to all the
faithful, and is to be seen in their flesh in some measure, as well as in his
in all fullness: as the life of the soul, in a man, is not confined to the
Head, but disperseth it self to all the members, and is truly manifest in them.

ANIMADVERSION 16.
(A) SEeing there are such a sort of people, as Mr Dell here describes; How
careful should the servants of God be not to take away old, and sure
foundations, and give them new grounds to build upon. He should do well to
consider how far he is from saying, that believers live the life of Christ, and
that they live immediately in God; who says that Christ lives in believers as
in his own flesh; and that the life of the Son of God was communicated to
Christ's flesh, instead of his proper humane life, and is likewise to be seen in
all believers, as the life of the soul in a man is not confined to the heart,
but disperseth it self to all the members, and is truly manifest in them; Is
not the self same life of the soul in head and members? does not every member
live immediately in the life of the soul? If Mr Dell say that he disliketh not
the profession of the men he points at, for affirming according to his own
doctrine, that they live the life of Christ, and that they live immediately in
God, but only for some higher notions, wherein they soar above the pitch of his
discoveries, and for walking unanswerably in regard of what they teach in
common with himself; then he should do well to lay this seriously to his heart,
whether it can possibly be said of any creature whatsoever in truth, that it
lives immediately in God. It is true that every man, even the worst of men, do
live and move and have their being in God, Acts 17.28. in this regard, that
through the acting of Gods Almighty power in them, and toward them, they are
acted unto life, motion, and being; yet so that they live, move, and be, not
immediately in God, but in those natural principles which God works; and
whereby he works in them to live, and move, and be. And again, it is true that
the humanity of our Savior, through the grace of personal union, was
immediately joined unto God; yea, so far into God, that by communication of
properties, his humane blood was the blood of God, Acts 20.28. and his humane
life the life of God, 1 John 3.16. yet had the humanity of our Savior a proper
life of its own, distinct from the life of the Eternal Word, which humane life
he laid down for us: our Savior had not been in all things made like to us his
brethren, which is affirmed, Heb. 2.17. if he had not in his humane nature
lived an humane life, immediately resulting from the union of his humane soul
and body, as all other children of men do: If his humane nature had lived
immediately in God, and so necessarily the life of God, it would have been, not
only as it was, the nature of God, but the divine nature, which certainly it
was not, being both passible, and mortal. Now if it be not true of our blessed
Saviors manhood or humane nature, that it lived immediately in God, how much
less can this be truly affirmed of any other man or creature whatsoever? And
when men are so far besotted with ignorance, and puffed up with spiritual
pride, as to vaunt that they live the life of Christ, even the life of the
eternal Word, and Son of the living God, and so live immediately in God, the
life of God; it is no strange thing to me to see such lofty ones, who, if they
be true to their most false principles, must needs own themselves, as diverse of
them have done, to be God, though they have been professors of the Gospel, left
by God in a way of righteous judgment under hellish dotage and delusion, to
live the life of sin and Satan in the flesh, in all manner of filthiness, and
uncleanness, and loosnesse, and abominable profaneness; for the meek, God
will guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. Though
the Lord be high, yet has he respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows
afar off, Psalm. 138.6.

(B) Can Mr Dell make this to consist with his own words in the former part of
this book, sc. Sin has its full power in our humane life: And again, when he
says that when we are made members of Christ's body, then life reigns in
Christ's flesh, as death in ours. If sin and death have full power, and do reign
in our own flesh, how then, as Mr Dell here affirms, do we live Christ's life in
our own flesh? Is it not true that it is impossible that Christ and sin should
live together in strength in the same flesh? that is elsewhere (and I think
very justly) laid down by Mr Del for an unquestionable position.

(C) If the life of Christ be first communicated to the spirit of our mind, as
Mr Del here affirms, and I believe, then I conceive that it will necessarily
follow, that our reason, judgment, prudence, etc. is refined and spiritualized
unto new life, in which believers live unto God; which he seems unwilling to
have men think to be so, in the former part of this Treatise, Sect. 11. (A).
For does not the mind of man denote his reason and rational faculties, which
have not only an influential, but regulative power also over the whole man? And
how can the life of Christ be communicated first to the reason and rational
faculties, but by purifying, refining, and spiritualizing of them, that they
may act under the spirit of Christ, for the dispersing of holiness through the
whole man, and so subjecting every inferior faculty in man, unto the holy will
of God? I like his doctrine in this place very well, if he can make it consist
with what he has before affirmed, I should be glad to see it effected in
consistency with Scripture doctrine.

(D) As our present natural life (by Mr Dels own confession) does not hinder,
but that we may live a spiritual and heavenly life, or the very life of Christ
in our flesh, if we be true believers, no more does our natural personality
which is founded in this our natural life hinder, but that believers according
to the Apostle, may be quickened together with Christ, and raised up together
with him, and seated in him in heavenly places. There seems therefore no cause,
in relation to their union unto Christ, to deny their personality, as is done
by Mr Del. Sect. 11. (B) (C).

(E) This in a sound Scripture sense, is no new or strange doctrine; for it is
certain that God has given to his people eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life, 1 John 5.11,12. Believers have eternal life begun in them through Jesus
Christ the Son of God, in this life, and shall receive the perfection of it for
ever; when Christ who is their life shall appear, and they shall also appear
with him in glory, and in all fullness go into life eternal, Mat. 25.46.

(F) That the life of the Son of God is not confined to our Saviors humanity,
but has an influence into all believers, for the quickening of them unto God,
is an acknowledged truth: But that the life of the Son of God is communicated
to, and to be seen in the flesh of believers, as in the flesh of Christ, with a
difference of measure only allowed between Christ and believers, is (as I take
it) to ascribe Godhead to believers in measure as to the Lord Christ in
fullness, which is new and strange doctrine indeed: I should be glad to see how
Mr Del can avoid the inference; for I hope he will not hold to the conclusion.
Was not the life of the Son of God so communicated to, and seen in our Saviors
flesh by reason of the union of his natures, as that he was God manifested in
the flesh? Is this to be affirmed of any other? I am very loath to conceive
that he thinks so, though his words seem to speak so much.

SECT. XVII. I live through the faith of the Son of God.
HEre the Apostle shows the way or means how Christ came to live in him, and he
in Christ, and that is, through Faith.

Christ (says he) so lives in me, that yet I live in the flesh, but the life I
live in the flesh, is not the life of the flesh, but I live in the flesh the
life of faith in the Son of God.

Now touching this excellent Grace of Faith, much might be said; but I shall
endeavor to give you the sum of all in as few words as may be.

And first I shall show you, That the right faith is not any work of ours, but
it is wholly the work of God in us: and therefore it is called by Paul, Col.
2.12. Faith (...), of the operation of God, and that according to that mighty
power which he put forth in Christ when he raised him from the dead; as the
same Apostle speaks in Ephesians. 1.19.20. It was a work of the mighty power of God
to unite Christ's humane Nature to the Divine, though it were wholly free from
sin, But it is a greater work of power to unite us to God in Christ, who are
full of sin; and yet God does this through faith in all true Believers, as I
shall show in the next place.

2. As faith is wrought in us by God, and is his constant work in us, so this
faith does apprehend God in Christ, even the Divine nature of Christ in the
Humane; and the Son of the living God in the Son of man, as the Apostle shows
here, saying, I live by the faith of the Son of God: Showing that the chief
thing that faith respects, and apprehends in Christ, is the Son of God. And
Peter in 1 Pet. 1.21. says that the faithful, through Christ, do believe in
God who raised him from the dead. (A) So that that only is true faith, which
does apprehend and receive the true God in Jesus Christ.

And thus from these two things we may in some measure understand the true
nature of faith, which is nothing but this. The Fathers laying hold on us by
his Spirit, and drawing us to the Son, and inabling us to receive the Son, and
so making us one with the Son, to abide and live in him for ever. So that
through true faith we have the nearest union and conjunction with the Son of
the living God, that any Creature can have, next after the Humanity of Christ.

Now from this Union, which we have with the Son of God through faith, do flow
many excellent advantages to Believers; some of which I shall name now; As,

1. (B) Hereby they are made the Sons of God, as John says, John 1. As many as
received him, that is, the Word that was with God, and was God, and was made
flesh; as many as received him by believing, to them he gave power to become
the sons of God. As that Word or Son of God, coming into the Humanity of Christ
(which was in all things like ours, sin excepted) gave it authority and power
to become the Son of God: so the same Word coming into us, through Christ gives
us power to become the sons of God in him, as the fire gives the iron in which
it dwells, power to be light and hot.

And so through faith, we have not only the Name, but also the Nature of Sons.
For faith uniting us to Christ, changes us into a new Nature, and takes from
us what we are in regard of sin, and makes us what Christ is in regard of
righteousness, and so it makes us new in heart, mind, will, affections, ends,
and in our whole conversation; for it brings Gods Nature into ours, and this
changes our nature into its own likeness, (C) so that whatsoever we do, or
whatever our condition in the world is, we shall still carry our selves in all
things as the children of God in some demonstration of the Divine Nature.

2. (D) Through this faith in the Son of God, we are made not only Sons, but
Heirs; Heirs of God, and joynt-Heirs with Christ: That as Christ according to
his Humane nature, being made One with the Son of God, by whom, and for whom
all things were made, was in Him made Heir of all things; so we through that
faith whereby we receive the Son, are made Heirs with Christ in such sort, that
all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.21.
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, all are ours whilst we are Christ's, as all
is Christ's whilst He is Gods. Now, this is a very glorious inheritance, which
as faith only apprehends, so faith only understands.

And this inheritance happens to us, not through the works of the Law, that is,
not through any outward works of outward righteousness whatsoever, but through
the righteousness of faith, through which faith we are truly made one with the
Son of God in Christ (as has been said) and in and with Him, do truly inherit
both God and the Creature.

3. (E) This true faith carrying us into the Son of God, and placing us in him
to abide in him, does truly carry us out of the utmost reach of all evil
things; out of the reach of the Law, Sin, Death, and Hell, seeing these can
have no place nor presence in the Son of God; and though these evils may reach
us whilst we dwell in our selves; yet we are got out of their reach so far
forth as by faith we dwell in Him.

4. (F) This right faith carries us into the Son of God; and does carry us into
all his Perfections and Excellencies, into his nature, and life, and
righteousness, and wisdom, and power, and glory, and into all the fullness of
the Son of the living God; and so true faith inriches a Believer in Christ with
greater treasure then the heart of a carnal Christian can possibly give credit
to; for through faith we are carried into the Son of God, to have all that He
has, and He again comes and fills us with all that he is and has.

5 True faith carries us into Christ, and makes us one with him, as the Author
and Original of all our good works. For through this, God dwells in us, and
works his own works in us, and we again dwell in him, and work his own works in
him; and those only are true good works, which God that dwells in us works in
us, and which we dwelling in God work in him.

(G) Yea, a Believer who is one with Christ, not only does good works, but does
them continually: for Christ in him is always active, and whilst he is in
Christ, he must be always active, and therefore says Christ, Joh. 15. He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: For through
this mutual abiding of Christ and a Christian in each other, a Christian as
naturally, and as necessarily does the works of God, as the fire burns, or the
Sun shines.

And these are some of the Advantages a Christian has, through faith in the
Son of God.

ANIMADVERSION 17.
(A) THat that only is true faith which does apprehend and receive the true God
in Jesus Christ: And also that true faith is not of our selves, but is wrought
in us by the Father through the Spirit, is very true and certain: But to
define faith, or describe it as Mr Dell here does, only and wholly by acts of
God the Father, is plainly to make God not only the author, but the sole actor
of faith, and so to deny any acting of the hearts of believers to Christ-ward
by faith, which (as I conceive) is doctrine very new and strange, from the
truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 10.10. It is true that here is
mention made by Mr Dell of believers receiving of Christ, but he says not (as
he might) that therein stands the nature of faith; but in Gods inabling a man
to receive Christ, which is wholly and solely Gods act as is also his making us
one with the Son, to live and abide in him for ever; which being one with, and
abiding in the Son, though it be an effect, yet contains nothing in it of the
nature of faith.

(B) That by faith through Christ, believers are adopted to be the Sons of God,
is certainly true: But that [as the Word or Son of God coming into the humanity
of Christ, gave it authority to become the Son of God, so the same Word coming
into us through Christ, gives us power to become the Sons of God in him, as the
fire gives the iron power to be light and hot] is plainly to take off believers
sonship, in relation to God, from the ground of adoption through grace, and to
found it upon the communication of the Divine nature to them in the same
manner, though not so immediately, nor in the same measure as to the humanity
of our Savior; which is a doctrine of such ill consequence, that still me
thinks Mr Dell should tremble and abhor to own it nakedly: For if the Son of
God coming into believers as into the humanity of our Savior, give them power
to become the sons of God, as it gave him power to be the Son of God, as the
fire gives the iron in which it dwells, power to be light and hot; then it
follows, that though believers have the Son of God in them through Christ, yet
having the Son of God in them, they have power to be the Sons of God
immediately and in themselves, as the iron has immediate power from the fire
to be light and hot: which being granted, overthrows the doctrine of believers
adoption by Christ, and puts all believers into the peculiar honor of the
immediate Sonship of our Lord Christ.

(C) Do believers in whatsoever they do, still carry themselves in all things in
some demonstration of the divine nature, as Mr Dell here peremptorily
affirms? I do believe the Apostle, that in many things we offend all; and
that the best of believers have their sad miscarriages, as the Apostle Peter
had, Gal. 2. and give too often demonstration of the relics of corrupt nature
in them: If Mr Dell can reconcile these things together, I shall leave that
labor to him.

(D) Believers, no doubt, through faith in the Son of God, are made heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ of all things: But that as our Lord Christ,
according to his humane nature was made heir of all things, by being made one
with the Son of God, so believers likewise receive the Son, understanding
thereby, the Godhead of our Savior, and so are made heirs with Christ of all
things; though it consent will with Mr Dels former doctrine, yet I find no
Scripture doctrine agreeing thereunto. The scripture doctrine in this point (as
I apprehend) is this, that all true believers, through faith in Christ, are
graciously adopted to be the sons of God; and if sons, then are they heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ of all things, and specially of the eternal
heavenly glory which is to come.

(E) That true faith uniting us as members to the Lord Jesus, does carry us out
of the reach of the law, sin, death, and hell, so far, that none of them shall
prevail against us, being believers, unto destruction, is doubtless a sweet
Gospel truth: But that faith puts us out of the reach of these evils, by
putting us into the Son of God, or Godhead of our Savior, is barely Mr Dels
assertion without the Scripture; which teaches that believers are carried out
of the destroying reach of the law, sin, death, and hell, through the redemption
which is in Christ Jesus; not through any such union into the Son of God, as he
here drives at.

(F) That right faith carries believers into the Son of God, into all his
perfections and excellencies, into his nature, life, wisdom and glory, and into
all the fullness of the Son of the living God, is a position which before this
time, I think never dropped from the tongue or pen of any Christian. Mr Del
seems not to have arrived to the height of such an apprehension by what we
read, Sect. 16. (F). sc. So that the life of the Son of God is communicated
truly to all the faithful, and is to be seen in their flesh in some measure, as
well as in his in all fullness; But it is here plainly and peremptorily
affirmed, that believers are carried into all the fullness of the Son of the
living God, the necessary consequences whereof, how dreadful they are, I leave
to him to consider; I trust he does not believe, that in believers dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, which the Apostle pointed at as the peculiar
incommunicable honor and excellency of our Lord Jesus the Son of the living
God, Col. 2.9.

(G) Where is that believer that does good works continually? The Apostle Paul
found not in himself a continual ability to do good works, Romans 7.15,18. and
pointed at the same impotency in the believing Galathians, Gal. 5.17. And me
thinks, to affirm that a Christian, as naturally and necessarily does the works
of God, as the fire burns and the Sun shines, which creatures we know have
no seeds of opposition against their native operations in them, is plainly to
make a Christian perfectly spiritual and holy, free from all relics of native
corruption, opposing in him the willings of grace: And if any such Christian be
to be found, according to Mr Dels doctrine, he must needs exceed the measure of
the Apostle Paul's holiness, which I think, no true humble Christian will
pretend unto.

SECT. XVIII.
BY all which we may perceive, that true faith is a greater matter then the
most are aware of. (A) For men usually think, that when they hear the Gospel in
the outward Ministry, and assent to it that it is true, that this is Faith, and
that then they do believe; but the true faith of Gods elect is a greater matter
then so; for through that we are truly made one with the Son of the living God,
and do abide and live in him for ever. (B) And so this right faith is a most
high and precious grace, and is the first manifestation of the Fathers eternal
love to the Soul, and the first grace whereby we have entrance into the Kingdom
of God: it is the Sabbath of Sabbaths: it is the greatest and highest worship
of God: (C) it is infinite and everlasting righteousness; it is the
mortification of the flesh, the quickening of the spirit; our mighty victory
over the Law, Sin, Death, Hell, the World, and Devil; it is the first and last,
and all in all, in the Kingdom of the Son: And he that believes as the
Scriptures have said, is already truly passed from sin to righteousness, from
death to life, and from Satan to God.

So that right faith is a most precious grace, and is found in very few of the
common Professors of the worldly Church; So that Christ himself makes this
question, The Son of man when he comes, shall he find faith upon earth? And
therefore it concerns all to inquire and try, Whether we partake of this Faith
or no? And whether the life we live in the flesh, be in the Faith of the Son of
God? otherwise we must know, that as he that believes shall be saved, so he
that believes not shall be damned.

It follows,

ANIMADVERSION 18.
(A) MAster Dell, I suppose, whatever he intimates in these words, cannot but
know that the generality of Protestant Divines, place the nature of saving
faith, not in a bare assent to the Gospel, but in an act of the whole heart
receiving Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel, John 1.12. And as for such men
who wrest the nature of saving faith, short of the receiving of Jesus Christ
with their whole heart, their doctrine is as unsatisfactory to the generallity
of understanding Protestants, as to Mr Dell.

(B) If true faith be a most high and precious grace, as is here affirmed by Mr
Dell; How then is Christ in believers truly all grace? which is asserted by
him, Sect. 14. (B) Is Christ a believers right faith too? That were very
strange.

(C) The praise of a right faith is very great in the book of God: But to say
of faith that it is infinite and everlasting righteousness; and again, that it
is the first and the last, and all in all in the kingdom of the Son, is no
Scripture expression, and these positions seem to trench very far upon the
glory of the Lord Jesus, of whom alone these high things are, and can be truly
affirmed, Jer. 23.6. Rev. 1.11. Colos. 3.11.

SECT. XIX. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.
THe Apostle having showed that all true Christians are truly crucified with
Christ, and are also truly quickened with him, by the same living Word and
Spirit of life which crucified them; and so do receive a Spiritual and Divine
life, instead of their humane and carnal life: and having also showed the Means
by which they attain to this blessed death, and blessed life, and that it is by
faith in the Son of God: (A) Here he proceeds to show us two main and chief
things, which faith regards and apprehends in Christ, to wit, his infinite
love, and the incomparable fruit of it; saying, who loved me, and gave himself
for me.

And so in these words, I shall take notice of these three things.

1. Of Christ's special and peculiar Love to his Elect, from these words, who
loved me. 2. Of his special and peculiar Redemption, being the fruit of his
special love, in these words, and gave himself for me. 3. Of Faiths particular
Application of both these special Graces to a Believer.
The first thing here considerable, is Christ's special love to some above
others; Who loved me.

Most certain it is from the word of the Gospel (which is the truest and
clearest light that ever shone in the Church of the faithful) that Christ does
not love all Mankind alike, but he loves some and not others.

There is indeed a general and common love of Christ, wherein he comprehends
all Mankind alike, which he manifests to them in making (as he himself says,
Matthew. 5.24.) his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; and sending his
rain on the just, and on the unjust; and as Paul says Acts 14.17. He does good
to all Nations, though they walk in their own ways; giving them rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their bodies with food, and their hearts
with gladness; and supplying them with the common things of this life, suitable
to their Humanity.

But he has a special love to his Elect, to the Church which is his Body;
these he loves as his own flesh; yea, as partakers of the same Divine Nature
with himself; and according to this love he communicates to these, of all that
very fullness of God which he has received from his Father.

Now with this special love, he loves not all Mankind alike, but only some,
passing by the rest.

The Grounds and Reasons of which special love of his to some, and not to
others, are these;

1. Because the Son, as he is of the same Nature with his Father, so he is also
of the same operation with him, and so he only does that which his Father does
first; as Christ himself testifies of himself, John 5.19. saying, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but whatsoever he
sees the Father do. For whatsoever things he does, these does the Son likewise.
For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself does: So
that the Father shows to the Son all those whom he loves; and whom the Son
sees the Father loves, those also does He love: and whom the Father does not
love, neither does the Son love them, because he can do nothing of himself, but
what he sees the Father do.

So that the Sons love is full as large as the Fathers, but no larger, seeing
both love with the same Spirit. For if the Father should love such only, and
the Son love others over and above; or if the Father should love more then the
Son, or the Son love more then the Father, this would breed a difference in
God, which cannot be imagined without highest blasphemy. And therefore those
whom the Father loves with this special love, the Son loves likewise, and none
but these.

2. As the Son loves those only whom the Father loves, so he loves them only
upon this account because they are the Fathers: as Christ himself says, John
17. Thine they were, and thou gave them me; and all that are mine are thine,
and all that are thine are mine; and so Christ owns no more then are the
Fathers, and those which are the Fathers he takes them as his own, and loves
them as the Father loves them.

3. As Christ loves them only with this special love, whom the Father loves,
and loves them because they are the Fathers, so he loves them as dearly as the
Father loves him: Now Christ says of these to his Father, Thou have loved
them, as thou have loved me: Again he says, That the love wherewith thou have
loved me may be in them, and I in them. And so, as God loves these as he loved
Christ (and he does not love all Mankind so) so Christ loves them as he loves
himself; yea, he seems to love them more then himself; for he loves them, and
gives himself for them.

And so having spoken of Christ's special love, I proceed in the next place, to
speak of the wonderful fruit of it, which is, his special Redemption: And gave
himself for me.

(B) Christ could not love his as his Father loved him, even with the Infinite
and most tender love of God, and still suffer them to remain under the Law, and
Sin, and Death, and the power of the Devil: but he being the Son of God, and so
able, the love of God within him made him willing, yea, even constrained him to
redeem them. And this Redemption he could no otherwise bring about, then by
giving himself for them: And so he gave himself for them indeed, even to be
made Sin for them, and a Curse for them; yea, he gave himself up to all the
sorrows of Death, and pains of Hell for them, and to endure to the very utmost,
the whole wrath of his Father for them.

And this was the greatest manifestation of the special love of Christ that
could be: as John says, Herein was love, not that we loved him, but that he
loved us, and laid down his life for us.

Now further, we must know that as there is a general love, that Christ bears
to all Mankind: So also there is a general Redemption proportionable to that
general Love; which is nothing else but this, the saving or rescuing of the
fallen and lost world for a time, from the execution of that death and
damnation into which it had inwrapped it self through Sin. but this is rather a
Reprieve then a Redemption; and if it be called a Redemption, it is but the
common and temporary Redemption of the World, during the patience and long
suffering of God toward the Vessels of Wrath, prepared for destruction.

But after the determined time of Gods Patience is expired, the wrath of God
breaks forth upon them, and death and hell swalloweth them up.

But the special Redemption of the Church, is a full, perfect, and eternal
Redemption of all the Elect of God from sin, and death, and hell, by the
Righteousness, life, and Salvation of the Son of the living God communicated
unto them: And this Special Redemption begins here in this life, as soon as
ever Christ dwells in our hearts by faith; and it is perfected at the day of
the Revelation of the Sons of God.

Now this Special Redemption extends it self no further then the Special Love
of the Son, and of the Father, as may appear thus.

Because the Special Redemption of Christ extends it self no further then the
Fathers Election, as the Fathers Election extends it self no farther then his
Good pleasure, or the Counsel of his Will which does limit the Infiniteness
both of his Goodness, Mercy, Wisdom, and Power in all his outward Actions
toward the Creatures, both in their Creation and Government, as also in the
Dispensations of all blessings toward them both bodily and spiritual.

So then as the Fathers Election is limited by his Love and good pleasure, so
the Sons Redemption is limited by the Fathers Election, and so the Sons
redemption is full as large as the Fathers election, but no larger: for Christ
himself says, That he came not to do his own will, but the will of him that
sent him: Now the Fathers will was that Christ should redeem all that he had
Loved, and Elected, and Given to him, but no more: And so we must necessarily
know the latitude and extent of Christ's Redemption; by knowing the Fathers love
and will in his election.

And so Christ Redeems no more with his Special Redemption, then those he loves
with this Special Love: and thus he loves no more then the Father loves.

2. Christ's Special Redemption of those whom he loves with this Special love
may be farther evidenced out of John 17. where Christ distinguishes all
Mankind into these two sorts. viz. The World, and they that were given him out
of the World; and tells us that his intercession was not for the former, but
only for these latter; saying, verse. 19. I pray for them, I pray not for the
world, but for those that thou have given me out of the world.

Now we must know that the Priestly office of Christ, consists of two parts;
His Oblation, and Intercession. For first he Offers himself a Sacrifice for his
people, and then after that he prays for them whom he had Redeemed by his
blood. And his Intercession is founded on his Oblation; and he never prays for
any but for those whom he has first Redeemed; and whom he has not Redeemed,
he prays not for; and whom he prays not for, he Redeemed not. And so Christ
not praying for the world, it is evident he never died for the world: for he of
course and necessity performs the second part of his Priestly office, his
Intercession for all those for whom he has performed the first part of his
Priestly Office, his Oblation or Sacrifice: And for whom he does not perform
his Intercession, it is most certain that he never performed his Redemption for
them: and this is so sure and certain a Truth, that the foolish and vain
Reasonings and Discourses of men shall never be able to prevail against it, nor
yet the very Gates of Hell.

And thus you have seen manifested to you, the Special Redemption of Christ, as
well as his Special love, both which he extends not alike to all Mankind (as
the Heretics say) but only to those whom his Father has given him, which are
not all Kindreds, Tongues, People, and Nations; but some out of every Kindred,
and Tongue, and People, and Nation, which he has loved, and redeemed to God by
his blood.

And now to make some Use of both these Truths together.

Use 1. And first, The World (as Christ terms Unbelievers and Reprobates) will
certainly be grievously offended at this Doctrine, when they shall hear that
they have no part nor lot, neither in the special Love, nor in the special
Redemption of Christ. But this we cannot help, nor be false witnesses of the
mind of God, which he has so clearly revealed in his Word. For they are not
of God; neither has Christ loved or redeemed them; neither do they much prize
this Special Love and Redemption. But the Sins they have, they love them, and
live in them, and do always resist and oppose Christ and his Spirit; and so as
they are rejected of God, so also they perish in their own sin and obstinacy.

Use 2. 2. The faithful may learn hence, that our Happiness and Salvation in
the first cause of it, does far surmount the utmost capacity of the highest
reason of all men and Angels, seeing it is builded on no reason, or ground of
reason in any Creature, but upon the mere will, and good pleasure of the
Creator, which is not moved, directed, or ruled by any thing that is in the
Creature, but by it self alone, and that freely, fully, and unchangably. Which
good pleasure of his, as it is the Rule of all his works toward the Creature;
so this also is to be the Rule of all reason in the Creature; and with this the
Creature is to rest satisfied without farther questions and demands: otherwise
it blasphemes at the highest rate, when it will needs be replying against God,
and not rest satisfied with his good pleasure.

Wherefore Christ himself speaking of this special Grace of God to the Elect,
gives him thanks for his good pleasure, which was the first Fountain of all,
saying, Matthew. 11.25.26. I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and
have opened them to babes. Even so Father, because thy good pleasure was such.
Which shows us that the good will of the Father, is the Fountain and first
Original of our Salvation, unto which the will and pleasure of the Son is fully
conformed; and the Reason, and Prudence, and Knowledge, and Understanding of
man, have no Place nor Use here*

Use 3. 3. The free and special Love and Redemption of Christ, apprehended and
felt by Faith, tends to the great Refreshing and Comfort of the Faithful; and
that in the midst of the greatest sense of sin and wrath. That the Lord, even
the Father and Son, should by the Spirit, thus single them out of all mankind;
and that the Father should freely set his love on them, and give them Christ to
give himself for them, and should manifest the truth and certainty of all this
to them by the Spirit, which only is the Faithful witness of the mind and
counsel of God to all his people; I say the true and Spiritual sense of this
Special Love and Redemption of God and Christ to them, cannot choose but fill
their hearts with joy unspeakable and glorious. So that the Soul cannot choose
but say, Lord, what is thy poor servant that thou should deal thus with me?
That thou should in thy deep and unsearchable counsel, and in thy most
hidden, but most righteous Judgments, pass by so many thousands and millions
of people in every age and generation, and should set thy love on me, together
with Christ and all his Saints, being in my self so wretched and unworthy a
Creature. And this choiceness and speciality of thy love, the more endears it
to me, and has ravished and overcome my heart. After this manner, yea and
beyond all expression must the Soul needs be affected, that is truly sensible
of the Special love and redemption of Christ.

ANIMADVERSION 19.
(A) THese words speak of Faith, as an act of Believers toward Christ,
regarding and apprehending in him his infinite love, and the incomparable fruit
of it, according to the old Protestant doctrine agreeing with the Scriptures;
which I think cannot be brought into any good accord with the description of
the nature of Faith, set down by Mr Dell, Sect. 17. (A)

(B) This is old, good, and acknowledged doctrine, firmly believed by those who
are wholly unsatisfied in much of Mr Dels former doctrine, as having no
affinity with what is here delivered,

SECT. XX.
ANd this for Use.

Object. Now if any say, If Christ's Love and Redemption belong but to a few,
why is the Gospel commanded to be preached to all Nations in the World?

Answ. I answer, That in all the world, among all Nations, it may find out the
Elect of God, and bring them to the true knowledge, and enjoyment of what God
of his free grace has done for them in Jesus Christ: and when that word
comes, they hear the Joyful Sound, and believe; and according to their Faith,
so is it to them.

And so I proceed to the third point, which is, Faiths particular application
of this special love and redemption of Christ to believers, who loved me, and
gave himself for me.

(A) It is the nature of true Faith, to apply Christ and all his Works to the
believer, and to make them his own; for faith puts on Christ, and clothes us
with Christ; yea, it eats and drinks him who is the Son of the living God, and
so makes Christ its own indeed.

Through faith Christ is formed in us, and we again are formed in him; and
Christ and we are so made one another through faith, that Christ Appropriates
us to himself, and we again appropriate Christ to us.

Other men content themselves with a General conceit that Christ loved them;
but a Christian has a Particular faith. Other men believe that he loved Paul,
and Peter, and John, and such eminent Saints; but true faith says in our
hearts, he loved Me, even Me together with them, and that with the self same
love; and gave himself for Me, as he did for them.

Quest. But some will say, Had not Paul a special Revelation of this love of
Christ besides faith?

Answ. I Answer, Paul had a special Revelation of this love, but yet no other
then all believers have who have received the Spirit, as the same Apostle
shows, 1 Cor. 2.12. where he says, We have not received the spirit of the
world, but the spirit that is of God, that we may know the things that are
freely given to us of God: So that the Spirit of God within us, shows us the
things that God has freely given us; among which Christ's Love and Redemption
are the chief. And the same Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that God would
give them the spirit of wisdom and Revelation to know Christ. Now this spirit
of Revelation does not only show us that there is a Christ, and what he is, but
also that this Christ is Ours, whatsoever he is; and that he has loved Us, and
given himself for Us. And this Revelation all the Faithful have together with
Paul.

Use 1. (B) And thus having answered this Objection, we shall proceed to make
some Use of this Point also.

And first we may observe what an excellent apprehension, and vision of Christ
true faith has; namely, it looks on Christ, not as a Severe Judge, or
Lawgiver, but as one who has truly loved us, and given himself for us. And
such a Discovery and Vision of Christ as this, will uphold our souls mightily
in all our saddest, and darkest hours; and will preserve us, that we be not
swallowed up of Despair. Yea when we see Christ thus, nothing is so sweet,
lovely, and desirable to us, as He is.

Now Satan and our evil Consciences, will ever be representing Christ otherwise
to us, to make him Dreadful and Terrible to our Souls: as Luther reports of a
certain Doctor in his time, who apprehended that Christ stood at the right hand
of his Father accusing him for his sins; and with the very horror, and agony of
this apprehension, he pined away and died.

Wherefore let us not see Christ as Satan and our evil Consciences represent him
in the hour of Temptation, but as the Gospel holds him forth, and then we shall
see him to be such an one who has loved us, and given himself for us: And such
a knowledge of Christ will support, and establish us again in the worst
assaults that sin, and death, and hell can make against us.

Use 2. 2. We may learn, That faith carries nothing to Christ of its own, but
it goes empty, and naked to him, and expects to receive all things from him:
Faith says, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, when I did not love him,
nor give my self for him; yea when I was an Eenemy to him, and Crucified him.
Faith says, I have no righteousness, nor wisdom, nor goodness, nor any worth
at all to carry to Christ; but I expect all from him, being in my self poor and
miserable, and blind, and naked.

Unbelief is altogether looking at what we have done for Christ; but faith is
altogether beholding what Christ has done for us.

Unbelief would fain bring something to Christ, for which Christ might accept
it; but faith brings us unto Christ, destitute of all good, and full of all
evil, and even then casts us with confidence and assurance, on his free love
and mercy.

Unbelief when it finds no good in it self, dares not go to Christ, nor trust
in him: but faith can trust in Christ in the midst of all sin and evil, as well
as in the midst of all graces and virtues; for else no flesh could be saved.
And thus unbelief makes void the Gospel, but faith establishes it.

For when a man would first find in himself a love to Christ, and readiness to
give himself for him e^re he can conceive any hope that Christ did love him,
and gave himself for him, this man abolishes the Gospel, and makes Christ void,
who came to save sinners, and to justify the ungodly. But now he that feels
nothing but sin and death and hell in himself, and all manner of evil and
enmity against God: and yet notwithstanding all this, can go to Christ by
faith, and can believe that Christ has loved him even in this condition, and
given himself for him, this is the man that magnifies the Gospel, and has the
right understanding and knowledge of Christ: Yes this is the man that gives God
the greatest glory that any creature on earth can give him, yea greater then
all the Angels in Heaven can give him; for they being full of the righteousness
of their first Creation, believe the Love of God to them; but for men that have
lost all that righteousness, and are besides filled with all manner of sin,
even then to believe the love of God in Christ, this is the precious faith of
the Gospel, and the greatest glorification of God that can be. Wherefore Paul
says here, he loved me, and gave himself for me; as if he had said, he found
in me no Free Will; or Natural abilities; no good desires, affections or ends;
but he saw me wholly estrayed from God, wicked, abominable, and the captive of
the Devil; and yet such was his goodness, that notwithstanding all this, he
loved me, and gave himself for me. And this was the victory and triumph of
Paul's faith.

Now by this that has been last said, we may perceive that every man naturally
would find something in himself to bring to Christ, to make him acceptable unto
him; and that very few can believe That he loves Us whilst we are sinners, and
that whilst we are yet sinners, Christ died for the ungodly.

Use 3. 3. In that Christ loved us, and gave himself for us, we may hereby come
to understand how strong, mighty, and unconquerable our sin was, even so mighty
that the whole world and all the creatures were unable, and unsufficient to
take it away: but the Son of God must give himself for it, and must become a
Sacrifice for it, or it had remained upon us for ever.

Wherefore let us know that our Free Will, and Natural abilitise, and works,
and duties were of no force at all to take away our sin, but Christ must do
that by giving himself for them: And insomuch as Christ the Son of the living
God, has given himself for them, we rest assured that they are done away for
ever, and that none can lay any thing to our charge if do we believe in him.

Use 4. 4. Let us labor for this particular faith, and assurance in our
hearts, that Christ has loved us, and given himself for us.

There is nothing that the Devil does more labor to hinder us from, then this
particular application: For he well knows, that if we once truly believe that
Christ has loved us, and given himself for us, then we cannot choose but
forthwith love him again, and give our selves for him; and also be most ready
and resolved to do, or to suffer any thing for Christ; the Spiritual sense of
this special love is so constraining. Wherefore as it is the great policy of
the Devil to labor to hinder us from the sense of Christ's special Love, so it
must be our especial care to endeavor to attain unto it. For the true and
Spiritual attainment hereof will be of great concernment to ut in all things.

For first, the Spiritual taste of this Special Love, will make us forward to
do any thing for Christ: (as I said) it will make us fruitful, and abundant in
his work; and we can never be Idle, when we shall comprehend with all Saints,
what is the height, and breadth, and length, and depth, and shall know this
Love of Christ which passes knowledge.

2. It will make us ready and forward to suffer any thing for Christ: any
reproaches, slanders, oppositions, persecutions, prisons, torments; nothing
being bitter or grievous to that soul where the Love of Christ is tasted.

3 The Spiritual taste of this Special Love, will sweeten all the mercies of God
which he gives us to enjoy in this world, which would not be truly sweet, if we
did not taste his special love in them: yea the taste of this love will make
every ordinary mercy extraordinary, and every small blessing a great one; for
nothing is ordinary or small, where the special love of God is tasted.

4. And lastly this spiritual taste of the special love of God, will cause us
constantly to put our trust in him, seeing God who has given us Christ, and
Christ who has given us himself, can afterward deny us nothing, nor suffer
any thing to do us any prejudice.

Wherefore let these considerations move us to labor for this particular
faith, that we may believe that Christ has loved us, and given himself for us.

Yea, let us known that such is Christ's love to his Elect, that he would not
have refused to have given himself for any one single person of them, and to
have suffered the same things for any one of them, as he has done for all of
them; that each of us may know that we are as much engaged to be thankful to
Christ, as if he had given himself for us only, seeing each Christian by true
faith, may say with Paul, he loved me, and gave himself for me. And this is all
the hope and comfort we have in this World, and we desire to live and dye with
this faith rooted in our hearts.

ANIMADVERSION XX.
(A) THis is a very good discovery of the nature of right saving faith, which
how it can consist with Mr Dels former description of the nature of faith,
Sect. 17. (A) I see not.

(B) The doctrine delivered by Mr Del in the following uses which he makes of
the point before him, is old, sound and good, and needs not any new notions to
support or enforce it. If that passage following, faith can trust in Christ in
the midest of all sin and evil, as well as in the midst of all graces and
virtues, be understood with some grains of Gospel salt, which it much needs,
as intending that when a man sees nothing in himself but sin and evil, he may
yet, and should then, being burdened, come to Christ for rest, and trust on
Christ for life, as much as if he saw himself in the midst of all graces and
virtues, saying with the Apostle, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of which I
am chief: It may then (as I conceive) be admitted for a truth, which yet had
need be delivered with much caution, and many Gospel provisoes, lest otherwise
it might occasion in men a boldness to continue in sin, that grace may abound;
which is a dreadful abuse of the Gospel noted and renounced by the Apostle,
Romans 6.1. I think that much of that reproach of Antinomianism, which many have
drawn upon themselves in our days, has proceeded from an Antinomian liberty
of language, which they have affected and taken to themselves, holding to no
ordinary rule or law of words in their expressions, but loving to deliver old
and sound doctrines in new and dangerous terms and forms of words, which have
(no doubt) misguided multitudes into wicked, and wretched errors, which I am
apt to conceive, their leaders did not (as their disciples do) apprehend to be
Scripture truths: It would be very happy if (at the length) that Apostolical
rule might obtain amongst us, both in words and deeds: Let us not judge one
another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or
an occasion to fall in his brothers way: Romans 14.13.

(...)
Quicunque ista lecturi sunt, non me imitentur errantem, sed in melius
proficientem.

August. Retract.
FINIS.

