The Character of Mercurius Politicus.
THe Mercurius Politicus is the paper Militia, a Diurnall Offensive and
Defensive: The only Pamphlet in pay, and a Libell of the Establishment among
the standing Forces of the Commonwealth.

It Is the Satyre-Generall. Gerbier inverted, or a Lecture concerning the Art of
speaking Ill.

It Is our Printed-Agent, or a domestique Ambassador, that considering the
danger of going abroad, chose rather to be Lieger at home, and lie betwixt the
State and the Country.

It Is The Devil's an Ass, the Weekly Comedy acted at White Hall by its
Majesty's Servant. The Author, that individual Black-Fryars, like the ancient
Pantomimes, sufficing to play all persons: For this is he, who in the Prologue
of these times entered first as Britanicus, the scene altering, turned into
Pragmaticus; and now at last appears in his own clothes, Mercurius Politicus.

So many times has our Mercury been metamorphos'd, that now you may, if you
please, call him the Mercurius Trismegistus.

He is a true branch of the Triple Tree: Who ever saw a gleek of Knaves thus
shuffled into one Card? It Is the right Hocus trick of shifting the three Boxes.

There cannot be a better definition of his book, and him, then that it is the
third feather of the politic Shittle-cock.

I wish that it were lawful for me here to observe the usual modesty of
writing, and that I could consume his Book, without touching his Person, as the
Lightning that exhausts the Liquor without endamaging the Hogs-head.

But besides that, there ought no quarter to be given to a Writer so often
revolted. His book, and he, are so complicated, and bound up together, they are
so much the same thing, and he takes such a pride in it, that if I could, yet
it were too great an inhumanity to part them.

It is his second self in black and white, and they live in a perpetual
transmutation, as convertible as Water into Air, or as formerly Diurnalls into
Rose-powder.

He is therefore of a body so incompos'd, that it looks like the very statue of
Pasquin, the Saint of his vocation.

His Face is so ill, as if nature had in it libelled against Mankind.

And he wears a Perriwig as if to make some satisfaction for all the Calumnies
he is guilty of, he bore his head always in a portable Pillory.

While his Cheek-bones rise as if from within, they would stamp those Letters
through with which he deserves to be stigmatized.

But there is a further reason for his Perriwig; a subtle disease having
distinguished betwixt him and his hair: The same which suggests to his mouth
that continual impurity. It being impossible that without some venereall cause
there should be a Tongue so virulent.

And indeed, this Mercurius Politicus is his third Mercury Pill, by which he
has cast himself into this high and last salivation: That as at first he spet
his Venom against the King, and next bespattered the Independent, so now he
may flux himself upon the Presbyterian.

It is strange that he could not let the Presbyterian alone, and will not allow
us so much as a form of Godliness.

But what can we expect from him in whom alone there are more Heresies then
among a whole Synod of Divines?

He seems to be a Salt extracted out of the ashes of whatsoever books have
been burned by the hands of the Hangman.

A day of Humiliation were not sufficient to deplore him, and a Counsel might
grow hoarse with Anathemaes against all his Errors.

This is our Puny Mahomet, who intends us no Scripture but this his own
Alcoran, of which he gives us an Azoara every week, and imagines too, that by
the power of the Sword he can make us believe it.

And according to this Religion he lives. He uses such Oaths and Blasphemies
as deserve that his Tongue should be burned through with an hot Iron, if any
thing can burn that which is set on fire of Hell.

Yet it might be expected that he should loath drinking, seeing mad Dogs do
always abhor the water; but it seems the Comparison does not hold in stronger
Liquors: For he, on the contrary, lives as in the days of Pantagruel, and
drinks as though it were to quench damnation.

He were a most fit man for a Denmark Embassage, to fox the King unto our
conditions; or if he could not that, then to drink up the Sound in his return,
and revenge us in an instant.

But this may, however, be tolerated, seeing in Commonwealths, as in Holland,
Suizzerland, and the rest, they necessarily drink deeper then in Kingdoms, the
healths of the Aristocracy and Militia being far more numerous then those of
a King and his Progeny.

But who, since the Act against Bawdy-houses, has allowed him this public
Brothell in his Mouth?

I believe that Signior Riva going interpreter into Spain, left to him the
Pimp-lieutenancy; and against all casualties insured in his person, the Italian
virtues.

And that very Wit in which he so much triumphs, imagining that he is the
Writing Attila, and God Almighties Whip-cord: what is it but a Ruffian-like,
and scurrilous language, in which, after all his endeavors, yet he will never
attain to the perfection of Billings gate.

Has he not bought it at the rate of all these vices, and joined together the
gall of Bawds, and Whores, and Sorcerers to make up his Intelligence? for what
he has not been able to betray, by the society of his own vices, he inquires
here:

And rakes up in these public dung-hills, the rags of men's conversation,
which he may after make up into his twopenny Mops, or serve himself of for
manure against the barrenness of his own wit.

Has he not with this Wit scandalized both Sexes, disobliged three Parties,
reproached our whole Nation? and not only ours, but all others, having
declared himself as the disgrace, so to be the public enemy of mankind.

This wit has made him our Lay- Spalatto, a three-pil'd Apostate, a renegade
more notorious than any in Sally or Algier.

And yet he could never by it make himself more considerable upon any part than
a seller of Rats-bane.

Those of the Royal Party discerning him always to be one that exercised his
Invention for the King, but his Malice against Him.

And how advantageous soever he pretends his conditions to be with this party,
a starved Garrison might have come in upon better terms: For what Articles
should they give to that man whom they saw already in their hands, being
betrayed by his own perfideousnesse, and insorced by necessity?

He had the right Articles of Milan, in which the Citizens, to save their
lives, submitted to draw Figs with their Teeth out of the Genitalls of the
Frederick Barbarossa.
Emperiours shee-Mules.

For such is the Office they have employed him in, wherein they have not so
much provided for their own service, as for his infamy. I will give you the
principal Articles of his Agreement.

Articles of the Surrender of the Mercurius Pragmaticus.
THat the said Mercurius Pragmaticus shall by the 6. of June surrender up
wholly himself, his Pen and Inke-horne, and the keys of his Study, into the
hands of the Lord President, and to the Obedience of the Commonwealth of
England. 2. That in token of his true conversion he shall forthwith set up the
Colors of the Commonwealth, and write a Book in defense of the present
Government, to which he shall affix his name in Capital Letters. 3. That from
the said 6. of June he shall compose a weekly Mercury of his style, in which
the truth of his Intelligence shall have no other measure then the Interest of
the Commonwealth. 4. That morever to testify his repentance for his late
rebellion, he shall present a Book, and ask pardon particularly of the
General, and all other Members of the Council of State or Army, whom he has
any way disobliged. 5. That for better security of the performance of these
Conditions upon his part, he shall forthwith deliver up all papers of
Transaction or Intelligence, together with their Ciphers which came to his hand
in the year 1648. and 1649. Together with a list of all persons with whom he at
that time entertained any Correspondence. 6. That upon the perfecting of these
conditions he shall be received into the protection of the Commonwealth, and
shall have every year a Cap and a Bell with permission to lick up the crumbs
that fall from the Lord Presidents Table: Beside, a weekly pension to be
assigned him upon his own Mercuries.
SIGNED, etc.

Did ever Witch make such a Compact? Had he not much better have taken up his
old trade of whipping Boys at a penny a week; or like a Gifted Brother have
propagated the Gospel in the dark corners of the Nation?

Or if he must needs be writing, could he not rather have chosen to draw up
their provident Acts against Powdring of Hair, or wearing of Paches? As for
example.

An Act prohibiting the wearing of Black Paches.
WHereas the face of the Commonwealth has of late been evershadowed with an
Army of Black Paches, which like a black Leprosy have overspread the Nation,
and much ecclipsed the Image of God in mankind, who therefore justly threatens
us with an invasion of the Scottish Locusts: Besides, the sensible decay of
Taffata, the great ornament of the City of London, and the Suburbs thereof. We
having discerned this with Galileoes perspectives, and considering how
preposterous it is to apply Leeches to the Face: As also that we might acquit
our Trust in preserving the Commonwealth of England, as a spotless Virgin,
have therefore enacted and ordained, That no person or persons shall after the
date hereof wear upon his or their Face or Faces, any Black Paches, or French
Flies, those provocations of lust and cantharides of Taffata. And particularly
they shall not wear any of those called the Lord Bronkhards Paches, as being a
monopoly of a prohibited Commodity. And whoever offends herein shall be
proceeded against as the Adulterers of the public Coin of the Commonwealth.
And unto this purpose there shall be a Committee chosen, which shall be called
the Committee of Scandalous Paches, and enabled to search over all parts of the
Body of those persons who shall be accused or suspected thereof. And they shall
likewise have instructions to consult with the Mint-master for the better
discovery of them, as also of all those who clip and sell them, who shall be
liable to the same punishment as the wearers. Provided that this Act shall not
extend to Rume-paches, which are necessary for those that seek God early and
late till they be answered by him; nor to such as have lost their Eyes in the
service of the State.

This had been an employment fit for a man of his Talent: But alas, I wrong
him: he was indeed only fit for what he has undertaken, that he might have his
place among the rest of those Raviliacks of the Pen, to make his Stab at
Monarchy, and serve upon all occasions for one of the Counsel of Conscience to
the Commonwealth.

For, though he has the malice, yet he wants the courage to serve them in any
higher mischief. And though our Mercury do wear a Rapier, it is as peaceable
as the Caduceus of the other: He does not wear it in the quality of a Sword,
but has it as other Beasts have their tails to steer him about when he turns
from one side to the other.

Or being divided still in himself by Faction and Guiltiness, he has thus
fortified his independent left side for fear of the right, which he has
disarmed as a Cavalier.

But it is not at all dangerous, this kind of Serpents having all their sting
in the tongue, but none in the tail.

Yet surely it cannot consist with the gravity and sobriety of our State to own
in any manner such a fellow, and to entertain this Snake with the forked tongue
into their bosom.

Nor can they with honor receive such an one into their sanctuary, who flies
thither only that he may murder out of their Windows.

Will they feed up an impoysoner with Napell to kill the young Alexander?

Will they encourage an Assasin to attempt upon all Christian Princes?

But if Commonwealths have a better Art of making Treacle of such Vipers, and
ours stand in competition with the State of Venice for the receipt: Yet it is
not fit that we should lie at the mercy of a Tavern, and the drunkenness of
an Arbitrary Pen.

Must we be subjected to his two Sheets of High Court of Justice? We are
content to serve, but it mads us to be reproached, and by such an one as him:
for there is no such torment to a Christian, as to be Tyrannized over by a
Renegade.

We ask but the same liberty that he has had against us: Let them but abandon
him to us as the Camillus to the Falisci.
Roman General did the Traiterous Schoolmaster to his Pupills, and they shall
see how we will order him.

Boccalini, that innocent Moralizer, yet for writing somewhat too freely for
those that were partial, was thrown into the Canal at Venice, and there
drowned: It is time that we had our State-scold to the Ducking-stool.

It is strange that my Lord President should suffer such a Monster at his
Table: who, if he must be maintained, as an Executioner of their Adversaries
reputation, and the public instrument of Infamy; yet it were fit, that like
the Hangman, he should have his Table apart, and eat and live excommunicate.

The lean Canniball has all that while my Lord President in his teeth, and
gnawes upon him in his mind, till he have opportunity to devour him.

So insatiable is his appetite of speaking ill, that there is no person so
intimate to him, or so deserving; nothing so secret or so religious which he
abuses not to that purpose: So that he is neither to be tolerated in Society,
nor Policy; neither in Coversation, nor in a State, but rather as a public
parricide to be thrown into the Sea in a sack, with a Cock, an Ape, and a
Serpent, the right emblemes of his politic Triplicity.

Such once the Changeling Prophet was
That Centaure made of Man and Ass;
And so himself did Balaam sell
To Curse for Moab, Israel.

FINIS.

