The last Speeches AND CONFESSION OF CAPTAIN JOHN CADE and JOHN MJLS Constable:
Who were hanged at VVaymouth, for endeavoring to betray that Garrison to the
enemy, with all the several examinations of the Plotters, and the sentences
denounced against them and others of the said Conspiracy.

By W. SYDENHAM, Col. Governor of Waymouth, and Captain William Batten,
Vize-Admirall of the Navy, and the rest of the Counsel of War at Waymouth.

With a Coppie of Sir Lewis Dives Letter to Colonel Sydenham about the same,
and Colonel Sydenham his answer.

Imprinted at London, by Jane Coe. 1645.

The last Speches, and Confession of Captain Cade, and John Mills Constable,
who were hanged at Waymouth.
I shall first of all present you with an insolent and bold letter sent by Sir
LEWIS DIVES to Colonel SYDENHAM, as you may perceive by the contents there,
directed thus.
For Master Sydenham at Waymouth.
SIR:
IN your last civil letter, which your Trumpetter brought me; you charge me
with treachery, and Fabian Hodder and his wife, for Intelligencers, and
Traitors: Look but upon your own heart, and there you shall find that
Character clearly written, wherewith, you falsely and iniuriosly accuse other
men. The desire I had to preserve their innocence, from your barbarous
inhumanity, was, for that I knew their approved loyalty to their Sovereign,
was a crime sufficient to make them expect the worst of ills, from Traitors
hand. But do your will, and heap vengeance on your own head, by shedding
more innocent blood: Pa^y shall die, deservedly by the Law of Arms; for having
quitted the Kings service, wherein in he was entertained, and turning Rebel:
And whereas you threaten others of a higher. Orb shall follow him, know this,
That were all my children under the power of your cruelty, I would not be
diverted from justice to save their lives. And for noclusion, be bost assured,
that if you put to death those innocent persons, I will vindicate their blood,
to the utmost of that power wherewith God shall enable me, upon you and yours,
without eve giving quarter to any who has relation to you, which shall
faithfully be performed by him that professes himself your enemy.

Sherborne the 12. of March 1644. Lewis Dyves.

To this malepart Paper, Colonel Sydenham returns this modest (but Soldier
like) Answer, directed thus,
For Sir Lewis Dives these, at Sherborn Lodge.
YOu call my last Letter civil, and yet seem to be somewhat anory at it, which
I should admire, had I not lately given you sufficient cause; for I must
confess ingenuosly, had I livery and seizon of your Castle, I should not be so
soon a slodged without some indignation, especially, if an Army of mine own
party stood by and looked upon it. You desire come to look upon my heart, which
I have done, and find written there in the fairest Characters, a true desire
of advancing Gods honor, maintaining the Kings just power, and contending for
the privileges of the Parliament at Westminster, and the liberty of the
Subject: which when I find you see maliciously opposing and despightfully
stiling Treason and Rebellion, I am induced to think this age has produced
unparaleld Monsters, who are (without slander) pestes humanigeneris; for
Traitors I may not call you, who cannot be possibly guilty of such a sin in
the opinion of Aulicus, the only Author, which it seems by your language) you
are verst in. You are very tender of shedding innocant blood, and therefore
Patie must die; but ( good Sir Lewis) for what crime? He served (you say) on
your side, I have heard it was (as you do) only as a Scribe, and has since
turned Rebel, because he would not stand tamely still, whiles you were
plundering him, heu nefas infandum, for this, right or wrong, the poor man must
suffer; and (setting honesty aside) you will be just for certain. May it please
your Worship to be merciful too, if not to him, yet to me and mine (when we
fall into your hands:) till when, your lote experience might remember you, that
I am is far from fearing, as my present condition is far from needing your
quarter, which I hope I shall have an opportunity to dispute farther of with
you, whom, or any man in England, I shall answer in this quarrel, in the mean
know that I intend to make a (...) of your Letter to hang Hodder with, whose
crime is the first contrivance of that treachery, which you after (though
blessed be God, but simply) acted to the loss, of what you lately value a
worth a crown. Patie you may hang but will not be able to bury, which may
occasion a great mortality amongst you: And therefore be advised to forbear by
him, to whom proclaiming your self a professed enemy, you have invited me as
professedly to subscribe my self,

Yours W. Sydenham.
March 15. 1644.
Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis: At a Council of War there held the first day of
March, 1644. before the Governor, and all the Field Officers and Captains of
the Garrison of Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis: And also before Captain William
Batten, Vice Admiral of the Navy, and Admiral of the Fleet then riding in
Weymouth, and diverse other Sea Captains then present.
Water Bond of Waymouth on his voluntary oath affirms that Thomas Samwaies
of this town Tailor, on Sunday last was fortnight about eight of the Clock at
night, in the house of William Philips, since deceased, in the presence of John
Scton, Io. Dry Tanner, the said William Philips, Leonard Symonds since dead
Walter Mich. and Io. Mills, Constble, Samuel Takle Baker, and John Lock say,
that on that night, or the Monday night following he would have the doors of
the Marshalsey broken upand that Portland men would come in and help, and that
the gates of the town would be opened unto them; And this Examinant says,
that all the persons before named, were in the house before he came in, and
that he this Examinant stayed not there above a quarter of an howie, and went
thence a Shipboard, and there stayed till about one of the clock, and then
came home, and was going to bed, at which time Robert Bon, and Edward Dove,
both of Portland, came to this Examinants house in Waymouth and caused him to
go up to the North point saying, that it was taken for King Charles; And this
Examinant went thither with the said Bun and Doby, and did service there in the
North point and helped leaded the Ordnance: and this Examinant says that
Humpherie Votier and he this Examinant both knew that the North point was
taken, and this Examinant says, that the said John Dry said, at the same time,
that he was to go to the passage to help on the Portland men, and then spoke
to the said Mils to go with him, to which he made no reply but smiled at it.

Thomas Samwaies of this town Tailor, on his voluntary oath says, that
Fabian Hodder about a month sithence, at the Prison told this Examinant. That
Sir Lewis Dives would gather his forces together, and would come and surprise
this Town with the help of Portlandmen: And says he, this Examinant after met
with Captain John Cade, at Fabian Hodders house in the presence of Hedders
wife, and had conference about the surprising of this Town, and says, That the
said Cade and Hedders wife told this Examinant, That on Sabbath day last was
fortnight. Sir Lewis Dives and the Portland Forces would come and surprise this
Town, and willed him to tell Walter Bond, Mariner, William Philips, and
Leonard Symonds, of the time of the surprise. And this Examinant told the said
Bond of it accordingly; unto which Bond said, That he would be with his Ship in
the Hole, and that if Portland men came, he would be ready to assist them in
getting into the North Fort: And this Examinant says, That none was present
but himself when he delivered the Message to Bond. This Examinant further
says. That the said Cap. Cade on Tuesday of Wednesday morning, after the Forts
werelsurprized by the enemy, met this Examinant at his door, spoke to him, this
Examinant, to this purpose, viz. Come let us get a Company, and seize upon the
Main Guard, and let down the Bridge, and let over the Kings Forces, and seize
on, and break open the prison door.

John Mills of Weymouth, Constable, confesses, That on Sunday last was
fortnight, he, this Examinant, about six of the clock at night, was in the
house of the said William Philips, to look for Thomas Alexander, where were
present, Walter Bond, Thomas Samwayes, John Dry, William Philips, and Thomas
Alexander, and says, That he spoke to no body there, nor any to him, and
stayed there not half a quarter of an hour, and went thence to Thomas
Alexanders, and there supt; and being charged, that the morning when this Town
was surprised, that he had a Handkerchief about his Arm in the Streets, denies
it, but says, He had a Handkerchiaf on his Arm in the house.

The said Thomas Samwayes, further voluntarily deposes, That about a week
before the Forts of this Grrison were surprised, Fabian Hodder composed an oath
in writing to this effect, viz. You shall swear by the Holy Trinity, that you
will conceal the intended Plot; which oath, Fabian Hodders wife brought to this
Examinant, and told him, that all that were made acquainted with the Plot,
should take the said oath: And further, this Examinant says, that Captain Cade
told this Examinant, That before he discovered the said Plot to any, they
should take the said oath.

Captain Richard Yeardly, on his voluntary oath, affirms, That on the Monday,
morning, when the Forts of this Town were surprised, he saw John Mills, one of
the Constables of this Town, with an Handkercheif, knit about his Arm, which
was reported to be the sign used by Portland men when they came to surprise
the Forts.

William Mineterne of this Town Mariner, on his voluntary oath says, That
about a week before the Forts were surprised, Captain John Cade meeting with
this Examinant between Rodpole and this town, the said Captain Cade said to
this Examinant, that there were forces were coming to take this town of
Waymouth, and Melcombe Regis, and asked of this Examinant, whether he would be
one of those that would assist in help gaining of the Town, and desired him to
put his hand to a list in writting to that purpose, to be of the company for
betraying of the Town. And further says, that the said Captain diverse other
times after solicited this Examinant, to further the design upon the Town.

The Examination of Anne the wife of Fabian Hodder of this Town, Merchant: 3
March. 1644.
Who says, that she, this examinants husband about Christmas last, had Writ
to Sir Lewis Dive at Sherbourn, to this effect, that Portland men would come,
and take the Forts of this Town, if the said Sir Lewis Dive would please to
come and take the Town of Melcombe, which Letters was unsealed and delivered
by this Examinant to Elizabeth Wall widow, daughter of mystris Thomazine Dennis
Widow, with the contents of which Letters, she this Examinant acquainted the
said Elizabeth Wall, who undertook to convey the same Letters to Sir Lewis
Dive. To which Letters Sir Lewis Dive made answer in writing ( which was sent
to this Examinants husband by the said Elizabeth Wall) that he would come up
with 1500, Horse and Foot, on Sabbath last was three weeks, about midnight,
which was near about the time that the Forts were surprised by Portland men.
And this Examinant further says, that her husband about a week before the
said forts were surprised, wrote another letter to Sir Lewis Dive to the like
effect as the former, which this Examinant delivered to Thomas Samwaies Tailor,
to be conveyed by the said Elizabeth Wall, which said Elizabeth did of ten
come to this examinants house, in messages from Richard Mighill, and another
Gunner sithence killed, who were put out of this Town, and afterward lived in
Portland. And this Examinant says, that on Saturday last was three weeks,
which was the day before the execution of the design, the Governor of
Portland and others there sent to this examinants husband in writing, that they
would come in the next day; which Letters was brought by the said Elizabeth
Wall to this Examinant, and delivered by her husband.

March 10. 1644.
John Barnes of Preston husbandman affirms, that John Anthony, and Edward
Flatman, on Thursday last, said that Robert Bowyer, John Bowyer, Andrew
Gatrhell, Thomas Galchell, and the said Edward Flatman, and diverse others to
the number of thirty and upwards, knew of the intention of the late surprisal
of the forts of this Garrison, before they were surprised by the Cavaliers, and
knew that the word was Crabchurch and the sign was a white handkercheife about
their Arms.

March 11th. 1644.
The said Robert Bowyer being examined says, that about six weeks sithence,
one of the soldiers in Arms for the Parliament, left a musket at this
Examinants house, which being demanded by the Forces in Arms against the
Parliament, that lately came to this Garrison, this Examinant told them he
would serve in the sad Musket himself, to this intent (as this Examinant says)
to preserve the same Musket. And accordingly this Examinant took his Musket and
marched with the Cavaliers unto Caseway, about a day or two after the Forts of
this Garrisons were surprised by the Enemy, where this Exammant stayed about
one hour, and half, and then in the evening returned unto his house in Sutton
with his Musket, and there staid and went abroad no more afterward. And this
Examinant says, that he had some Match and Powder, but no Bullets, Bandeleers,
or sword, and that he did not charge his musket. And further this Examinant
says, that Master Waad Clerk curate of Sutton, John Feildew, Edward Flatman,
and Thomas Gatrhell, were all at Caseway in the company of the Cavaliers. And
afterward they returned unto Sutton aforesaid, but whether any of them had
Arms or no, this Examinant knows not, for that, as this Examinant says, he
was distempered with beer. And this Examinant says, that he was not inlisted
in any company, or under any command, And that in his march toward Casevvay,
he discharged his Musket, which was laden with Powder only; once or twice.

The said John Bovvyer being examined, says that on Sunday, when the Forts of
this Garrison were surprised about half an hour after sunsetting, William
VVilsheer of Sutton aforesaid, came to this Examinants house, and asked this
Examinant, whether he would go forth in the fields and see if the Kings Army
was coming, upon which the Examinant, and the said Wilsheere, went into Sutton
Cowleaze called ^ordan, Edward Flatman. John Feildue, will Wilsheer, Tho. Cox,
John Meech Junior. Alexander Butcher, John New, and two of Vpway, John Bowyer,
Johnbryer, etc.
and there met with those named in the margent of this Examinants examination,
who had no Arms save that Master Feildue had a Pistol. And this Examinant
says, that all the same parties met in that place to meet the Kings Army, that
were coming against the Town of Waymouth, and Melcomb Regis. And stayed about
an hour and more, and thence went unto Week Oliver, and sat there about an
hour and drank a pipe of Tabbacco and went thence to the higher end of Mr.
Kains Ground in the Cowleaze, and laid there a hour: and thence came to
Newhouse Master Kaines Dayrie house, and there a little above that house stayed
about an hour to see the coming of the Kings Army, and there saw shooting
against the Town, and did conceive the Town taken by the Kings Army, and said
before that they conceived the Kings Army would not come down to take the Town.

The said Andrew Gatrhell, alias Blanchard, being examined says, that on
Sunday night, before the Forts of this Garrison were surprised, John Feildue
came to this Examinant at his house about two hours in the night, and told him
that the Kings forces were coming down to take this Town, and told this
Examinant that he had gotten some company, and spoke to the Examinant to go
with him that night, saying that it would be worth to him five pounds, but this
Examinant refused to go with him, and went to bed.

The said Thomas Gatrhell, alias Blanchard being examined says, that on Sunday
night before the Forts of this town were surprised, John Peildue about two
hours in night came to this Examinant, and spoke to him, to go with him that
night, and promised him that it would be worth to him five pounds, but this
Examinant says that he refused to go with him, and went to bed, and further
says that the Wednesday following he this Examinant, and Roger Bowyer, Simon
Wilsheere, John Wand Clerk, John Peildue, and Edward Flatman, went to Caseway
to see the Soldiers, because they were reported to be a great Army: And says,
that this Examinant and the said Robert Bowyer, and William VVilsheere, stayed
at Causeway at the Alehouse, about two hours, and then returned back unto
Sutton.

The said John Bryer being examined says, That John Feildue came to him that
sunday night, before the Forts of this Town were surprised, and spoke to him to
go with him a mile or two that night, and this Examinant says, that about an
hour or two in night, that Sunday night, John Feildue, John Bowyer, John Meech
the younger, William Wilsheer, Edw. Flatman, Thomas Coxe, Alexander Butcher,
John New, and fix or seven of Vpway and Broadway, whose names this Examinant
does not know, met all in Rodpoll Field, about M. Kaynes Dairie House: And
says that they all staid there in that place, about three or four hours,
until about an hour after the beginning of the Onset on this Town by Portland
men: And this Examinant says, that during the sight, M. Feildue told the
company, that he conceived that Portland men had entered the Nore: and says;
That the said John Fieldue, the same Sunday after Evening prayer, at the widow
Bradfords house, none being present but the said John Feildue and the said
Examinant, that this Town would be taken that night: And further says, That
the said John Feildue by the way as they went into Radpoll field, and in the
field when they met all together, told them that the design was that Portland
men were that night to surprise the North point, and Sir Lewis Dive with his
Forces were to make an onset on Melcomb, with the assistance of the said
Feildue and the rest of the said Company; and says they all staid in Rodpoll
field about two hours after the Onset by Portland men, expecting Sir Lewis
Dives forces, and they not coming all of them returned unto Sutton, and their
own homes; And says, the Vpway men had long staves, and one of them a Welsh
hook, and Mr. Feildue a pistol, and all the rest but sticks in their hands;
And that the number of the persons so met together, were in all about sixteen,
and says that Mr. Feildue told all the said Company, that the word was
Crab-church, and further says, that the said John Meech the younger, came down
to this Town to fetch the word, but what word, this Examinant knows not.

The said William VVilsheere being examined, says, That John Feildue on
Sunday in the Evening, before the Forts were surprised, sent Alexander Bencher
to this Examinant, to have him come to the said Feildue which he did
accordingly; And then the said Feildue spoke to this Examinant, to go with him
to Week Oliver, and thereupon this Examinant and John New went to Week
Oliver, and there met with the said John Feildue, John Bryer, Alexander
Butcher, Edward Flatman, John Meech the younger, John Bowyer, and Thomas Coge,
and there stayed about half an hour after this Examinants coming thither, and
went thence to Rodpoll, by Mr. Kaynes Dairie house, and there met with Richard
Keate and John Hayne of Broadway or Vpway: And says, that Mr. Feildue and the
said Meech had Pistols, Haine, a Welsh hook, and the rest Cudgels: And says
that John Meech told this Examinant, that if the Town were taken they should
have five l. a piece, and said that the Cavalieres word was Crabchurch. And the
said Meech told this Examinant, that he had both words from the Town, and then
Mr. Feildue told this Examinant and the rest of the Company, that Portland men
would surprise the North Fort, and that Sir Lewis Dive would come with his
forces, and make an Onset on Melcomb, and in expectation of the coming of his
Forces, this Examinant and the rest stayed about an hour and half after the
Onset by the Portland men, and then returned to their own homer.

The Confession of Nicholas Chapel, taken the 17. of Febr. 1644.
THat John Mills on Friday February the 7. went out of Portland to Fleer, and
came back on Saturday night, and on Sunday Febr. 9. order was given at Portland
Church, that all Islanders and Soldiers should appear at the Castle by five of
the clock, with their Arms; And a party was chosen and sent along the Beach,
whom John Dry a Tanner met at the passage, and conducted them to the Chapel
Fort: A party was sent by Water, whom Walter Bond a Fisherman of Hope met at
the Peer, and conducted them to the North Point: And the said Nicholas
Chapel heard the Enemy say, the Gunners were consenting to the Plot, and that
John Feildue was to come on Melcomb side with 60. men, and to be let into the
Town, but by whom this Examinant knows not: And that the number of men
brought over for the surprisall of the Forts were 120. with whom the Townsmen
were to join.

There is already condemned by the Council of War, Walter Bond a Sayler,
Thomas Samwayes a Tailor, that dwelt in Melcomb, John Mills the Constable of
the Town, and Captain John Cade; besides an Irish Rebel a native Papist, that
put a Rope about his own neck, and hanged himself.

1. Captain John Cade is hanged, according to sentence denounced against him by
the Council of War, whose confessions is before amongst the Examinations:
Besides which, he made no other at all; for when he was upon the Ladder, all
that he would say before he died was only this, that he could say no more then
he had said already, and so died.

2. John Mills the Constable is also hanged according to sentence denounced
against him by the Council of War, who died most desperately; what he said at
his Exrmination, is before, since which nothing more would be confessed by him,
nor any sign or token of sorrow or repentance: But when he was upon the
Ladder, he most desperately threw himself off, not showing any signs of
humiliation, or calling upon God for mercy on his soul, but carelessly in a
most desperate manner died, not so much as praying to God to receive his soul.

3. Walter Bond Sailer, he was reprieved by the Council of War, and is now
in the prison, his Confession is before.

4. Thomas Samwayes the Tailor that lived in Melcomb, he was reprieved by the
Council of War, and has expressed much sorrow for his treacherous fact; He
was brought to the Gallows to be hanged, but upon his penirency and
confession, he was reprieved and carried back to the prison.

5. The Irish Rebel hanged himself without judgment or execution, doing all
upon himself.

6. Diverse of them are slain; Fabian Hodder and others, are in Prison in Poole,
and other places, not yet tried; and some are run away,

FINIS.

