THE CHARACTER OR EAR-MARK OF Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE Bencher of Lincolnes-Inne. In
which are contained many seasonable, and Wholesome Exhortations to the same:

Carpitque and Carpitur. LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLIX.

A CHARACTER OR EAR-MARK OF Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE.
'TWas once a saying of the famous Aristotle, that for a man to be afflicted,
it was Humanum; to be derided, 'twas Turpissimum: And upon that good Rule Mr.
Prynne had spared me the labor of a studied derision if he had once showed
himself ingenuous in any thing save the Confession of his own shame, which
truly he has plentifully done very lately in a great number of peevish and most
unadvised Pamphlets. A Man, (one would think) that might have learned the
Consequence of seditious Scribbling, long e're this time, if his guilt had taken
half so deep an Impression upon his heart, as his punishment has left on his
Head: But his violent humor is now (as it seems) grown incorrigible; he
proclaims open hostility against all this side of the terrestrial Globe, and
appears like an inhabitant of the Antipodes point blank against all men.

There Is a Martial Law amongst School-boyes, that after the first blow given by
one of the Combatants, the other may fall on, and defend himself though his
standing on his own guard cost his adversary a Bloody Nose, or a Black Eye.
This Gentleman is the first that has bidden defiance to us all, and himself
too; his high spirit and animositie has encouraged him to make the first Onset;
and what quarter can he expect from either Enemy or Friend, who asperses both,
and tells them to their faces he scorns them? Certainly, mighty is the Man's
Courage, who dares attempt these things; great his prowess; invincible his
valor; to give you one proof of his Magnanimity for all; do but reflect upon,
and well consider the grand Action, or rather Passion of His life, and tell me
who more daring, more potent, more venturous than He, who in the twinkling of
an Eye, Praesto, while a man could say What Is this? run his head through an
Inch-thick board.

Often have I made it matter of admiration, when I have seen an abusive Copy of
Verses (that has been but the product of a green brain) of a Malapert
Youngster against his Schoolmaster, in revenge of that severity which his own
folly justly merited: My wonder has been more increast, when I have read a
Libel penned against a Country Justice of the Peace, by an oppressed or
sportive Gentleman: but for a Man, an old Man, a Lawyer, Bencher of Lincolns
Inn, about the period of his days to rail at all Authority, all kinds of
Government, to make himself diametrically opposite to whatsoever is called the
Present power, in good earnest I think there are more wonde^rers at it than my
single self. Against Kings, against Liturgy, against Bishops, against those
that are against Kings, Liturgy, and Bishops; pro and con, con and pro, for,
and against. I lately perused a Paper, the title whereof was this, The names of
the Lords of the Other House: having read it over, and over again, I was
somewhat troubled at his late Highnesse's oversight or forgetfulness, in
leaving out this Gentleman's name, for (without all peradventure) [THE LORD
PRYNNE] would have sounded very emphatically, and He would have quitted himself
in the discharge of that function very worthily, which consists (as I am
informed) altogether in exercising a Negative voice over all the good People of
this Nation, which I Am sure he would have done from the highest to the lowest.
Negatives are indeed a good Periphrasis for the Deity; yet very dangerous (as I
conceive) for any man to a pro^rine to himself or make a Monopoly on especially
a Man that never was a Lord in this world, nor ever is like to be one.

This is the Man, the error of whose Judgment, and impardonable instability is
to be imputed to the loss of his two Biasses; for if a Bowle's deviation from
the Jack is occasioned hereby, much more a rational Creature's a fortiori. This
is the William, whose passion is the Conqueror (as Cleaveland says in another
case.) This is the eminent Wit of all London, abating only one Creek, which
they call Billingsgate; there indeed is a nursery almost as eloquently gifted
as himself.

But, among all the scurrilities, and absurdities he is guilty of, I am most of
all offended at two things, which constantly, duly, and inseparably accompany
his writings, 1. His Monstrous Title-Pages, and 2ly. His abominable frightful
Margent: As to the first of these; Any Man now-a-dayes who but sees a single
sheet in Quarto on a Booksellers stall (be it but in transitu)
all-to-be-close-Printed in the Front, he never makes further enquiry after the
Author's name, but presently makes as quick, and nimble Conception of Him, as a
beggar does of an Alehouse, when he spies a Red Latice; or an Whoremaster of a
Bawdy house, when he sees a torn Smock hang out at the window. The words in the
Title page (poor miscreants!) how they crowd one another for elbow room! truly
(in my judgment) the great Bush (to use the old Saw) renders the wine
suspicious, and may well drive the Reader upon the Poers Interrogatory,

Quid tanto dignum tulit hic promissor hiatu?
What this same Promser has done
To merit so much gaping on?
In general this may be affirmed, that whoever shall trouble himself to read
over all his works, titles, and all, may ehance at the conclusion to meet with
a fate parallel to that same good Fellow's, who walking the streets early in a
morning, found a Packet, curiously bound up, and sealed, but having taken the
labor to open the first paper of the bundle, he finds another, and another,
and a fourth, fifth, and sixth paper, till at length he found in the amidst of
all, what think you my Masters? why, even (saving your presence) a Surreverence.

Then for his Margent, or Commentaries, Tom Farnaby never crammed Persius worse
than he loads himself, Quotations, Statutes, figures, etc. which a man had
better believe to be all as he says, than turn over so many volumes to
disprove him: In a word, I am almost so foolish as to approve of his two
conceits who resembled His Text, and Comment, to a Calve's head and
Poartenance; or an Owl encircled with a multitude of little Birds.

But I beseech you Sirs! why Mr. Prynne no Parliament man this bout? why must
he reply with Bacon's Brazen noddle, TIME WAS? why an excluded member? Are they
not all Keepers of the Liberty? and does not he assume to himself as much
Liberty as any Freeman in England, or the other two Nations? Truly all the reason
that I hear of for it, is that which exalted him, January 30. 1637. merely his
tongue, and pen, the turbulencies of his language, and abuse of his excellent
parts. The maintaining of a Paradox has been counted of old the gallantry of
great Wits; but then, these Paradoxes were so qualified, that their Author's
Judgment might plainly appear to be clean different from what he therein
argued for discourse sake. Certainly no man can be so far besotted to suppose
the offspring of his Invention (produced at first probably out of a frolique)
to be in good sober sadness a truth, a reality, to be adhaered unto, admired,
adored, that a man ought to prize it beyond flesh and blood: I am so charitable
to believe His first Essay, in this nature, was intended only for an experiment
of His Parts, and Sophistry, however it comes to pass now that he seems to
make that his Faith, which was but once at best, Opinion: with the Melancholy
Nobleman's Son who once acted the Beggar's part in a Comoedy, and ever after
persuaded himself to be in his whole life, what he had personated on the Stage
for one hour. And now what better recreation in the intervals over a pot of
ale, than to produce Mr. Prynn's Republican? what better sport than to hear Mr.
Needham's Emissaries to cry through the nose, Mr. William Prynn's Good Old
Cause rightly stated, and the bad uncased, etc. All this while, the whole
series of all his designs aiming at Authority, and the Pilots that sit at the
Helm of State. But what are they that bark at the Moon? The busy fly makes
many an attempt upon the candle, till at last his singed wings compel him to an
inglorious retreat. The filth which a man spits at Heaven, commonly lights on
his own pale.

Mr. Camden tells a story concerning the ancient Britons, that at their first
plantation in Armorica, being forced to take wives of that Counrtry, they were
no sooner married but they cut their wives Tongues out, to the end (says he)
that their Children might not learn that Country language from their Mothers. A
stratagem truly, very commendable: I am not so cruel to wish the like doom to
our Lawyer, because it is his most necessary implement; but I could wish it
restrained, and bridled, to prevent the hazard of our Childrens becoming as
bad Shimei's as Himself.

A word or two in the Quakers tone; William Prynne, cease thy Scribbling; Plague
not the Press with rallery any more; Obey the Magistrate; Murder not the Law;
Maim not the Gospel; Cease to speak ill of the Powers above thee; Leave off
thy reviling, evil speaking, thy factious, seditious spirit; Be humble, be
lowly, lest a worse thing betide thee.

To conclude; I wish him a through conviction of his infirmities, and such a
one as may render them as odious to himself, as they are to all the World, of
sober, moderate men. I wish him Repentance, and if he be incapable of that, I
wish him once again a Pastboard Rongrace, to protect his beauty from ranning by
the Sunbeams, when the State shall think fit.

FINIS.

