Legislative Power IN PROBLEMES, Published for the INFORMATION of all those
who have constantly adhered to the GOOD CAUSE: AND For the Reformation of all
those who had embraced the BAD CAUSE.

BY PETER CHAMBERLIN Docter in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes 1659.

PROBLEMES.
1. WHether God or Man, Jesus Christ or a Parliament have the Supreme Authority
of England?

2. Whether it be lawful to say that Jesus Christ is the One Lawgiver? Ja.
4.12. Is. 33.22. Or, whether that Epistle and Prophecy are Apochrypha in
England?

3. Whether it be not Treason to say Parliaments are not Lawgivers, or have
not the Legislative Power?

4. Whether if Jesus Christ and the Parliament are both Lawgivers, there be
not more Lawgivers then ONE?

5. Whether Parliaments have known what to do with this Law-giving or
Legislative Power? And whether it has not been a Burdensome-stone to Kings,
Zech. 12.3.
Parliaments, Armies, Protectors, Councils and People? and has not been ross'd
up-and down from the One to the Other, like the Atk of God stolen from
Eben-Ezer and set up by Dagon, and so carried from Ashdod to Gath and Ekron,
till it returned to Israel again?

6. Whether it was not greater Policy and Wisdom in Lycurgus, Numa Pompilius,
and Mahomet to entitle their Laws to the Oracle of Apollo, the Nymph Egeria,
and the Holy Dove? And whether the people became not more conscienciously
obedient thereto, then when Parliaments entitle Laws and Legislative Powers to
themselves; yet acknowledge it Derivative, which necessarily renders them
obnoxious and accountable to them from whom they derive it?

7. Whether it were not better for Parliaments to accept of the Legislative
Power of Jesus Christ, and of the Law, Statutes, and Judgments ready offered
them from God. with the whole Platform of Government prepared by the Word of
God, and practicable within one Month, and easy to be established: Ezekiel, 22:
27.
then still to be overturned, overturned overturned, and trouble and hazard
themselves and the Nation, to find out another Legislative Power and other
Laws, whichlast no longer then the Men that make them: nor that but during the
Power of the Sword?

8. How much blood and Treasure had been saved, had the Parliament been pleased
to acknowledge the Legislative Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, Ja. 4.12. Is.
33: 22. 1 Timothy 6.15. Deuteronomy. 1.17. and 17.18.19. 2 Chr. 19 6.
the only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords: and the Law Statutes
and Judgments of Almighty God?

9. Whether it were not far more honorable for Parliaments to have their
Authority from God, in judging for God by the Laws of God: then derived from
Kings (as some would have it) or (as others say) from the People, who
themselves never had it; but conceit it their Due, because acknowledged by
Parliament: and so con ceive that Parliament men cosen them of their due?

10. But if it must be acknowledged that Jesus Christ and the Parliament have
each a Legislative Power, Whether do they both give One and the same Law?

11. If One and the same, Whether the Prerogative of Jesus Christ or of a
Parliament ought to take place in calling the Law by their Title whose
Prerogative it is? Act. 4.19 5.29.


12. If it be different, Whether it is more lawful to obey God or Man, unless
Jesus Christ be not God; or His Law not Gods Law?

13. As it is more honorable for Parliaments and more sure to have their
Authority from God than man: So whether it be not more honorable and safe for
the People to be governed by the Law of God then Man? And whether it does not
more bind andasatisfie the Conscience, as being the very Answer of every Man's
Prayer (though some know not what they say) that Gods Kingdom might come, and
His Will might be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Matt. 6.10.
rather then be enslaved one sort of Men to another: and often times the best
and most peaceable, to the most unjust and Tyrannical? whereof the most
formidable has been a single person, though He that makes all men afraid must
needs be afraid of all men?

14. Whether it be not easier and better to be governed by a Law which every
Child knows, then by Laws which all the wise Lawyers, Sergeants and Judges of
the Land know not?

15. Whether the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament thwart each other? Or,
whether they both agree to be the Faithful and Authentic Records of the Law of
God?

16. If not, Why are they suffered to disturb the Conscience of Honest Men
against any Government that is not according to that Law?

17. If any part of those Scriptures ate false, Why do not our Teachers Teach
and Rulers command those places to be left out? And why the Assemblies of
Divines both of England and Scotland do own them, and yet publish in Print such
notorious and manifest contradictions against them, in some particulars of
their Confession of Faith and Catechisms? And whether the Pope, who has left
out and changed some places of Scripture which made against him, (though he
assume to himself an Authority above them) has not dealt more honestly with
his People herein then some of our Teachers and Rulers have hitherto done with
us? 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Romans 15.4. Exo. 20.1.31.18.34.1.4. Deuteronomy. 5.22.9, 10.
10.2.4. Lu. 19.14. Mal. 3.6. Heb 1.12, 13.8.


18. But if all the Scriptures are complete, as given by Inspiration of God:
Whether is that Text to be believed, which says the Law is Holy, Just and
Good, Romans 7.12. And why do not men so own and obey them? Or can we say the
same of the Acts, Laws, and Statutes of the Land?

19. Whether the ten Commandments spoken by God, and twice Written with the
finger of God: Ordinarily taught to Children, and written on most Church Walls
and Windows; and acknowledged so in all Confessions and Catechismes, are not
the Law of God?

20. Whether God be bound to make any other Law for Mankind any more then He is
bound to give an other Messiah to the Jews, because they will not have this Man
to reign over them?

21. Whether Time or Place, Nation or Sex alter that Law? or whether God be
altered that made it? so that, What was Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery,
Theft or Falls Witness so long ago in Palestine among the Jews; is it not so
now in England among the Gentiles?

22. Whether King David knew what he said, when he affirmed the Law of the Lord
is Perfect, His Statutes Right, and his Judgments True and Righteous
altogether? Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. And whether Moses and Solomon knew what they said
when they Commanded Men neither to Add nor Diminish? Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Pro.
30.6. And whether God Himself (may it be spoken with reverence to shame this
wicked World) knew what He did when He Commanded Joshua, as Moses also
Commanded Israel from the Lord, that they should turn neither to the Right
Hand, nor to the Left? Jos. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 17.20. and 28.14. Or indeed,
whether Lawyers or Judges or any humane Authority know what they say, or what
they do, when they say the Law of the Lord is imperfect, and that they must and
do Add and Diminish: and that they Will and Do turn both to the Right Hand, and
to the Left: and will Make and Compel others so to do also?

23. Whether the Statutes and Judgments Recorded in the Old and New Testament:
or the Statutes and Judgments Recorded in Parliament, and Courts of Record do
most properly belong to the Law and ten Commandments of God: Or whether the
great God was Wise enough to appoint Statutes and Judgments for His own Law?

24. Whether Moses meant Gods Statutes and Judgments to be fit for all Nations,
when he challenged all Nations to Compare with them? Deuteronomy. 4.8.

25. Whether the Apostle Paul meant the Law of God, when he pleaded the things
contained in the Law to be by Nature written in the Heart? and whether ^e meant
the Statutes and Judgments of God, when he brought the Conscience bearing
Witness, and Men's Judgment or Reasoning Thoughts (as Judges) Accusing or
Excusing? Romans 2.14, 15.

26. Whether our Maxim in the Law of the Land, mean the Law of God as it is in
the Old and New Testament, with the Statutes and Judgments thereto belonging?
Or whether there be any other Law of God, that is or can be meant, when it
says that Whatsoever is contrary to the Law of God, is Void, ipso facto?

27. Whether (ipso facto) All other Laws but the Law of God are not void since
it is the Statute of God, that none should Add nor Diminish, Exodus 4.2. and
12.32. Pro. 30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19. Nor turn to the Right Hand, nor to the Left?
Jos. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 5, 32.17.20.28.14.

28. Whether God 's Law be not the Fundamental Law of all the World?

29, Whether God's Law be not the Fundamental Law of England?

30. If it be true which some of our Judges and Lawyers have said, that Reason
is the Fundamental Law of the Land: whether the Law of God be not that Law of
Reason, unless Parliaments, Judges, or Lawyers can show a Law more Reasonable?

31. If it be true what Judge Jenkins in Print, and others have said that
Precedent is the Fundamental Law of the Land: Whether any can show more
Authentic Precedents then the Law of God throughout the Scriptures?

32. If Antiquity (as some) plead to be the Fundamental Law of the Land:
Whether any Hictory in the whole World can show any Law more Ancient, or, by
many hundred of years, so Ancient as the Law of God?

33. Whether our own History and Chronicles do not in particular relate that
King Lucius, and King Alfred did set up the Law of God to be the Law of this
Land? And if so, Whether have we any Law of the Land more Ancient then their
Reign?

34. Since then the Law of God is the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, the
Law of Reason, the Law of Precedent, the Law of Antiquity, Romans 2.14.15. Deuteronomy.
4.8.
and by all these the Fundamental Law of the whole World, and by our own Maxim
the Fundamental Law of England: And that whosoever Opposes, Contriveth,
Acts, or Abbetteth in any thing against the Fundamental Law of England, is
guilty of the highest Treason, and by all means Ordinary or Extraordinary to
be Cut off: Why will some go on to Act, Execute, and Contrive Laws, Statutes
and Judgments contrary to the Law of God; against their own Heads, and most
certainly against their own Souls? For if God spared not a King, a Vice Roy, an
Arch Bishop, and diverse Nobles for sinning against no Ordinary Law of the Land:
how shall meaner persons escape if they sin against All?

35. Nevertheless whether all the Laws and Execution of Laws of this Land are
not Different or Contrary to the Law of God; Let every man speak what he hears
and sees and feels?

Oh the Divine Law of God? Oh the Devilish Laws of Men?

What Good is not in the Law of God? what Evil is not in the Laws of Men?

36. Whether is not the sum of Gods Laws, Love, and the Execution Do as you
would be done by? does it not end all suits in a day, and pays all Debts
without Arrests or Imprisonments, and might be practicable throughout the Land
in one month?

37. Was there ever suits for Title of Land heard of in all the worst of Kings
of Israel? And where is ever a Suit in Chancery among the vilest Barbarians?
Might not Justice be Ordered throughout the Land by the Law of God in a month,
and is our Justice in order to this day? And where was ever any Family free
from Suits in England?

38. Are not the Laws of men Innumerable, causing Strife, and Contention,
Theft and Murder? O Blessed Holland, the worst of all Lands, yet made an
Artificial Paradize by industry and Government? Oh Happy England the Garden of
the World, but most accursed in Government beyond all other Lands, until
amended by God and our Governors?

39. What do Privileges signify, saving thou shall not Steal, but I may; with
two supportors. 1. Valet factum quod non valet fieri, Things done are lawful,
which are not lawful to be done; the 2 an Act of Indemnity or Oblivion
signifying Steal no more till next time?

40. What does Possession signify to be a 11 Points of the Law, but catch that
catch may, that none should play the Thief but hold fast, so that a Posse
Comitatue can hardly restore it to the right owner? Oh the Vile Law of Men?

41. Whether Soldiers have not several times with their Officers, Vowed and
attempted to Free the Nation, and hang up the Lawyers Gowns by the Scottish
Colors, which bosting was answered by the Author, that when Lawyers were
Cajoled out of Westminster Hall by Soldiers with their Tongues, then Soldiers
should be Cudgeled out of the field with their own Scabbords?

42. Whether the first noise of Reformation made not the Inns of Court as empty
of Lawyers, as now the Temple Trees are empty of Rooks, in token that Lawyers
and Reformation are inconsistent?

43. Whether every Family in England, does not curse both Laws and Lawyers of
England, and that (for the most part) not without cause? Yet whether some
bigotteed Lawyers do not think as the Rulers in John 7.49. That Moses Christ
and Paul with their Followers were accursed that knew not the Laws of Englands?

44. What Laws are practiced in England, that are not the Remains and
Relics of Antichristian Superstition and Tyranny, according to the Ignorance
of our Forefathers? And whether they are not contrived to maintain Tyranny,
enrich Lawyers, and empoverish the People?

45. Whether most of the great Lordships in England are not gotten into the
possession of the Families of Lawyers since Queen Elizabeth days, that
Sergeants went a begging for Clients in Paul's, and to be entertained for ten
shillings?

46. Whether any can have Justice, or go to Law without money? and whether the
Proverb be not true; the Law is Costly?

47. Whether he that must deliver his Purss upon the High way, or he that must
deliver the best part of his Estate in a private Study have the better choice?

48. Whether Lawyers do it upon a Gospel account when they teach men by
Experience to give the Coat also rather then go to Law: Mat. 5.40.
proving that half a Loaf is better then no Bread?

49. Whether two or three Millions are not spent in Law, and whether it be not
better deserved of the Army and Navy, since the one enslaves us to the Norman
Tyranny, and the other has given us some Breathings of God?

50. Whether the Hercules Pillars of the Law be not the Chancery, and of the
Chancery an Arbitrament, if not life! and when people will be wise to see this?

51. Who ever got by Suits in Law besides Lawyers and wicked men: for if
Justice were done, what had the honest man but his own, made now more precious
to him by his Vexatious trouble and charges? And if Injustice were done the
Knave and the Lawyer shared stakes? And whether our Laws be not contrived to
fill the Lawyers Coffers, and satisfy Revengefull Minds, and Tyrannical
Purses; And when it will be otherwise, since they are always uppermost to
share in making as well as executing their own Laws?

52. Whether Lawyers pretend best for the Laws, when they say their Law is
good, but blame the Corruption? Or when they say their Law is good, but blame
the Execution (their Courts and Judges)? As if a Law could be both Good and
Corrupt: Or a good Law could have bad Execution, for if men Execute the good
Law, they Execute what is good: If otherwise, they Execute an Evil. But being
beaten out of all these lurking holes, at last they endeavor to Anchor in the
Law of God, and say it is ACCORDING. Do not they then infer that the Law of
God is most perfect, when they hope for justification of theirs, by being but
ACCORDING?

53. What Benefit have we by the Law of the Land?

54. Is any man's Person safe when his life lies at the mercy of any one
Perjurd or Malicious Vilain that will svvear him out of it at the Sessions? o^
is that Law to be valued by Englishmen, that value an Englishman but at 13
pence-half-penny? Is that Law to be Adored which like Esops Stock devour the
^roglike Adorers that are fond of it, so that if an Attorney Genesis were let
lose to plead their own Laws, no Head could be safe on any man's Shoulders in
Army or Parliament? and this can be by every Puny demonstrated.

55. Is any man's Estate secure, when his utmost satisfaction being cheated of
it, is but to have the Tip of the Cheaters Ear, if he can get it? And if he be
robbed of it, he may for the bestowing of more time and money, see the thief
swing in a halter, and all what he has forfeit to the State? Or if he please
be hanged himself for receiving his own stolen Goods, if he be not wary in the
doing of it?

56. Is any man's good name safe when it is lawful to accuse him of all villainy
in Chancery Bills or at Sessions?

57. Is any man sure of Liberty, (though it be the Pedro Inganno's Box so often
held up with the Title of Salus Populi, and so dearly paid for with Blood and
Treasure:) Whereas it lies at the Mercy of Arrests and Imprisonments by every
malicious Knave that will be at the charge of a Luo Minus, a Latitat, a Capias,
a Writ of the Counter, or a Bill of Middlesex?

58. Whether all these Glorious Laws and Privileges are worth two Millions a
year to the people? And whether the Army and Navy do not better deserve it?

59. Whether the People can be said at all to have their Liberty, when two or
thee Lawyers keep it? Or whether Trade can prosper so long as Excise,
Assessements, and Taxes continue?

60. Whether Excise and Taxes are occasioned by the Army since Offers have been
made to maintain the Army without them?

61. Whether some do not find it sweeter to continue Taxes, then to hearken to
Dr. Chamberlin for the taking them off? And whether they be not sure that the
people will be content to be always Taxed, though the taking off Taxes and
Excise might very much quicken Trade?

62. Whether there be not a great Gulf between the Army and People, since it
could swallow up some years two Millions of Taxes between the Payer and
Receiver?

63. Whether the Bottomless-Pit be not some-where near England, when almost
all Ireland and Scotland, and most of the Kings, Bishops, Deans, and Chap. and
Delinquents Lands, Estates, and Houses: besides about 60 Millions of the
Peoples Treasure are gone: Yet the Parliament never the better for it?

64. Whether Quintus Curtius ever attempted a greater work in closing up the
Gulf at Rome: then the Author who offers to close up this Gulf which seems to
grow wider and wider? And who knows what will become of us if the Parliament
leave us in May next, and leave this Gulf open, when there are no more
Irelands, nor Scotlands, nor such great Estates, nor so many Jewels and
Millions in England lest to be thrown in?

65. Whether the Army have not been the Parliament and Peoples best friend in
time of need?

66. Whether the Soldier who fought against the King, or all the Lawyers
who were and are for the King, and fled to him in the Wars, leaving their
desolate places to Women; be the best Common-vvealths Men?

67. Whether the Army be not the Representative of the Power, as the Parliament
of the Authority of the People?

68. Whether it be not fit for Power and Authority to Unite together?

69. Whether Oliver left not the experience of which is strongest if they
divide?

70. Whether when we are divided France may not Alarm England whilst Spain
takes Ireland? Then whose friendship can we invite but the Plump Hollanders, if
not too late?

71. Whether our Laws and Lawyers will not more and more divide them, and help
on the work of the Jesuits: for where can he find better shelter, then under a
Bar Gown?

72. Whether a Kingdom divided can stand? (...). 26.


73. Whether it be possible to unite them, but by the Legislative Power of
Jesus Christ, and the Law of God?

74. Ezekiel. 21.27. Ps. 2.6. Jo. 5.44.
Whether God be not bound by His word to overturn, overturn, overturn, Kings
Parliaments, Armies, Protectors people, till Jesus Christ be set up upon his
Holy Hill?

75. Whether Men can believe this that receive honor one from another, and not
that honor that comes from God only? Jo. 5.44.

76. Exodus 18.21. Act. 19.25. Ast. 5.39. Matt. 7.12. Ps. 50.22 Luke 19.
Whether ever men that receive 1000 li. 5000 li. 10000 li. per annum by these
Laws, will consent to a Law that gives up their place and Office to Men of
Truth, Fearing God and hating covetousness? And whether it will not be worse
then the self denying Ordinance? and whether they will not know that by this
Craft they have their wealth, and cry up great Diana of the Ephesians? Oh the
admirable Law of God! Oh the prodigious Law of Man! When will men leave
fighting against God?

Oh the Divine Law of God, which teaches all men to do as they would be
doneby! Oh the devilish Law of men, where we can have no peace or safety in
Body, Goods, or Mind! Leave off for shame ye Prodigies of men that resist the
Holy Ghost and fight against God: Lest he tear you to pieces and there be none
to deliver: lest he say, Bring those mine enemy; before me that would not have
me to Reign over them, and slay them before my Face. Lest the fury of the
People and Army, and tumultuous rage of the poor be made Vials to power out the
vengeance of God upon you. Have we not Clouds gathering beyond the Seas? Have
we not gripings in our Bowels at home? Is any Man in England this day
satisfied? Have we not Jesuits spawning over all the Land? Is not Trade decayed
and Money fled away into all parts beyond the Seas?

77. And what King, Judge, or Commonwealth did ever come near the keeping of
Gods Law, whom God rewarded not with Safety and Honor, long Life, Peace and
Prosperity?

78. And what Law did or could ever cause a people to dwell in peace and
safety, every man under his Vine, and every man under his Fig Tree, eating and
drinking and making merry; And Silver to be as Stones in Jerusalem, save the
Law of God only (1 King. 4.20.25. and 10.27.) And when Men remember that Law (
Mal. 4.4.) as remembered it shall be when the little Stone becomes a great
Mountain ( Dan. 2.34, 35.) when his Kingdom shall come, and his will shall be
done in Earth as it is in Heaven. ( Matt. 6.10.) then it shall be so again?
Mica 4.3, 4.

Oh how blessed and happy a thing it were that God would grant Wisdom to this
present Authority, Ja. 1.5. Ps. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 2 Chro. 19.6. Deuteronomy. 15.32.
and 17 20. and 28.14. Jo. 1.7. Amos 5.24. Dan. 2.24, 25. Rev. 5.10 Matt. 6.10,
Rev. 9.1.11. Rev. 13.1.11. Is. 1.26. Psa. 144.14.
and power to kiss His Son: and be no more the Representatives of Man; but the
Representatives of God, to Judge for God, by the Laws of God without respect of
persons, turning neither to the right Hand nor to the left, and be Crowned with
the glorious Title of LIBERATORES ANGLIAE, and not CUSTODES LIBERTATIS. Then
should Righteousness run down as a mighty stream. And they be Judges as at
first, and Councillors as at the Beginning. Then shall the little Stone fill
the whole EARTH, The Saints shall Reign on EARTH. Gods will shallbe done on
EARTH. No more shall Apolluon, Abaddon Scorpionize Men. No more shall Beasts
arise out of the Sea or Earth to Stygmatize men. Then shall the Oppressor
cease, and no more complaining be heard in the streets. Taxes should be no
more, And Trade and industry should abound more than in our Neighbors blessed
Bee-hive. The poor should have bread, and the Army no more in Arrears, Prison
doors should be open, and Debtors satisfied without Arrests. The youth and
flower of our Nation instead of being infected with the crabed nonsensical
study of the Laws, or drawing straight lines by crooked Rules, raise up their
noble Fancy to the wisdom of Arts and Arms, The Depths of Nature and knowledge
of the whole world, to the Honor of God and themselves, and not imbesling but
enriching of their Estates and Posterity; Then Peace and safety, plenty and
prosperity should overflow the Land.

For I P.C. as a Servant and Witness of the word of God, do Testify with my
right hand lift up to Heaven, that if our present Parliament and Army shall
hearken to the Word of God and fulfill the humble desires of his servant, That
all these blessings shall immediately ensue: But, if they despise and harden,
God will overturn and make them desolate, as in the twinkling of an eye. And
will raise up an other Authority and Power more wise and glorious on whom he
will power his Spirit, and they shall do these great things, and more. For the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isa. 1.20. and 40.5.58.14.

Read and Believe, or Read and Tremble.

