A Motive to Peace and Love. Delivered in a SERMON At Paul's the first Lords Day
in June, Anno Dom. 1648.

By Humfry Chambers, D. D. and Pastor of Pewsy in the County of Wilts.

Isaiah 32.17. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. LONDON, Printed for John
Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1649.

To the Right Honorable, Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Warden
of the Stannaries, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter.
My Lord:
BEing pressed by the desire of the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen of the
City of London, notified under the hand of the Clerk of that Court, to print a
Sermon which I lately preached at Paul's; I was willing rather to deny mine own
judgment, which prohibited, then theirs, who called for the publication of the
same.

Such as it is, I presume to offer it unto your Lordship, and under your name
to the worlds view, because I know that the Argument thereof suiteth with that
noble disposition which your Lordship upon all occasions expresses, to promote
Peace, Love, and Christian unity in these distracted destroying times. Besides,
I was glad to catch at any opportunity, to make some public Record, of those
many great undeserved favors which your Lordship is pleased to heap upon me,
and oblige me in the strongest bonds of thankfulness and duty, ever to be, and
appear to the uttermost,

Your Lordships most humble Servant and Chaplain Humfry Chambers.

A Sermon Preached at PAUL'S the first Lords Day in June, 1648.
5. Galatians, Ver. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be
not consumed one of another.
THe words are an Apostolical Caveat to a dividing short-sighted people, who
being in the fire of contention either could not, or would not look forward to
the ashes of confusion, which they were dissolving themselves into. The
Galatians before the breaking out of the light of the Gospel upon them, were
as other Gentiles in darkness, and in the shadow of death, They knew not God,
Gal. 4.8
but then did service to those which by nature are no gods. But when the
blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ reported to them the glad tidings of
everlasting salvation, and blessedness to be imparted in Jesus Christ, to all
that believe in his Name, they did at first happily embrace that saving
Doctrine, and did run well in the acknowledgement of the same, as the Apostle
bare them witness in the beginning of the seventh Verse of this Chapter; You
did run well says the Apostle. But they were soon stopped, or staggered in
their course by certain Teachers of errors, and such as brought in destroying
divisions amongst them, of whom the Apostle collectively wrote as of one man,
with admiration, and indignation, in the end of the seventh Verse, Who did
hinder you that you should not obey the truth? And then in the sweet voice of a
loving extenuation he did assure them in the eighth Verse, that this
crosse-worke, this mis persuasion contrary to the Gospel (what ever the
Authors thereof pretended) was not of God; This persuasion comes not of him
that calls you, the Apostle left them to make out his abrupt speech; and to
conclude that it was from that great Makebate, the Prince of darkness, acting
in his transformed Servants, against God, his truth, and people. These subtle
Agents of the Prince of darkness, the troublers of the Galatians, however at
first they were for number but contemptible, yet the Apostle showed, that not
resisted, not ejected, they were likely, and might quickly prove sufficient to
corrupt the whole Congregation with their pernicious error; A little leaven
(says the Apostle, using a Proverbiall form of speech at the ninth Verse)
leavens the whole lump, intending that a little Doctrine contrary to the
Gospel, carried on by a few subtle Teachers, may soon sour, corrupt, and
undo a whole Congregation. Howbeit, that those who were tender of heart (newly
brought to the faith of the Gospel) might not be grieved at this speech, as if
they had been in danger of being utterly corrupted, and sowred with the false
Doctrine which was brought in amongst them to their everlasting destruction;
the Apostle comforted them in the beginning of the tenth Verse, and assured
them confidently, that that God who had graciously called them to the saving
knowledge of his truth, would powerfully confirm them therein unto the end; I
have confidence in you (says the Apostle) through the Lord, that you will be
no otherwise minded; and he was as confident that the Achan, the troubler of
the people of God, who ever he was, how high soever he looked, should be
troubled by the God of Heaven, and should at last bear his deserved judgment,
for so he expressed himself in the end of the tenth Verse; But he that
troubles you shall bear his judgment whosoever he be. These troublers of the
Galatians (belike the more to enduce them to entertain their Doctrine of the
necessity of legal Circumcision, and the universal observation of the Law of
Moses, for life and righteousness) did suggest that the Apostle Paul himself,
whatever he did at Galatia, yet at other places did likewise preach even as
they, the same Doctrine of Circumcision, and of the necessity of universal
obedience to the Law of Moses, for righteousness unto justification and life;
but the Apostle put this by, as a wicked false slander, really confuted by his
constant continuance in the contrary Doctrine of the Gospel, even unto
persecution; for had the Apostle declined the Doctrine of the Gospel in any
place, why should he suffer for the same as he did in every place? Or, why
should the Jews be enraged every where against him, if the Apostle had
blemished so much the Cross of Christ in his Doctrine any where, as to have
peiced up the saving virtue thereof with the additionall supply of legal
ordinances and obedience? Thus the Apostle confuted the slanderous suggestion
of the false Teachers against him at the eleventh Verse; And I, if I yet preach
circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense of the
cross ceased; and thereupon (in a holy heat, and height of spirit, and zeal
for God, and for the good of his people) the Apostle wished at the twelfth
Verse, that these troublers of the Galatians were cut off, I would that they
were cut off that trouble you; whither this cutting off were by the hand of
Heaven, or by the hand of the Civil Magistrate, or by the hand of Church
Censures I now dispute not, plain it is, that the Apostles holy heart could
not brook an indifferent liberty, for those that were the Patrons of errors,
contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to invenome and destroy the Church of
God by them, he wished to them not a lawless freedom and toleration, but a
speedy removal and abscision, he wished that they were cut off, that they
might not be the corrupters, that they might not continue the troublers of the
people of God: Belike these seducers to bring the Apostles Doctrine into
contempt, suggested otherwhiles, that he did so preach up Justification by
faith in the righteousness of Christ, that he taught Believers to lay aside
the obedience of the Law of God, as to Sanctification; but the Apostle expressly
testified in the thirteenth and fourteenth Verses of this Chapter, that so
far was he from laying aside the Law of God, or teaching Believers to neglect
that holiness which was enjoined therein, that he did fully establish in his
Doctrine every part and parcel of the holy everlasting Law of God, as it was
summed up in that Epitome of love toward men, arising from the love of God;
and howsoever he preached a liberty from the Law in point of Justification, yet
he preached a liberty to the Law in point of Sanctification; and knew no other
liberty but that suitable to a true Gospel call, as we may learn by his own
words; Brethren, you have been called to liberty, only use not your liberty as
an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another, for all the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: And howsoever the Galatians, especially the false Teachers among them,
were very apt to vaunt themselves as great Patrons of the Law, yet the Apostle
showed that herein they did extremely fail of a due regard unto the Law of
God, that they walked not according to the Law of love, according to that Law
which in just comprehension does include whatsoever the Law enjoined, but they
were biting and devouring one of another, to the endangering of the utter ruin
and destruction one of another, as it is expressed in the words now read; If
you bite and devour one another, take heed that you be not consumed one of
another. The which words do fall into: 1 An accusing Supposition, and 2 A
threatening Caveat.


1 The Apostle supposing did accuse the Galatians (at leastwise, many amongst
them) of being bitterly bent one against another, of biting and devouring one
another. And

2 In the Caveat, the Apostle threatened them with that which would certainly
come upon them, if they went on in that unlovely, unlawful course, which was
no other but an utter and common destruction, drawn both upon one another, and
that by one another; they that would not join together in love according to
duty, the Apostle threatened, that God would join them together in Judgment
according to desert. In the supposition therefore you have the Galatians sin,
biting and devouring one another; in the Caveat you have their danger of being
consumed one by another; their sin great, and their danger great, and this
great danger set by the Apostle over against this great sin, that from the
consideration of the danger they might be deterred from that sin which drew
it on, and never dare to continue biting and devouring one another, least they
should at last be consumed one by another; I purpose through Gods assistance to
speak unto the Supposition and Caveat severally, as to the explication of
them, and then join them together in that one maine Doctrine, which does arise
from them both conjoyntly considered; which Doctrine I shall make the subject
of my present discourse. But first, in general you may observe very easily,
that both the Supposition and the Caveat are conceived in words figurative,
which are borrowed from the eating of meats for the nutriment of the body; for
that meat may become nutrimentall to the body, it must pass as it were under
three degrees:

1 There must be biting, or chewing of it with the teeth

2 There must be eating, or swallowing down of it into the stomach And then,

3 There must be the concocting, which is as to the particular nature of the
meat, the consuming of it, that so it may become proper aliment for the body
being assimulated thereunto.

Now two of these degrees are set down in the Supposition, there is biting one
another, and there is (as we read it) devouring, but the truth is, the word
(...) is plainly eating one another; There is biting and eating, and then in
the Caveat there is the consequent of biting and eating, the act (as it were)
of concoction, whereby there is a consumption of the food as to the particular
nature of the same, that it may become aliment to the body; Take heed that ye
be not consumed one of another: When as meat is chewed with the teeth, and
taken into the stomach, it is very near being consumed, it is very near the
losing of its own nature, that it may be turned into the nature of the body
which is to be nourished thereby; and even so, when they that are joined
together in any near union upon the Earth, do bite and devour one another
Morrally, they are very near being consumed one of another penally, they be
very near to common ruin one with another, who through intestine divisions
do meditate and promote the particular ruin one of another.

But now to look particularly by way of explication.

First upon the Supposition, If you bite and devour one another; And,

1 Plut. De Garrul.
are Vallum and praesidium linguae, the fence and guard of that unruly member,
but this biting is with the teeth which grow out of the tongue, or rather in
the tongue, tongue-teeth, bitter words, and sharp reproaches, such as the
Prophet spoke of; Their teeth are spears and arrows, Psalm. 57.4
and their tongue a sharp sword: Where we must know that tongue and teeth do
not import two things, but they do both figuratively express the same thing,
even cutting and piercing words, whereby men do in the metaphor of my Text,
bite, and in the metaphor of the Prophet, wound and cut one another, at any
distance, and thus the word biting is here to be understood; for as it is
apprehended that the venom of those hurtful Creatures, Snakes and Adders,
etc. are in their teeth, and that by them they do impoyson those men and other
living Creatures which are wounded by them, so it is evident that when a man
proves pernicious to others, much of his venom whereby he is enabled to hurt
lies in his tongue-teeth, The poison of Aspes is under their lips, Romans 3.13
says the Apostle; you know what lies next under the lips, yet the Apostle did
not mean that the teeth of men properly so taken were the seat of their
poison, but their tongue-teeth, as he expressed it in the fourteenth Verse,
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; so that the teeth which convey
the venom of the heart from one unto another, and wherewith men in the sense
of my Text, bite one another, are wounding reproaches, and bitter peircing
words, which are uttered by one against another, and these teeth bite hardest
when such reproaches and hurtful speeches are not only uttered into the air,
and unto the ears of men but when they are in writing, or in printing, made
sharp to bite the reputation and the esteem of others publicly, and if it
were possible perpetually unto all posterities; then these teeth are sharpened
indeed, and then they bite home, when men bite not in present only, but take a
course to bite and feed (as it were) as death does upon others after they are
in the Grave, and after they are cut off from the land of the living. In the
next place,

2 biting being (as it were) a grieving reproach, and devouring, a ruining
report; for so you shall find devouring ascribed to the tongue, Psalm. 52.4
Thou have loved all devouring words, O thou false tongue. Or else we may by
this devouring understand a further acting by way of persecution, and
oppressing opposition of others according to the use of the phrase, Psalm. 14.4
Have the workers of wickedness no knowledge, which eat up my people as if
they would eat bread; that is, which oppose, oppress, and with rage persecute
them, and so dev^ure them as a man would eat bread; put both together and you
have the full sense of devouring in my Text; When as men do in height of
enmity by bitter words devour (as it were) the name, esteem, and safety one
of another, and when (which further degree of virulency usually goes along with
this) there is according to man's power an open persecution, and oppressing
opposition raised by one against another, then such men are fully come to that
devouring one of another which my Text intends. Lastly,

Take heed lest ye be consumed one of another) these words are very plain,
and very terrible, for they import an utter and a common destruction, ready to
seize upon those who are mutually guilty of this sin of biting and devouring
one another, and that by the means and hands one of another, for that the
Apostle showed to be the dreadful judgment which usually follows at the
heels of this sin of mutual biting and devouring one another, as the words
of my Text plainly intimate, If ye bite one another, take heed ye be not
consumed one of another. Thus I come from surveying the sense unto the Doctrine
which the words (being held together) hold out unto us, and this it is; That,

They who are joined together in any near union, when they rise up one against
another in bitter raylings, and oppressing oppositions, they are in greatest
danger of implunging one another in utter and common destruction. More briefly
thus; Intestine division is a sad preface and preparation unto utter, common,
and mutual destruction. For entrance to that which I shall now speak in
prosecution of this Point:

First, consider that the unions of men (which this Doctrine does relate unto)
are of two sorts, namely;

1 Civil or Politic.

2 Ecclesiastical or religious.

1 There is a Civil union of men in relation to temporal preservation and
happiness. And

2 There is an Ecclesiastical union of men in relation to everlasting
salvation and blessedness; and the Doctrine of my Text holds of both, and of
both expressly; but the Apostle had especially in his eye, those raylings and
contentions, those bitings and devourings which are amongst Christian brethren,
whom Christian Religion does or should nearly unite; first therefore to speak
unto the point in hand.

In relation unto men that are joined together in Civil unions, Mat. 12.25
A Kingdom (says he) divided against it self is brought to desolation, and
every City or house divided against it self cannot stand; that is, it is
impossible it should stand long, when there is a division and a contention
raised within the bowels thereof: It is well and generally known that all
Civil unions begin in a family, in a house, in those three combinations of
Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Governors and Servants; by the union
of Houses, Cities, and Towne-ships are constituted; by the union of Cities,
Kingdoms are composed; and so upwards out of the union of Kingdoms arise
large and comprehensive Empires, or States of the earth, under whatsoever
denomination of unity; Now our Savior showed, that if we begin at the lowest
Civil union, a House, and so rise to a City, and then come to a Kingdom, and
by proportion if we thence ascend whither we can, to any superior Civil
union, still it is true that such a union divided in it self against it self
cannot stand, divided in it self against it self; it comes to desolation;
When the Lord would express the utter ruin of the people of Judah (in the
immediate occasion thereof) he showed, that it should be effected by intestine
division and dissension. Isay 3.5
The people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his
Neighbor, and the child shall behave himself unseemely against the aged, and
the base against the honorable; which words declare, that innate divisions,
and contentions in the State of Judah should breed confusion, and that bring
forth utter destruction in any of the same. And accordingly, how homebred
divisions were the immediate occasion of the last and great destruction of
Jerusalem, when the hand of Divine Justice drew out the Roman Sword against it;
I need not speak, it is so famously known in Story, nor indeed is there any
cause why to speak much, either for the expre^sing or asserting of this truth
in regard of Civil States, that fretting divisions, and contentions in the
bowels are a disease that brings a Consumption upon them; all the Kingdoms of
the world have known thus much by experience, who never flourished but under
concord, and were ever in a consuming temper when blasted with imbowelled and
imbittered contention. No wonder therefore that all the deep-working
Politicians of the world lay it for a maxim, Divide and Impera; once raise
divisions in any State, how mighty soever, and you may rule and ruin it at
pleasure. A State divided in it self needs no enemy, it is enemy enough unto
it self, and will do an enemies work against it self, although it has no
other wages but self destruction and utter overthrow: but of Civil unions,
and the mischief which comes by them I shall Doctrinally say no more, but
proceed to that which the Apostle does especially eye in this Text, which is;

Biting, devouring one another, they are then in the right course to be
consumed not only one with another, but one by another, to be the most
effectual bloody instruments of each others ruin; for this I shall briefly
give you four Scripture grounds; the first is this.

Because by mutual bitter railings, One body, one Spirit, one hope, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
one God and Father of all, to unite and cement together in love and
tenderness, they do not only disobey but trample under foot that new
Commandment which the Lord Jesus Christ has ratified for ever in his Church; A
new Commandment give I unto you, Jo. 13.34
that ye love one another as I have loved you, that you also love one another.
And again, This is my Commandment, Jo. 15.12
that ye love one another as I have loved you. There is not any man that is
truly taught of God to life, but one part of his lesson is love; this impaled
love of Christ's Disciples, which our Savior has commanded. The Apostle says,
These. 1.4.9
Concerning brotherly love you need not that I write unto you, for you your
selves are taught of God to love one another; taught, not only to know but
practice it as a duty, for so it follows in the tenth verse; And indeed ye
do it toward all the Saints which are in all Macedonia. We see then, that the
Saints are practically taught of God the lesson of mutual love, and we find
the Apostle in the Ephesians, laying out one branch of the duty of this love in
these words, Ephesians. 4.31, 32
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be
put away from you with all malice, and be kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. When
therefore there is a course directly contradictory unto this rule of the
Apostle, taken amongst Christian brethren, when bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, and malice prevails amongst them, and
that mutually to the out-facing and treading down of Christian: love, they
contract that high and common guilt of sin which cannot but endanger the
running of them headlong into a deep and common gulf of destruction; however
men may please themselves with their own deceivings, this is certain, if God
be not pleased to purge out this spirit of bitterness and enmity from amongst
Christian brethren, and to teach them living together, to walk according to
the rule of love toward each other, nothing can be looked for as the fruit of
the great guilt, of biting and devouring one another, but the implunging one of
another in utter and common destruction, dispensed toward Hypocrites in Gods
hand of wrath, and toward Believers in the hand of fatherly displeasure.

Consider,

We may consider, Mat. 24.12
Our Savior says, That because iniquity should abound, the love of many
should wax cold. And it is as true on the other side, that because the love of
many does wax cold, therefore iniquity does abound; It is hard to name the
door at which more wickedness enters into the world then at that of
contention, and I believe you will be of the same mind when you have weighed
the Apostles words; namely, Jam. 3.16.
Where there is contention and strife, there is confusion and every evil
work; whilst men are wrangling and contending with brethren, the Devil is at
liberty, and has great opportunity to come in with much evil, and to spread
the same to the corrupting of the contentious persons: Seeing therefore that
contention nourishes transgression amongst brethren, it must needs let in
destruction upon brethren, and expose both one and other unto a common ruin.
Consider one thing more, namely,

That bitter railings, Prove. 15.1
Grievous words (says the Holy Ghost) stir up anger; and anger amongst
brethren once stirred is very strong, and hardly removed: Prove. 18.19
A brother offended is more hardly to be won then a strong City, and their
contentions are like the bars of a castle. If the world had never known this
before, it is more then sufficiently evidenced in our time, and before our
eyes, who see Christian brethren differing upon smallest matters, through angry
words, and provoking carriage, hurried on to that height and strength of
mutual enmity, which is hardly if possibly to be subdued and removed: Now,
when as strong enmity bears sway betwixt those that should be joined together
for the mutual support and comfort one of another, especially when they are in
a world that loves them so well, that (if the God of Heaven did not tenderly
love them, and he that bounds the Sea did not bound the rage of men against
them) it were impossible for them to be and not to be destroyed; when as I say
they who should lay out themselves for the strengthening one of another, grow
to bitter invincible enmity one against another; the end of brethren embroyled
in such unbrotherly contention is likely to be that which was the end of the
mixed multitude of the Moabites and Ammonites and men of Seir, 2 Cor. 20.23.
when they came up against Jehosaphat, It is said that the Children of Moab and
Ammon stood up against the men of Seir utterly to destroy them, and when they
had made an end of the Inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy
another. We may therefore from this and the foregoing considerations, with
assurance conclude, that if bitter enmities and contests be nourished and
strengthened amongst those that are nearly joined together in the bond of
Christan religion, (and should be so likewise in the truth of Christian love,)
they be in greatest danger of what is expressed in my Text, That by biting and
devouring one another they shall come at last to be consumed one of another.
And thus much be spoken to the Doctrine of my Text: Now I come to the
Application of this point.

I should desire all men to consider whether the present Doctrine does not
look sadly upon us at this day, whether this Doctrine does not speak terror
more then all the Armies and conspiracies in the world unto this City, and all
the Cities of the Kingdom, unto this State singly considered and complexedly
together, with the annexed Kingdoms? unto our Church and almost every branch
and parcel thereof? I see no so terible an indication of common ruin
approaching unto us as this, that men are left so generally, so sottishly, with
malicious despite, to bite and devour one another, not laying it to heart, that
they are ready to be consumed one of another. First.
Inprosecution of this use, I suppose to speak first to civil contentions and
divisions, and whilst we have them only in our eye, this Doctrine is like to
Ezekiels role that was written within and without, and it was written
lamentation, and mourning, and woe: For is there not such a spirit of intestine
rage and bitter enmities gone out, not only into this City but into the whole
Land, that it is (as it were) the very meat and drink of many, to be biting and
devouring one another, both publicly and in secret, in word and print; And
whilst it is thus, is it not lamentable to consider how we stand upon the
brinke (but that the God of Heaven does work beyond thought in miracles of
power for our preservation) how we stand, I say, every moment upon the brinke
of common destruction? I shall not adventure (it belongs not to me) to speak a
word as a Statist concerning either the causes or remedies of this misery; but
as a poor servant of Jesus Christ, I desire to speak a little of both from
Scripture information. And first;

If any man demand what is the cause that England is wholly given up to savage
felf-crueltie, and all the Cities thereof to rejoice in the plucking out of
their own Blood and Bowels, and the Inhabitants thereof to sport themselves in
mutually biting and devouring one another; surely the multitude does much
mistake the cause of this mischief, every man almost thinks he sees the
reason hereof, here and there without himself in the folly, falseshood, and
politic miscariages of others, and very few look into their own souls, and
unto heaven to see the true cause of this growing misery; but it is certain
that whoever are the instruments, the root of this our misery lies in our own
breasts and lives: There is (shall I say) a shamfull, I think it may be better
called a shamlesse practice of notorious wickedness, in several kinds amongst
us continued to this day, we have talked of a reformation, and I believe that
the hearts of many have groaned after it. And further, I believe that the
desire of it has been acceptable to the God of Heaven, and let me say one
thing more, I do yet believe that we or our posterities shall live to see a
happy reformation, and that all this which has been done and suffered in
relation thereunto shall not be in vain. But in the present state of affairs
amongst us, when we look for a reformation, we cannot but see abundance of
corruption prevailing in the Land, yea, those that stand upon the Watchtower,
being required to speak the truth, can say no more nor less of us then what
you find in the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 6.28.29.
They are all grieveous revolters, they go about with slanders, they are all
corrupters, the bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire, the
melter melts but in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away, and therefore
what can the conclusion be, (without the incomprehensible actings of mercy,)
but as it follows Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them. I cannot but speak, and yet the truth is, there is no need of
speaking in a case so notorious, and universally acknowledged before hand
concerning some, yet but a very little parcel of those sins that do outface
(as it were) God and men amongst us at this time: There is that abominable
pride and wantonness to be read in the faces of men and women in their gates,
gestures' and attires; There is that heavy oppression and hateful prophannesse
yet remaining in our land; There is that gross hypocrisy under several
liveries, walking in our streets, for the body of hypocrisy is now adays
worn upon a great many kinds of Cloth and Color by men who have learned the
abominable art of making God and religion to serve turns: There is that unjust
partiality, that manifest contradiction to divine truths, that lewd and loud
lying, both in word and print abounding amongst us, that in regard of these and
many more sins, the messengers of God may truly speak of us, as the Prophet
wrote of old concerning the Jews; The show of their countenance witnesses
against them, they have declared their sins as Sodom, they hide them not;
For there is no hiding nor concealing of these and many the like notorious
sins, they are to be seen without secret search upon the faces of the
multitude: And can we then wonder that there should be an evil spirit of
contention from God, when there is such an evil spirit of contention against
God maintained in the midst of us? Can it seem strange that when we quarrel
with, and fight against the God of Heaven, the God of Heaven should leave us in
judgment to quarrel with, and fight against one another. God is the same to a
Nation as to a man, when the ways of a man please him, he makes his enemies to
be at peace with him, but when as the ways of a man are contrary to the Lord,
the Lord walks contrary to him, and usually leaves very friends to walk in a
way of contrariety toward such a person: And so it is with nations, when the
ways of a nation please the Lord, he will make their enemies to be at peace
with them, but when the ways of a nation are contrary to God, God will walk
contrary to them, and make their very friends their Enemies, nay make them to
themselves their greatest Enemies, that they shall need no Enemy, whilst they
cruelly meditate and act their own ruin, according to that in the Prophet
Jeremiah, Jer. 13.14
I will dash them (says the Lord) one against another, the fathers against the
children, I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but I will destroy
them: I desire to leave one Scripture with you, that you may seriously look
upon it, and consider whither we have not cause to be greatly humbled, and to
acknowledge where the root lies of all our imbittered inbred contentions, it is
in the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 9.18, 19, 20, 21.
(I confess is is a very terrible Scripture, unto all those that do not know
how to look beyond the Kingdom of England for their comfort, nor do know how
to look upon the God of Heaven for their refuge and refreshment in the worst
of times,) the Lord says thus at the eighteenth verse, Wickedness burns as
the fire, it shall devour the brieres and threnes, and shall kindle in the
thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke;
through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, and the people
shall be as the fuel of fire; no man shall spare his Brother, and he shall
snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat on the left hand and
shall not be satisfied, they shall eat every one the flesh of his own arm,
Manasseh Ephraim, Ephraim Manasseh, and they both shall be against Judah, for
all this his anger is not turned away, but his wrath is stretched out still: Oh
that we might in this our day lay this to heart and learn, that whilst
manifold wickedness remains in height amongst us, the fire is kindled which
(if infinite mercy prevent not) will burn us up, with all our multitudes and
glory, and cause us cruelly to consume one another in the heat of intestine
contentions; yea though the Lord by many and mighty deliverances seem willing
(as hitherto he has done) to pluck us as a firebrand out of the fire, yet if
our wickedness still prevails, we shall have cause to fear, that for all
this his anger will not be turned away, but that his hand will be stretched out
still.

A second cause of this division which the Scripture points out, Only by
Pride comes contention. Prove. 13.10.
When men are of that temper, that every man will go highest, there can be no
other fruit of it expected but sharp and sudden contentions; When the
Inhabitants of a City are contented to walk the same streets, and every man to
take or give the wall as his place is, or as it casually falls out, all is
quiet, and all at Peace; But should they pitch upon this resolution, every one
to take the wall, and no man to give it, the issue would soon be justling,
quarrelling and mutual violence, threatening the speedy ruin of the place. I
desire to leave it upon your consciences in the sight of God, whether you may
not in this see much of the cause of our contentions, of our civil uncivil
contentions at this time: Great height and haughtiness of spirit reigns in
the land, every man almost would be first and uppermost, and when that cannot
be, then comes the quarrel charged indeed upon other causes, but flowing
really from the spring of pride, which if it still rise and run as at
present, will never cease to fill up the measure of our state contentions.

Another ground of our miserable contentions (which the Scripture points at)
is Self-seeking. Philipians) All seek their own, not the things that are
Jesus Christ's. I add, nor those things which conduce to public welfare; when
it is true of any State or Kingdom, that the members thereof grow so selfish,
that they look upon all public transactions through the spectacles of
private interests; It is not possible, but that such a State must be miserably
rent, if not speedily ruined with manifold contentions: State-Hipocrisie is a
chief and known nurse of State-Enmity; whilst men under the hood of public
pretentions, carry on designs steered merely by private intentions and
interests, and professing to mind public good, make public goods their
common prey: no marvel though they quarrel and fight on with another about
parting. I shall leave this likewise to all your consciences in the sight of
God to consider, whether this has not been, and is not still a great cause of
the bitterness and civil enmity that prevails in the land! let me say this
(as in the presence of God) if there be any (which is greatly to be feared) who
have the heart blood of Ireland, and the bowels of England, lying at the
bottom of their full Bags, and Chests, or fair Houses, and Mannours, which
they have gained in these loosing times, (under what glorious pretense soever,
of a regard to the public, they shroud themselves) God will find them out,
and their sin shall find them out, and a time shall come wherein those men
shall know that they can never wash their selfish hands in innocence, from
being guilty of continuing that bitter destroying Enmity, that does now
prevail in our land. Questionless, abominable self-seeking is one of our
great Staterending evils at this day. One thing more by the Scripture we may
learn;

That sinful lusts maintained in regencie, resolved not to be tamed nor tied
up from accomplishing of them) make them highly to act in the way of civil
contentions and enmity, against every one of what rank soever, who acts
against their lusts. The Apostle James does expressly lay down this root of
contentions amongst men, Whence comes Wars and Fightings amongst you? Wars
amongst you, intestine, Wars and Fighting, whence come they? come they not
hence (says the Apostle) even from your lusts that war in your members? Jam.
4.1.
When as men have unruly lusts fighting within them, then they prove unruly and
ready to fight against all those that would restrain them in their evil
ways; They pretend so many causes of their discontent, and enmity against
those with whom they are at variance, but when it comes to the trial, the
reason why they are so much displeased and enraged against others appears to
be this, Because they seek to restrain them from their living by the rule of
their unruly lusts: There be many men at this day that would make the world
believe, that an endeavor to set up Presbyteriall Discipline for the purging
of the Church from scandalous offense, is a great cause of those quarrels and
contentions that are amongst us, but I believe that to one man that takes
distaste at the Presbyteriall Discipline out of conscience, or any grounded
pretense of conscience, there be an hundred (shall I say) nay many hundreds
that do hate it and oppose it and all those that are friends to it, upon no
other account but this, Of their lusts because they be afraid to be restrained
thereby in those wicked lusts which War within them against the law of God.
The multitudes of men lie under a wicked fear of having the yoke of Jesus
Christ put upon them, and if the truth were spoken out, what it is that makes
many so much discontented and enraged against Presbyteriall Discipline, it is
clearly this, Because they be afraid that if that should prevail, they should
not hold the name and outward privileges of Christianity together with their
sinful lusts, with so much freedom as formerly they have done: It is a matter
of just and great lamentation at this day to see how the most struggle with
their heads, tongues, and hands, to make good a liberty for their lusts, and
in that regard rise up in an hostile enmity against all those that are any
ways active or isntrumental for their restraint. And this is doubtless a
head spring of our civil imbroylments at this time; Thus we have learned from
the Scripture four several causes of our present contention viz. The open
practice of notorious wickedness, proud ambition, self-seeking, and sinful
lusts maintained in their regencie.

I come now to speak something of the course which is to be taken for remedy
of our sore malady of civil contention, but I must do that very briefly,
that I may reserve some time (in the second place) to bewail our irreligious
contentions in matter of religion: That we may by the mercy of God attain
deliverance from this civil bitterness and enmity, I shall direct you to the
means which may be of force to remove the forementioned causes of this our
present misery, remove the cause, you cure the disease, and might the causes
of our contentions, which I have before pointed at be taken away, I doubt not
but our enmity would soon be changed into amity, and our bloody contention
into sweet affection.

That these evil causes of our civil contentions may be removed, Jeremiah, If
you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride: Mourn all
ye that are Gods hidden ones, mourn in secret for the open wickedness, the
pride, the selfishnesse, the sinful lusts which prevail in the land: Who can
tell whether Childrens tears shed in secret may not prevail with the Father
of mercy, for the removing of those public sins with which their righteous
souls are grieved from day to day.

The servants of God ought to mourn over these sins in special confessions
when they appear in days of solemn humiliation before the Lord At such times
the servants of God should with Ezra, take shame to themselves and lie in the
dust for these notorious sins, this pride, this selfishnesse, these lusts which
work our ruin; Ezras 9.6.7. Ezra. 10.22.
When Ezra bewailed the sin of the people God poured out a spirit of
reformation upon the people; were our public mournings serious, we might
find the Lord in his returns equally gracious.

Thirdly, Turn to the Lord (says the Prophet) take ye words unto you and
turn to the Lord, Hos. 14 2.
and say, take away iniquity, and receive us graciously, and we will offer to
thee the fruit of our lips. God takes away iniquity only for this his mercy
sake, yet will for this mercy be sought unto by his servants that he may afford
it; and therefore Gods people should fix their eyes on the Lord Christ, as that
mediator by whom their prayers are made effectual with their God and Father,
and then bend themselves to pray down, as much as may be in themselves and
others, these crying sins which are the causes of our public miseries.

The servants of God should endeavor the removal of these sins, Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.
First, a Christian is to look that he has no fellowship with works of
darkness himself, and then as occasion is offered to reprove them in others,
unto all which duties believers are made sufficient, not through their own
power, Phil. 4.13.
but as being able to do all things through Christ that strengthens them, and
were this course taken for the removing of these corruptions which are the
occasion of our miserable contentions, I cannot but believe, that we might
with abundance of comfort expect to have the spirit of virulencie cast out of
the land, at least wise so far cast out, as that it might not work so
desperately as at present, to the working of our ruin: And now though I know
that there are but too too many contentions in the land, yet give me leave to
press one contention more upon you, a new one; New things take, Oh that this
new motion might find assent and acceptance according as it deserves. I hope a
contention might be named which could like Aarons rod swallow up all those
other contentions which the infernal Master of Magicians has thrown in
amongst us; The contention, I speak of and move for, is this, that every man
would contend to go before each other in the example of a real reformation,
in regard of the forementioned and the like hateful and hurtful evils which
lie at the root of our contentions, and of all the miseries which do prevail
in the land. This Christian contention (might it once take,) would take up our
unchristian contentions at the roots, and bring us after all our tossings to
that fair Haven of civil rest where we would be. And now I would gladly
speak two words more to carry on yet further an endeavor for the removal of
our contentions, and for the promoting of an happy civil peace amongst us. The
first is this;

Let every one that can pray to the Father in the name of his Son, pray for
this blessing: I know many talk of prayer that know not how to go to God by
Christ to lay a prayer at his feet, I forbid not such to pray, not knowing how
far the voice of nature groaning under pressures may prevail with a
faithful and gracious Creator, but let every one that can pray in the name of
our prevailing Mediator, who has a promise of gracious audience, pray for the
peace of our ferusalem, pray for the peace of the land of our Nativitie and
habitation, pray for the peace of the Kingdom, and pray in faith. Despondencie
of heart deadeth pray^r, Jam. 5.15
faith in Gods power and faithfulness animates prayer. The prayer of faith
shall save (says the Apostle) in the way of isntrumental efficacy, that is;
effectually serve Gods saving mercy for the good of his people: pray therefore
earnestly all ye that can pray unto the God of Heaven, and pray in faith, for
this needed mercy of a civil peace to be afforded to our land; though I do
not say that such should pray in an absolute assurance of the particular mercy
presently to be enjoyed, yet they may and should pray in a faithful dependence
upon the power, goodness, and faithfulness of the God of Heaven; hoping that
the Lord who has done so much for us already, will at the length answer the
prayers of his servants, and crown their desires with that peace and civil
union which they groan to see established in the land, and in the Kingdoms
annexed unto it. One word more that this peace may be premoted.

Follow peace with all men, and holiness^. Universal peace is to be pressed
after as far as possibly may stand with due regard to holiness, Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord: This holiness here pointed at by the Apostle, I take to be the just
bound of that, (if it be possible) in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans. If it
^e possible as much as in you is, To. 12.18
live peaceably with all men. There ought to be in Gods servants (as far as
respect to holiness will bear) all possible endeavor to obtain and
maintain peace with all men. I press not this to interrupt the course of
judgment according to righteousness, Amos 5.24
may it ever flow, out like a stream in the land, and overflow all malicious
unreconcileable enemies to the peace and union both of this land and the
Kingdoms annexed whoever they be; but with this proviso, that the stream of
judgment according to righteousness may run in the channel of safe and
saving mercy as much as may be, Zac. 7.9.
considering that there shall be judgment without mercy, to him that shows no
mercy and mercy rejoices against judgment; As far as a due respect to
holiness, Iam. 2.13
and judgment according to righteousness does admit, there ought to be in all
a conscionable pursuance of peace with all men, and I suppose that a civil
peace can never be well expected in a Scripture way in this Kingdom, unless
the holy Ghosts counsel be followed herein; Now then for you that are the
Inhabitants of this great City (not to reproach you by ripping up any of those
flaming contentions which appear amongst you, the Lord avert the evil which
they threaten for his mercies sake) let me speak unto you as one that desires
seriously the peace and welfare of this place, be exhorted to pray for, and to
pursue peace with all those who are together with your selves Members of this
City, as far as a due regard to righteousness and holiness may possibly
bear. Do not you see that a sweeping destruction is ready to invade you at
the wide gate of your divisions? and let the Inhabitants of this land be
persuaded with due respect to righteousness and holiness to follow peace,
with all those that are together with themselves Members of this State. Let
every man in his place study to bring the Parliament, the Army, the City, the
several Counties, and if it be possible the King and Kingdom, the head and
Members of our State, into a bond of peace and love, that there may be a sweet
joining of all together for the mutual defense, security, and benefit one of
another, and for the good of the whole. And for those that are the Inhabitants
of the three Kingdoms, let them all be persuaded to pray for, and pursue a
stable peace betwixt the nations, that these three Lands may be as a threefold
Cord twisted together in the hand of Gods mercy, to such a strength as shall
not need to fear the force or fury of any public or common Enemy. It were
very happy if this speech of the Apostle in my text might generally ring
throughout the Kingdom yea throughout the Kingdoms, If ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye he not consumed one of another. There is a very
great danger of a common consumption, whilst men go on in so much particular
bitterness, fomenting civil divisions and contentions amongst themselves; It
was the Prophet Habakkuks complaint. There are that bring in strife and
contention: Hab. 1.3.
And are there not such amongst us? are there not such in the the Kingdom? in
the Kingdoms at this day? who like bellows filled with the arie of Hell, do
continually breath out lying suggestions, and studied intimations of grounds of
jealousy amongst brethren, for no other end but to blow up an everlasting
contention in the land and between the Kingdoms, that they whom God has
greatly blessed, may at the length be sadly ruined together? shall such men be
so diligent to divide and to de stroy, and shall not every man that soves God
and loves the Kingdom be awak^ned to press on, and pray for a peaceful union
of Parlialiament, City, Army, Country, Magistracy, Ministry? and (if God
have such a mercy in store for us) of him with all, whom we would be glad to
enjoy as head of all, in faithfulness and righteousness, that there may be an
union of all in the fear of God almighty, to be really assistant one to
another as fellowmembers of the same State, for the mutual good and benefit
one of another. I shall say no more to this point but what you find in the
epistle of James, namely That the wisdom which is from above, Jam. 3.17.
(heavenly wisdom) it is, First pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy, and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of those that
make peace. Mat. 5.9.
And blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
Therefore let all with a due respect unto the glory of the God of Heaven, in
maintenance of holiness and righteousness, (which I lay still as the
foundation and boundstone of our peace) be ever careful to promote and
maintain an universal civil peace in this and the annexed Kingdoms, which
may be the foundation of comfort and safety to us and our posterities. Thus I
come to speak

Unto the second kind of biting and devouring,

I do not bewail the zeal of any brethren, Jesus, against those wicked,
damnable, blasphemies, and heresies, and other notorious, errors which like a
smoke out of the bottomless pit, are ready overshadow our land; I know it is
the duty of believers and ministers in special to contend for the faith which
was once given to the Saints. Jude 3.
Nor

Do I bewail the Christian zeal of any, 1 Timothy 5.20
Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

Neither do I bewail the six'd steadfastness of the hearts of those who do
hold close unto truths, Ephesians: 4.14.
And to be tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: Stabilitie of
judgment becomes those that have received truths from the mouth of God Nor

Do I bewail the endeavors of those who desire and labor to see
Church Discipline, according to the word of God, established with vigor and
activitie in our land, for the purging out of old leaven, that we may be a new
lump according to the certain will and appointment of Jesus Christ by his
Apostles: 1 Cor. 5.7.
Purge out therefore the old leaven that you may be a new lump. I would not be
mistaken, as if I did glance in the least at any such practices which are
according to God, and which are according to the rule and direction of the word
of God. But that which I intend to speak of, I look upon as a sorrowful
subject, and such as no tears are sufficient to bewail; For there is beyond
all this, that insufferable rage and violent strife of tongues, that railing
and bitterness appearing in our land, amongst those who have good grounds to
build Christian love and union upon, that we have cause to blush, if not to
tremble, at the mention of it. I hope no man will say that this should be
concealed, I would it could be concealed, but the truth is, it is too late to
talk of concealing that folly which is openly laid before the eyes of the
world, by many of those, of all sides, whom yet I dare not give up as men
wholly destitute of unfeigned regard unto the living God: I will not discuss
how far grace may lie at the root of that zeal which fleshly corruption may
transport unto such a distemper as brings forth bitter railing against
brethren, that would be to long too speak of; But this I say, That whether it
be from grace in part, and corruption overcarrying it, or whether it be from
corruption only working under a pretense of grace, evident it is, that there is
a palpable and gross miscarriage in this kind amongst us at this day, to the
dishonor of God and to the reproach of the Gospel, and I doubt not but much
to the weakening of the hands and hearts of those that fear the Lord I shall
not adventure to press farther into this point, then I am sure you will or may
easily go along with me, in testifying the truth of what I shall speak: And
in this which I shall now bewail, I Will speak impartially, I do not know on
either hand which of the differing parties amongst us is more or less guilty,
in regard of the miscarriage so notorious in this kind: do not our streets
ring, and are not our stalls filled from day to day, with * Certain it is that
some books which had truth for their center, yet because they have wanted
temperance, modesty, and urbanitie for their circumference, have (to the great
prejudice of the truth) hardened the adversary in their errors; and by their
bitter invectives vvhetted them not only to defend themselves and to offend in
the like, but many times (being thereby urged to write) to defend the error it
self to the hurt of many which otherwise might have vanished away without any
contradiction.
books written with ink steeped in the gall of Hell, and printed in the most
unlovely Characters of bitterness and despite, it is so plain, posterities
will read the folly and madness of men amongst us. In this kind of men, I
say on all sides, who do in all their differences unhappily agree with might
and maine to slander one another; For whereas charity should cover a multitude
of sins, charity it self is covered, and many as if they were strongly
engaged thereunto, studiously lay out the offenses of brethren in print, with
some advantages, yea lay on offenses upon brethren with boldness, which no eye
(but that which is dazeled with envious jea lousie) no heart (but that which is
braced with malicious partiality) could ever have seen or adjudged them
guilty of. The miscarriage of many in this kind, at this time is such, that
charity it self is put oftentimes to the stresse, to be charitable toward
such men as do please themselves in such uncharitable practices: of this the
servants of God may justly say that it is a la^^^^tation, I wish it may not be
added, and shall be for a lamentation: Nor will recrimination serve to justify
any man in this kind. If one man be before another in bitter reprochings, that
will never justify the injured person in paying the rayler again in his own
coin, and rebanding those scoffs and scorns which cannot without shame
appear, or be made mention of amongst Christian Brethren. The rule of
Christianity will never ply to this practice: If one man be so mad as to fire
his tongue at Hell (for so the Apostle says of a wicked tongue that it is a
fire kindled at Hell) and then spit he cares not whom in the face with
scorching reproaches, Sir Ed. Cook 5. pt. ^ of his reports ad Lector.
in this case a Christian man is bound so far to tender his own esteem, yea
Gods honor, as in the words of meekness and of truth to quench, if possible,
the slander, that it may not blast his reputation and profession: But no man is
warranted to answer this spitfire just in his own hellish language, and to
strain again to raise such re^roches against him, as are likely to expose
both to common scorn. The rule for Christians is this, Romans 12.17.21
Render to no man evil for evil. Be not overcome by evil but overcome evil
with good. A man will say, why they provoke me? provoke thee! and was not the
Lord Christ provoked? he left his own example for us to imitate, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that Judges righteously. 1 Pet. 2.21
It were an happy and glorious victory worthy of a Christian indeed, to tread
such base revilings under foot, and scorn to meet any miscarrying brother upon
such a field, as they have cause to be ashamed once to appear in who are the
servants of that blessed master, who being reviled reviled not again.
Howsoever therefore I deny not, but that the servants of God may have their
several apprehensions in some Doctrinall or Practical points of Religion, and
in their difference not be able to meet, and in that distance be enforced one
to adhere to one, and another to another, judgment, and practice too, in some
circumstantialls of religion; may not all this be done in love, without
railing-bitternesse, without biting and devouring one another? Must teeth of
necessity come into the tongue-combate? Cannot it possibly be that Christian
men may argue either in word, or writing by the Scriptures of God, what is in
difference between them, but they must need turn unchristian railers, and
expose each other, and religion to boot unto common scorn? Great cause we have
in our saddest thoughts to bewail this in the presence of God, and to look
upon it as a hateful evil that does at this time strangely prevail in this
land. Many great pretenders to religion; there be now adays, the maine of whose
religion stands in sleighting and reviling all those as utterly irreligious,
who do not keep peace with them in what they call religion; and hence it is,
that so many religious persons (in their own esteem at least) do most
irreligiously break out into this wicked course of biting and devouring such,
whom a little love would teach them to call brethren: How glad would any
Minister of Jesus Christ be, might, he apply a remedy to this malady? I dare
not adventure upon any long discourse about this necessary subject, the time
will not admit it, but that I may briesly draw to an end, I shall tender to you
some Scripture prescriptions, and I would be glad that they may be said unto
mine own, and all our hearts, that this miferable distemper which is among
brethren may be removed. The rules are these

Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved,) bowels of mercy,
kindness humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, Col. 3.12
if any man bave a quarrel one against another, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do you, and above all these things put ye on charity which is the bond of
perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are
also called in one body and be ye thankful. Oh be thankful, let every one
that knows the Lord Jesus as his head, be thankful that he is called into one
body, with every one who is by the faith of the truth of the Gospel joined to
the Lord Jesus.

It may be that differing apprehensions, concerning some truths or practices of
religion, may arise beteewne him and some other persons, who do notwithstaning
(together with himself) hold fast the faith of the truth of the Gospel.

Let him yet be thankful, that he is brought together with them into the same
body, and then consider how peacefully and under what a strict law of love, it
becomes those to live that are fellow members of Jesus Christ and of one
another in his mystical body.

Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, 2 Rule. Phil. 2.3.4.
but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themselves,
look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others: Were self-love and self-seeking once brought to the grave, brotherly
love would soon receive life and a glorious resurrection amongst us.

Let us not be desirous of vain glory, 3 Rule. Gal. 5.26
provoking one another, envying one another. Might, Ambitions, Envyings, and
Provocations (which are the very soul of Church-Contentions) be laid aside
amongst brethren; Brethren I mean who have a good right to that name amongst
Christians, by holding to the form of sound Christian Doctrine, and to the
Worship and Ordinances of God taught in the Scriptures, (might, I say,
ambitions, envyings, and bitter provocations be laid aside) it would be a
blessed root of brotherly love, and Christian sweetness amongst us.

Let us consider one another to provoke to love and to good works, 4 Rule. Heb.
10.24, 25.
not forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner of some is.
Might unhappy separations be avoided, and might wicked railing contentions,
which tend unto wrath and enmity be laid down, and on the contrary side, the
Servants of God be induced instead of provoking to wrath, to provoke one
another to love and good works, we might no doubt expect a sudden change of
the face of the Church of God in our Land, no less glorious then of midnights
darkness into a noone-dayes brightness. Me thinks an answer might be taken
from this place to that Apology, which many are apt to make for their virulency
against Brethren, why say they; they provoke us to anger by words and actions,
and can we possibly live in love and peace with them? Grant all that these
pretend, say that brethren be so vile, so forgetful of their duty as to
provoke others greatly unto wrath, yet should not this put other Christian
Brethren from a serious endeavor according to their duty, to provoke even
those who provoke them to wrath to love, and to good works: And were this
carriage to be found amongst Christian Brethren, certainly we should see a
blessed and happy union of Believers effected in our Land, yea we should see
the Church of God amongst us to look out, as the expression is in the Song of
Solomon, Beautiful as Tirz^h, comely as Jerusalem, Cant. 6.4.
terrible as an Army with banners. If an Army be at varience in it self, no
Child needs fear them, but if they keep to their Banners, and march in order
and unity, an Army is terrible to the stoutest of men: So would the Church of
God amongst us be, if the Servants of God did according to duty, keep up unto
a blessed union and unity of love, affection, and tender regard one to another,
conscionably provoking each other to love, and to good works; This would make
the Church of God amongst us, Look forth as the Moon, clear as the Sun,
Cant. 6.10
and terrible as an Army with banners. I Will go no further, but leave all this
to Gods blessing upon your further consideration, desiring that there may be
some fruit of love, Civil love, and Spiritual love arising unto you from what
has been spoken this day: Consider of it seriously I beseech you in regard of
both unions, Civil, and that which is Religious, that division threatens
destruction, and embowelled contention utter ruin; I Will now therefore only
borrow the Apostles Incitation, you may call it his Adjuration for the
earnestness of it to the Philippians, and apply it to you according to the
present necessity; Phil. 2.12
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort in love, if
any fellowship in the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one
mind; If there be any thing of Christ, any thing of the Spirit, any thing of
love dear unto you, for these things sake I beseech you, that you would study
to have the same love, to be of the same mind, that you may be of one accord,
and may preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and now end all
with that valedictory advice of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians; 2 Cor.
2.13.
Finally brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of love and pea^e shall be with you.

FINIS.
Warner Major. Martis vicesim. die Junij, 1648. Annoque regni Regis Caroli
Angliae etc. XXIV.
IT is Ordered by this Court, that Mr. Goodwin, Dr. Chambers, Mr. Cadworth, and
Mr. Herle, be desired by Mr. Hynde from this Court to print their Sermons of
late made in Paul's Church respectively upon the Lords Day before the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and others there assembled: the same being very well approved
of, and thought fit to be published.

Michel.


