XII. RESOLVES CONCERNING the disposal of the Person of the KING IN A sharp
Reproof to a Rejoinder to three Pamphlets, published in defense of Mr.
CHALONERS Speech (Called, A Speech without doors, and said to be defended
without Reason) under pretense of the Vindication of the Parliaments Honor.
WITH A Declaration of the General Assembly of Scotland, concerning the danger
of Capitulation with those who have raised war against the Parliament, and
against receiving protections from, and Complying with the Cavaliers.

PROVE. 15. 26. (...) 2 TIMOTHY 4. 14. Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much
evil: The Lord reward him according to his works. (...). Polyb hist. lib. 1.
LONDON Printed by Jane Coe 1646.

XII. Resolves concerning the disposal of the Person of the King.
AS it may be said to the Parliament of England, as King Iehosaphat said to his
Senators take heed what ye do, for ye Judge not for man but for the Lord. 2
Cro. 19. 6. So for any ambitious spirit by evil Language to traduce, or by
Lihills, (...), to asperse any Member thereof, he that does so, gives a very
insufficient account of any faithfulness to that Parliament whereof the other
is a Member, (especially in any thing said or done before the whole House, and
by them approved,) And (what ever is professed) in times of trial, such will
prove like Nyssers Apes, (...). Greg. Nyss, de professi. Christian) for a
little honor or profit to himself.

Now for this Rejoinder, (who professes himself to be the same who writ the
Animadversions on Mr. Chaloners Speech) though he would have it granted that he
gave a good account of himself before, yet by examination it appeared to be
quite contrary, and this second (being audi^ed) is yet worse, as I shall make
it appear to those who will view the sum and substance thereof: In which I am
resolved on much brevity.

1. He says that the Scripture prefixed in the title of his Animadversions.
For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. Pro. 28. 2. Was
intended against Change of Government (driven at in the Speech) by the King,
and both Houses of Parliament.

1. Answer) this is a most false aspertion, Mr. Chaloners words were these,
First, settle the honor, safety, and freedom of the Common wealth, and then
the honor, safety, and freedom of the King, so far as the latter may stand
with the former, and not otherwise, which is according to the law of the 12.
Tables, Salus populi, suprema l^x. The learned Scotchman himself delivered his
opinion 2. years since; That there is no imaginable Comparison betwix: one man
with all his accidents of Prerogative and absoluteness, and three national
Churches, and Kingdoms: B^tter a King weep for a Childish trifle of a
prerogative, than Popery be erected; and three Kingdoms be destroyed. LEX.
REX. Quest. 25.

2. The Rejoinder says, that it is dangerous to have many void places in
Parliament, and so a frequent succession of many new Members, or to have the
chief Officers civil and millitary put in many new hands, if the persons
entrusted be not extraordinary well qualified.

2. Answer, This is pleaded directly in the behalf of those Delinquents that
have deserted their trust; for none else are outed the Parliament, (except
those that dyed) and in their places new ones are chosen. And for Officers, the
Parliament choose none (neither civil or millitary) but such as they conceive
are well qualified; Are such aspersions as these for vindication of the
Parliaments Honor?

3. He says that there is nothing in the Covenant, that obliges him to
mentaine the Law of the Land, as well as the person of the King.

3. Answer. I conceive that the Rejoinder has not taken the Covenant, but let
those that have taken the Covenant, read it; and see what they have sworn.

The King cannot but be subject to the Coactive power of fundamental Laws:
This is a fundamental Law, that the free estates lay upon the King, that all
the power that they give to the King, as King, is for the good and safety of
the people; and so what he does to the hurt of his subjects he does it not as
King, Qui habet potestatem constituendi, etiam and jus adimendi, l. nemo 37. l.
21. de reg jure. Is this paper then of his, to maintain the Laws of the Land?

4. Some things the Rejoinder refusing to dispute, I shall wave, and come to
the next thing he lays hold on, where I find him traducing the Parliament, as
if any man may as well tell any notoriou, lie, if he do it to assert the votes
of Parliament; As Mr. Chaloner; or any other Member may deliver their opinions
( upon the Votes) in the House. (And is this for the Honor of the Parliament?

5. He says that the Speech without doors (as he calls Mr. Chaloners) houlds
forth that the Kingdoms are contending, who shall not have the Kings Person.

And that this infers by consequence that the Parliament either did not
wisely, or not uprightly i^ voting that the Person of the King is to be
disposed of as both Hou^es shall think fit.

5. Answer, When the Parliament heard that the King was come to the Scots Army
in England; they voted their disposal of him, to prevent that harm which
might befall His Maj. in the Army. But afterward this personal being of the
King with the Scots begets a national dispute of his disposal between the
Kingdoms. The Scots claiming a right of Coacting with the Parliament therein;
yet declaring their opinions that his going into Scotland is not the safest;
Mr. Chaloner (in his Speech) puts the House in mind of so much of their
resolution, as conceiving it useful to take notice of; that seeing they
approve best of his being in England; who shall take care for the good of the
Kingdom, and the safety of his person therein, but the Parliament of England,
in whom the power is of treating and concluding for the good and safty of the
Kingdom, though the King be with their Army in England, and propound
otherwise; when Maccolumbut the 92. King of Scotland, would have admitted a
treaty to the hurt of that Kingdom, the Estates of Scotland said, non jus esse
Regi, nisi omnibus ordinibus consentientibus. And Robert the 100. in a
Parliament held at Scoone, was told by the Estates of Scotland, when he would
have made a treaty, that he could not judices facere nisi ex sententia
conventus publici.

6. The Rejoinder Recanteth for reporting somewhat spoken by Mr. Chaloner, in
the House, but not printed: confessing it was only a simple narration. And was
not this bravely done of him to asperse the Parliament, and traduce their
proceedings?

7. He will not be convinced how it can be, that a King of one Kingdom can be
a subject in another, except he cease being a King.

7. Answer, The King of Denmark, (being in league with England,) comes into
England, His Office, Scepter, Sword, and all his whole power remains still in
Denmark, though his Person be here, he is King of Denmark, but a Subject of
England; but this point has been sufficiently cleared already to those that
are reasonable men. And for the power of the King in Abstracte, and the man in
Concreto, Lex, Rex; is large upon it, in his 29. Question.

8. The next thing the Rejoinder falls upon, is about Commissioners of
Parliament sent to another State; who he says are exempt from the Laws, and
Jurisdiction of that State where they are Commissioners, and all his reason is,
that he will acknowledge them neither Princes, nor private men.

8. Answer. All the world may see, that this is mere Sophistry, and that he
uses these querkes, and insinuations to traduce the people. Have Commissioners
no rule to be ordered by in another State? then they are Princes absolute: have
they a Rule? then they are not exempt from that Rule. Is not this a wise
Statesman to write in vindication of the Parliament?

9. He still denies that Prince Charles is at the sole dispose of the State of
France, and affirms that it is like Treason to say that the Parliament cannot
by their lawful Authority recall him.

9. Answer, The Rejoinder might tell us how, and by what Law, the Parliament
can control the State of France in demanding the Prince. The Parliament is
very sensible of the ill consequence of his being there, and would fain have
him in England again. And shall this Gentleman accuse the Parliament that they
have a power to recall him and do not, (and yet pretend to write in the
vindication of the honor of the Parliament,) I appeal to all Lawyers and
Statesmen to judge, if this be not false and scandalous.

As for the instances of that King in England, as also of Ambassadors, (because
he waves it, as being something convinced;) I shall not reply to those things.
For that of Livius, concerning the Ambassadors of King Tarquinus, and so of
actions of States de facto, no wise man will stumble at it, that has his eyes
fixed on what is de jure: for so the case is argued.

10. From Mr. Chalenors words of the Lawyers in England, concerning King John,
if they should have yielded to the French, they knew well enough what would
become of the King of England. The Rejoinder argues, that in like manner if the
Parliament of England should justly dispose of our King, they should in so
doing dispose of the King of Scotland.

Ans. Had King John been personally in Normandy, the King of France would not
(probably) have sent into England about it. But he was freed from that power
by his personal being in England. The person of the king of England is in
England. Is this for the honor of the Parliament, to give them no more
relation to their Kings person in England, then a King of France has?

11. He moves for some overtures; as the King to come to London, the Scots to
go home, and the Parliaments Army to be disbanded, or sent into Ireland.

11. Answer. The Parliament out of their great desire to have the king to come
and remain with them, sent to his Majesty propositions from both Kingdoms, and
agreed for their pay and marching home. But for the disbanding of the
Parliaments Army, that must be left to the wisdom of the Parliament. For so
the Law, say wise men and the Law. Argu. l. Aliud 160. Sect. 1. De Jur. Reg.
l22. Mortuo de fidei. l. 11. 14. Ad mum. l. 3. 1. 4. Sigonius de Rep.
Judaeorum, l. 6. c. 7. Cornelius Bertramo, c. 12. Junius Brutus, Vindic. contra
Tyran, Sect. 2. Author libelli de Iure Magistrate. in Subd. q. 6. Althus
Politic. c. 18. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. Paraeus Comment. in Romans Peter
Martyr, in lib. Iudic, c. 3. Joan. Marianus de Reg. l. 1. c. 7. Hottoman de
Iure Antiq. Regni Gallici. l. c. 12. Buchanan de Iure Regni apud Scotos. Rex.
Lex. quaest. 21.

12. And for that Argument which he would have disputed, Whether the Scots are
bound to maintain the Kings person if the Parliament should wrong his person, I
conceive it needless to argue it, there being no fear of any such danger.

12. Answer. But do such Positions tend to the vindication of the Parliment; If
this Rejoinder be not an Incendiary, I know none. Yet give me leave in this to
vindicate our brethren, who have declared as follows.

Declared by the General Assembly of Scotland
Capitulations, and Protections, howsoever accoun^ed of by those who walk after
the wisdom of the flesh, are destructive to our Covenant, almost in all the
Heads, and Articles thereof: They tend unto the corrupting of Religion in this
Land, and obstructing the Work of Reformation in England, unto the
countenancing, and strengthening of the Popish and Prelaticall party, unto the
subversion of the due Rights and Privileges of the parliaments, and
diminishing of his Majesty's just greatness, and authority, unto the
withdrawing of Incendiaries, and Malignants from condign punishment, unto the
overthrow of the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, unto the deserting of our
Brethren, folloing of divisive motions, and denying to hazard or susser the
loss either of lives, or estates in the defense of the Cause, and them that
adhere there unto. We see not any strength of reason in that seeming necessity,
unto which many pretend themselves to have been redacted: If men could not have
retired from the fury and violence of the Enemy, or had not some probable way
of resistance and defense against the same, they should have taken it as an
evidence of the will of God, calling them to suffer, and give a testimony unto
his Truth. Our Covenant does no less oblige us to suffering, then to doing;
and it is the ignorance or ineff^ctual consideration of our duty that makes us
thus to wipe our mouths, as if we had done nothing worthy of rebuke: Neither
yet does it excuse, that some were not active to obtain Pro^ections, the
receving of them was to prostitute the chastity of that affection which we owe
unto the Cause of God, and could be no better then a bribe that blinds the eyes
of the wife, and hinders from doing judgment unto the afflicted.

The deep apprehension of their souls danger, moves us seriously, and in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to entreat all Temporizers, and Back-sliders to
remember whence they are fallen, and to repent: Let it not be a light thing
unto such, that they have despised the Oath of God, undervalued the precious
Truth of the Gospel, and drawn upon themselves the guilt of their Brethrens
blood, by forsaking them in their just defense. If the due sense of their sin
shall bring them to lament after the Lord, they may hope to find him gracious,
and merciful, to forgive their iniquity, and heal their backslidings: But if
they shall harden themselves, and continue in their provocation; they have
cause of fear, that the Lord of Hosts shall avenge the quarrel of his Covenant
upon them who have sworn falsely by his Name.

Yet is it not that those alone have cause to mourn; All the Land have done
foolishly, and provoked the holy One of Israel unto wrath: The Lord has been
glori^us in the midst of us; but who has regarded his work or considered the
opera^ion of his hands? Though he has been liberal in the offer of his love,
yet few have believed the Gospel, and studied to walk worthy of the same: Jesus
Christ has neither been known nor honored; who has valued him in the
excellency of his Person, or employed him in the virtue of his Offices? Holy
duties have been neglected, piety, and godliness reproached: Is there not
cause to lament for the Atheism, ignorance of God, blaspheming of his Name,
swearing by them that are no gods, intemperancy, uncleanness, deceit and
oppression that prevails too too apparently amongst many? And should not our
eyes run down with tears, because of jealousies, self-seeking, and obstructing
of Justice amongst our Judges? because of rioting, and excess, spoiling and
oppressing amongst our Soldiers? because of negligence, and prophanity amongst
Ministers? because of murmurings, and grudgings, deep security, carnal
confidence, neutrality, and luke warmness almost amongst all? The Covenant
which has been attended by a stately work of more then ordinary providence,
and sealed with many rich, and pre^ious blessings from Heaven, is by many
undervalued, and set at naught; nay, by some blasphemed, as an accursed, and
unholy thing. Because of those things, thousands have fallen by the Sword, and
ten thousands by the Pestilence: our highways are desolate, and our Cities
left without Inhabitants, the like has not bin heard in our days, nor in the
days of our Fathers: And yet the wrath of the Lord is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still. Oh that men were wise to hear the voice of the
rod, and who has appointed it: Shall we continue to tempt the most High, and
strive with our Maker, until he make an end of us? Let us confess our
iniquity, and be humbled for our sin; let us sow to our selves in
righteousness, and reap in mercy; let us break up our fallow ground, for it is
time to seek the Lord, until he come and rain righteousness upon us.

We cannot but from the sense of those judgments that lies heavy upon the
Land, and from that wrath that still threatens us, warn every man to repent,
and set on to duty. Let Rulers and Judges do judgment, and execute Justice
without respect of persons: Let Officers and Soldiers live soberly, do
violence to no man, and more mind the cause of God then their own advantage:
Let Pastors feed the flock of Christ in love, be zealous in advancing the work
of reformation, and purging of the House of God: And let every one in his
station, mind those things whereunto the Lord has called him. Though we be
afflicted and sore broken, yet if we return unto the Lord, he will have mercy
on us, and heal us: Has he not already begun to raise us up?

It is a mercy worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance, that in the day of
the power and pride of our cruel and insolent enemies, the Lord should show
himself glorious and mighty, to give victory and salvation to his people, when
our hopes were near gone. We were in a low condition, not only at the weakest,
but even at the worst, under the guilt of many provocations, repining against
the Lord, and hasting to the paths of the destroyer: Yet the preserver of men
had regard unto us, to keep us from destruction, and to ease and avenge us of
many of our adversaries, whose carcasses he made as dung on the earth in the
day of his fury and indignation. If after so great a mercy, any should be found
amongst us to turn away from the Lord, and again to submit unto, or comply with
the enemies of his truth, they could not but sin against their own souls, and
provoke the eyes of his glory until there were no remedy. We beseech all the
Lords people throughout the land, nay we charge them before God; and the Lord
Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the dead, to hold fast the truth in
love, to have regard to the glory of the Son of God, the excellency of the
Gospel, the sacred and inviolable bond of the Covenant, the beauty of the work
of Reformation, and the worth of a good conscience above all earthly losses and
advantages; and from the due sense and apprehension of those things, to arm
themselves with strong resolutions against all the degrees of backsliding, or
complying with the enemy.: That they be no mo^e as Reeds shaken with the wind;
but they may give a proof of their faith, patience, and courage, in the midst
of all the difficulties and straits which they shall meet with. Every one who
knows the Lord, will cleave to their duty, and wait for his salvation: He is
faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will
with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest too long upon the lot of the righteous. But
when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Zion, and upon
Jerusalem; he will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the proud enemy, and
bring down the glory of his high looks. Then shall all the haters of Zion be
astonished and confounded, but the Lords people shall be glad and rejoice in
his salvation.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

