THE CHARACTER OF A CAVALIERE, With his Brot^er SEPERATIST.

Both striving which shall be most active in dividing the two Nations, now so
happily, by the blessing of GOD, united.

PSALM. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.

LONDON, Printed for W. H. 1547.

(...) of Treachery, and cunning Contrivance, viz. when we began to look for
some happiness after so much misery, how cunningly did this Jesuit, this
Inc^ndiarie, this Malignant-Rebell, this Cavalier, thrust in differences to
divide us and our Brethren of Scotland, to which wicked ends how many trains
has he laid? how many Plots and Conspiracies undertaken, yet all invaine? how
many Satyricall Invectives have been by him published under the Notion of
Independency, when we could plainly perceive, that under this vizard there was
the inveterate Malice of our old Adversary, the Jesuited Cavaleere, which had
no other hopes to raise his fortune but by our fall, and make himself happy by
our ruin? which fault you have him here confessing, with all other his Crimes
and misdeameanors against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, doing penance in
a Sheet, and crying guilty of all the blood that has been spilt within his
Majesty's Dominion.

He confesses that he has been a Malignant Adversary against Church and State.

He confesses (how at last) that he has been such a stubborn^ wretch, that he
has rendered himself almost incapable of favor, notwithstanding all our
Parliamentary mercies, in offering and proffering pardon to him, if he would
come in and submit, before the day of mercy were past. 'Twere nihil ad Rhombum,
for me to relate up here how many such precious opportunities he has slighted
and neglected.

He confesses, that he has been such an Incendiarie, as ( Phaeton-like) able
to set the whole world on a fire: Truly I think his Epitaph suits not amiss
to this purpose.

" Sandys Transl. Ovid Metam.
Here Phaeton lies, who though he could not guide
"His Fathers Steeds, in high attempts he died.
I have observed many that write Characters, as Overbury, Curere, Shelton, etc.
But there is never any as yet met with the Character of a Cavalier. There was
one (they call him Cleveland) that writ the Character of a London Diurnall; in
which there was more of Wit then Honesty, more of Profaneness then Piety.

But to our Character: Here you have his poor Gentleman Cavaliere, but in one
sheet; whose greedy Ambition (not long since) scaree all the Wealth of Europe
could have satisfied; The East not the Well so be bounding his unlimitted
desires.

He Is the only man of all Memory, whose unworthy Actions will perpetuate his
Memory to ensuing Generations. His very Name will be odious; (...) when
Posterity (willing to cast a reflection on the deeds or their Predecessors)
shall find his name mentioned in our ^^^^lls; they ^^ll be inquisitive to know
the Nature of the Be^st: This Skellum, this Nigro carbone notatus, this
Monstrum horrendun. He is one that bares an universal Hatred against Unity,
and hates no Text of Scripture so much as (133. Psalm, 1 verse) Behold how
good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

And therefore he bears an immortal hatred against our Brethren of Scotland,
and there is nothing that sounds so harsh in his ears, as the name of Britanny:
What (says he) England and Scotland United? then there is no hopes: we have
cause to rejoice, that our Brethrens fidel^ty has frustrated their hopes, to
the eternal honor of that N^tion.

He cannot endure the very word Covenant, it is the worst Character that ever he
saw; that binds ^s together for maintaining and settling the Religion, Rights,
Laws, and Liberties of both Kingdoms.

He hates a Parliament, the very word p^ts him besides his Wits: Before this
Parliament was called, there was one of them heard say, (when there was talking
of a Parliament) Nay then we are undone, though ^alse in other things, yet a
true Prophet in this.

He says, He loves a true Parliament, which is (if he may be his own id est)
a Junto, an Oxford Parliament: or such an One that would claim no power, a
(...) Parliament, that may only give advice and Coun^ell.

He hates slavery above all things, and so he hates himself: for he sold
himself a slave to baseness. The King he says may take away whatsoever he
has, and dispose of men's fortunes, persons, or estates at his pleasure,
without the controlment of any humane power. Which must do nothing against
him, (though never so wicked) coercive, but all directive: All our Arms must
be Suadeo, Rogo, Hortor, (...), quaeso, etc. And if he be in an error, he may
make new ^awes to defend that error. If he will murder us, if banish, if i^
prison, or confiscate our Estates, stone, or behead us; there is none may say,
Quid Agis? What do thou? This is his ordinary Discourse, and that that proves
a Paradox to another, he takes for a granted Truth.

But to speak of some thing that he loves as well as hates.

He has an indifferent good conceit of Q. Elizabeth, and stands for the
Religion (as established) in the days of Queen Elizabeth's sister.

He has a better opinion of the Spaniard then formerly the English use to have,
in regard he hopes he will contribute some help to the Catholic Cause in
Ireland.

He loves peace (at any rates) now he sees he can no longer prolong the
wars, and railes against us because there is no peace; no matter for Truth,
that being a thing he^ never met with in all his plundring Progress.

And for Military Affairs, as he hates the Militia so he loves the
Commission of Array, which Arms the Subject against himself, and puts a sword
into his hands to dig out his own Bowels.

He was (when Oxford, Bristoll, Exeter Worcester, York. etc. were under the
unhappy power of his command) of a stout stomach, haughty, proud, desperately
audacious not enduring to be subject to the severity of Laws. The reason why I
dip my Pen in Vinegar, and fight against him with my Quill (that fought against
us with his Sword) is that of Tertullian, Contra hostem communem omnis homo est
miles; Every one will be an Enemy to a common Enemy.

Consider his out-ragious cruelty against his Inseriours, how he devoured his
fellow Subjects, offering of many thousand spightfull indignities to their
persons, by which he has made himself odious to all good men. He is the
Monster of the world, from whom (still) to be delivered we should do well to
make it a branch of our deprecation. His very name one time was as formidable
as now odious. Their armies (for the most part) consisted of a Miscelany of men
from all strange Nations Walloons, French, Dutch, Redshanks, Irish-Cath^^^^^
having onl^ the outsides of men, and scarce th(...) (...)e^^est mercies were
extreme cruelties; the Characters of which, one that run^ ^^ay read, upon
those unfortunate Garrisons that were under their Commands, plainer then in
this Character; in which (as in a little Map) there is not room for the
description of small places.

The Laws of Nature and Nati^ns (...) A^^ ^^^y of Positive and written Laws,
the laudable Customed and Liberties of England, (to which we are all born) were
by the Rapines Plunders, Murders, Extortions, and Exactions of this
Malignant-Rebell subverted and trampled under foot.

And now we talk of Liberty, let us take Liberty a little to Characterize the
Libertives of these times, who take Liberty of practice to act those things
that modesty (...) me conceal.

With this Cavaliere I might also picture for the homebred Enemy, that is a
little nearer to us, and is as active, as ever* H^, only our unhappiness does
not break forth in open A^^^^ but the hatred (he conceives against us) is so
great, that if should Characterize that, (instead of the man) you would rather
admire me, then believe me.

And his great design that he has drove of late has been how to divide the
two Nations, England and Scotland which if they could have done, their errors,
heresies bla^phemies schisms, and divisions would have crept in to every
c^rner of t^^^ ^^nd.

I could here show it under their own hand-wr^ting, and bring in a Black
Catalogue of their Books, many in number, that even the very Titles of them (if
care^ully collected together) would swell it self, with some few enlarg^ments,
into a reasonable volume; all which they have used as so many fatal Engines
and Plots, first to divide us here at home, and so make us miserable, and then
abroad to hinder all Union or Covenant with our Brethren, for fe^re in it there
be a Clause against Errors, Heresies, and Schism^^; and so add more
unhappiness to our Misery, by adding Oil to augment the flames.

But if these flamee of Contention be not cautiously and timely prevented,
they will prove more fatal to our Churches and Kingdoms then all the former
dissentions, especially (if it proceed so far) that it breaks forth into a
new Civil (...) amongst but selves, now we have totally vanquished the
C^^mon-Enemy, the Cavalier enemy.

Both of them have been very active by their Machivilian policies to divide us,
but it is a happiness they were permitted but to mark us out for Ruin, and
were not able to accomplish that that their malice had intended; for certainly;
if we that are now (so happily) United, had been, (or should be) divided, we
should set open a gap to let in the old exploded Prelacy, and Episcopacy, or
introduce the more feared Anarchicall Hydra, or Babel of Independency.

Of this latter there are a nest of the vilest Vipers, that ever Afric or
Nilus did produce. You have the Anabaptists, the Brownists, the Adamites,
Familists, the profane Libertine, with the Envious Hypocrite all masking
themselves under the Vizard of Independency: A Generation that if long
permitted to increase, will Viper-like eat out the Bowels of their natural
mother, the Church of England.

If this spiritual Yoke come upon us, we may sooner bewail it, then remove
it: Let us therefore with the Apostle endeavor to quit our selves like men.
Gal. 5.1.
And so I end my Character with the beginning of the 5. Chapter of Paul to the
Galatians: Stand fast therefore in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free and be not again ent^ngled with any Yoke of bondage: with the Yoke of
slaverie that the first part of my Character set forth, nor this of the latter.
Newfangled flattering Sectarisme; from both which to be delivered, (and that
we may observe a golden mean) there is but few but will say. Amen.

FINIS.

