A SCOURGE FOR A DENN OF THIEVES.

Master, is it I^ Mar. 14, 19. Matt. 26.22.25.

LONDON, Printed by J.C. for the Author, 1659.

A SCOVRGE FOR A Denn of Thieves.
DO we live in an Age that it is a shame to speak the Truth, or Danger to
Proclaim the Glory of God?

Let the Children of him that was a Murderer from the beginning, and a Liar, (
Joh. 8.44.) Let them that make a Lie, believe a Lie, ( Rev. 22.15.) Let them
that believe a Lie love a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

The Truth is, JESUS CHRIST IS THE ONLY ONE LAWGIVER.

To others may be Legislative Powers many; 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.) BUT TO US THERE IS
BUT ONE LAWGIVER, who is able to save and to destroy. ( Ja. 4.12. Isa. 33.22.

Eliah was but one against 450. 1 Kings 18.22. And Micajah but one against
about 400, 1 Kings 22.6, 8.13, 16.

Behold, I Peter Chamberleu, Doctor in Physic, do once again bear Witness,
That if the Laws of God be set up, in the Name and Title of the Laws of God:
And the corrupt Laws of our Heathen and Antichristian Forefathers, and of our
more corrupt Lawyers and Courtiers be abolished; There shall be more equal
Distribution of Justice, even concerning Meum and Tuum (besides other Matters)
in one year than has been done these 500 years by Kings, Parliaments,
Councils, Armies, or People, by all the Laws of men; and all People shall rest
satisfied.

But if men go on to prefer Man before God, and to prefer the Laws of Men
before the Laws of God; I do hereby Testify, That my Soul is guiltless of the
OATH that lies upon the whole Land, wherein both Parliament, Army, and People
were engaged.

I said in Print, If Public Goods and Lands were sold, the Parliament would
remain in Debt: and the Soldiers unpaid, AND IT IS SO.

I said in writing, That God would Chastise the Parliament, AND IT WAS SO; for
this Men thought me Mad.

I lost four years Attendance on the Parliament for the Public Good; yet I had
many Friends amongst them. I lost both Houses, Lands and Goods by Committees,
and Officers of Parliament and Protector: I lost the Rewards and Wages due to
me from the late King; yet have done service unto all without Recompense. I ask
none, but the fruit of mine own Labors, which is not yet granted. 'TWAS GOD
MADE ABRAHAM RICH. Genesis 14.23. and 14.1.

LET MY VOICE AT LAST BE HEARD.

We shall not need to envy Holland for Trade, nor the Indies for Wealth.

There need be no complaining in the streets, nor Soldiers want Pay.

We shall no more feel the oppression of Taxes, Assesments, or Excise, but
there is Remedy for all; And 500000 li. at Stake for performance: If yet we
forbear contriving the Public stock into private Pockets; and set up a
sufficient employment for all Poor: And make an Everlasting, Honorable,
Well-grounded Peace, with the Uuited Provinces, by countermining the Jesuits of
both Nations, and advancing Trade; All which, may well be done: And for which
the Pawn of 500000 li. shall be laid down (which is more than King or
Parliament, Protector or Committee ever laid down for their fidelity, without
the taxing of the People; though they have been trusted with Millions and
Millions, and the Work no forwarder than you see this day.

Nevertheless, Shall faith be found on Earth? ( Luk 18.8.) or English Lawyers
destroy English Laws? Thy Kingdom come (O Lord) Thy Will be done on Earth, as
it is in Heaven. ( Matt. 6.10.

Salus Populi Suprema lex

If the Parliament, whom the Lord has hitherto Honored with the Authority, or
the Army to whom God has vouchsafed the Power of the Reformation we now enjoy,
are pleased to take this Scourge into their hands, and grant what tends
thereto, without injury to any: I will undertake upon my Life, to bring those
that will lay down the 500000 pound, and engage much more, that the things
herein mentioned shall be performed in every Punctilio; But if they will
neither do it, nor accept of it, nor suffer it to be done, then for certain,
God will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he come to whom the Right is.

I am not ignorant how difficult that work must be, which has been the
Engagement of Parliament, Army and Protector: yet not effected.

I am not Ignorant what sum of Money must be raised yearly, to keep the
Officers and Soldiers, and Navy, in constant Pay and maintenance.

I am not ignorant what a vast sum it is to offer 500000 li. Advance.

I am very sensible how highly Men in Power will Resent it, if I should fail of
my undertaking, and all men beforehand will give out their several Verdicts.

I am very sensible, how my life is exposed to the fury of the Soldiers, if
they want their Pay.

I am no less sensible, that I cannot escape the fury of the People, if once
they have Tasted the sweets of Freedom, and be again betrayed or entangled into
Bondage.

Nor am I ignorant how contemptible the thing it self may be for my sake,
Though, give me leave to ask one Question, Whether, if I had fed as fat upon
the Public purse and kept back mine own, and could as easily dispense with
Engagments as some Wise men of this Nation, who were once less than my self, I
might not have been as wise, and as soon believed as they?

But I am very well assured, that this very Proposition will be my Witness in
the Day of the Lord; that I have been faithful and no Liar, but have spoken the
Truth from my heart, and have not hid my Talent in the day of Trial, though I
have long kept silence, waiting when others, more near the Helm, would
accomplish the Work.

Therefore, if accepted, I desire all Treaties may be in Writing and Printed
that no misprisions might disadvantage the Good in ended; and that all the
World may Witness, whether the defect shall ly in me or others.

The Postscript.
Whilst the Leaden Letter walks slowly to the Press, I hear of JEALOUSY stepped
in between the Parliament and Army, Commissionating her two Favorites (the
invisible Jesuit, and long incensed Malignant) to Divide both Them and their
Spoil. Machiavel is admired for his Learned Dictate; of Hypocrysie, and she
walks confidently both into Churches, and Councils of State in all Countries,
till at last advanced to Power, she grows weary of her Mask and discovers her
Face; But JEALOUSY inspired with Fatal Prophetic Fire, consumes the Thrones of
Kings, and Coins their Crowns into Thorns: making the boldest Tyrants fearful
to enjoy what once they longed for, and lose what through Labor, Blood and
Perjury they have obtained to.

Often with prophain Feet she Tramples on the chastest Beds, and cruelly converts
them into Graves, making the dearest friends the greatest enemies.

O Jealousy, What have thou done? Rather, what have thou not done in England?
But the wisdom of God is above all.

It Is Jealousy does threaten the Soldier a disbanding, to provoke his Power.
It Is Jealousy reminds the Parliament of their long interruption to inflame
their Authority. It Is Jealousy bids the People remember their manifold unjust
Plunders and Taxes to affright them with a decay of Trade, Poverty and manifold
Miseries, till that (despairing) they hearken not to Moses, though he foretell
their Deliverance.

I know my self despicable and despised. And many had rather perish than be
saved by my means, though forced to follow some of my former Counsels.

I know the Work Great, Difficult, and Terrible.

Yet, Oh yet! let Aaron's Censer divide between the Dead and the Living; What
is past cannot be Amended. Who can recall yesterday?

The noise of 500000 li. may fright all the Usurers in Town, lest I mean them;
and turn the Scriveners (as once) a grazing.

The noise of maintaining an Army of 30000 Men, and a Navy of 100 sail of
Ships, and maintaining a swarm of Poor besides, shuts up the Tradesmans shop,
and locks the Merchants Coffer for fear lest I mean them.

But to resolve the doubt; Does any think it impossible for 500 noble,
well-minded, godly men in England, each to advance 1000 li. a piece, to Redeem
Themselves and their Posterity eternally from slavery and Taxes, and be repaid
in time their own again? Or do they suppose, All my numerous acquaintance so
inconsiderable, that I know not where to have the sum, should the number be
wanting? I have already 50 Worthies in London, but Doubts and their former
sufferings, have cautioned them as yet to conceal their Names, lest a Snake may
be in the Grass and a Hook in the Bait: There has been such fishing for Money
these many years.

Were it impossible to unite these 500 Worthies in Counsel (when this Paper
has purchased a good report) that they may first debate the weightiest
matters: And so offer them to the Parliament and Army, for a better Stamp of
Power and Authority. Then Treat with Agitators for all the several Regim^ts of
Soldiers, to condition their Pay, employment and maintenance; And with
Trustees for all the several Shires, about employing the Poor, and taking off
all Taxes?

Shall the industry of Holland maintain a constant Army by Land, relieve All
comers, welcome All strangers, set out a formidable Navy at Sea, Oppose and
weary the richest Kings in Europe, having neither Fire, Water, Earth, Air,
Iron, Wood, nor Stone, etc. to boast of? And shall we fear to maintain our
selves, who have all these in abundance!

MAN ONLY MAKES MAN MISERABLE. It Is God makes all things good. I have said.
Nor will I further Court Men to their happiness:

Though neither Parliament, nor Army, nor yet the People will believe me, Shall
they hate me for my good will? My Treasure is above. God is my exceeding great
Reward.

O ENGLAND! SIN NO MORE LEST A WORSE THING COME UNTO THEE. Joh. 5.14.

FINIS.

