A SERMON Preached at the PUBLIC FAST the tenth day of May 1644. at St Mary's
OXFORD, BEFORE The Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS There Assembled.

By R. CHALFONT B. D. and Fellow of Lincoln Coll. Printed by their Order.

ZEPH 37. I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction, so
their dwellings should not be cut off, howsoever I p^nished them, but they rose
early, and corrupted all their doings.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall to (...) 1644.

Martis 21. Maii 1644.
By the Committee of COMMONS resident during the Recesse.

ORdered that Mr Constantine give thanks to Mr Chalfont for his Sermon Preached
at Saint Mary's the last Fast: and that he desire him to cause the same to be
printed for the public good.

Noah Bridges.

JER. 44.10. They are not humbled even unto this day --


AT the very reading of these words, the parallel is so obvious, me thinks I
hear many asking the question with a little change which the Eunuch once did
of Philip Act. 8.34. Of whom speaks the Prophet this? of us, or of some other
People? The truth is, in the letter and history it is spoken of the Jews, but
so Symbolically of us of this nation, that your own thoughts would apply them,
should I hold my peace.

This whole Chapter may be entitled Novissima Jeremiae, Jeremies farewell
Sermon to the Jews. For if we mark the Prophetical story, it is the last
extant, and (if the conjecture of some be good) his last too, that for which
well nigh after 45 years preaching amongst them, he was stoned to death by the
People. In it we have just matter to raise both our attention and wonder, and
that whether we respect the Prophet, or the People; indeed there is nothing of
this Prophet but it is wonderful, his Calling, ordained to be a Prophet before
he was borne; his sufferings, Jer. 1.5.
he was (...), as Pelusiot calls him, never man took more pains with,
deserved better of, and was worse used by a people; in this a lively type of
him whose name was wonderful, Vir dolorum, that suffered great contradiction
at the hand of sinners: but above all the invinciblenesse of his spirit, his
Heroic Zeal and constancy in the Cause of God and for the good of the
People, greater then to be discouraged by the opposition of men, or the
extremity of misery. He had now survived the Funerals of the Temple of God,
and his own Country, and lived to make the sad Elegy upon the desolations of
both, and after all this was carried away by the violence of a Rebel multitude
into a strange accursed land: Calamities that might have allayed, if not quite
quenched the spirit of any but Jeremiah: but such a spirit as his knows not to
be discouraged, an express character whereof he has given us in this Chapter.

But yet the wonder is far greater, if we look upon the People, whose ears if
any thing might have opened to discipline (as Elihu speaks, Job 36.10.) and
made them sensible of their sins, they were written in letters of blood, they
might have read them in the ruins of Jerusalem Here the Prophet having opened
his Commission, verse. 2.
takes his first rise. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have
seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the Cities
of Judah, and behold this day they are a desolation, and no man dwells
therein, because of their wickedness -- though I sent all my servants the
Prophets riseing early and sending them, saying, Oh do not this abominable
thing that I hate, etc.

To sin after so Solemn Interdiction, and warning to the contrary by the
concurrent voice of so many Ambassadors, All the Prophets sent from God to that
purpose, and those dischargeing their duty with so much Zeal and solicitude;
had left them without excuse. To sin after the example of so terrible a
judgment as that upon Judah, the History whereof stands like the carcasses of
Ships that have suffered wrack at Sea, to forwarne all passengers of the
danger of those Sands, at which they were cast away, or like that Inscription
upon the Tomb of Senacherib, slain by his own sons in the Temple of his
God, (...) Oh all ye that pass by look upon me and be holy. All ye that
hear, and read of my calamities, be afraid, and tremble, and do no more
presumptuously: I say, to sin after the warning of such an example, adds a
higher gradation to sin. There Is no man, whose head is not of brass and his
heart of Adamant, that can read the Tragoedy of Jerusalem with dry eyes.
Nazianzen tells us of himself, Ora^. 12.
that he never took the book of the Lamentations into his hand (and yet this,
says he, I do often) but his heart was even quite overcome with symphathy and
his eyes with tears, (...), and he again lamented over the Lamentations of
Jeremy. But to persevere in the same sins after this Vidistis their own
sight and feeling of those woeful expressions of Gods wrath, when the eye
should have affected the heart, and left the lasting impressions of fear upon
the soul; to commit the same abominations still, which had provoked divine
vengeance, to the utter destruction of their own Country, while themselves
bare the visible Characters of Gods fury upon them, this indeed sets their
impiety, their Rebellion in praecipiti, upon the very Pinnacle and top of
sin. Here the Prophet mounts his Battery, if possibly he may make a breach
upon their stony hearts and at last force them to repentance. Therefore now
says the Lord the God of Hosts the God of Israel. Verse. 7.
Wherefore commit you this great evil against your own souls to cut off from
you man and woman, child and suckling out of Judah, to let none remain? In
that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands in the land of
Egypt, whither ye are gone down to dwell, that ye might cut your selves off
and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the Nations of the earth?

Therefore Now says the Lord, etc. Now after all the demonstrations of mine
indignation against you, in such Judgments as were never the like, Wherefore
commit You, this great evil? You that are the poor remnant of those so many
thousands of of Judah, as it were a Firebrand snatched out of the Funeral Pile
of that once flourishing Country, and reprived from the Ruins of your Nation;
whom I would have preserved for my names sake, unwilling to extinguish and
quite cancel the people and the name of Israel, had you consulted your own
safety under my protection: Wherefore do you by your obstinacy provoke my
Justice to your own destruction? Why will you perish whom I would preserve?
Have you no remorse toward your own souls? are ye willing your souls should
perish eternally? Have you no pity upon your Wives? or if you and they, as much
united in guilt as Conjugall Contract, will dye together in the same sins,
have ye no compassion upon your poor Infants, those innocent sucklings that
have not as yet contracted the guilt of your Rebellion? Are ye content there
should remain no other remembrance of Judah but only of your sins and my
wrath? would ye willingly stand as an eternal monument to the whole world of
divine Fury, a reproach and a Curse: So that posterity shall make mention of
your name only in their solemn Execrations, The Lord make thee a Curse, and
an astonishment, as he did Jerusalem and Judah? Or what do you flatter your
selves with hopes of impunity in Egypt? do you think to find security in that
place, whither you have carried down with you my Curse, and your old sins? is
Jerusalem destroyed, and shall Egypt go free? Have all my Judgments upon you
been like the beating of the air by the wings of a bird in his flight, that
leaves no footsteps or remembrance behind him? Have ye forgotten the
wickedness of your Fathers and of your Kings? Have your Fathers, nay your
Kings, been made to drink deep of the cup of my Fury, and shall you escape,
who were kept alive only because ye were the poorest of the people? Cannot all
the Calamities you have suffered bring you upon your knees, and melt your
hearts into contrition for your sins? I should have thought that the long
tract of time and the severe discipline I have used, might long e're this day
have led you quite home to repentance. But alas! what shall I say of you? you
have not even to this day so much as set one foot in the way thither. Nondum
humiliati, all the Judgments you have suffered, have not made any, no nor the
least impression upon you; God himself seems amazed at this, and to be at a
stand, as well as the Prophet, and to want an expression to reach the height of
this obstinacy, and therefore breaks off in an admiration at the desperate
perverseness of this People by way of Epiphonema in the words of the Text,
They are not humbled even unto this day.

These words are Onus Iudae in terra Aegypti. The Burden of those Jews, who
contrary to Gods prohibition, and their own protestation, were gone down into
Egypt. In them you may please to observe with me these three particulars. 1. A
duty implied, the performance whereof the great Judgments of God so long upon
them called for all their hands, and the want whereof he here upbraides to them
by way of admiration, and that is Humiliation, they should have been humbled.
2ly. The neglect of that duty censured, They are not humbled. 3ly. The
Aggravation of that neglect; 1. from the persons guilty They the Jews, Gods
own people, that could not pretend Ignorance of their duty, nor of the equity
thereof. 2ly. From the Circumstance of time, even unto this day. Time they had
and teaching enough to have learned their duty: but yet after all instructions
and invitations thereunto by the tenders of mercy, all comminations against
them for their obstinacy; yea moreover and not only after some scatterings of
wrath upon themselves in lesser Judgments, but also after as dreadful a
Tempest of vengeance as ever fell upon a people; Even unto this day. They are
not humbled even unto this day. These are the parts of the Text, the sense
whereof may be resolved into these three propositions.

1. From the duty implied, that which this people ought de jure to have done
when Gods hand was against them in those terrible Judgments, the Inference is.

That when Gods wrath is revealed from heaven against a 1 Propos.
people, in the way of his Judgments, it is high time then for them to be
humbled.

2ly. From the neglect of this duty, in that the Jews de facto in their
greatest distress, under the sorest Judgments, were not humbled, I conclude,

That a people in outward Covenant with God, 2 Prop.
may even under the extremity of the greatest Judgments remain unhumbled.

3ly. From the aggravation of this neglect, both in respect of the guilt it
lays upon such a people in this verse, and the wrath it draws down upon them
at the next, The Result is, 3. Propos.


That it is the highest aggravation of the sin of a people, and an evident
token they are designed to ruin, not to be humbled under the mighty hand, the
great and continued judgments of God. They are not humbled even unto this day,
neither have they feared nor walked in my Law, nor in my Statutes that I set
before you and before your Fathers, therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel, Behold I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off
all Judah.

But should I insist upon all these propositions severally, I fear I should
graspe more matter, then I should be able to hold within the compass of the
time; should I omit any, I might seem to trespass upon the Text. I shall
therefore take a middle way to reconcile both, pitching upon the first as the
head stream, the other two as the lesser into which it runs, that, as
bearing the inscription of this days duty, for the doctrinall part of this
days exercise; the other two will fall in, either by way of proof, or
Application

In the handling of which, I shall endeavor to follow St Hieroms counsel to
Nepotian, Ita docere, ut non clamor populi, sed gemitus suscitetur; so to
speak as to provoke the tears, not the applause of my hearers; such thoughts
are unworthy to ascend this mount at any time, much less at this; words
conceived only in the brain and born in the lips of the Speaker, for the mos
part dye upon the ear of the hearer; they which come from the heart are
likeliest to descend thither; To feast the ear by an eloquent discourse this
day, were to break the Fast while we are at the Church. The ear and the eye,
every member of the body, and faculty of the soul, must bear a part in this
days affliction, as well as the belly: The golden eareings were the matter of
which the golden Calfe was made, 'twere an abomination to bring them into the
house of mourning. The children of Israel, in the day of Gods displeasure and
their sorrow Exodus 35.5. were commanded to pluck off their Ornaments, that God
might know what to do unto them, till then they were not so much as in a
posture for mercy; sackcloth and ashes are the best Ornaments, sighs and
tears the best Orators of this day; could I but mourn out a Sermon, and you
sit before the Lord this day weeping, it would be best preached and heard; the
word sown in tears would be reapt in joy; then might we hope that this Fast
would prove a blessed Eve to some glorious Festival; the dismal cloud of
wrath that now darkens the whole land, and almost every day falls down in
storms of blood, would blow over, and the sun of Gods favor, which is now
hidden, shine forth; that we (which the Lord in mercy grant) and this whole
Nation might see the salvation of our God. I come now to the point.

When Gods wrath is revealed from heaven against a Nation in the way of his
judgments, then it is high time for them to be humbled.

For the carrying on of which point, I shall propound and endeavor to resolve
these 3 Questions.

1. What it is to be humbled, and consequently, what the sin is of which the
Jews stand charged in the Text, they are not humbled?

2ly. Why it is said that when Gods Judgments are upon a people, then it is high
time for them to be humbled? These 2 in Thesi.

And 3ly In Hypothesi, to put our own Case, what cause we of this Nation have
to be humbled at this day? Having dispatched these, I shall then, by Gods grace,
close up all with a seasonable application.

For the first what it is to be humbled?

I answer that it is not to be understood passively, in this sense never
Nation more humbled, then they in the Text, they were humiliati a Deo; a people
formerly exalted in Gods favor above all other in the world, indeed they were
his only by way of eminency and distinction, His people; but now not only
degraded from that dignity, but exposed as the greatest object of contempt and
wonder. How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and
remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger! Lam. 2.1. All the
Chronicles in the world cannot match the sad downfall of this People. Peceatum
humiliaverat, sin had taken off their Crown from their heads and deprived
them of their exellency they were humiliati, but not humiles, ipsi se non
humiliaverunt they did not humble themselves, it is an active humiliation the
neglect whereof is upbraided here unto them, and of which God and the Prophet
complain, They are not humbled even unto this day.

This active humiliation, or self humbling, implies 3 things, 1. A sense both
of sin and the punishment, a tenderness of heart opposed to that the Greeks
call (...), in Tertullians language Duricordia, the hardness and
unmalleablenesse of heart, incapable of any horror of sin or impressions of
wrath, that (...) or indolentia, stupidity, and desperate senselessenesse of
our hand against God, and his against us, when though the fierce wrath of God
lies upon us, yet we feel it not, Heb. 12.^.
a despising of Chastisement, a not laying to heart of our own ways and of
Gods, our sins and his judgments, a stupidity frequently charged against
this people; one place only I shall mention, it comes home to our present case,
Esa. 42.24, 25. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did
not the Lord? he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law. Therefore he has poured upon
him the fury of his anger and the strength of battle: and he has set him on
fire round about, yet he knew not: and it burned him, yet he laid it not to
heart. Here is a perfect and full Character of an unhumbled people, to lie
under the guilt of the greatest sins, and the pressure of the sorest Judgments,
and yet to remain insensible of either, not to lay them to heart.

2ly. Contrition, Tremelius and some others render it nondum attriti, and upon
our own Margent, according to the Original, (...) a radice (...) contrivit,
comminu^^.
we have contrite for humbled in the Text, They are not contrite even unto this
day. The heart is then humbled when it is broken in pieces, hence those two
phrases are joined together in Scripture, Psalm. 51.17.

The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a contrite and broken heart [cor
contritum and humiliatum] O Lord thou will not despise. It is called an
abhorring of our selves in dust and ashes, in Job's phrase; a rending of the
heart, in Ioeumll's; a being in bitterness, in Zecharie's; Afflicting of the
soul, in Moses; Confusion of face, in Daniel's; a laying of the mouth in the
dust, in Ieremie's; it is called Compunction, or the pricking of the heart,
when sin becomes as a thorn in the spirit, and as a dagger at the heart; it
is said of Saint Peter's hearers, Act. 2.37. That they were pricked at the
heart; when the heart is smitten within, and the thigh without, Ephraim's
posture, whom we find Jer. 31.19. thus bemoaning himself under his
chastisement, Surely says he, after that I was turned I repented, and after
that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confounded
because I did bear the reproach of my youth. When the inward grief of the
heart does express it self outwardly in sighs and tears, the affliction of
the soul in that of the body by those (...), as Is. Pelusiot terms them,
Fasting and Sackcloth. I clothed me with sackcloth and humbled my soul with
fasting: Psalm. 35.13. When the soul and the body, which like Simeon and Levi
were confederates in sin, shall sympathize in their sufferings, and exercise
a mutual revenge upon themselves for the offenses they have done; when with
David, we shall wash that bed with our tears, which we have defiled with our
sins; when those eyes which before darted out rays and sparkles of Lust,
shall stream forth waters to wash, and those hairs curled and frizl'd up to
provoke dalliance, shall hang down to wipe our Saviors feet, as Mary
Magdalens: In breife, when the soul comes to be surprised with the horror of
it is own guilt, and the fear of Gods Judgments, and is more afflicted with
bitterness at the review of the dearest and most adored sin, then ever it
was affected with delight in the commission of it.

The 3d thing implied in this active humiliation, is a taking of shame to our
selves, and giving God the glory of his Judgments, according to the Counsel of
Ioshuah to Achan, My son give God the glory. Jo^. 7 19.
This is called the confession of our sin and acceptance of our punishment,
as in that signal place, Lev. 26.41. (a place very worthy our notice, as in
which we may read, both our duty and hopes in this our present distress,) The
Lord having there mustered before the Children of Israel a whole Army of
plagues, which he threatens to let in upon them in case of disobedience, and
from time to time to recruit against them with the vast accession of new and
seven times greater calamities in case of Rebellion, opens a door of hope unto
them, even in the very worst condition, If they shall confess their iniquity,
and the iniquity of their Fathers, and their trespasses which they have
trespassed against me, and that they have walked contrary to me, and that I
also have walked contrary to them, and have brought them into the Land of their
enemies; if then their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then accept of
the punishment of their iniquity, Then I will remember my Covenant, and I will
remember their Land. An humbled spirit is most severe to it self, translates
not the fault upon others, much less charge God with severity. Job. 7.20.
I have sinned, and what shall I do unto thee oh thou preserver of men? says
Job upon the dunghill. He puts his mouth in the dust, says Jeremy, if so
be there may be hope. It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, Lam 3.22.
and 29. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it, says
David, Psalm. 39.9. Rehoboam his Princes and people humbling themselves, though
God threaten to leave them in the hand of the Egyptians (now come up with a
great Army against them) yet acknowledge The Lord is righteous, 2 Chronicles. 12. O.
O Lord to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to
our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee, [was the confession of Daniel
setting his face to seek God by prayer and supplication with fasting, and
sackcloath, and ashes,] but to our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against him, Dan. 9.8.9. I will bear the indignation
of the Lord, (says the Church in Micah,) because I have sinned against him,
Mic. 7.9. It is the course of some of our Courts of justice, that the
delinquent after sentence can obtain no mitigation of his punishment, nor
discharge from his imprisonment, till he acknowledge his offense and the
justice of their proceedings against him; this may seem hard, it is possible in
the Courts of men the innocent may suffer, no injustice possible from the Court
of heaven, It is the rule of that Court, no relaxation, or mercy to be expected
thence till we confess the demerits of our sins, and the righteousness of
Gods Judgments; and therefore the Prophet David held this course in the
confession of his sins and supplication for pardon: I acknowledge my
transgressions, and my sin is ever before me: against thee only have I sinned
and done evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou
speak, and clear when thou judge. Psalm. 51.3, 4. The Lamenting Prophet in
that Sea of wrath let in upon Judah, gives God the glory of his justice. Lam.
1.18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. And
this he does by way of Proclamation too. Hear I pray you all people and behold
my sorrow, my Virgins and my Young men are gone into captivity. It is the Lord
says Eli, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3.18. This acceptance of
their punishment was imported in the posture of the penitents standing before
the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 20.13. N^hem. 9.2.
It is storied of Mauritius the Emperor, that when his children were murdered
before his eyes (as once were Zedekiahs before his) and himself after received
the sentence of death, he cried out Iustus es Domine, and rectum judicium tuum.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments. These the speeches,
this the deportment of an humbled spirit: And thus much in answer to the first
Question, what it is to be humbled, the neglect whereof stands here charged
against the Jews. They were not humbled unto this day.

I proceed to the 2d. Why, when Gods judgments are up. on a people, then it is
high time for them to humble themselves?

For the satisfaction whereof, I must desire you to take notice that after sins
committed there are 3 seasons for a man or Nation to humble themselves.

The first immediately upon their Commission, this indeed is (...) the best
opportunity, repentance in the Fathers language is, (...), the great medicine
to salvation, and we know that a Sovereign remedy will speed the cure, if
applied while the sore is fresh. It Is in the wounds of the soul as those of
the body, those that are long delayed are healed with more pain and
difficulty. That humiliation never miscarries of the blessing, which (as Jacob
did Esau) shall take sin by the heel; when they shall come as twins into
the world, sin the first borne shall be destroyed like those of the
Egyptians, and the elder not only serve the younger but as Joseph's brethren, or
like Dagon before the Arc, shall fall down before him. Alexander being asked
how he made himself master of Greece returned answer (...), by making no
delay; should we put the same question to David, and demand how he obtained
pardon for his sin in numbering the people, he would make us the like answer,
by not deferring to humble himself, no sooner was the fact done but his heart
smote him. 2 Samuel 24.10. This was Saint Peter's season after the abnegation of
his Master and perjury. The Cock crew, Jesus looked back, and Peter
immediately went forth and wept bitterly Matt. 26.75. (...), the same night was
conscious both to his sin and repentance, his wound and his cure. Chryshom.
53.
This indeed is the handle of opportunity, the lock of time to humble our
selves; and blessed are they that lay hold upon it.

The second season of humiliation is then when the conscience convinced of
sin committed, begins to be affrighted with the apprehensions of wrath,
when the soul comes to see its guilt and is afraid of Gods judgments, and
therefore makes have to agree with God offended while he is in the way, and to
stop the Decree of wrath before it come forth, this opportunity deserves it is
praise, but (as it is said of some of David's worthies) in the second place. That
person under the Judicial Law, that being guilty of man slaughter recovered
the City of refuge, before he was overtaken by the avengers of blood, saved his
life, so shall that man that nation theirs, who understanding themselves in
danger of Gods wrath by reason of sin shall fly to the throne of grace and by
unfeigned contrition lay hold upon the horns of the Altar, before the
messengers of wrath have laid hold upon them. But unto the King of Judah which
sent you to enquire of the Lord, thus shall ye say unto him, because thine
heart was tender and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou
heard'st that I spoke against this place and against the Inhabitants thereof,
that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have rent thy clothes
and wept before me, I have also heard thee, says the Lord. Behold therefore, I
will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place, it was spoken of good King Josiah. 2 King. 22.19.

The third and last opportunity for a people to humble themselves, is when the
Decree is broken forth, and the wrath of God is actually upon them, when the
smart of the rodd makes them sensible of their sin, as it is said of Israel
Ps. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and enquired early after
God. This was Mannasseh his season, as vile a wretch as ever breathed upon the
earth, a very prodigy of wickedness yet when he was in affliction, when his
chains were upon him then he sought the Lord and humbled himself greatly. 2
Chro. 33.11. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself. Prove. 22.3.
Sees the Calamity in it is commination and prevents it in the threatening; sees
it first, and, as it is said of the man and the Basiliske, kills it by having
the first sight of it; while the cloud of wrath is but like that of Eliah, a
hands-breadth, foresees a tempest, and makes have for shelter. (...), a fool
will be instructed while the rod is upon his back; children when they smart
will cry and beg, and promise never to do so again. The rack of a great
Plague will extort a confession from obstinate Pharaoh. I have sinned this
time, the Lord is Righteous and I and my people are wicked. Exodus 9.27. When
the judgment is not only at the door, but entered into the house, Quis rogo
interfici alterum juxta se videt and ipse non metuit? etc. Salv.
and shall take away one here, another there, and all are in danger, will not
every one be afraid? If the Lion roar, will not the beast tremble, much more
when he shall come and seize upon his prey? Is it not time for the whole Town
to come in when their houses are on fire, with water to quench it? It was high
time for Aaron to stand in the gapp when the Plague had made a breach upon the
People. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer and put fire therein from off
the Altar, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an autonement for
them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. Numb.
16.46. Such cases as this admit no delays, as Messadamus was wont to say of
himself, Know no to morrow: a little neglect here may undo a Kingdom, (...),
serious things to morrow, cost him dear that spoke it, both his life and
Thebes. In such times as these, who knows what a day, some few hours may
bring forth? Sodom and those sister Cities had a fair morn, the Sun rose
gloriously, but never had people in the world a more terrible day. High time
therefore it is when Gods hand is exalted in the way of his Judgments, for a
people, a Nation, to humble themselves, The necessity thereof will evidently
appear from the consideration of these particulars.

1. That the sound of this Trumpet is the last summons God gives a Rebellious
people, it is the last Flagg that he hangs out, if they submit not and yield
then, nothing to be expected at Gods hand but utter ruin. It is storied of the
victorious Tamerlaine that great scourge of the Ottoman Empire, that when he
advanced against any Town or City, so soon as he was set down before it; the
first day his Tents were all spread with white, a color of Clemency, importing
to them that if they would presently surrender they should be received into
Mercy; if notwithstanding this tender, they should yet stand out against him
the next day his Pavilion was clothed with red, a color of blood, to give them
to understand his severity; If neither of these two prevailed for a surrender,
the third day the same Tents were all hung with black, to let them know that
now all overtures of mercy were past, and that now they must expect whatsoever
calamity the fury of a conquering enemy could bring upon them. Such a course it
is that God holds with a sinful people, according to the rule he himself gave
unto the Jews in their wars Deuteronomy. 20.10. He first proclaims peace, holds
out the white Flagg, summons them to repentance by the tenders of mercy; Go,
says the Lord, and proclaim these words toward the North and say; Return, O
backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am
merciful (says the Lord,) and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you.
Ier. 3.12. If this gentler invitation prevail not upon their love, he next
sends forth his Rod-Herald to make such a summons as may work upon their
fear; Hear ye the Rod and who has appointed it; Micah. 6.9.
This is Gods Red Flagg, and the last he holds out to sinners with conditions
of peaces: If the Rod cannot teach a People their duty, nor the severity of
Judgments upon the Land instruct the Inhabitants in Righteousness, if a
Nation remain deaf at the thunder of Gods loud voice, this obstinacy
obstructes all the doors of hope, all the passages of mercy, God hangs out
against them the black Ensign of desolation.

Secondly, Obstinacy under Judgments raises a sin to the very height, it
fills up the bag, and compleats the measure of a peoples iniquity, and leaves
sin incapable of greater aggravation. In the fourth of Amos God sets forth the
sin of Israel arrived as it were at the non ultra of sinfullnesse, further
then which it could hardly go; that notwithstanding the variety and extremity
of the greatest Judgments upon them they relented not, nor returned unto God;
it is the burden of every charge by a patheticall scheme which the Rhetoricians
call Epistrophe or conversion, there five times repeated, Yet have they not
returned unto me, says the Lord: I have sent among you pestilence after the
manner of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken
away your horses, and I have made the stink of your Camps to come up into your
nostrils, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have overthrown
some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand
plucked out out of the burning, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord. Oh this Yet has an Emphasis, an Accent upon it, and makes sin carry an
infinite weight in the balance of the Sanctuary: They are not humbled even
unto this day, after all the experiences of divine Fury, heightened the Jews
sins beyond an expression. To relapse into the same offense after punishment
doubles the malefactors guilt, and deprives him of the Favor of the Judge; but
to sin upon the rack, under the plague, while Gods marks are upon them,
renders sin almost incapable of forgiveness. O Lord are not thine eyes upon
the truth? thou have stricken them but they have not grieved, thou have
consumed them but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their
faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return, Jer. 5.3. It follows
at the seventh verse. How shall I pardon thee for this? Oh there is a
transcendent malignity in that sin which God that is infinite in mercy, as it
were knows not how to pardon! The Psalmist mentions it as the greatest
aggravation of the Israelites Rebellion against God, that they sinned yet more,
by provoking the most High in the wilderness, a place wherein God had given
them so many ocular demonstrations of his indignation against their Rebellion,
Psalm. 78.17. yea it is added (if it be capable of any further degree of guilt)
The wrath of the Lord came upon them and slew the fattest of them, and smote
down the chosen men of Israel: yet for all this they sinned still, verse. 31,
32. There is only one place more I shall mind you of, I beseech you to lay it
to heart, I almost tremble to recite it, because I greatly fear, and I am
persuaded, your own hearts will bear me witness this day, that the guilt of
that sin lies heavy upon the most of us: the place is Isa. 22.12. and some
verses following. In that day (viz. a day of trouble and treading down, and
perplexity by the Lord of Hosts, as it is called verse. 5.) did the Lord of Hosts
call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloath, and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep,
eating flesh an drinking wine; eating and drinking for tomorrow we shall dye,
And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye dye, says the Lord of Hosts.

ly. Not to be humbled in times of distress is the Character of a hopeless
People, the black mark upon a man or Nation designed to ruin. It is the
property of the damned in Hell, to be tormented and sin, to be tormented and
to blaspheme God, because of their torments. To be more obstinate under plagues
and to drive on then in sin, when God takes off their Chariot wheels, and
declares himself manifestly from heaven against them, is the sign of a
Pharaoh's heart, and of that people that God will drown in the red Sea of his
wrath. For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they
seek the Lord of Hosts, Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and
tail branch and rush in one day, Isa. 9.13, 14. This is a Nation that obeys
not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives correction, Truth is
perished and is cut off from their mouth. Cut off thine hair, oh Jerusalem,
and cast it away, and take up a lamentation upon high places, for the Lord has
rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. Jer. 7.28, 29. A Father that
after all gentle ways frequently tried without success, at last finds his
child obstinate under the rod, gives him over as a lost child. A Surgeon
that after all corrosions and lancings and mutilation of joints, finds the
Gangrene to spread further into the body, looks upon his patient, as hopeless
of Cure. And King Ahaztrespassed yet more in his destresse; and the Holy Ghost
points him out to the world as an eternal object of reproach and wonder* This
is that King Ahaz! as if he had said, Oh all ye that pass by, did ye ever
hear of such a man as this? did ye ever read of one whom the sense of
judgments embitter'd into the height of impiety? why this is the man. This is
that King Ahaz. These severer remedies are the last course God takes, if that
fail, Conclamatum est, the case is desperate, you may write upon their Gates,
THE LORD HAVE MERCY UPON THEM. The Lord shall smite Egypt, (says the Prophet
Isaiah,) he shall smite and heal is, and the shall return even to the Lord,
and he shall be entreated of them, and he shall heal them. Isa. 19.22. Gods
Rod (as it is said of Achilles spear) has a virtue to heal those wounds it
makes. Now how the Lord smote Egypt to heal it, we read at the 2d verse of
that Chapter. I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall
fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbor, City
against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom. The Example applies it self. This
one would think a strange course, to make whole by dashing in pieces, to bring
things into order by confusion, to reconcile by dissension, to raise up the
happiness of a people upon the foundation of a civil War. Yet this is the
course sometimes of the great Physician of Nations, who can bring light out of
darkness, and allay the most violent poison into an Antidote: he will smite
and heal them. if this way succed not we may conclude then that their wound is
grievous and their bruise incurable, Ier 30.12.

The Scripture sets forth this Method of Gods dealing with Nations under the
type of sundry most expressive Metaphors; Hos. 6.4.5. O Ephraim, what shall I
do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? I have hewn them by my
Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as
the light that goes forth. A Trope taken from the Mason or Carpenter who does
square and cut the stone or timber to make it sit for the building, or such
purposes as they are designed to by the Artificer, unto which if after all
their pains they prove useless and unserviceable, then he throws them away
as good for nothing, and I have slain them by the words of my mouth. The
Prophets I have sent, have denounc't against them all the curses in the book
of the Law, and declared to them that they are but dead men, if they perservere
in their sins, yea moreover, and thy Judgments have been like the light
that goes forth. Thou Lord have made known thy displeasure against them in
the sight of the Nations; but they like men have transgressed, they have dealt
treacherously against me* God having ran his whole course with them, seems not
now as it were to know what further to do. O Ephraim what shall I do unto
thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? The Lord in Ezekiel. 24.3. sets forth the
desperate filthiness of Jerusalem by a pot whose scum could not be consumed;
the Prophet there is commanded to set on a pot* Set it on and also pour water
into it, and then to put in the best pieces of flesh, and every choice bone,
and after that to make them boil; when this course prevails not to get out
the scumme, the Prophet from God pronounces a Woe against it. Wherefore thus
says the Lord God, Woe to the bloody City, to the pot whose scumme is therein,
and whose scumme is not gone out of it. But yet God does not give it off here,
there is one course remains yet to purge out the scumme, and that he takes, if
any thing can do it it is that: He commands the Prophet to empty the pot, to
make the pile for fire great, to heap on wood and kindle the fire, and then to
set the pot thus empty upon it, that the brass might be hot and burn, that
the filthiness might be molten in it and the scumme consumed; now because
after all this her filthiness remained, and her great scumme went not out of
her: The Lord concludes her as an incurable City under that dismal sentence,
at the 13 verse. In thy filthiness is lewdness; because I have purged thee and
thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more,
until I have caused my fury to rest upon thee; The Prophet Jeremy yet further
illustrates the desperate estate of that people whom the extremity of distress
cannot reclaim from their wickedness by a most apposite similitude taken from
the Refiners, who by melting their metal in the fire make a separation of the
good metal from the dross. Jer. 9.7. I will melt them and try them, for what
shall I do for the daughter of my people? as if he had said, If there be any
thing sound or of worth in a drossie cankred people, it cannot be preserved,
but only by melting them in the furnace, this currupted Nation cannot
otherwise be saved but only by the fire. Now with how great labor and
exactness God performs this trial, the Prophet expresses Jer. 6.28, 29.
where he brings in God complaining against Judah. They are grievous revolters
walking with slanders, they are brass and Iron, they are all corrupters, the
bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder melts in
vain, for the wicked are not plucked away. Malitiae little non sunt consumptae,
their wickednessees are not consumed and purged by the refining fire of Gods
Judgments. Their iniquity is so incorporated that though the bellows be burnt,
(i.e.) the voice of the rod as well as the Prophet made hoarse and quite spent
with crying unto them to humble themselves, the lead used for the separation of
the dross from the better metal was all wasted in the fire, yet they were
not purified, their dross did still cleave unto them; no extremity of calamity
could part them and their sins, and therefore it follows at the next verse.
Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

Fourthly, God does especially observe the several deportments of the
inhabitants of a land when his judgments are upon them; his pure eye runns to
and fro to see how men stand affected, and to take notice what men do, and say
in the times of distress. It was a fearful visitation which God threatens
Judah with. Ier. 8.3. where the prophet tells them, that so great should their
calamity be, that Death should be chosen rather then life. at the 6 verse he
represents God as it were going from City to City, from house to house, and
from company to company, and there listening to hear what the people would do
and say in the day of their fears. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright, no man repented him of the evell, saying, what have I done? They spoke
happily much, (as God help us too many now) but they spoke not as they should;
they spoke not aright, for they repented not of their wickedness, no man said,
what have I done? What a paucity is there in the world who in times of
distress speak that which God expects and desires to hear? amongst all the
talk of the times how rare is that of repentance, the err of tears, and the
voice of weeping, those sighs and groans which the penitent soul sends up to
heaven as Ambassadors to the throne of grace for mercy? How few such speakers
as the Prophet Malachi mentions? Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one
to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of Remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. Mal. 3.16. Where shall God find a selfe-humbling, selfe-condemning
sinner, who sensible of his own guilt, says, What have I done? Beloved, that
great God, before whom all things are naked, that knows the secrets of all
hearts, is present amongst us at this time in the midst of the Temple, and sees
with what devotion or with what want of it we stand in his Courts, he takes
notice how the pulse of every one of our hearts beats, there is never a thought
which he marks not, never a sigh fetched in private but he sets down in his
book, never a tear shed in our Closets that he saves not in his bottle; he
observes too who stands off and comes not in this day to afflict his soul, as
if he had no sins to procure the Judgments that are now upon us, or no sense
to feel them. There Is never a person carowsing at the Tavern, nor swearing in
the streets, no Zimri and Cosby acting their Lusts, none idle or happly worse
employed in the house, when the Assemblies are mourning at the Church, that he
observes not. Never a sin this day committed but he seals up in his bag,
the sins that at other times might be mitigated by an excuse, committed on
this day grow into a presumption beyond an Apology, God writes them in Capital
Letters with a pen of a Diamond; he does at all times abhor a proud and
unhumbled soul, such a one this day is an abomination, the soul that is not
afflicted at such times as this, shall be cut off from the people; a contrite
and broken heart is the only sacrifice that can propitiate him in this day of
atonement. If we consult the sacred Records, we shall not find a more perfect
Register of any thing then of such, both persons, and People, as humbled
themselves under Gods mighty hand stretched our in Judgment against them, and
of such as at these times remained obstinate and impenitent; those he remembers
to their advantage, and mentions with praise, these he records with
indignation, and sets a stigma a brand of infamy upon them, for their lasting
reproach so long as those sacred monuments shall remain in the world; I can but
point at one or two instances of many. In 2 Chronicles. 32.25. we read of Hezekiah,
whom God had miraculously recovered from a dangerous sickness, and granted 15
years more to his life, when his term was expired, that he rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him, for his heart was lifted up, therefore
there was wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem. Notwithstanding Hezekiah
humbled himself for the pride of his heart (both he and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem:) so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of
Hezekiah. In the next Chapter we have the story of the unparalled wickedness
of Manasseh his Son, and how vanquished, by the King of Assyria, he was carried
away captive in fetters to Babylon, and there when he was in affliction how he
besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly. On the other side it
stands as a perpetual blot upon the name of Amon the son of Manasseh, that
though he had sinned as his Father had done, yet he humbled not himself, but
Amon trespassed more and more. And upon Zedekiah chap. 36.12. that he did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself
before Jeremiah the Prophet speaking from the mouth of the Lord. Examples in
this kind would swell beyond the time. I hasten.

5ly There Is nothing in the world can stand in the gapp to stop God marching
against us in the way of his Judgments, and keep out a Torrent of wrath
flowing in upon a Kingdom, but only the humbling of our selves. Our eyes for
the most part in times of distress like Solomon's fools, Prove. 17.24.
are at the ends of the earth, we look upon our forces abroad, and our
fortifications at home, like those in Isai. 22.8. that in that day did look
unto the Armories, made up their breaches, drew in their waters, broke down
their houses to fortify the wall, enlarged their trenches and let in the
poole; and these things are not to be neglected, but here was their fault, and
I fear ours, they looked not to the maker thereof, they had no respect unto
God, no care by the humiliation of themselves in weeping and mourning, (a duty
which the Lord of Hosts called for at their hands at that time, as the only
means of their safety and preservation) to make him propitious to them, to
appease his wrath, and engage him for them, who if he keep not the City, the
watchman watches but in vain. it is our God that is the Pignus Imperii, the
Palladium, and Ancile of our Cities. While we enjoy his protection and
presence, we may not only say of them as they did of Sparta, that their men
were their walls, but our God, salvation will the Lord appoint for walls and
bulwarks. no weapon shall prosper against the City that is defended by God;
he will send Armies from heaven to fight for us, when we have none in the field.
They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
Judge. 5.20.
The river Kishon swept them away, even that ancient River, the River Kishon.
Half a Regiment with Gideon, when God goes General with them into the field,
shall be more then enough to discomfit the whole host of Midian. he can strike
the besiegers with a Panicke fear, and make them fly at the only imagined
noise of Horses and Chariots. On the other side, if God be against us, it
availes not what our provisions, and fortifications be, or how many thousand
are for us. All the Castles, and Bulwarks, and Armies in the world cannot
protect us, from God as an enemy. Aiguanus tells us of a Prince, who being
called in by the Inhabitants of a City to their assistance, and the rather to
persuade him, being assured that the place was verytenible, well provided, and
fortified; The Prince returned answer desireing to know whether their city
were covered above, so that Gods anger could not fall from heaven upon them;
signifying unto them, that it was a vain thing to hope to secure themselves in
the strength of walls, and the help of men, while sin laid them open to the
wrath of God. The sins within are more to be feared, then the enemies
without. (...) was a voice heard from heaven by the Tyrant Phocas, who thought
after all his villainy to preserve himself by the impregnablenesse of the
place; wickedness is within, the City shall be destroyed. I read of a people
that, when Alexander sent unto them to know what it was they most feared; (he
supposed they would have said himself.) but they answered, that they were most
afraid lest heaven should fall upon them: and indeed this is most to be
feared, lest the wrath of the God of heaven fall upon us; after all our
fortifications we lie open to heaven, and there is no way to secure our selves
from an enemy thence, but by humbling our selves. Humiliation has often made
up the breaches, when a whole nation has been ready to be overwhelmed by an
inundation of Judgments. As Abigail once did David, it appeaseth God in the
height of his fury; it stands as the Rain. bow that God has set in the
Clouds, which whenever he looks upon he relents, and will not drown that
people in a deluge of wrath. Non potest orbis cadere, que^ lacrymae sustentant,
says S. Austin; the tears of contrition they are the Pillars of a Kingdom,
the props that sustain and bear up the world that it does not fall into it is
primitive confusion, Humiliation is that sure Anchor of hope which has saved
the Church, and State from wrack, in the greatest tempests upon both. God has
obtained his end when he sees us prostrate upon the ground, and yielding our
selves, his indignation does not fall so low, he cannot exercise vengeance upon
them who revenge sin upon themselves, nor destroy them that lie down at his
feet, and cry for mercy. 2 Chronicles. 12
They have humbled themselves, says the Lord of Rehoboam, and his Princes,
therefore I will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be powered
upon them by the hand of Shishach. Go, says the Lord to those Commissioners
Ezekiel. 9. Set a mark upon them, that they may be spared in the day of my wrath;
They are mourners, they cry out for their own and the sins of the Nation. If
my people that are called by my name shall humble themselves, and pray, and
seek my face, and turn from their evil ways; I will hear from heaven and
have mercy, I will pardon their sin, and heal their Land. 1 Chronicles. 7.14. We
have an exellent example to this purpose in the 10th of Judges. The children of
Israel fell from the service of God to the service of Idols, God sells them
that will not serve him to be slaves to their enemies, who vex and oppress
them full 18 years, (a long bondage,) this the condition of the people on the
the other side of Jordan; and it is like to be as bad with those on this side
the river; The enemy is upon his march with a mighty Army: The People in
distress fly to God for assistance, and receive a cold answer from him, such
as might have discouraged them from all hopes of deliverance; for first he
upbraids them, with those many deliverances he had wrought for them already.
Did not I deliver you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and the Amorites, and
the Children of Amen, and the Zidonians? etc. as if at this day he should
answer us of this place. Did I not deliver you from the Tyranny of the Pope,
from the Spanish Armado; and the Gunpowder-treason? from the many plots against
the persons of your Kings, and the peace of your State, from the fury of the
pestilence, and the terror of death in sundry battles of late? Yet have ye
forsaken me; and then concludes he will deliver them no more, but bids them go
to the Gods they had chosen, and let them deliver them in the time of their
trouble. In this case what ground had faith upon which to stir up importunity
to ask, or hope to expect salvation and deliverance, when as God had flatly
answered them that he would deliver the mno more? Why, yet this hope they have
still. The Lord is merciful, he has been entreated to forgive when he has
purposed to punish, and to save when he had resolved to destroy. It may be
their sighs and tears and prayers may overcome Gods resolution, and move him
to deliver them, though he has said he will deliver them no more. How e're
they are resolved to throw themselves at his feet, if they must die they will
die there, if he will not help them in their distress, they cannot find any
fault with him, they have deserved no favor at his hands; if he will see them
destroyed he may, but their hope is that notwithstanding they have been a
disobedient people, yet the Lord will look upon them now as an humbled people,
and have compassion upon them. And they said unto the Lord, we have sinned, do
thou unto us as seems good unto thee; deliver us only we pray thee this day.
And to their humiliation they add reformation, for it follows. They put away
their strange Gods from them, and now mark the success with God; why his
heart is as it were melted into pity toward them, for, says the Text; His
soul was greived for the misery of Israel; and against his former declaration
crowns their submission with a glorious victory.

In the last place, it will appear evidently as a truth written by a beam of
the sun, that there is great cause why a people, when Gods hand is stretched
out in wrath against them, should humble themselves, if we do but consider how
glorious and dreadful that God is whose hand is exalted in Judgment, and how
vile creatures we are; and what a terrible thing his wrath is, and how impotent
we are to stand against it. His Majesty is so excellent, that the most glorious
Seraphinis dare not behold it, but through the veil of their wings, and then
too dazelled with admiration, cry Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the
whole earth is full of his glory. Isa. 6.3. Never yet had mortal man, even the
most innocent, any glympse of that glory, but did presently humble and abhor
himself. Woe is me (says the Prophet Isaiah at the 5. verse. of the Chap.) for
I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of
a People of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts. Much more cause then have a sinful people to be abased, to be
astonished, and to tremble, to meet him in the way of his judgments, the
infinite depth of whose wrath no created understanding is able to fathom. The
wrath of a King, says Solomon, is as the roareing of a Lion, when the Lion
roares who will not tremble? Prove. 19.12.
Yea but this is the wrath of a God, this speaks an immensity, an
infiniteness, we cannot conceive. Judge. 8.21.
As the man's is, so is his strength; as God is so is his wrath; it is a wrath
that does virtually, and eminently contain all the terrors of the Creature. We
read of strange exquisite torments the Cruelty of Tyrants have invented, these
all are but shadows to the effects of his wrath. The scripture gives us some
adumbrations of it by such resemblances, as speak it to be a most terrible
wrath. It is compared to fire the most active and terrible creature; the
Philosopher tells us that nothing can live in that Element; and our fire, in
respect of that, is but like the fire that is painted upon the wall, and yet
the poor creature must live for ever in it, God upholding it that it may feel
the power of his wrath, Isay. 30.33.
to a River of fire and brimstone; that carries something more with it: The
deluge of water was very dreadful, it drowned a whole world, but such a flood
of fire and brimstone, how horrible would that be? and what are the proudest
sinners to stand before it, who are but as stubble? why, it carries away gates,
and walls, and Castles, and Kingdoms, and Heaven, and Earth, and all with it.
The earth shook and trembled, the foundations of heaven moved, because he was
wroth, 2 Samuel 22.8. and shall poor man that is crushed before the moth be able
to oppose himself against it? Can thine heart endure, or thine hands he strong
in the day, that I shall deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Have thou a hand to
resist it, or an heart to bear it? one drop of that wrath falling upon them,
will turn the sun into darkness, and the moon into blood, and make the
stars drop down from heaven; one sparkle thereof shall set on fire the
Heavens, and the earth, Matt. 24.29.
the whole frame of nature, and burn down to the bottom of Hell. Lord, who
knows the power of thy wrath? For according to thy fear, Deuteronomy. 32 22.
so is thy wrath. says Moses Psalm. 90.11. Melancholy apprehensions will fancy
strange fears, but imagination it self falls infinitely short of the power of
Gods wrath. should God take and set a man upon hells brinke, that he might se
the torments, and hear the cries of the damned there, his understanding
certainly would be much enlarged to conceive, but yet never able to know what
is the power of Gods wrath. O consider this and tremble, ye that do not only
sin down, but pray down this wrath upon your selves, by those fearful
imprecations God damn me, and The Devil take me. Little do these poor souls
think what it is to be damned. Isay. 33.14.
Who can dwell with devoureing fire? who can dwell with everlasting burnings?
And yet this they must, upon whom God shows forth the power of his wrath in
their damnation: What ever vain people now conceit of it, the time shall come
when Kings, and great men, and rich men, chief Captains, and mighty men, Rev.
6.1^.16.
shall petition the mountains and the rocks, to hide them from this wrath,
Thou O Lord, even thou art to be feared, Psalm. 7^.7.
and who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? Now since Gods wrath is so
terrible, when it begins to grow hot against a people, there is more then
cause, it is high time for them to humble themselves. I have done with the 2
first Queres, I descend now to the last, which brings the point nearer home, to
show what cause we of this Kingdom, and particularly we of this place have to
humble our selves; I cannot point at all particulars, I shall only touch these
three.

The first is, the great distress, that is this day upon the whole kingdom;
this is a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation. we read in the 21. of
Judges, that when by the sword of Civil war, the Tribe of Benjamin was cut
off and destroyed, that the other Tribes came to the House of God, and abode
there until even before the Lord, and lift up their voices, and wept sore,
saying. O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there
should be this day one Tribe lacking in Israel? and the children of Israel,
(says the Text,) repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is
one tribe cut off from Israel this day? We are met (Beloved) at this time in
Gods house to humble ourselves, and what cause of mourning have we for this
Nation, wherein I will not say one Tribe is cut off already, but many of the
heads and chosen men of every Tribe: and the whole remnant of this once
populous flourishing Kingdom is ready to be destroyed by the bloody sword of
an intestine dissension, 2 Ch^on. 20.23.
while we like those earth-borne Thebans, or cursed Cananites, help to kill and
destroy each other? When Ziglag was burnt with fire, at the very sight of it
David and his men wept so much that they could weep no more. 1 Samuel 30.3. what
greater reason have we to weep at the sight of the general conflagration of
our own Country? Were there nothing to be lamented by us in this day of our
Fast, but the public miseries of this poor Kingdom, with how loud and
fearful a cry do they call every one of us to mourning. Ye daughters of
England weep over me who clothed you with scarlet, 2 Samuel 1.24.
and sed you with the flower of wheat: How are the mighty fallen in the midst
of the Battle? how are not only the weapons of war, but all the abundance
and delights and glory of your peace perished? What cause have we (I say) not
only with good Nehemiah to have our countenances sad, Nehem. 1.4.
and to sit down and weep, and mourn, and fast and pray before the God of
heaven, but to wish with Jeremie, O that our heads were waters, Jer. 9.4.
and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of our people.

A second cause we have to humble our selves at this time is the consideration
of every one of our own sins, and the sin of the Nation, the guilt and
provocation whereof have drawn down upon our heads the great wrath, and
indignation of our God. Tears were made only for sin, (...), etc. God (says
Saint Chrysostom) has implanted in us the passion sorrow for no other thing
in the world but sin; Hon. 7. ad pop. Antiochenu^^.
in our Calamities we should look with the eye of contrition more upon our
sins then our sufferings, and be more afflicted that we should deserve
afflictions, then that we should endure them. A Pharaoh will cry out of the
Plague, and pray for the taking away of the death, repenting Israel prays for
the removal of their sin. Take away all our iniquity. Hos. 14.2. and indeed
all other Calamities to this are in the same Fathers words, but (...), bare
names of Calamity, (...) etc. sin is only truly so. Ibid.
Whatsoever bitterness is in any affliction, is put into it by the malignity
of sin; and therefore the Godly who are (...), men of tears, in their weeping
have always most lamented their sins. When Gods wrath was incensed against
Israel to have destroyed them for the golden Calfe. Oh, says Moses, this
people have sinned a great sin, and yet now if thou will forgive their sin
etc. Exodus 32 31. O my God, says Ezra in the great distress of his people, I
am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, O my God, for our iniquities
are increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens
Ezra 9.6. the same course is held by Nehemiah, and Daniel in their
supplication, King David when the destroying Angel is sheathing his sword into
Jerusalem, cries out, I have sinned and I have done wickedly 2 Samuel 24.17. Mine
heart, says Jeremy, within me is broken because of the Prophets, my bones
shake, I am like a drunken man, like a man whom wine has overcome, because of
the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness; for the Land is full of
Adulterers, for because of swearing the Land mournes, the pleasant places of
the wilderness are dried up; and their course is evil, and their force is not
right. Ier. 23.9.10. O for some Jeremies to lament this over again for this
nation. Tears that are shed for sin are (...), commendable tears, Orat. 21.
as Nazianzen terms them. The Philosopher tells us that the dew of heaven and
the rain from above, is far more fertile then the waters from the fountains
and rivers below, and so are those tears for sin then those that are for
affliction. And if ever people had cause to be humbled, to have their hearts
broken, and their eyes run down with rivers of waters for their own sins
and the sins of their Nation, then have we certainly this day. That we should
sin away our peace, and those blessings which made us glorious in the sight of
the Nations; that we should sin our selves into all these miseries that are now
upon us; The greatness of our present distress testifies to our faces the
greatness of our sins. God that never afflicts willingly, Lam. 3.33.
and when he does, punishes citra condignum, less then the desert of our
sins, Job. 11.6.
has declared unto us the enormity of our sin by the extremity of our
punishment. Jerusalem has greivously sinned, Lam. 1.8.
says the Prophet; And therefore is she removed. We may say too this day,
England has greivously sinned, therefore is she greivously afflicted, her
glory is removed and departed from her.

But yet this is not all; the sins whereby we first drew down this great
wrath upon our selves are not all the cause we have to be humbled at this time;
no, there is something more for which (were it but thoroughly resented) all our
hearts should melt, all our bowels tremble, and all our Livers be poured out
on the earth, like water before the Lord this day; and that is that we still
sin under Judgments, that we have not humbled our selves as yet under Gods
mighty hand, that we have contracted the guilt of many new grievous sins,
even since the time that Gods hand has been upon us in so terrible a
Judgment. Great cause has every one of us to sit down and take up a
Lamentation over his own hard heart: Alas! What stone is my heart made of? The
hardest marble will weep, when the heaven is black with tempests above:
though great clouds of Gods anger have hung a long time over our heads, and
many storms of wrath fallen upon us, yet my heart mournes not. The Adamant,
that they say, will only expel vain fears; no real fears no terror of
present Judgments can make any impression of fear upon my heart. The
Naturalist tells us too that the Adamant is broken with Goats blood, but
neither the blood of Jesus Christ that scape-Goate, nor that of so many
thousands of our brethren that have been slain, have melted my heart into
tears of Contrition. What? is it a rock? why the rock when struck but twice
by the rod of Moses, sent forth waters abundantly, says the Text, Number. 20.11.
But God has often smitten us with his rod, and yet no waters of repentance
flow from my hard impenitent heart. Oh this sets our condition in the very
depth of misery, and almost beyond the hopes of recovery, that we sin still,
that we repent not under Judgments. What floods of tears are sufficient to
deplore this impenitency; O our God, says Ezra, what shall we say after all
this? for we have forsaken thy Commandments, Ezr. 9.10. This is that which
Daniel insisteth upon as the maine aggravation of the sin of Judah, Dan.
9.12. that though the like had not been done under heaven, as had been done
upon Jerusalem, Though, says he, all this be come upon us, yet made we not our
prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and
understand thy truth. Oh Beloved, let this consideration be like Moses rod to
strike water out of our stony hearts, that the plague of sin is upon us,
while we sigh and groan and dye under the plague of Judgments; Let us lament
that we have not lamented for our sins, and say, The Lord pardon our
Impenitency, the Lord forgive the sins we have committed since the time that
his Judgments have been upon the Land. Let it be the mark of the beast, and
the badge of the Kingdom of Antichrist, when the Angel has poured out the
vial of wrath upon them, to gnaw their tongues for pain and blaspheme the God
of heaven because of their sores and torments, and not to repent of their evil
deeds, Rev. 16.10. But let us whom God has yet reprived from the two deaths of
war and sickness which have been so long upon the Kingdom, be on the
mountains like doves of the valleys, every one mourning for his own iniquity.
Ezekiel. 7.16. I have now dispatched the three questions, and have done with the
doctrinall part; Let your patience I beseech you hold out a little longer,
while I close up all with a seasonable application.

In the first place, the Text rises with full force against the most of us, I
fear there are very few that can wash our hands of the guilt of this sin,
which stands here charged against the Jews, They are not humbled even unto
this day. We find by woeful experience that this day (to make use of our
Saviors words, this Scripture is fullfilled in our ears. Though the wrath of
God be in a high measure upon us, and has long continued upon the Land: Yet
where are the Jeremie's that mourn, the Daniel's that fast, the Nehemiah's and
Ezra'es that pray? the Priests that weep between the Porch and the Altar, and
say, Spare thy people O Lord? the Moseses that by the humiliation of themselves
labor to stand in the gap? If there be but one house on fire in the Town,
there is a general cry and running to help, every one carries water to quench
it: Now that the whole Kingdom is all on a Flame, and that cries to every one
of us, Water, water; oh for some such water as the children of Israel poured
out before the Lord in Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7.6. fasting and crying out mightily, we
have sinned! oh for buckets of tears, penitent tears to quench a flaming
Kingdom! oh that every head were full, and every heart a Fountain of those
waters, that we might draw thence to extinguish the devouring fire of Gods
wrath; but alas woe is me! woe is this whole Nation every one brings fuel to
increase the flame, few or none labor to quench it. I know all that have any
sense of our present miseries, cannot but resent it with grief; do ye not
observe a deluge of sin upon the Kingdom, as well as a flood of wrath, which
has broken down all the banks of the fear of God and the reverence of man?
Salvian complains, in lib. 6. of the City Triers, Assiduitas calamitatum
illic, augmentum criminum fait, iis ipsis quibus coercebantur scelera plagis
erescebant, ut putares poenam ipsorum criminum quasi matrem esse vitiorum. I
would our practice did not make it speak English. Could you ever have thought
impiety should have risen to so prodigious an height? is there any wickedness
dares not show it self in public: The Licentious lewdness of unclean
persons which heretofore abhorred the Light, (fear and shame made them put on
a veil then) now dares the day: all rapine and spoil and violence legitimated
under the name of Plundering, the worst kind of Robbery. Oppression and unjust
dealing improved by all the Art deceit can invent, as if all Conscience as well
as Laws were asleep, if not quite dead. Heart-burnings and malice in every
Town and village, triumphing even over our common miseries, as if nothing
could reconcile us but only utter ruin and the grave. It was the observation
of Augustus Casar, Conviviorum and vestium luxus agrotantis and labentis
imperii signa esse and praenuncia. That excess and riot in diet and apparel
was a sign and forerunner of a languishing and expiring Kingdom. Was ever
nation more guilty of these two sins, then ours of late? nay do we abate now
that God calls us to fasting and sackcloath? Are not our Tables as full as
heretofore? if not, are not our Tavernes and Alehouses so, those (...), watery
places, where (as Evagrius was wont to say) the Devil most of all delights
to haunt? It is methinkes a very sad story which Salvian tells us of Carthage,
Alii foris jugulabantur, alii intus fornicabantur. l. 6. degub.
at a time when war was even at their City Gates. That while the enemy acted
the Butchers upon their brethren without, they played the Beasts in
uncleanenesse within; both Captives at the same time, they to the Barbarians,
these to their Lusts; these revelling in the City, while they were groaning out
their last in the Field; these wallowing in their filth, while they lay
weltring in their own blood: their case was much like ours; I would our course
were not so like theirs. Was there ever a greater riot in Clothes among all
sorts of people then now? Ez. k. 16.51.
England as well as Judah may seem in her pride to justify Sodom: a sin
committed with an high hand as it were in contempt and despite of heaven: Cast
your eyes about you and see Nunquid hae Tunicae plangentium? Is this the habit
and attire, this the garb of mourners? Are not many arrayed as in the day of
the Solemn Feast and triumph of the Church and Kingdom, rather then the time
of the great perplexity and distress of both? the very names of our women's
tackling would fill up the whole third Chapter of Esaias: Neither Gods Ministers,
nor yet his Judgments can preach down this sin, no not so much as their
black spots and their paintings; Is it such a blackensse as this think ye,
that the Prophet Joel speaks of, Joel 2.6. All faces shall gather blackenesse?
Consider that, and be afraid, ye know not how near that day is, and remember
the fate of painted Iezabell. Has it not been almost the Echo of every
Sermon against oaths and blasphemies, and those cursed imprecations? Oh do
not this abominable thing that God bates; and indeed should we be silent, the
very stones in the streets would speak; and the timber out of the house would
answer them; yet the wicked know no shame, those sins are grown to a
presumption both against God and the King. The children of Israel, faith God,
could not stand, but turned their back before their enemies because they were
accursed, Jos. 7.12. Alas! then how shall these stand in the day of battle,
that do so often curse and confound themselves? It is said of the Thracians,
that when it thunders they shoot up their Arrows as it were in defiance
against heaven, these men their oaths and execrations. That excellent Law we
have against this sin has been strengthened by two pious Proclamations of
late; Oh that there were a like care and zeal in the execution. Honorable,
and Beloved, let me in the name of God and in the behalf of this poor
Kingdom beseech you, as the Father in the Gospel sometimes did our Savior
for his child possessed with an unclean spirit, If you can do any thing have
compassion on us and help us. I would I could say with our Prophet. Mark. 9.12.
Surely those are poor and foolish, they know not the way of the Lord nor the
Judgments of their God; Jer. 5.4, 5.
I will go to the great men and speak unto them for they have known the way
of the Lord and the Judgment of their God. Oh ye heads of our Tribes, 2 Chronicles.
28.10.
and ye the sons of Levi, as the Prophet Oded sometimes spoke, are there not
with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? Pardon me, I beseech
you if I speak freely; The Sacrifice of this day is a sin offering, and it is
Gods express command, Lev. 5.11. that neither oil nor frankincense be put
upon it, it is a sin offering. Lay your hand upon your heart, and tell me,
what Reformation do you find every one in his own heart? what one sin have
you forsaken of which before you were guilty? what one duty do you now make
conscience of which you formerly neglected? do you find a Frame of spirit in
your selves answering the sad and trembling condition of the Land? in a word,
are ye humbled even unto this day? I would I could hear a good answer from
you, that I might yet hope for better times; as your persons are
representative, so are your sins too; your sins are the sins of a whole
Town, a County, a Diocese, and so should I account your humiliation. I doubt
not but here are many which are exiled from their houses, and ^ifled of their
Estates; your condition is sad, but let me put the Question to you; Are your
hearts humbled? O Humiliation, Humiliation, what is become of thee? where shall
I find thee that thou may be a Pella, a City of refuge, to protect us from
the Avengers of blood; a Noah's Arc to save a sinful nation from the flood of
Gods wrath? The City says, she knows thee not, the Court complains thou art a
stranger there, and the Country cries thou art gone out of the Land. Though the
two great destroyers, the Red and the Pale horses, have marched through the
whole Land, multitudes of people every day swept away, the cries of our
oppresed, wounded, spoiled, undone friends, Fathers, Brothers, kinsmen, sound
every hour in our ears, the sighs, and tears, and groans of our dying
nation, are fresh, and loud; the ruin of the Kingdom, and desolation as it
were in sight, yet are not most of us like that stupid judge in the Acts, Act.
11.17
And Gallio cared for none of these things? The truth is, when these clouds
first began to gather together, there was much perplexity amongst us where the
tempest then hanging over our heads would fall, we were all in great fear
what the event of those distractions would be; but now that our fears are come
upon us, we cease to be afraid; like those Froggs in the Fable, when Jupiter
threw down the logg amongst them, it put them in a great fright for a time, so
that they held their croaking, but after a while, when the fear was a little
over, they came near to the Log and leapt upon it. The most of us seem to be
sick of Ichorams disease, 2 Chronicles. 21.15.
our bowels of compassion to others, (nay which is yet more) of pity to our
selves, are fallen out. We relent not at the murder and undoing of so many
thousands of our brethren; we can hear the passing bell tole, and see the
panges of death upon our own Country with dry eyes and unhumbled hearts, and
not so much as say, Alas my mother* what Jeremy, nay what seas of tears, even
tears of blood, are sufficient to lament this obstinacy? Jonah. 4.11.
Should I not have compassion on a great City, wherein are six hundred thousand
souls that know not the right hand from the left? the greatness of the
multitude was a motive that prevailed with God to spare Ninive; and should not
this be an Argument as prevalent with us, to withdraw us from sin, and to
persuade us this day every one to humble himself? Exodus 10.3
O my wretched heart! How long Pharaoh like, will thou refuse to humble thy
self? If thou have no pity upon thy self, yet should thou not have
compassion upon a perishing Kingdom? Shall I carry to my grave, nay to Hell
with me the guilt of the blood of so many thousand Innocents? Those (...), men
that walk in their sleep, they will venture upon dangerous precipices,
because they know not their danger, but when they are awakened, and come to see
what they have done, they are astonished, and even struck dead with the
apprehension of the danger escaped, it is a wonder to see that men awakened by
the loud cries of Gods judgments (or if we be asleep still, we are in a dead
sleep) should dare to go on in such desperate ways, as many of us do: that we
should have our eyes open and see our danger, and yet not be afraid, that the
wrath of God should be so long upon the Land, and we not humbled even unto this
day.

In a word, to close up all (I have already tired both you and my self) as
Jotham sometime spoke to the men of She-^hem; Jndg. 9.7.
Hearken I beseech you unto me, that the Lord may hearken unto you; I know the
desire of your soul is to do good to your poor Country; your hearts cannot
but yearne toward your distressed mother, and I hope with many of you, as this
is the time of Jacobs trouble, so it is of Jacobs wrestling too, Hos. 12.4.
by strong cries and tears, that the Lord would turn away from his fierce
wrath, compose our bloody distractions, and heal our Land. Do you desire that
God should hear you? Why then hearken unto him, 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, (he will hear the prayer of
the humble) and what ever our present condition be, he will exalt us in due
time; Ps. 10.17.
if your own hearts tell you that you have not been humbled even unto this
day, why then write the name of this day, let your hearts be humbled before the
Lord this day: God forbid that any one of us should carry an unhumbled heart
out of this house of mourning: but when we are gone hence, let us enter every
one into his own Closet, and there power out his afflicted soul in sighs,
and groans, and tears, and prayers, before the Lord for his own sins and
the sins of the Kingdom. Oh let us make this day a day of Atonement for our
selves, and this whole nation. When Benhadad was quite vanquished By Ahab, he
sent his servants with sackcloth upon their loins and ropes upon their necks,
which came to the King of Israel, and said, Thy servant Benhadad says, 1 Kign.
2^.32.
I pray thee let me live; the encouragement they had to do this, was because
they heard, the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings. Let us do so this day,
humble our selves in fasting, and tears, and beg our lives, and the life of
this poor Kingdom at Gods hands; he is a merciful God; say unto him, This
expiring Church and dying Kingdom say, we pray thee let us live. O let us not
defer any longer to humble our selves. I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the care (says Job) but now mine eye sees thee, Job 42.5, 6.
wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. we have heard long since by the
hearing of the care, what destructions God has wrought upon the Earth, we have
heard of the Desolations of Jerusalem and many other Cities, and Kingdoms, of
old, and of Germany and Ireland of late (the report is still bleeding new,) Oh
distressed Ireland! and happy had we been had their examples awaked us, that
we our selves might not have been made an History to others; but now that we
have seen him by the eye, in the way of his judgments, what will become of
us, if we do not humble and abhor our selves? It is said Rev. 9.20. That
though the third part of men were killed, yet the remnant that were not slain
by the plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, neither repented
they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor
of their thefts. O let it not be said of us of this Nation, us of this place,
that though the sword and the sickness have slain, shall I say a 3d part of
the Kingdom? we know that many thousands are already fallen in England; the
sword is not yet put up into the sheath, nor the commission to destroy taken
from the pestilence: O let it not (I say) be said of us, that are as yet spared
from destruction, that we have not repented of the works of our hands. much
less let that be verified of us, which is spoken of the Nations. Rev. 16.8, 9.
That when the fourth Angel had poured out his vial upon the Sunn, and power
was given him to scorch men with fire, the men were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God which has power over those plagues; and they
repented not to give him the glory. The destroying Angel has poured out the
vial of Gods wrath upon the Sun of our peace and former prosperity: Through
the anger of the Lord of Hosts is the whole land darkened: the fire that is
kindled in all our dwellings has scorched some of our persons, and consumed
many of our estates; the Lord forbid that this great affliction should enrage
our spirits to blaspheme the name of that God who has power over those
plagues; or that this great sin should be laid to the charge of the inhabitants
of this Kingdom, that notwithstanding all the judgments upon them, yet they
repented not to give God the glory. But let us rather make them our patterns,
who are propounded to us as examples of repentance in times of distress, and
wrestle with God this day by unfeigned contrition, for that blessing, which we
cannot obtain at the hands of men. Oh what would many of us give, (had we it
to give) for that blessing which lately was as a price in the hand of fools!
Now what more does God require of us for the redemption of this inestimable
Pearl, but only this, that we should humble our selves? Honorable, and
Beloved, there have been many hopeful ways taken for the recovery of our
lost Peace: your endeavors have expressed your hearty desires, to compose our
unnatural divisions by an happy accommodation: the Royal tongue has
prevented me in the acknowledgement of your pains this way; the Lord reward it
unto you, and all those that are thus minded, and the blessing of the
Peacemakers ever rest upon you. But the many and great sins of this Nation
have blasted the success, and as yet hid these good things from us. What
remains now, but that Ye and We, and all of us by uncessant prayers and tears
importune the throne of grace, and humble our selves before the God of peace,
for the blessing of peace?

Oh, but methinkes I hear some say, Alas my heart, notwithstanding all that
has been said, is yet hard and unhumbled: Can you give me some receipt, that
may break it and melt it into tears of Repentance?

Take this breise prescription, and carry it home along with thee: in the first
place, Zech. 1^.10
pray to God that he would pour out upon thee the spirit of grace and
supplication. Beg a look from Christ, there is a virtue in Christ his look
to pierce the hardest heart, Luke 22.61, 62. Respice Domine Jesus, ut sciamus
nostrum de ^lere delictum Ambrose. Psalm. 147.18. Ios. 15.19.
and to soften it into godly sorrow and remorse for it is sins. Jesus looked
back, and Peter went out, and wept bitterly. The fountain of penitent tears
is in heaven; our hearts are naturally dry, like the deserts of Arabia, until
he that turns the wilderness into a standing poole, and the dry ground into
springs of waters, causes his spirit to blow up on them, and then the waters
shall flow. Go to God with that request which Achsa did to her Father, Give me
O Lord, the springs of water, the upper and the nether springs, that I may weep
for our distress, but more for our sins. In the next place, raise up thy
soul upon the wings of heavenly meditation, and fly up to Mount Golgotha, and
there look upon him whom thou have peirced. Consider him in his bitter agony,
sweating drops of blood trickling down to the ground: In those consternations
of spirit, trembling under the unsupportable burden of his Fathers wrath;
hanging upon the Cross, nailed hands and feet; forsaken of men, and in his
own sense of God too, breathing out his afflicted soul in a loud cry. And
then reflect upon thy self, not only as the Author of all, Heb. 6.6.
but also as one that by thy known, wilful, presumptuous sins have often
crucified him afresh, and put him to an open shame. The fountain of blood
opened in Christ's side for the expiation of sin, will open a fountain of
tears in thy heart for the commission of it. They shall look upon him whom
they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mournes for his only
son, and shall be in bitterness for him, Zech. 22.10.
as one is in bitterness for his first borne.

Now the Lord in mercy bring home and settle that which has been spoken at
this time, upon every one of our hearts. Amen.

FINIS.

