CERTAIN SEASONABLE QVAERIES Propounded For diverse parties of different
Interest, and very necessary to be considered of at present. viz. For the two
Houses of Parl. For the City of London. For the Reformed Soldiers. For the
Kingdom in general. For our Brethren the Scots. For Major Genesis Laughorne. For
the Presbyters.


LONDON, Printed Ann. Dom. 1647.

Certain seasonable Quaeries propounded for diverse parties of different
Interest and very necessary to be considered of at present.
For the Houses of Parl.
1. Quaere. VVHither the Kingdom be desirous to engage it self in a new
war, or that the people of England have so irrevocably obliged themselves to
their trustees that they will hazard more bloodshed and a common confusion by
protecting of some faulty members from being brought to common Justice? and
whether (as the Scots said in the Earl of Straffords case) it be not better
that a few rather then unity perish?

2. Whether it be a just Privilege of parliament, that every Member shall be
free from being questioned for any crimes; and whether they ought not to be
liable to the censure of the law for misdemeanors?

3. Whether the Army or any man can imagine that justice will be done against a
Member of the Parl, for any offense whatsoever, either by the House or any of
the Committees (notwithstanding the late Order, giving liberty and invitation
to all men, to question them for bribe taking and corruption) for they will not
condemn themselves or their fellows?

4. Whither it stand with the honor and dignity of a Parliament, and conform
to the practice of former times to vote Contradictions, and reassume to the
question matters that have been resolved upon full debate by the whole House:
and whether there was ever heard of such a breach of Privilege of Parliament,
as to order the expunging of the Declaration of the 30 of March 1647 against
the Army, without any grounds that were not known before?

5. Whether it be not to be wished by all men who are tender of the dignity and
reverence that is due to Parliaments, that this present Parliament should be
dissolved rather than the charged Members should be plucked out of the House by
the Army, which they must be necessitated to do in order to their own safety,
and for preventing another imbroilment of the Kingdom in blood, if the House
insist on their Votes of the 25 of June, for the charged Members vindication.

6. For the City of London.
Whether the engaging in a new war does not concern the City of London a
little, and therefore whether it be not important that a common hall be called
before any thing be resolved on in that kind, so that they be not lead blindly
by the Common Council, (many of whom are as fearful to be called to an
account as the charged Members) to act any thing that may hazard the safety of
the City and Kingdom?

7. Whether in case of another civil War, the Excise, Twentieth, and Fifth
parts, Contributions, and all the other heavy taxes will not be set on foot
again, and greater oppression used to raise Moneys, and to maintain it then
before, and considering that the Countries which were the seat of the late
War are almost wholly exhausted, whether is not this City like to pay all the
reckoning?

8. It is very remarkable that this City (above any in the world) has never
been sacked: Our Histories attribute its preservation to the great wisdom and
providence of the Magistrates and Inhabitants, who in times of danger timeously
declined such hazards, Therefore is it not good Counsel to wish the present
age to follow the example of their prudent Ancestors, and to use the same
means whereby to obtain the like blessing of peace and safety?

9. Whether there can be hoped for either peace or safety until the King be
restored to all his Rights in honor, the Law enlivened, the Army paid their
full Arrears, satisfied in their just dernands and disbanded, that wide breach
of love and charity be closed up by an Act of oblivion, and tender Consciences
be regarded in what is meet?

10. For the Reformadoe Soldiers.
Whether the Reformadoe- Officers and Soldiers do believe in their
Consciences that the Parliament have now at length paid them their Arreares out
of a good will, and whether if the Army had not stood upon it they should have
received any Money at all, and therefore are not all such as have got benefit by
the Army bound in gratitude not to oppose their friends?

11. For the Kingdom in general.
Whether this Kingdom can ever hope for any ease or justice during the sitting
of this Parliament, since the Lords have weekly for these eighteen months sent
down to the House of Commons to desire their concurrence for dissolving that
great oppression Country Committees, and yet the Commons would not vouchsafe
hitherto to put it to the question?

12. Whether it be not necessary that all the Members of Parliament, all
Committee men, Excise men, Customers and others, who have been employed in the
public Receipts of the Kingdom should be called speedily to a strict
account; And since it is clear that above forty Millions of Money have been
levied upon the Kingdom since the late War, for the public use, and yet not
a Twentieth part thereof employed to that end, Whether the Countries ought not
justly to refuse and withstand the raising of any more Moneys, till they have a
good account how what is already paid has been disposed of, and whether it be
not fitter that all the Public Receivers aforesaid should pay down what is
remaining in their hands, and that the gratified Members should disgorge their
large remunerations toward the speedy discharge of the Army, and the relief
of our distressed Brethren in Ireland, then that the Kingdom should be further
impoverished by new Taxations, as the Ordinance of sixty thousand pounds
monthly, which if submitted to will be endless?

13. Whether the people of England did not so well like of the Scottish Armie's
behavior, that they will esteem those men their friends who labor to bring
them into the Kingdom again, and whether the North-Countries (if they come)
will not bid them welcome to England with a vengeance?

14. For our Brethren the Scots.
Whether the Scots can be so impudent as to hope His Majesty can think well
of them? And whether they are not more displeased with their Parliament Friends
for loosing the King, then the Cavaliers were with the Scots for selling Him?
And though they have no mind to restore the money (as Judas did in the like
case) yet it is a question whether they are not ready to hang themselves to
hear that the King is with the Army?

15. For Major Laughorne.
Whether Major General Laughorne hopes he shall be better rewarded for
adhering to the two Houses of Parliament against the King and the Army, then he
was for his former Services, for which when a Committee-man of Wales moved that
Laughorne and his men might be employed for Ireland and the Country rid of
him, Michaell Oldsworth, the Earl of Pembrockes Directorie made, Answer, that
they did not only think them unfit for that Service, but not to deserve the
Character of Christians?

16. For the Presbyters.
Whether the Assembly of Presbyters have not just cause to be offended with the
two Houses for not Voting them to be Iure Divino when they could not prove it?
And whether the Assembly might not have had a Creed as cheap as the Direstory
and Covenant from their dear Brethren of Scotland? And whether we shall ever
see their New Confession of Faith, because we have not heard of it almost these
two months (that is) since the House of Commons (as their Diurnalls speak)
upon debate of it, Voted and passed God the Father?

17. Whether the Assembly do not now find that the Constitution of the people
of England will never admit of the Presbyterian Government? And whether they
ought not to implore the prayers of all good people, that God and the King will
be pleased to take them to his mercy now they are at their last gasp?

18. But if any of them or their Elders, continue obstinate in their Rebellion
and madness, whether the Receipt commended by Who in his book, called The
Fire of the Sanctuary newly uncovered, page 360. has these words: If he that
seems Religions will yet be idle, false, undutifull, and stubborn, rail at
Ceremonies, Bishops and Common Prayer, disdain to be corrected and maintain
his faults, That man or Woman will never have any true Religion in him till with
a cudgel all these counterfeits be beaten off.
D. Cornelius Burgess (who is one of themselves) being well applied, will not
sooner bring them to right wits and understanding, than Hellebore or any other
Medicine the College of Physicians can preseribe?

19. Whether most Parliament Men, all Committeemen, Excise-men, Sequestrators,
Assembly-men, CLsses, etc. wished not now that they had not meddled with the
business? And whether they would not willingly give all they have got, to
purchase that repose of Conscience and security that many honest loyal men
whom they have undone possess with comfort?

Resolved upon all these Questions, That none but despetate conscious persons,
and such who care not for their own ends to sacrifice the peace and glory of
the English Nation, will act or encourage men to their certain destruction by
a second War, and the opposition of the King and the Army: And if any such be,
they must expect to be torn in pieces, as being the worst of men, and the most
pernicious enemies to the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

