THE Complete Midwifes PRACTICE, In the most weighty and high Concernments of
the Birth of Man.

Containing Perfect Rules for Midwifes and Nurses, as also for Women in their
Conception, Bearing, and Nursing of Children: from the experience not only of
our English, but also the most accomplished and absolute Practicers among the
French, Spanish, Italian, and other Nations.

A Work so plain, that the weakest capacity may easily attain the knowledge of
the whole Art.

With Instructions of the Midwife to the Queen of France (given to her Daughter
a little before her death) touching the practice of the said Art.

Published with the approbation and good liking of sundry the most knowing
Professors of Midwifery now living in the City of London, and other places.

Illustrated with several Cuts in Brass.

Exodus 1.17. But the Midwifes feared God. V. 20. Therefore God dealt well with
the Midwifes. By T.C. I.D. M.S. T.B. Practitioners.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1656.

The expert, and famous, madam LOVYS BOURGEOIS midwife to the Qweene of France.

Sold by N: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill.

To: Vaughan sculp
portrait of Louise Bourgeois

THE PREFACE OF Sundry PRACTITIONERS in and about the City of LONDON, etc.
Christian Reader.
IT is high time, there being already published, many Treatises in this kind,
for us to discharge our consciences for the good of the Nation, we have perused
all that have been in this nature in English, and find them strangely
defficient, so crowded with unnecessary notions, and dangerous mistakes, that
we thought it fit to give you warning of them, that for the future the
unfortunate practisers, may prevent the almost guilt, of the crying sin of
murder.

It is Admirable to us, that our Country should be so much deluded, to build
all their practice upon such Authors that have not at all conduced to any
considerable advantage in this so necessary useful Art as the preserving of
mankind; Alas! how many miserable volumes have these late times brought forth.
Not to disparage any that have deserved, but in so weighty a concernment as
this, we must stand upon our integrity, There has been a reasonable intention
in the publishers of some books, viz. The Birth of man, the most ancient, but
very much unfurnished; as also the books of childbirth, The expert Midwife,
the worst that have been written in that kind, in French; and its almost or
miracle to us that Mr. Culpepper, a man whom we otherways respect, should
descend so low, as to borrow his imperfect Treatise from those wretched
volumes, some of which are before mentioned, and we must deal faithfully with
you, that, that small piece of his, entitled, The directory for Midwifes, is
the most desperately defficient of them all, except he writ it for necessity he
could certainly have never been so sinful to have exposed it to the light.

Now Christian Reader, to give thee a true information of what we have here
done for thy good, we shall not only Justify from our own experiences, but
fully demonstrate from the writings of the best practisers, both of the French,
Spanish, and Italians, and other Nations; and we must clearly confess, that we
are highly obliged to the incomparable labors of that most famous woman of the
world, Madam Long Bourgeo, late Midwife to the Queen of France, the praises
that we read of all those that ever heard of her, are not so much a flourish as
truth, for her reasons are solid experiences, and her witnesses have been all
of the most emminent persons of France; and not only of her, but as we have
already expressed of the most excellent known men or women of this Art of other
Countries; it is upon this account that we break the barriers, and boldly stand
the brunt of all censures.

The chief occasion of this book, is to make it a great exemplary, and School,
where medicine married to the Midwives industry, may teach every one the
admirable effects of the Divinity of this art of Midwifery.

And now knowing Reader that the Receipts herein contained, which have ever had
happy succeses, are not made public to the world on any other design then or
the assistance of such persons whom either the want of fortune or opportunity
denies such sudden helps, neither can we be without bleeding hearts, if we but
consider how many have been lost by the unskilfulnesse of those that attempted
this great work; nor should we have prostrated our reputation and private
experiences, but to correct the frequent mistake of most Midwifes, who resting
to bold upon the common way of delivering women, neglect all the wholesome and
profitable rules of Art, which might concern them in the occult diseases of
women, as also of the Anotomical parts of the Body. Thus having discharged our
consciences, we have no more to write, but refer you to the book it self,
desireing a blessing of God on these our faithful endeavors, we are the hearty
well wishers of your good,

I. C. I. D. M. S. T. B.


The Contents.
OF the genitals or vessels dedicated to generation in men or women, p. 1. Of
the vessels of preparation, C. 1. p. 2. Of the Parastatae or vessels where the
blood is first changed. C. 2. p. 3. The use of the preparing vessels, C. 3. p.
ib. of the Testicles in general, c. 4. p. 4. Of the Tunicles of the stones, c.
5. p. 5. Of the suspensory muscles, c. 6* p. 7. Of the substance and temper of
the stones, c. 7. p. 7. Of the actions of the testicles, c. 8. p. 9. Of the
Utility of the testicles, and their parts, c. 9. p. 10. of the vessel that
cast forth the seed, c. 10. p. 11. Of the Seminary bladders, c. 11. p. 13. Of
the Kernelly Prostatae, or forestanders, c. 12. p. 14. of the structure of the
Yard, c. 13. p. 15. of the several parts, constituting the Yard, c. 14. p. 17.
Of the action of the Yard, c. 15. p. 21. Of the use of the Yard in general, c.
16. p. ibid. Of the use of the parts constituting the yard c. 17. p. 22.
Sect. 2.
Of the Genitals of women, c. 1. p. 25. Of those parts called Mymphs and
Clytoris, c. 2. p. ib. Of the fleshly knobs, and the greater neck of the womb,
c. 4. p. 27. Of the Hymen, c. 5. p. 28. Of the vessels that run through the
neck of the womb, c. 6. p. 29. Of the fabric of the womb, c. ^. p. 30. Of the
preparing vessels in women, p. 34. Of the stones in women, p. 35. Of the
different or ejaculatory, c. 8. p. 37. Of the actions and uses of the Genitall
parts in women, c. 9. p. 38. Of the actions of the Clytoris, c. 10. p. 39. Of
the action and use of the neck of the womb, c. 11. p. ibid. Of the uses of the
vessels running through the neck of the womb, c. 12. p. 40. Of the actions of
the womb, c. 13. p. ib. Of the utilitie of the womb, c. 14. p. 41. Of the
utilitie of the preparing vessels in women, c. 15. p. 42. Of the utilitie of
the stones, c. 16. p. 43.
Sect. 3.
Of the signs of conception, c. 1. p. 44. Whether she has conceived a Male, c.
2. p. 46 Whether a Female, c. 3. p. 47. Of the conception of Twins, c. 4. p.
ibid. Of false conception, c. 6. p. 48. How women with child ought to govern
themselves, c. 6. p. 54. How to govern themselves in the time of their going
with child, c. 7. p. 57. etc.
Sect. 4.
Of the mixture of the seed of both Sexes, as also of its substance and form,
c. 1. p. 62. of the three tunicles which the birth is wrapped in, in the womb, c.
2. p. 64. Of the true generation of the parts, and the increase of them,
according to the several days and seasons, c. 3. p. 65. Of the nourishment of
the birth in the womb, c. 4. p. 69. Of the condition of the Infant in the womb
in the sixth, seventh, and eight month, c. 5. p. 71,
Sect. 4.
Of the situation of the child in the womb, p. 72.
Sect. 5.
Of Midwifes, c. 1. p. 75. What ought to be observed when she is near the time
of her lying down, c. 2. p. 76. How to expel the Colic from women in
childbed, c 3. p. 79. How the Midwife may know when the pains of travail do
seize a woman, c. 4. p. 80. Of the falling down of the waters, a good while
before the woman travails, c. 5. p. 81. What the Midwife ought to do in time of
travail, c. 6. p. 82. How to draw forth the Secondines, c. 7. p. 84. What may
be given to a woman in travail. c. 8. p. 85. How to put the Womb again in its
place. c. 9. p. 86. Against the extreme loss of blood, which happen to women
immediately after their delivery, c. 10. p. ib. What is done to a woman
presently after her delivery, c. 11. p. 88. Of women that have a great deal of
blood, and purge not neither in their travail nor after, c. 12. p. 90. For
those who have but a little blood, c. 13. p. 92. What is to be done to the
Infant, c. 14. p. ib. How to govern women in Childbed, c. 15. p. 93. Of the
bathings that a woman is to use for the first eight days of her lying in, c.
16. p. 95. How a woman ought to govern her self, in case she be to be delivered
of two children, c. 17. p. 95. Of the danger that a woman has to purge her
self for the first days of her lying in. c. 18. 97. Of the second washing for
women, c. 19. p. 98. What is to be done to Infants as soon as they are born, c.
20. p. 98. Of the last washing for Women, c. 21. p. 101. Of an Astringent for
Women when they shall have occasion, c. 2^. p. ibid. To make searcloaths for
women, c. 23. p. 102. To cleanse a woman before she rises, c. 24. p. ibid. How
a woman lying in of her first child, may avoid the gripings of her belly, c.
25. 103. The Queen of France her Receipt, p. 104. Certain precepts hindering the
delay and difficulty of bringing forth. c. 26. p. 105. How the secondines are
to be hastened out. c. 27. p. 108. Pills for the purpose, p. 111. Of Cases of
Extremity; and first, what is to be done to a woman, who in her travail is
accompanied with a flux of blood, and with convulsions, c. 28. p. 112. Of
ordering the woman after she is delivered, c. 29. p. 129. What is to be done to
the breast, Belly, and lower parts of the woman in childbed, p. 131. An
Ointment, p. 132. An oynment to keep the milk from clotting, p. 133. A
Fomentation much commended, ibid. Of the choice of a good Nurse, p. 135. What
is to be done in the extreme parts of a child, p. 1. 36. What is to be done to
such children as are troubled with phlegm, p. 137. What is to be done to
children that have their Cods full of wind, p. 138. How to take away the Canker
out of the Infants mouth, ibid. What is to be done to children whose intestines
are fallen, p. 139. To make an ointment to strengthen the thighs and legs of a
child and make him go. ibid. Of the relaxations of the Matrix, and the cause,
p. 140. of a disease that happens by reason of the fall of the Matrix. p. 143.
To remedy the fall of the fundament in Infants, p. 144. of the Diseases of
women, and first of the inflammation of the breast, ibid. of windy Tumors in
the breasts, p. 1. of the watery tumor in the breasts. p. 4. of the kernel in
the breast. p. 7. of the Scirrhus of the breasts. p. 9. of the Canker in the
breasts, p. 12. of the greatness of the breasts, p. 14. of the defect,
abundance, and coagulation of the Milk, p. 16. of the Diseases of the neck of
the womb: and first of the disease called Tentigo. p. 17. of the narrowness of
the neck of the womb: p. 19. of wheales, condilomas of the womb, and of
Hemorrhoids, p. 20. of the Ulcers of the neek of the womb, p. 23. of the womb
being out of temper. p. 26. of then arrownesse of the vessels of the womb. p.
30. of the puffing up of the womb. p. 31. of the inflammation of the womb. p.
33. of the Scirrhus of the womb. p. 36. of the Dropsy of the womb, p. 38. of
the falling of the womb, p. 40. of the ascent of the Matrix, as also of the
wounds and ulcers of the same. p. 42. of the pain of the womb. p. 44. of the
suppression of the flowers, p. 46. of the dropping of the flowers and the
difficulty of their coming down, p. 51. of the discoloring of the flowers, p.
53. of the inordinate flux of the Flowers, p. 54. of the over-abundance of the
Courses, p. 56. of the whites and Gonorrhea in women, p. 59. of the Green
sickness, p. 61. of the suffocation of the Matrix, p. 62. of barrenness, p.
66. of bringing up of children, and their diseases. of the diseases of the
head, p. 71. Bigness and swelling of the head in little children, p. 73. of
the diseases of the eyes, ears, and noses in children, p. 75. of certain ulcers
in Childrens mouths, p. 76. of certain other tumors called Paroulis, and
Espoulis, p. 77. of the two strings under the tongue of a child, p. 78. of the
Coughing children, ibid. of breeding teeth, p. 79. of the inflammation of the
Navel-string in Infants, p. 80. of the Worms, ibid. of the convulsion in
Infants, p. 81. of the swelling of the Hypocondria in Infants, p. 83. of
Costivenesse in children, ibid. of looseness in children, p. 84. of Burstnesse
in children, ibid. of the inflammation of the Navel, p. 86. of the jutting
forth of the Navel, p. ibid. of the stone in the bladder, p. 87. of the not
holding of the Urine, ibid. of the Intertrigo, p. 88. of Leanness, ibid. of
the difficulty that children have to make water, p. 89. of the inflammation of
the Almonds of the ears, p. 90. of vomiting, ibid. of the Hicquet, p. 91. of
the pain of the belly in children, ibid. of the small pox in children, p. 92.
Certain other instructions grounding upon practical observations, fit to be
known by all Midwives, and childbearing women. etc. p. 95. A Second
observation of a Woman that had been in Travail nine days, p. 99. of a Woman
here in Town that bare her Child eleven Months and could not be Delivered. p.
101. of the common opinion, that a woman seven months gone, ought to walk very
much; and of the accidents that happen thereby. p. 1^3. of a child which they
thought sick of the Epilepsie, occasioned by the sickness of the Mother, and
of the cause. p. 106. of a young woman who being struck upon the belly by her
Husband with his foot, was in great pain, and could not be brought to bed
without the help of a Surgeon. p. 108. of two Deliveries of one Woman. p.
109. of a Woman that because she would not be ruled in her Lying in, died. p.
111. of certain Women that bear children and lie in before their time, and
others at their full time, who grow big, and full of humors which causes the
death of the child presently after their Delivery, their children being
nourished in their Bellies like fish, only with water. p. 113. The observation
of a woman who was thought unable to bear any more Children, yet contrary to
expectation was delivered of one, and the reason thereof. p. 114. A good
observation in the choice of Nurses, p. 115. of a Woman which I laid two
several times, and of the difference of her bearing of two children, proceeding
from several causes, p. 117. Instruction of a famous, and dying Midwife to her
Daughter, touching the practice of this Art. p. 119.
The natural form of a child lying in ye wom^

To be sold by N: Brook at ye Angel in Cornhil.

G. F. (...)
depiction of woman and fetus

THE COMPLETE MIDWIFE HER PRACTICE.
Of the Genitals or vessels dedicated to Generation in Men and Women.
THe consideration of these things is so necessary for the purpose of this
book, that they require not only a deep meditation, but the praeeminence to
take up the first thoughts of those who would arrive to the knowledge of a thing
so much needful to all mankind. And it may be lawfully feared that many women
do miss their design because they know nothing but the outside of things; so
that in matters of extremity, because they are ignorant of the structure of the
parts, they cannot tell how to go about their work. We shall therefore begin
with an easy Anatomy of the privy parts both of men and women, so far as shall
be requisite to the gaining of so great a skill.

In the first place therefore we shall begin with man, in whom those things
which are called the vessels of preparation are first to be considered.

CHAP. I. Of the vessel of preparation.
AMong the Spermatic vessels are to be considered first, two veins, and two
arteries: these are carried downward from the small guts to the Testicles, and
are much bigger in men then they are in women.

The original of these veins is not always the same, for commonly the right
vein rises out of the hollow vein, a little below the source or original of
the Emulgent; but the least takes his original from the lower part of the
Emulgent it self. Yet sometimes it has a branch carried to it from the trunk
of the hollow vein.

The middle part of these veins runs directly through the Loins, resting upon
the Lumbal Muscle, a thin Membrane only intervening; and thus having gone about
half its journey, it branches out and distributes it self to the near adjoining
filmy parts of the body. The uttermost part of these vessels is carried beyond
the Midriff to the Stones, yet do they not pass through the Peritonaeum, but
descends with a small nerve and the muscle called Cremaster, through the
Duplicity of the Midriffe; when it approaches near the stones it is joined with
an artery; and now these vessels which were before a little severed one from
the other, are by a film rising from the Peritoneum closed up, and bound both
together, and so twisting up like the young tendrils of a vine, they are
carried to the end of the stones.

The arteries which are associated to these veins take their original a little
beneath the emulgent vein, fig: 1.

fig: 2.

diagrams of the urinary system Explanation of the first figure.
A A. The right and left kernel of the reins. B. The true kidneys. C C. The
Emulgent veins. D D. The Emulgent Arteries. E E. The spermatic veins. F F.
The spermatic arteries. G G. The trunk of the hollow vein. H H. The trunk of
the great Artery. I I I I. The Vreters. K K. The vessels that prepare the
seed. M M. The stones withal their tunicles. N N. The vessels carrying the
seed, retorted back into the bladder. O. The bladder. P. The neck of the
bladder. Q Q. The two glandulous Forestanders. R R. The two muscles that erect
the yard. S S. Two other muscles dilating the Vreter. T. The body of the yard.
U. The preputium that covers the nut of the yard.
Explanation of the second figure.
A. The bladder turned downward. B B. The insertion of the ureters into the
bladder. C C. The neck of the womb which Anatomists call the sheath which
receives many vessels. E E E E. The two lower round ligaments of the womb cut
away. F F. The blind vessel of the womb annexed here to the uppermost and broad
ligament. G G. The same vessel on the other side separated from the broad
ligament. H H. The deferent or seed carrying vessels on each side ending in the
neck of the womb. I I. The upper and membranie ligament of the womb like the
wings of a bat, through which many vessels that arise from the preparing
vessels are scattered and diffused. K. The preparing vessels of one side not
yet disserend from the 1 membranie or filmie ligament. L. The preparing vessels
on the other side severed from the filmie ligament, to show you their insertion
into the stone with its filmes, M M. The stones, where one is covered, the
other is bare. N N. Many veins and arteries scattered into the neck and
bottom of the womb, serving for the purgation of the flowers and the
nourishment of the birth. O O. The nerves scattered through the body of the
womb.
whence they descend, downward and a little from their beginning or original
they are joined to these veins, till they are closed together by an Anastomosis
or inoculation, ending like a Piramid.

CHAP. II. Of the Parastatae, or vessels where the blood is first changed.
THese four vessels after many ingraftings and knittings together, seem at
length to become only two bodies, full of little crumplings like the tendril
of a vine, white and in the form of a Piramid, resting the right upon the right
stone, and the left upon the left stone. These are called Parastatae, which as
they stand pierce the tunicles of each stone with certain fibers or
extraordinary small veins, which afterward dispearse themselves through the
body of those stones. The substance of these Parastatae is between that of the
stones and that of the preparing vessels; for they neither altogether consist
of Membranes, neither are they altogether Glandulous or kernelly.

CAAP. III. The use of the preparing vessels.
THe use of those vessels which are called the vessels of preparation is
chiefly to attract out of the hollow vein, or left Emulgent, the most pure and
exquisitely concocted blood, which is most apt to be converted into seed; which
they contain and prepare, giving unto it a certain rude form of seed in those
parts that lie as it were in certain pleights or folds, which they do by a
peculiar property bequeathed to them.

Another use of them is gathered by their situation, for as they are now
situated, that is to say, the right vein coming from the hollow vein, and the
left from the Emulgent, this inconvenience is avoided, that the left vein is
not forced to pass over the great artery, and so be in danger of breaking, by
reason of the swift motion of the artery. Moreover there being a necessity that
male and female should be begot, it is fit that there should be seed proper for
the generation of both sexes, whereof some must be hotter and some must be
colder; and therefore nature has so ordered it, that the hotter seed should
proceed from the right vein for the generation of man, and the colder from the
left for the generation of females. The left vein has also this property to
draw from the Emulgent the more serous and less pure blood, to the intent that
the serous humor might stir up venery by its salt and acrimonius substance;
and therefore it is observed that those who have the left stone bigger are most
full of seed, and most prone to venery.

The use of the Parastatae is this, to contain the blood and stay it in their
windings and wrinkled bodies, and by power received from the stones to change
the color of the blood.

CHAP IV. Of the Testicles in general.
THe stones are in number two, very seldom one, and much seldomer three or
four. The situation of the stones in men, is without the Midriff, at the root
of the yard under the belly, and that for two causes, to keep men more chaste;
it being observed that those creatures which carry their stones within their
bodies are more salacious, and bring forth in greater numbers.

Their bigness is not always alike in all creatures, but in men as big as a
Pigeons egg, or as a small Hens egg; and commonly the left is bigger then the
right.

In the Anatomy of the stones diverse things are to be considered. Their
Tunicles or the skins in which they are wrapped, as well those which are common
to both, as those which are particular to either, next the muscles, then the
substance of which they are composed: and lastly the vessels which are
dispearsed through the body of the stones.

CHAP. V. Of the Tunicles of the stones.
THe Testicles are wrapped up in diverse coverings, about the number of which
there has been great dissension. But they are now reduced to five, whereof two
are common, and are called Scrotum, and Dartos, three particular, the names of
which are Elytroydes, Erythroides, and Epididymis.

The first of these, which is like a satchel or purse, and is common to both,
consists of a skin and a cuticle. This contains the two stones like a purse,
and is obvious to the touch. The skin of this part differs from any other part
of the skin which covers the body: for whereas that is stretched out and spread
close over the whole body, this is more loose, and made to stretch out or to be
wrinkled up together as occasion is, that is as the stones either ascend or
descend: they ascend commonly in the time of conjunction, they descend in
febers, weakness of the Testicles, or by reason of old age.

The second Tunicle.
The second is called Dartos, because it is easily separated from the others. In
this the testicles lie as it were in a nest, wrapping them about more close
then the Scrotum does. It takes its Original from the fleshie Pannicle, which
though it be thinner hereabouts then in any other part of the body, yet is it
full of little Veins and arteries.

The proper Tunicles The proper Tunicles.
are first the Elytroides which is also called Vaginalis by reason it supplies
the office of a sheath. It takes its original from the production of the
Peritoneum, for where the spermatic vessels pass, they do not at all bruise the
Peritoneum, but carry it down to the stones, and so constitute or make this
Tunicle. To know this Tunicle, and the original of it is very necessary for
Physic, because that hollowness which the Processess of the Peritoneum do make
for the passage of the spermatic vessels, is sometimes dilated as far as the
beginning or source of this Tunicle, and both the small guts and the caul fall
down upon the Testicles, which is the cause of that kind of birstness which by
the Physicians is called Enterocle. This Tunicle grows to that which is called
Dartos, being joined to it by many nervous fibers. Underneath this is the
Tunicle called Erythroides, or the red Tunicle; so called from the multitude of
red veins which are sprinkled up and down in it. It rises from the other
membranes and is encompassed without by the first proper tunicle.

The third, and that which immediately compasses the stones, is that which is
called Epididymis: it is white, thick and strong, to preserve the soft and
loose substance of the stones. It rises ftom the Tunicle of the seminal
vessels, being the thickest of all the Tunicles, and has some few veins
scattered up and dovne in it.

CHAP. VI. Of the suspensory Muscles.
TO keep the stones from oppressing, or stretching over much the passages of
the seminal vessels, Nature has provided them two Muscles for them to hang by,
on both sides one, in form oblonge and slender.

These Muscles derive their original from a thick membrane which is joined to
the hanch bone in the further part of that region, where the hair grows, The
original of these Muscels.
and is fastened to this bone with certain fleshie and straight fibers; where
the oblique Muscles of the Abdomen or Mideriff end, thence reaching down upon
the superior members of the Testicles, they are extended through the whole
length of that round body.

These Muscles are never seen in women being altogether useless, because their
stones are not pendent, but are enclosed within their bodies.

CHAP. VII. Of the substance and temper of the stones.
THe substance of the stones is glandulous or kernelly, white, soft, loose,
spongy, and hollow; having sundry vessels dispersed through them.

Now although the substance of the Testicles be most soft and moist, yet does
not this moistness constitute a uniforme or homogeneal body; for the substance
of the stones is wholly dissimilar, and full of fibers. These fibers also seem
to be of a different substance from that of the stones, being only clothed
which the flesh of the stones, as the fibers of the Muscles are inwardly
nervous, but coverd over which the flesh of the Muscles. These fibers again
differ in this, that the fibers of the Testicles are hollow, but the fibers of
the Testicles full and substantial. These fibers are said to come from the
spermatick vessels, and thence branch themselves forth through the Testicles,
by which that part of the seed which is over and above what serves for the
nourishment of the testicles, as drawn forth and kept for procreation.

As concerning the Temper of the stones, they would sooner be thought cold then
hot, if that Maxim were true, that all white things are cold, and all red
things hot. Nothwithstanding, because nature is known to abhor all coldness in
the work of generation; Therefore we must presume to affirm the temper of the
stones to be hot, for they always abound with blood, and a pure spirit, that
can never be whichout heat: Besides that heat is required for the concoction of
this blood; and the changing it into seed; yet is it very temperate, as
appears by the softness of the substance, for as coldness and dryness is the
cause of hardness, so heat and moisture is the cause of softness.

Nevertheless we are to understand this, that the temper of the stones is not
alike in all, for in some they are far colder then in others. And therefore
these who have hot testicles are more salacious and prone to venereal actions,
having the places near about much more hairie, and their testicles much harder
then others. Those that have their testicles cold, find every thing contrary.

The greatest heat is in the right testicle, because it receives more pure and
hotter blood from the hollow vein and the great Artery, the left colder,
because it receives a more inpure and serous blood from the Emulgent vein.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Actions of Testicles.
THe action and use of the Testicles, is to Generate seed, a gift which they
obtain from an inbred quality which nature has bestowed upon them. For the
blood being received by the spermatic vessels, and there beginning to change
it is color, is by and by received by the deferent vessels, or the vessels
which carry the blood so prepared to the Testicles, where it is for a while
contained, and afterward being carried to the stones is by them made seed, and
the last work perfected. And it may with more easiness be affirmed, that the
seed is generated by the stones, because every like is said to generate its
like; now the substance of the Testicles is very like the seed it self, that is
white moist and viscous. Whether the stones are the only efficient causes of
the seed, is not here to be disputed, being only a nice point, and no way
profitable; we shall rather with silence adhere to that opinion, which affirms
the function of the testicles to be the generation of the seed, which is the
most likely, and proceed to the next.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Utility of the Testicles and their parts.
THe structure of the Testicles being thus known, It remains that we show you
their use. This is first discovered from their situation. For of those
creatures that have stones, some have them in their bodies, as all Fowl, others
have them without, though not pendent; others have them hanging downward, as
men. Men therefore have their Testicles without their bodies for two causes;
first, because it is required that the Testicles of the male should be bigger
and hotter then those of the female, so that it were impossibe for them to be
contained with the body, because of their quantity. Besides, the seed of the
male being the effective original of the creature, and therefore hottest, it is
also required that the seed should be more abundant then could be contained in
the Testicles, were they placed within the body; for the seminary passages
must have bin less, and the veins themselves would not have afforded such
plenty of matter as now they do.

The motion of the Testicles is also to be considered; by which they move
sometimes upward and sometimes downward. The one of these motions which is made
upward is voluntary, as being made by the muscles, but the motion downward is a
forced motion, not happening without the laxitie of the muscles; the Testicles
through their own weight falling downwards. These muscles are called
Cremasteres, their use being to draw up the Testicles to shorten the way for
the Ejaculation of the seed, as also to keep the vessels from being distended
too far by the weight of the Testicles.

The use of the Tunicles is now to be spoken of, and first of that which is
outermost, and is called by the Latins Scrotum, being the purse wherein the
Testicles are contained. It is made to wrinkle it self up and to let it self
loose that it may be large enough for the Testicles when they swell with plenty
of seed, and to wrinkle up again when the Testicles, being emptied and so
becoming less, are drawn upward. The other coats or tunicles also made for the
defense of the stones, but so thin and light, that they should not oppress the
stones with their weight; that which is called Erythroides has many veins for
the nourishment of the Adjacent parts. The Epididymis, was made to wrap the
testicle round about, lest the Humid matter of the testicle should flow about
and consequently be wasted.

CHAP. X. Of the vessels that east forth the seed.
THat passage which comes from the head of the testicles to the root of the
yard, is called the Ejaculatorie vessel. This, as I said before, rises from the
head of the testicles, and joining downward to the testicle descends to the
bottom, and thence being reflexed again, and annexed to the preparing vessel,
it returns again to the head of the testicle, from thence it proceeds upward
from the Testicle till it touch the bone of the small guts, still keeping close
to the preparing vessel, till it pierce the production of the Hypogastrium.
Thence tending downward through the hollowness of the hip, it slydes between
the bladder and the straight gut, till it reach the glandulous Prostatae or
forestanders, and fix it self at the foot or root of the yard, and there end.
It is not all one at the beginning, and at the end, for at the beginning, while
it remains among the tunicles of the testicles, it is full of windings and
turnings; near the end it has many little bladders like to warts.

Now we must understand that these seminary vessels do not only contain the
seed, but they perfect and concoct it, having a seminifie or seed-making
quality, which they borrow from the Testicles. There are other uses of these
seminary vessels: for near the original of this vessel, that is to say, the
head of the testicles many small passages, or as it were conduit-pipes, do
stretch themselves forward into the body of the testicle, into which the
genital seed that remains is remitted, and also drawn or sucked from those
passages; this seminary passage is at length wound above the testicles,
adjoining all along, but no where incorporated into the body of the Testicle,
unless at the bottom, in which place it is thought that the seed does again
insinuate it self into the testicles through those hollow fibers: being thence
propagated and continually making supply to the stones.

It is to be noted also, that these vessels while they move to the Root of the
yard, do not go by streigth passages, which would be then very short, but by
crooked windings and turnings, make the passages as long as may be, that they
may have longer time to contain and prepare the seed.

CHAP. XI. Of the Seminary bladders.
AT the end of the deferent vessels on both sides, are certain little bladders,
knit and joined together, and placed between the bladder and the right gut; the
last of which, together which the seminary vessels, is terminated in the
prostatae or forestanders by a little channel.

These bladders have two several uses, for they do not only striengthen the
seminary vessels where they end, but also seem to be the stores and magazines
of the seed. They are many, that every time a man uses the act of venerie, he
may have a new supply of matter from these several vesicles. Thus that which is
next the yard being first disburdened, the second is the next time emptied, and
so till all the store is spent; and were it not for these vesicles, a man could
not lie which a woman more then once.

In these vessels, such is the propensitie of nature to propagate, let the body
be never so much emaciated, there is always found a lesser or greater quantity
of seed. They are hollow and round to contain a greater quantity of seed,
they are also full of membranes, that they may be contracted or extended as the
plenty of seed requires; they are crooked and full of windings, and turnings,
that the seed contained may not easily slip out.

CHAP. XII. Of the kernelly Prostatae, or forestanders.
THe glandulous prostatae or forestanders: are two little testicles as it were
seated at the foot of the yard, a little above the sphinctere of the Urinarie
vessels, they are wrapped about with a membrane, which does also cloth the
seminary vessels and vesiicles: before and behind they seem more flat, on the
sides they are more round, they have a substance like other kernels, loose and
spungie, only they differ from them by reason of their whiteness and hardness;
they are endued which an exquisite feeling, to stir up a greater desire of
copulation. These Glandulae or kernels have certain pores that open themselves
into the Ureter through which the seed, these forestanders being squeezed by
the lower Muscles of the yard, distills into the yard.

The use of these kernels is partly to beget an oily, fat, and slipperie
substance, with which the urinarie passage is sometimes anointed, to defend it
from the acrimony both of the Seed and Urin, and to keep it always moist.

The other use is taken from the name of Prostatae, which word in the singular
number signifies a tutor or defender, for they are there placed to preserve and
strengthen the ends of the different vessels, lest by over much distention of
the yard, the teminary vessel should be either burst or moved out of their
places.

They have a third use, for being placed between the bladder and the right gut,
they serve instead of cushions for the vessel to rest upon, and to guard them
from all compression: Hence it happened sometimes that those who are very much
bound in their bodies while they strain themselves over-vehemently, do now and
then void a kind of seed, which happens by a violent compression of those parts.

CHAP. XIII Of the structure of the Yard.
THe structure of the Yard is not unknown, that is to say, at the root of the
share bone in the hinder part of the Hypogastrion or lower part of the belly,
where the hair grows, which bone is called Os pubis. Though the greatest part
of it is not pendent without, but adjoining to the podex is situated near the
joining of the share bone, being fast knit to it in the perinaeum, or space
between the cods and the fundament; the other part is pendent and is seen
hanging outward. This situation is most appropriated to the manner of the act
of generation, usual and peculiar to men, who do not couple after the manner of
beasts. The figure of it is in a manner round, though not exactly, broader in
the upper part which is called the back of the Yard.

The Thickness and Longitude of the Yard is so much as is required for
procreation, The quantity of it.
yet it is not so long as in many other creatures. Yea, and in several men
there is a very great diversity, little men being for the most part, best
provided in that part; It is also thought, that there is a national difference,
as to the bigness of this member; it being a general received opinion, that the
often use of Venery does increase the quantity of it in all dimensions.

The Yard will also be longer, if the Navel strings are not bound up, or knit
too close by the midriffe, in children that are newly born; but at some
distance from the navel: This happens by reason of the ligament coming fron the
navel to the bottom of the bladder; which if it be too much abbreviated, draws
up the bladders, and consequently shortens the yard; but if the navel string be
left at a longer distance, the Urac hos is enlarged, and consequently the yard
has more liberty to extend it self, and therefore the midwifes are from hence
advertised, that they do not spoil the harvest of Generation, by cutting the
sith too short.

The substance of the Yard.
As to the substance of the yard, it is not of a bony substance, as in dogs
wolphs or foxes; for so it would become always hard and erected, and hinder men
from all business but the act of venerie. Neither is it grisly, for so it could
neither erect it self, nor flag, when occasion required; neither is it full of
veins, for so it could not be emptied and repleted on such a sudden as often
happens; besides that tunicle of the veins are so thin that they could not
suffer so great a dissension; neither can it be full of Arteries, because it
wants a continual pulsation; neither can it consist of nerves, because they
having no hollowness cannot be extended and loosened, as it must of necessity
happen to the yard. It is therefore necessary that the yard should have such a
substance as is not peculiar to any other part of the body. It is therefore to
be understood that there do concur to the framing of the yard, two nervous
bodies, the passage for the Urine, which is called Urestua, the glary or nut of
the yard, four muscles, the vessels and the skin.

Here does arise a question, why the yard has not any far; which is in brief
this; because that there should be no hinderance to the perfect sense of the
yard, which could of necessity not be avoided, if that member were subject to
any obesity; the fat being subject to be melted by frication.

CHAP. XIV. Of the several parts constituting the Yard.
AMong the parts that compose the structure of the yard, is that skin which with
its cuticle, and fleshy pannicle, is common not only to this, but to other
members; only it has this peculiar to it self, that it may be reflexed, and
drawn back from the nut of the yard. This skin that turns back is called the
preputium; because that part in circumcision was cut away, with which prepuce,
the nut of the yard is covered.

The Glans or nut of the yard is a fleshy part, soft, thin, repleat with blood
and spirits; The nut of the yard.
endued with an exquisite sense; something sharp and acute at the end. This is
fastened to the prepuce at the lower part, by a certain ligament, which is
therefore called the bridle, or the filet, which commonly is broken in the
first venereal assaults, which are for the most part the most furious.

The greatest part of the yard is constituted by two nervous bodies, on both
sides one, The two nervous bodies.
which terminate both together in the nut. They rise from a twofold original,
leaning or resting upon the hip, under the share bone; whence as from a sure
foundation they go on till they arrive at the nut of the yard.

They consist of a double substance, the first is nervous, Their substance.
hard and thick; the inner part black, loose, soft, thin and spungy. It is
called the Nervous pipe. These two bodies are joined together by a certain
membrane, thin, yet nervous, which is strengthened by certain overthwart
fibers, being there placed in the likeness of a weavers shuttle: and though in
their original they are separated the one from the other, that there might
remain some certain space for the ureter; yet they are joined together about
the middle of the share bone; where they lose about the third part of their
nervous substance.

The interior substance, which is wrapped about by the exterior nervous
substance, The Ureter.
has this worthy observation, that there appears stretched through the whole
length of it, a thin and tender artery, proportionable to the bigness of the
body; which is diffused through the whole loose substance of the yard, reaching
as far the root of the yard. Besides these two, there is another body which
lies between these two, as proper, or rather more peculiar to the yard then
they are. This is a pipe placed at the inferior part of the yard, being called
the Vreter, though it be a passage as proper to the seed, as to the urine;
which is encompassed by the two forementioned bodies. This is a certain
Channel produced in length, and running through the middle of those nervous
bodies, consisting of the same substance that they do, being loose, thick,
soft, and tender; every way equal from the neck of the bladder to the nut of
the yard, saving that it is a little wider at the beginning, then it is toward
the place where it ends, which is at the head of the glans or nut of the yard.

At the beginning of this Channel there are three holes; one in the middle, The
holes of the Ureter.
and something bigger then the other two, arising from the neck of the bladder;
the other two on both sides one, being something narrower, proceeding from the
passage that goes out of the seminary vessels, and conveighs the seed into this
channel.

This is further to be noted in this place, that in the channel, where it is
joined to the glans, together with the nervous bodies, Note.
there is a little kind of cavern, in which sometimes either putrid seed, or
any other corroding humor, as happens in the gonorrhaea, being collected, is
the cause of ulcers in that part, the cause of very great pain; and it many
times also comes to pass, that there is a certain little piece of flesh which
grows out of this ulcer, that oftentimes stops up the passages of the urine.

To the structure of the yard, The Muscles of the Yard.
there do moreover concur two pair of muscles, one more short and thick,
proceeding from a part of the hip, near the beginning of the yard, and being of
a fleshy substance. The use of these two muscles, is to sustain the yard in the
erection; and to bend the forepart of the yard, which is to be inserted into
the womb: the other pair is longer, and rises from the sphincter of the
fundament, where they are endued with a more fleshy substance, being in length
full as long as the yard; under which they are carried downward, ending at the
sides of the ureter, about the middle of the yard. Their use is to dilate the
ureter, both at the time of making water, and at the time of conjunction; lest
it should be stopped up, by the repletion of the nervous bodies, and so stop up
the passage of the seed. They are also thought to keep the yard firm, lest it
should lean too much to either side, and also to press out the seed out of the
prostatae or forestanders.

The vessel of the Yard.
There are vessels also of all sorts in the yard: first of all certain veins
appearing in the external parts, and in the cuticle; which branch themselves
out from the Hypogastrion. In the middle, between the space of the fibers, they
send out certain branches from the right side, to the left, and from the left,
to the right. These veins swelling with a frothy blood and spirit, erect the
yard. There are also certain nerves which scatter themselves from the pith or
marrow of the holy bone quite through the yard, bringing with them the cause of
that pleasure and delight, which is perceived in the erection of the yard.

CHAP. XV. Of the Action of the Yard.
THe main scope of Nature in the use of the yard, was the injection of seed
into the womb of the woman, which injection could not be done, till the seed
were first moved; neither could the seed be moved but by frication of the
parts, which could not be done, till it were sheathed in the womb, nor that
neither, till the yard were erected.

This distension is caused by repletion; which is caused by the plenty of
seed: Secondly, by superfluity of wind, which if it be too violent, is the
cause of priapisme: A Third cause proceeds from the abundance of urine
contained in the bladder. Sometimes the heat of the reins is a cause thereof.

CHAP. XVI. Of the use of the Yard in general.
THe Yard is situated under the midriff over against the womb. And is also
placed between the thighs, for the greater strengthening of it in the act of
copulation; Neither is this the only strength which it has, for at the lower
part it appears more fleshie, which flesh is altogether muscly, for the greater
strength thereof. Neither is it only contented with this Musclie flesh, it
having too muscles also for the same purpose, on both sides to poise it even in
the act of erection; which though they are but little, yet are they exceeding
strong.

The figure of the yard is not absolutely round, but broader on the upper side,
lest it should be hindered by the convexity of the superior part, in the
casting forth of the seed.

Concerning the biggness of the yard, it is by most esteemed to be of a just
length, when it is extended the breadth of nine thumbs.

CHAP. XVII. Of the use of the parts constituting the Yard.
THe first thing in the constitution of the yard, that offeres it self to view,
is the skin, which is long and loose, by reason that the yard which is
sometimes to be extended, and sometimes to fall down again, so requires it.
The extremity of the skin is so ordered, that it sometimes covers the glans, and
sometimes draws back; that whilst it covers the nut of the yard, it may defend
the yard from frication, or provoking the motion of the seed.

Moreover this skin in the act of copulation, shuts up the mouth of the womb,
and hinders the ingress of the cold air. Concerning the two nervous bodies,
constituting the substance of the yard; their use is for the vital spirit to
run through the thin substance of them, and fill the yard with spirits.
Moreover by their thickness, they do prevent the two hasty empting and
flying out of the spirits, which are to stay in, for the greater and longer
erection of the yard.

The use of the Ureter is for the passage of seed and urine through it. The
substance of the Ureter is much the same with the two former bodies; the inside
being more thin and loose, the outside more nervous and thick; which is so
ordained, that it may be more apt to be erected with the yard. It goes forward
from the place where it begins, to the end of the spermatick vessels, and the
neck of the blader, and the warty forestanders where There arises a thin and
tender membrane, which the Chirurgions ought to take a great deal of care
least they break, while they thrust their siringes toward those parts; It is
endued with an exquisite sense to stir up pleasure and venereal desire.

As to tbe substance of the Glans, The use of the Glans.
it is the same with that of the yard; only it is not envelop'd with any
nervous body. For this ought to be repleted and increased, but not hardened;
lest it should injure the bone of the womb, by rubbing too hard upon it.

The figure of the Glans is such that at the top where it is most acute, it
has a hole for the issuing forth both of seed and Urine, which part coming to
the mouth of the womb, casts the seed into that concavitie, at which time the
neck of the womb with her overthwart fibers, seems to take hold and embrace
the glans; and that it might take the better hold, nature has framed a round
Circle at the bottom of the yard, for that purpose, with a convenient jeting
out round about from the body of the yard; by the benefit of which circle, the
seed is kept in the womb, and not suffered to fly out. Lastly, the Glans is so
constituted, as if all the actions of the yard consisted in the Glans; whether
in the act of erection, or copulation; or as to the pleasure which a man
perceives that lies all in this place.

SECT. II.
CHAP. I. Of the Genitals of Women.
AT the lower part of the belly appears the pubes, or the region of the hair.
Under this place are as it were lips of flesh, which in women that are ripe for
man, are clad with hair at the upper part, because of the heat and moisture of
the place; and this part is that which is most properly called the privy
member, being the exterior orifice, into which the yard of the man enters. In
the middle it has a cleft, on both sides of which are two fleshy
protuberances, beset with hair, being two soft oblong bodies composed of skin
and a spungy kind of flesh.

CHAP. II. Of those parts called Mymphs and Clytoris.
THe Nymphae or wings are a membraine or filmy substance, soft and spungy, and
partly fleshy; they are of a ruddy color, like the comb of a Cock under his
throat; they are two in number, though in the beginning they are joined
together by an acute Angle, where they produce a carneous substance, like the
preputium which clothes the Clytoris. Sometimes these wings so far increase,
that there is many times need of incision; a disease common among the Egyptians.

The Clytoris, The Clytoris.
is a certain substance in the upper part of the great cleft, where the two
wings concur. This in women is the seat of venereal pleasure: It is like the
yard in situation, substance, composition, and erection, and has something
correspondent both to the prepuce, and to the glans in men. Sometimes it grows
out to the bigness of the yard, so that it has been observed, to grow out of
the body the breadth of four fingers.

This Clytoris consists of two spungie and sinewy bodies, having a distinct
original, from the bone of the pubes. The head of this is covered with a most
tender skin, and has a hole like the glans, though not quite through, in
which, and in the bigness it differs only from the yard.

CHAP. IV. Of the fleshie knobs, and the greater neck of the womb.
PRresently behind the wings, before we go far inward in the middle of the
cleft, there do appear four knobs of flesh, being placed in a quadrangular form
one against the other; they are said to resemble Myrtle berries in form. In
this place is inserted the orifice of the bladder, which opens it self into the
fissure, to cast forth the Urine into the common channel. Now lest any cold air
or dust, or any such thing should enter into the bladder after the voiding of
the Urine, one of these knobs is seated so, that it shuts the urinary passage.
The second is right opposite to the first, the other two collateral. They are
round in virgins, but they hang flaging when virginity is lost.

The lips of the womb being gently separated, the neck of the womb is to be
seen, The neck of the womb.
in which two things are to be observed; the neck it self, or the Channel, and
the Hymen, which is there placed: by the neck of the womb, is understood the
Channel, which is between the said knobs, and the inner bone of the womb; which
receives the yard like a sheath; the substance The substance.
of it is sinewie, and a little spungie, that it may be dilated; In this
concavitie there are certain folds or orbicular pleights; these are made by a
certain tunicle, so wrinkled, as if a man should fold the skin with his
fingers. In virgins they are plain; in women with often copulation, they are
oftentimes worn out, sometimes they are wholly worn out, and the inner side of
the neck appears smooth, as it happens to whores; and women that have often
brought forth, or have bin over troubled with their fluxes. In old women it
becomes more hard and grisly. Now though this channel be something writhed and
crooked when it falls and sinkes down, yet in time of the flowers and
copulation, or in time of travel it is erected and extended, and this
overgreat extension in women that bring forth, is the cause of that great pain
in childbed.

CHAP. V. Of the Hymen.
THe Hymen The Hymen.
is a membrane not altogether without blood, neither so tender as the rest, but
more ruddie, and scattered up and down with little veins, and in a circular
form; it is placed overthwart, and shuts up the cavity of the neck of the womb.
In the middle it has a little hole, through which the menses are voided. This
at the first time of copulation is broken, which causes some pain, and gushing
forth of some quantity of blood; which is an evident sign of virginity; for if
the blood do not flow, there is a suspicion of a former deflowring.

CHAP. VI. Of the vessels that run through the neck of the womb.
BEtween the Duplicitie of the two tunicles, that constitute the neck of the
womb, there are many veins and arteries that run a long; arising from those
vessels, that descend on both sides to the thighs, and are inserted into the
side of the neck of the womb: the great quantity and bigness of them deserves
admiration; The cause of the largness of the vessels.
for they are much bigger then the nature and openness of the place seems to
require.

The cause of this is two fold; first because it being requisite for the neck
of the bladder to be filled with abundance of spirits, and to be extended and
dilated for the better taking hold of the yard; there is required a great heat
for these kind of motions, which growing more intense by the act of frication,
does consume a great quantity of moisture, so that great vessels are
requisite, and only able to make that continual supply that is needful.

There is another cause of the longness of these vessels, which is this;
because that the monthly purgations are poured through those veins; for the
flowers must not come only out of the womb, but out of the neck of the womb
also: whence it happens, Note.
that women with child do sometimes continue their purgations, because that
though the womb be shut up, yet the passages in the neck of the womb are open.

The two holes, or pits, near the lips of the pudendum.
This is also further to be noted in the neck of the womb, that as soon as ever
your sight is entered within the female fissure, there do appear to the view,
two certain little holes, or pits, where in is contained a serous humor; which
being pressed out in the act of copulation, do not a little add to the
pleasure thereof.

This is the humor with which women do moisten the top of a man's yard; not the
seed but a humor proper to the place, voided out by the womb.

CHAP. VII. Of the fabric of the womb.
TO the neck of the womb, the womb it self is adjoined, in the lower part of
the Hypogastrion, where the Hips are widest and broadest; which are greater and
broader thereabouts then those of men; which is the reason also that they have
broader buttockes then men have.

The womb The womb.
is placed between the bladder and the straight Gut; being joined to the
bladder and leaning upon the straight Gut; where it lies as between two
cushions; this situation of the womb was fittest, that so it might have
liberty to be stretched or contracted, according to the biggness of the fruit
contained in it.

The figure The figure.
of the womb is round, and not unlike a Gourd that lessens and grows more
acute at the one end; the bottom of the womb is knit together by Ligaments of
its own, which are peculiar. The neck of the womb is joined by its own
substance, and by certain membranes to the share bone and the sacred bone.

As to the bigness The bigness.
of it, that varies according to the age, constitution of the body, and use of
venerie. For it is much greater in women that have brought forth, then in those
that are with child, and after the birth, for the most part it exceeds the
bigness of the bladder; but in virgins it is for the most part equal to the
bladder.

It is of a substance so thick as that it exceeds a thumbs breadth in thickness,
which after conception is so far from decreasing, that it increases still to a
greater bulk and proportion.

This substance the more to confirm it, is interweaved with all manner of
fibers, The fibers.
straight, oblique, and overthwart.

The Vessels of the womb are Veins, The veins.
Arteries, and Nerves.

There are two little veins which are carried from the spermatick vessels to
the bottom of the womb; and two greater from the Hypogastricks, which go not
only to the bottom, but to the neck. The mouth of these veins pierce as far
as the inward concavitie; in which place the extremities of them are called
Acetabula; which in the time of the flowers, gape and open themselves by reason
of the great plenty and stream of blood, that powers it self from thence; and
therefore they are at that time most conspicuous; In women with Child, that
which is called the Liver of the womb, is joined to them, that it might draw
blood for the nourishment of the child; at which time these veins do so swell,
but especially in the time of near deliverie, that they are as bigg as the
Emulgent veins, or at least half as thick as the Hollow veins.

It has two Arteries The Arteries.
on both sides, the Spermatick, and the Hypogastrick, which every where do
accompany the veins.

The womb has also diverse little Nerves knit together in form of a net, which
are carried not only to the interior part of the bottom of the womb, but also
to the neck, and as far as the privities themselves; and that chiefly for sense
and pleasure; for which cause there is a great sympathy between the womb and
the head.

This is also further to be noted, Note.
that the womb in its situation is not fixed and immovable, but moveable, by
reason of two ligaments which hang on both sides, from the share bone, and
piercing through the Peritonaeum; are joined to the bone it self, so that it
sometimes happens that through those holes of the Peritonaeum, which give
passage to these ligaments being loosned, either the Omentum or Call, or the
Entrails, do swell outwardly, and cause the burstness either of the Caul, or
of the Guts, and sometimes it happens by reason of the loosnes of those
ligaments, that the womb is moved with such a force, that it falls down; and in
the act of Copulation is moved up and down; sometimes it moves upward, that
some women do affirm that it ascends as high as their stomach. Now though the
womb be one continued body, yet is it divided into the mouth, and the bottom.

The bottom of the womb is called all that which by still assending stretches
it self from the internal orifice to the end; being narrow toward the Mouth,
but dilating it self by little and little, till it come at the entrails.

The mouth of the womb, is that narrowness between the neck and the bottom; it
is an oblong and transverse Orifice; but where it opens it self, orbicular,
and round, the Circumference very thick and of an exquisite feeling; and if
this mouth be out of order, and be troubled with schirrus, brawn or
over-fatness; over-moisture, or relaxation, it is the cause of barrenness. In
those that are big with child, there uses to stick to this orifice; a thick
viscous glutinous matter, that the parts moistened may be the more easily
opened. For in the deliverie, this mouth is opened after a very strange and
miraculous manner, so that according to the bigness of the birth, it suffers an
equal dilatation, from the bottom of the womb to the privy member.

CHAP. VI. Of the preparing vessels in women.
THe spermatick preparing vessels, The vessels.
are two veins and two arteries, differing not at all from those of men, either
in their number, original, action, or use, but only in their bigness and the
manner of their insertion. For as to their number, there are so many veins, and
so many arteries, as in men. They arise also from the same place as in men,
that is to say, the right, from the trunk of the hollow vein descending; the
left, from the left Emulgent.

There are two arteries The Arteries.
also, on both sides one, which grows from the Aorta; these both bring vital
blood for the work of generation.

As to the Longitude and Latitude of these vessels, they are narrower and
shorter in women, only where they are wrinkled, they are much more wreathed and
contorted then in men; for the way being shorter in women then in men, nature
required that for stretching out of these vessels, that they should be more
wrinkled and crankled then in men, that the blood might stay there in greater
quantity, for the preparation of the seed.

These vessels The insertion of the vessels.
in women are carried with an oblique course through the small guts to the
stones, being wrapped up in fatter membranes; but in the midway they are divided
into two branches whereof the greater branch goes to the stone, constituting
the varicous or winding body, and those wonderful inoculations: the lesser
branch ends in the womb; in the sides of which it is scattered up and down, and
chiefly at the higher part of the bottom of the womb, for nourishment of the
womb and of the birth; and that some part of the flowers may be purged out
through those vessels: Now because the stones of women are seated near the
womb, for that cause these vessels fall not from the peritoneum, neither make
they such passages as in men, neither reach they to the share bone.

CHAP. VII. Of the Stones in Women.
THe stones of women, although they do perform the same actions, and are for
the same use as men's, yet they differ from them in situation, Their situation.
substance, temperament, figure, magnitude, and in their covering.

They are seated in the hollowness of the Abdomen; neither do they hang out as
in men, but they rest upon the muscles of the Loins; and this for that cause
that they might be more hot and fruitful; being to elaborate that matter, which
with the seed of man engenders man.

In this place arises a question, not trivial; A doubt.
whether the seed of woman be the efficient, or the material cause of
generation? to which it is answered, that though it have a power of acting, yet
that it receives the perfection of that power from the seed of man.

The stones of women differ from men's also, as to their figure, Their figure.
because they are not so round and oval as those of men, being in their fore
and hinder part more depressed and broad; the external superficies being more
unequal, as if a great many knots and kernels were mixed together. There is
also another difference, as to the subject, because they are softer and moister
then those of men, being more loose and ill compacted.

The bigness and temper.
Their magnitude and temperament do also make a difference, for the stones of
women are much colder and lesser then men's; which is the reason that they beget
a more thin and watery seed.

Their coverings also do make a difference, for men's are wrapped up in diverse
tunicles, because being pendent outward, they were otherwise more subject to
external injuries; but the stones of women have but one tunicle, which though
it stick very close to them, yet are they also half clothed over with the
Peritoneum.

CHAP. VIII. Of the deferent or ejaculatory vessels.
THe deferent vessels are two blind passages, on both sides one, nothing
differing in substance from the spermatick veins. They rise in one part from
the bottom of the womb, neither do they reach from their other extremity,
either to the stone or to any other part, but are shut up, and unpassable,
adhering to the womb, just as the the blind gut adheres to the Colon; but
winding half way about the stones, are every ways remote from them, no where
touching them, only are tied to them with certain membranes, not unlike the
wings of Bats, through which certain veins and arteries, being produced from
the stones, do run; and end in these passages: where they begin, at the bottom
of the womb, they are hollow and large, but as they proceed further on, they
grow narrower, till near their end they do again obtain a larger bigness; these
two passages thus running from the corners of the womb, to the stones, are
taken only to be certain ligaments, by which the stones and the womb are
strongly knit together; and these ligaments in women, are the same things with
the Cremasteres in men.

CHAP. IX. Of the Actions and Uses of the Genital parts in Women.
IN the privy part are seen, the Pubes, the mountains of veins, the two
lips, the Orifice, under which the two wings lie hid the little knobs of
flesh, resembling myrtle berries, the passages of the Urin and the Clytories.

As for the pubes and the Mountains of Venus, they serve for this use, that the
great Orifice might be the better shut, and to avoid compression in copulation;
for which cause they are beset with hair, and are covered with a hard kind of
fat; the great orifice receives the yard, and gives passage to the Urine and
the birth. The use of the wings, or knobs of flesh, like Myrtle berries, are
for the defense of the internal parts, shutting the orifice of the neck, least
cold air, dust, or any other annoyances, should hurt it, from without; and
while they swell up, they cause titillation and desire in those parts. Lastly,
the passages of the Urine being shut up by the knobs of flesh resembling myrtle
berries, hinders the unvoluntarie passage of the Urine.

CHAP. X. Of the action of the Clytoris.
THe action of the Clytoris is like that of the yard, which is erection; which
erection is for the motion and attraction of the seed.

CHAP. XI. Of the action and use of the neck of the womb.
THe action of the neck of the womb, is the same with that of the yard; that is
to say, erection, which is occasioned diverse ways. First, all this passage is
erected and made straight, for the better conveyance of the yard to the womb.
Then while the whole passage is erected, it is repleated with spirit and vital
blood, whereby it becomes narrower for the more straight embracing of the yard.

The causes of this erection are, first, because if the womb were not erected,
the yard could not have a convenient passage into the womb; secondly, it would
hinder convenient affrication, without which the seed could not be drawn forth.
Lastly, it hinders any hurt or damage which might be done by the violent force
of the yard.

CHAP. XII. Of the uses of the vessels running through the neck of the womb.
FIrst, it is required that there should be a concurrence of diverse veins and
arteries, for the nourishment of that part; and though that part it self being
full of membranes does not require much nourishment, yet by reason that it is
to suffer erection, that could not be done but by blood and spirits, which are
contained in these vessels; besides, although the fubstance of this part be of
a cold temperament, being notwithstanding still heated by the act of
copulation, that heat would soon consume a slender nourishment, which nature
has supplied by the concourse of these vessels. Another cause of the plenty of
these veins, is nourishment of the birth, and the exclusion of the flowers.

CHAP. XIII. Of the actions of the womb.
THe first use of the womb is to attract the seed, by a familiar sympathy, just
as the lodestone draws iron.

The second use is to retain it, which is properly called conception.

The third is to cherish the seed thus attracted, to altar it, and change it
into the birth, by raising up that power which before lay sleeping in the seed,
and to reduce it from power into act: The fourth action of the womb is to send
forth the birth at the time prefixed; the apt time of expulsion, is when the
expulsive faculty begins to be affected with some sense of trouble, that is
when the birth afflicts and oppresses the womb with its own weight.

Besides these uses, it has these moreover to nourish the birth, and to dilate
it self, which it does by the help of veins and arteries, which do fill more
and more with matter, as nature requires.

The chiefest action of the womb and most proper to it, The proper actions of
the womb.
is the retention of the seed; without which, nothing of other action could be
performed for the generation of man.

CHAP. XIV. Of the utility of the womb.
FIrst, it is the most fit place for copulation, as being in a place furthest
removed from the senses, near which it were not fit to be, by reason of the
inconveniences which would necessarily arise.

It is most fit to receive the birth, as being hollow, in which concavity the
birth may increase to its full proportion every way.

It is most fit for the exclusion of the birth, as being placed downward,
whereby the birth might help its self with its own weight; and also by reason
of the muscles of the Abdomen, which serve for compression, and do help the
endeavors of the mother.

CHAP. XV. Of the Utility of the preparing vessels in women.
THe Utilities of these vessels are taken, first, from their original, and from
their insertion, the right vein rising from the hollow, and the left from the
emulgent, as in men, that the more hot and purer blood might come from the
right vein, for the procreation of males, and the more serous and watery blood
from the Emulgent, for the generation of women.

The vessels also in women are shorter then in men, because the way is not so
far to the stones; which brevity of the vessels is lengthened out by the many
turnings and windings with which those vessels are endued. In the middle way
those vessels divide themselves like a fork, the greater part going to the
stones, carrying the matter for seed; the lesser is carried to the womb, where
it scatters it self all along the sides of it, for the Nutrition of the womb.

As for the Arteries, they afford the blood which is more full of spirits to
perfect the seed.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Utility of the stones.
THe use of the stones in women, is the same as in men; that is to say, to
prepare the seed, and to make it fit for procreation. They are seated within,
that they should not want a continual heat, to cherish them; for the matter of
the seed being colder in men then in women, it requires a greater heat, which
it would of necessity want, were the stones placed outward, like those of men;
and for that cause are they covered only with one tunicle, that the heat of
those parts may more easily pass to them. And therefore the stones of women,
are softer then those of men, because they should not perfect so substantial a
seed; and that the heat of the adjacent parts should not be wholly taken up in
the cherishing of them.

Their figure is not exactly round, Their figure.
but depressed, that the little Meanders of the veins dispersed through the
membrane, from the stones to the deferent vessels, might have more room to be
inserted for the attraction of the seed, out of the whole substance of the
stone. The inequality and ruggedness of them makes for the longer stay of the
seed in those crooked and winding vessels.

SECT. III.
CHAP. I. Of the signs of Conception.
Signs of conception.
HAving thus showed you the Anatomy and use of the parts, it will be requisite
to discourse of the conception it self, which is the main and chief end of
these vessels: And first of the signs of conception.

The signs of conception on the mothers side, are certain and apparent;
first, if after she has had the company of her husband, she has received more
content then ordinary.

Pains in the head, vertigo, dimness of the eyes; all these concurring together,
portend conception; the apples of the eyes decrease, the eyes themselves swell
and become of a dark color, the veins of the eyes wax red, and swell with
blood, the eyes sink, the eyebrows grow loose, various colors appear in the
eyes, little red pimples rise in the face, the veins between the nose and the
eyes swell with blood, and are seen more plain; the vein under the tongue looks
greenish, the neck is hot, the backbone cold, the veins and arteries swell,
and the pulses are observed more easily; the veins in the breast first look of
a black color, but afterward turn yellowish, the teats look red; if she drink
cold drink, she feels the cold in her breast, she loathes her meat and drink,
she has diverse longings, but her natural appetite is destroyed: continual
vomitings follow, and weakness of the stomach, sower belches, worms about her
navel, faintness of the loins, the lower part of her belly swelling, inward
griping of the body, the retention of the seed seven days after the act of
copulation; after which act there is a cold and trembling, which seizes the
external members; the attractive force of the womb increases, the womb dries
up. It is also a certain sign of conception if the Midwife touching with her
finger the interior neck of the womb, shall find it exactly closed, so that
the point of a needle will not go between: the womb waxes round and swells, the
flowers cease to flow, for the veins through which they come down, carry the
blood to the nourishment of the birth; the thighs swell with some pain, the
whole body grows weak, and the face waxes pale; the Excrements proceed slower
out of the body: the Urine is white, a little cloud swimming at the top, and
many atoms appear in the Urine. Take the Urine of a woman and shut it up three
days in a glass, if she have conceived, at the end of three days there will
appear in the Urine certain live things, to creep up and down. Take also the
Urine of a woman, and put it in a basin a whole night together, with a clean
and bright needle in it, if the woman have conceived, the needle will be
scattered full of red speckles, but if not, it will be black and rustie.

CHAP. II. Whether she have conceived a Male.
Conception of a Male.
IF she have conceived a male child, the right eye will move swifter, and look
clearer then the left. The right pap will also rise and swell beyond the left,
and grow harder, and the color of the teats will change more suddenly. The
milk will increase more suddenly, and if it be milked out and be set in the
Sun, it will harden into a clear mass, not unlike pearl. If you cast the Milk
of the woman upon her Urine, it will presently sink to the bottom. Her right
cheek is more muddy, and the whole color of her face is more cheerful; she
feels less numness: The first motion of the child is felt more lively in the
right side for the most part upon the sixtieth day. If her flowers flow the
fourtieth day after conception. The belly is more acute toward the navel. As
the woman goes she always puts her right leg forward, and in rising she eases
all she can her right side sooner then her left.

CHAP. III. Whether she have conceived a Female.
IF she have conceived a Female Conception of a Female.
the signs are for the most part contrary to those aforesaid.

The first motion is made most commonly the nintieth day after conception,
which motion is made in the left side; Females are carried with greater pain,
her thighs and Genital members swell; her color is paler, she has a more
vehement longing. Her flowers flow the thirtieth day after conception. Girls
are begot of parents who are by nature more cold and moist, their seed being
more moist, cold and liquid.

CHAP. IV. Of the Conception of Twins.
IF a woman have conceived twins, Conception of Twins.
the signs thereof appears not till the third or fourth month after her
conception; and then it will appear by the motion of the Infant, and by the
extraordinary swelling of her belly. As to the motion, it is plain that she
does bear twins if she perceive a motion on the right and left side at the
same instant, which she perceives more quick and violent. As for the greatness
of the belly, if the woman perceive it bigger then at any other times of her
being with child, as also if the two flanks be swelled higher then the middle
of the belly; if there do appear, as it were, a line of devision from the
navel to the groine, making a kind of channel all a long; if the woman carry
her burden with more then ordinary pain: These are commonly the signs of
twins.

CHAP. V. Of false Conception.
False Conception.
Women do oftentimes deceive themselves concerning their conception; for they
do many times believe themselves to be big with child, when it is nothing else
but either the retention of their flowers, which do not fall down according to
their accustomed periods of time, or else that which is called the Moon-calfe,
which is a lump of flesh, for the most part like the guisern of a bird, greater
or lesser, according to the time of its being there, which is most commonly not
above four or five months.

Several sorts of Moles.
Of moles there are two sorts; the one is called the true mole, the other is
called the false mole. The true mole is a fleshie body, filled with many
vessels, which have many white, green, or black lines, or membranes; it is
without thought, without motion, without bones, without bowels, or entrails;
receiving its nourishment through certain veins; it lives the life of a
plant, without any figure or order being engendered in the concavitie of the
matrix, adhearing to the sides of it, but borrowing nothing of its substance.

Of the false mole Of the false mole.
there are four sorts, the windy mole, which is a conflux of wind; the watrie
mole, which is a conflux of watrie humors; the Humorous mole, which is a
conflux of various humors; the Membranous mole, which is a thin bag filled
with blood. All these four are contained in the concavity of the womb.

These moles Sign of moles.
are sometimes engendered with the Infant, though they do oftentimes cause the
Infant to die, either because it does deprive the Infant of that nourishment,
which goes from the infant to the increase of that, or else because it hinders
the growth and perfection of the Infant. The cause of the fleshy mole does not
always proceed from the mother, for the man does often contribute to the
increase of it, when the seed of the man is weak, imperfect and barren, or
though it be good, if there be too small a quantity of it, which after it is
mingled with the seed of the woman, is chok'd by the menstrual blood, and so
not being sufficient for the generation of the Infant, instead thereof produces
this little mass of flesh, which by little and little grows bigger, being wrapped
about in a caul, while nature strives to engender any thing rather then to be
idle.

It happens also when the woman during her monthly purgations receives the
company of her husband, her body being not yet purged and void; or else when
the woman lies with a great desire and lust with her husband, after she has
conceived, or when she has retained her monthly courses beyond her time.

The windy mole, The windy mole.
is engendered by the weak heat of the matrix, and the parts adjoining, as the
liver and the spleen, which engender a quantity of wind, which fix in the
concavity of the matrix.

The watery Mole, The watery mole.
is engendered of many confluences of water, which the womb receives, either
from the speen, or the liver, or the parts adjoining, or else from the weakness
of the liver which cannot assimulate the blood which is sent thither, for the
nourishment of the thing contained in it; part whereof turns into water, which
cannot be voided, but remains in the womb.

That which is called the Humorous mole, is engendered of many moist humors,
serosities, or the whites, or certain watery purgations, which sweat forth from
the menstruous veins, and are contained in the concavity of the matrix.

The Membranous mole, The membranous mole.
is a skin or bag, which is garnished with many white and transparent vessels,
filled up with blood: This being cast into the water, the blood goes out, and
the membrane is seen only to gather like a heap of clotted seed.

False Conception has many signs, The signs of false conception.
common with the true conception; as the supression of the flowers, depraved
appetite, vomitings, swelling of the belly, and of the breasts; so that it is a
hard thing to distinguish the one from the other: only these that follow are
more properly the signs of false, then true conception. For in false
conception, the face is ordinarily puffed up, the breasts, that at the first
were swollen, afterward become every day more then other softer and lanker,
and without milk. In fine, the face, the breast, the arms, the thighs and
groynes grow lank and meager: The belly waxes hard, as happens to those who are
troubled with the Dropsy, and almost of an equal roundness; with many pricking
pains, at the bottom of the belly, which have scarce any intermission; which is
the cause that they can hardly sleep, being encombered with a heavy and dead
burden. It may be known also by other signs, for in the conception the Male
Infant begins to move at the beginning of the third month, for the most part,
and the female at the beginning of the third or fourth month, now where any
motion happens, the woman ought to observe whether she have any milk in her
breasts or no, if she have milk in her breasts, it is a sign of true
conception, if she have not, it is a sign of a false one. Besides, in true
conception, the mother shall perceive her child to move on all sides, oftener
though to the right flank then to the left, sometimes up, sometimes down,
without any assistance; but in false conception, although there be a kind of
motion, which is not enlivened that proceeds from the expulsive faculty of the
mother, and not from the mole. The mother shall also perceive it to tumble
always on that side she lies, not having any power to sustain it self; beside
as she lies on her back, if any one do push gently downward the burden of her
belly, she shall perceive it to lie and rest in the place where it was pushed,
without returning thither: Beside that which will confirm it more, is, when
after the end of nine months the woman shall not come to her travel, but that
her belly still swells and is puffed up more and more, all the rest of the parts
of the body growing thin and meager, this is a sign of a mole, notwithstanding
that many women have been known to go ten or eleven months before their
delivery.

The signs of the windy mole are these, when the belly is equally stretched and
swelled up like a bladder, more soft then when it bears the fleshie mole, and
especially near the groynes, and small of the belly; if it be struck on, it
sounds like a drum; sometime the swelling decreases, but by and by it swells
more and more; the woman feels her self more light, it is engendered and
increases swifter then the fleshie mole, or the watery, and it makes such a
dissension of the belly, as if one were tearing it a sunder: For the watery and
humorous mole, the signs are almost the same; the belly increases and swells by
little and little, as the woman lies upon her back, the sides of her belly are
more swelled and distended then the middle, or the bottom of the belly, which
grows flatter then, by reason that the water and the humors fall down to the
sides of the belly, moving up and down on the belly, as if there were a
fluctuation of water there.

This distinction is more to be observed in the watery mole, that the flank and
thighs are more stretched and swollen then the humoral, because that the waters
flow thither oftentimes, and that which comes forth through natures conduite,
is as clear as rock water, without any ill savor: but that which flows out in
the humoral distemper is more red, like water wherein flesh has been washed,
and is of an ill savor. This is also to be marked in false conception, that
the flowers never come down, and the navel of the mother advances it self
little or nothing, both which happen in true conception.

There are besides these above written, certain other tumors which the women
do take for moles. These occasion a rotundity and swelling in the belly, which
are not discovered till the woman be opened, and then there does appear, though
the body of the womb be clean and neat, without any thing contained in it, at
one or both corners of the womb, a quantity of water, contained as it were in
little bags; in others are to be seen a heap of kernels and superfluous flesh
clustered up together in the womb, which cause it to swell. Yet in these women
it has been observed, that their purgations have been very regular, which has
been a sign that the womb it self has been in good temper.

There is also another excrescency of flesh, which may be termed a pendent
mole, The pendent mole.
which is a piece of flesh, hanging within the inner neck of the womb, which at
the place where it is fastened, is about a fingers breadth, still increasing
bigger and bigger toward the bottom like a little bell: This flesh hanging in
the interior neck of the womb, possesses the whole orifice of the privy member,
sometimes appearing outward, as big as the fist, as has been observed in some
women. Of the cures of all these we shall treat in due place.

CHAP. VI. How women with child ought to govern themselves.
IN the first place she ought to choose a temperate and wholesome air, neither
too hot nor too cold, nor in a watery and damp place, nor too subject to fogs or
winds, especially the South wind, which is a great enemy to women with child,
causing often times abortion in them. The North wind is also hurtful, engendring
Rhumes and Catarrhs and Coughs, which do often force a woman to lie down before
her time. Likewise the winds which carry with them evil odours and vapors, for
these being sucked with the air into the Lungs, are the cause of diverse
diseases.

For her diet Her Diet.
she ought to choose meat that breeds good and wholesome nourishment, and which
breeds good juice, such are meats that are moderately dry, the quantity ought
to be sufficient, both for themselves, and for their children, and therefore
they are to fast as little as may be, for abstinence unless upon good occasion
renders the child sickly, and tender, and constrains it to be born before its
time, to seek for nourishment, as the overmuch diet stuffs it up, or renders
it so big, that it can hardly keep its place.

All meats too cold, too hot, and too moist, are to be avoided, as also the use
of salads and spiced meats; and the too much use of salt meats, are also
forbidden, which will make the child to be born without nails, a sign of short
life. Her bread ought to be good wheat, well baked and levened. Her meats ought
to be Pigeons, Turtles, Phesants, Larks, Partrige, Veal, and Mutton. For herbs
she may use Lettice, Endive, Bugloss, and Burrage, abstaining from raw Salads:
for her last course she may be permitted to eat Pears, Marmalad, as also
Cherries and Damsons; she must avoid all meats that are diuretic, and provoke
urine, or the terms, and such meats as are windy, as Pease, and Beans. Of
Longing.
Yet because there are some women that have such depraved stomachs, by reason
of a certain salt and sower humor contained in the membranes of the stomach, as
that they will eat coals, chalk, ashes, cinders, and such like trash, so that
it is impossible to hinder them; to such therefore we can only say thus much,
that they ought to forbear as much as in them lies, assuring them that such
trash does not only endanger their own health, but the health of the child.
Yet if they cannot command that depraved appetite, let them so provide, though
it be by giving some small satisfaction to their depraved longings, that they
do not hasten any further inconvenience; for though those strange meats be very
contrary to nature, yet the strange desire that they have to them, does not a
little avail to the disgestion of them. For her drink, let it be small Ale,
though now and then a cup of pure wine does not amiss, to comfort the stomach
and the parts dedicated to generation.

Her time of sleep Her sleeping.
is best in the night, for the concoction of those meats which she has eat
in the day time: she must avoid, by all means, the sleeping after dinner; she
may sleep full out nine hours; her sleeping beyond that time is prejudicial.

She may exercise Her exercise.
her self moderately, for violent exercise loosens the Cotyledons, through
which the Infant receives his nourishment: the riding in coaches is forbid
especially, for the last three months.

She ought to avoid great noises, Other precepts.
as the noise of Guns, or great bells.

Laughing, crying, if it be immoderate, is extremely hurtful, as also
immoderate anger.

In the first four months she ought not to lie with her husband, for that
shakes and moves the fruit of her womb, and causes the flowers to descend; she
must also abstain in the sixth and eight; but in the seventh and ninth it is
not denied, and is thought to facilitate the delivery.

She ought also to keep her body soluble, which if it should come of it self,
she must take loosing syrups to help nature; As Soon as ever they perceive
themselves to be with child, they must lay a side their busks, and not
straighten themselves any way, for fear of hurting the fruit of their womb, by
not giving it its full liberty of growth.

CHAP. VII. How women ought to govern themselves, in the time of their going
with child.
FIrst, that her breasts, Precepts concerning the breasts.
after her delivery, may not grow big, and swell overmuch; as also to a void
the danger of two much blood, which being converted into milk, may chance to
curd and breed some disease in the breast: Therefore as soon as she perceives
her self with child, let her carry about her neck, a small neck-lace of gold,
though some do more esteem of a neck-lace of steel, or a little ingot of steel,
to hang between the two breasts: you may also foment the breasts a quarter of
an hour every morning, with the distilled waters of sage, perwincle, or
Ground Ivy, making them first luke warm: when the third or fourth month of
her time is come, Concerning the belly.
and that she perceives the Infant begin to move, about which time the belly
begins to swell, and to grow big, she may swathe it with a linen swath-band,
which she may anoint with some convenient pommatum; this keeps the belly
smooth, and from wrinkles, and from hanging down like a tripe.

She may use this liniment, or Pommatum.
the gall of a kidd, and of a sow, of each iij. capon greass and goose greass
of each an ounce and an half; cut these into little pieces, and melt them in
an earthen dish, putting thereto as much water as will suffice to keep them from
burning; then strain it through a linen cloth, and afterward having washed
it in fair water, until it be very white, add to it of the marrow of a redd
dear, about an ounce, then wash it again in rose water, or some other water
of a good sent, and anoint the swath-band therewith.

Or this,
. of the grease of a dog, and the fat of mutton, which is about the kidnyes, of
each two ounces; the fat of a whale, about an ounce; oil of sweet Almonds,
about an ounce and a half; prepare the greases as abovesaid, then mingle them
with the other things, and wash them in rose water, as before.

Some women that are loath to grease their bellyes with these ointments, do
carry the skin of a dog, or else the outward and thin pilling of a sheeps skin;
take the skin of a dog ready dressed, for the making of gloves; wash it a good
many times in fair water first, and afterward in rose water, then dry it in
the shade, and moisten it in the foresaid oils.

Take this one more Liniment.
. a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, well washed in fair Water; of rose
water, and of oil of sweet Almonds, an ounce; of the seed of a a Whale, half
an ounce; melt these altogether, and anoint the belly. These ointments are to
be kept in a Galley-pot, covered over with rose water.

The woman having attained the ninth month of her time, and still continuing
these ointments, she may now begin to use more exercise, walking gently before
dinner, for the first twelve or fifteen days of that month; afterward she
may use a more strong exercise, that is for the eight or ten next days. In the
first days of this month it might not be unprofitable to be bathed in the
following decoction, for the space of a quarter of an hour, and being
afterward put to bed, to let her self be well rubbed, and afterward anointed
with some good ointment all about the navill, along the Os sacrum, and the bone
of the small guts, and all about her hips and thighs.

You may use this Bath.
of Mallows, marshmallows, mother-wort, of each two handfuls; roots of
Lillies, three ounces, of Camomil and Melilot flowers, of each a good handful;
the seed of Line, Quinces, and Fenugreek, of each an ounce; boil all these in
fair water to make a decoction, and for a half bath.

You may use this Ointment.
Hens grease, three ounces, the grease of a Duck, an ounce and an half, oil
of Linseed, an ounce and an half, fresh butter, two ounces; melt all these
together, and then wash them well, either in pellitorie water, or in the water
of mugwort, adding thereto two ounces of the muscilage of Marshmallows.

If the woman all her time do complain, that she feels little or no motion of
the child, let her carry upon her navel this following quilt, which will give
strength to the Infant.

powder of Roses, red Corral, Gillow-flowers, of each three ounces and an half,
seed of Angelica, two drams, Mastick, a dram and an half, Ambergrease, two
grains, Musk, one grain; put all these in a sack of fine Linen, and quilt them
together for the use aforesaid. Thus much is to be observed by women with
child, that are in health, and have no other diseases hanging upon them: but
of the other diseases incident to women with child, we shall take a time
hereafter to treat.

SECT. IV. Of the formation of the child in the womb.
CHAP. I. Of the mixture of the seed of both Sexes, as also of its substance
and form.
AFter that the womb, which is the Genital member of the Female Sex, has
received the seed of the Man, she commixes also her own seed, so that there is
now but one mixture made, of the seed of both sexes.

Now of the next matter of the birth, there is a difference among the learned,
which being unnecessary for this place, we shall let go, and stick close to
them, who affirm, that the seeds of both sexes, being confused in the womb,
does make up the first matter of the birth; so that if there were not a mixture
of both seeds, it were impossible that any generation could be. Yet though
there be of necessity a confusion of both seeds, we deny not but that their
qualities are different, for the seed of a man, exceeds the seed of a woman,
both in thickness and heat, which is more cold and moist, and therefore more
watery. Yet though they differ thus in quality, it is not to be denied, but that
the seed of the woman, gives a mutual assistance to the seed of man, in the
work of generation.

But it being unquestionable, that the menstruous blood is the matter of the
woman's seed, therefore that ye may know the original of it, it is to be
understood, that the Menstruous blood, Of the monstrous blood.
is nothing else but an excrement of the third concoction, gathered together
every month, and purged out: Which purgation being duly made, the woman is
then in perfect health of body; but if they come not down according to their
accustomed times, and seasons, or do not come down at all, the woman neither
can conceive, nor engender.

Thus the seeds of both sexes meeting in the womb, and there mixing together,
they are presently enclosed in a little Tunicle, begot by the heat of the womb,
and are there as it were, coagulated and curdled together.

CHAP. II. Of the three tunicles which the birth is wrapped in, in the womb.
FIrst, out of the extreme superficies of the seed, by reason of the more
watrie moisture of the woman's seed, a thin membrane is generated, which by
reason of its moist quality, is dilated farther, being at first transparent,
but after the birth comes forth, folded up together, and is called the
secondines.

But of the superfluous moisture of these two tunicles, are begot two other
tunicles, which defend the infant from being cloged with any superfluities, as
from the flowers retained, after conception, which serve neither for the
nourishment, nor for the increase of the infant. Yet are they retained till the
very time of the birth, at which time they are either let out, by the hand of
the Midwife, or else bursting the secondine, wherein they are contained, they
flow out of themselves.

The second tunicle is that which was anciently called Allancoides, wrapping
about all the inferior parts, from the navel downward; this is full of folds
and wrinkles; in which the urine, sweat, and other sharp humors, that distill
from the infant, almost grown to maturity, are contained and kept to the time
of delivery.

By this second tunicle therefore the infant is delivered, and defended from
those humors, least they should either corrode, and hurt the tender skin of
the Infant, or else any way defile and foul the Infant.

The third tunicle, with in all these, compasses the whole birth round about,
defending it from all sharp exterior humors, being very soft and tender.

CHAP. III. Of the true generation of the parts, and the increase of them,
according to the several days and seasons.
AFter the womb has received the Genital seed, and by its heat has shut them
both up, curdled and coagulated together, from the first to the seventh day are
generated many fibers, bred by a hot motion, in which not long after, the
liver, with its chief Organs, is first formed. Through which Organs, the vital
spirit being sent to the seed, within the tenth day forms, and distinguishes
the chiefest members. This spirit is let in through certain veins of the
secondine, through which the blood flows in and out, of which the navel is
generated. At the same time, in the clotted seed there do appear three white
lumps, not unlike curdled milk, out of which arise the liver, the brain and the
heart.

Presently after this, a vein is directed through the navel, to suck the
thicker sort of the blood that remains in the seed, for the nourishment of the
parts. This vein is two forked.

In the other branch of this vein is a certain blood collected, out of which
the liver is first framed; The Liver framed.
for the liver is nothing but a certain mass of blood, or blood coagulated and
hardened to a substance: and here you may see what a company of veins it has,
which serve both for the expulsive, and attractive faculty. In the other branch
are generated those textures of veins, with a dilatation of other veins, as
also of the spleen and the guts in the lower part of the belly; by and by all
the veins, like branches gathering into one trunk, toward the upper part of the
liver, meet all in the concave or hollow vein. This trunk sends other branches
of veins, to constitute the Diaphragma, others it sends into the upper part of
the backbone, seated about the Diaphragma, as also the lower parts, as far as
the thighs.

The Heart formed.
Afterward the heart with its veins, directed from the navel to that part of
the seed and carried as far as the backbone is formed.

These veins suck the hottest and most subtle part of the blood, out of which
the heart is generated in the membrane of the heart, otherwise called the
Pericardium, being by nature thick and fleshie, according as the heat of the
member requires. Now the hollow vein extending it self, and piercing the
interior part of the right side of the heart, carries blood thither for the
nourishment of the heart; from the same branch of this vein, in the same part
of the heart arises another vein, called by some the still vein, because it
beats not with so quick a pulse as the others do, ordained to send the most
purely concocted blood in the heart to the lungs, being encompassed with two
tunicles, like Arteries. But in the concavity of the left part of the heart,
arises a great beating vein, called the Aorta, diffusing the vital spirit from
the heart into all the beating veins in the body.

Under the said vein, called the Aorta, in the concavity of the heart, there is
another vein, called the veiny Artery, which was therefore framed to carry the
cool air from the Lungs, to temper the great heat of the heart.

Now there being many veins, which running from the concavity of the heart, are
inserted into the Lungs, therefore by these veins the Lungs are also framed;
for the vein which proceeds from the right concavity, produces a most subtle
blood, which is turned into the substance of the Lungs. By the great veins of
the heart and liver, the hollow vein, and the Aorta is the whole breast
generated, and after that the arms and legs in order.

Within the foresaid time, is generated the last and chiefest part of this
substance, that is to say, the brain, in the third little skin of this mass,
for the whole mass of the seed being repleat with vital spirits, that vital
spirit contracts great part of the Genital moisture into one certain
hollowness, where the brain is formed; outwardly it is covered with a certain
covering, which being baked and dried by the heat, is reduced into a bone, and
so is the Cranium made.

Now the brain is so formed as to conceive, retain, and change the natures of
all the vital spirits, whence are the beginnings of reason, and of all the
senses; for as out of the liver arise the veins, out of the heart arise the
arteries, so out of the brain arise the nerves of a more soft and gentle
nature, yet not hollow like veins, but solid. These are the chiefest
instruments of all the senses, and by which all the motions of the senses are
made by the vital spirit.

After the nerves, is generated by the brain also the pith of the backbone,
which cannot be called marrow: for the marrow is a superfluous substance begot
out of the blood, destined for the moistening, and for the strenghthening of
the bones: but the brain and pith of the backbone take their beginning from
the seed, being not destined for the nourishing or strengthening of the
members, but to constitute certain private and particular parts of the body,
for the motion and use of the senses, that all the other nerves may take their
beginning thence; for from the pith of the backbone, do arise many nerves, by
which the body obtaines both sense and motion.

Here is also to be noted, that out of the seed it self are generated gristles,
bones, tunicles, for the veins of the liver, the arteries of the heart, the
brain with its nerves; besides the tunicles and pannicles, and the other
coverings which the infant is wrapped in. Now of the proper blood of the birth,
the flesh is formed; and whatever parts are of a fleshie substance; as the
heart, the liver, and the lights. Then are all these nourished by the
menstruous blood, which is attracted through the veins of the navel. This is
all distinctly done from the conception unto the eighteenth day of the first
month, in all which time it is called seed. After which it receives the name
of Birth.

CHAP. IV. Of the nourishment of the birth in the womb.
While the birth remains in the womb, it is cherished up with blood,
attracted through the navel, which is the reason that the flowers do cease
always in women, as soon as they have conceived.

Now this blood, presently after conception, is distinguished into three parts;
the purest part of it is drawn by the child for the nourishment of its self;
the second, which is less pure and thin, the womb forces upwards to the breast,
where it is turned into Milk.

The third and most impure part of the blood remains in the matrix, and comes
away with the secondines, both in the birth, and after the Birth.

Now the infant being thus formed and perfected in the womb, for the first
month sends forth its Urine through the passages of the navel; but in the last
month, that passage being shut up, through the privy members; yet
notwithstanding, while the Infant is in the womb, he voyds nothing out at the
fundament, because he has taken no nourishment in at the mouth. After the
forty fifth day it receives life, and is then called an Infant.

Now though the infant has by this time obtained sense, yet does he not move:
He most commonly moves in twice the time that he was formed, and in thrice the
space after he began his motion, he hastens into the world; as for example, if
the Infant were formed in forty five days, it will move in ninety, and be
born the ninth month after that, and thus much of the formation and nourishment
of the child in the womb.

CHAP. V. Of the condition of the Infant in the womb in the sixth, seventh,
and eighth month.
AFter the third and fourth month, the infant is nourished with more plenty of
nourishment, until the time of deliverie approach. Now you must observe that a
child born in the sixth month, cannot live, by reason that it is not come to
its just perfection; but if it be born in the seventh month it will very
easily live, because it is come to its full perfection. Now the reason why
those that are born in the eight month. do not live, when as those which are
born in the seventh do, is plain; for in the seventh month, the Infant stirs
it self, to come forth; so that if it have so much strength, it easily
performs its desire, if not, it remains in the womb, till it have gathered
two months more strength. After this motion of the seventh month, if it be not
able to come forth, it changes it self into another part of the womb, by which
motion, it is so weakened, that if it should be born in the eight month, it
were impossible that it should live, for it is weakened by a double motion, not
only that of the seventh month, but also by that motion whereby it strives to
go forth in the eight month.

SECT. IV.
CHAP. I. Of the situation of the child in the womb.
COncerning the situation of the child in the womb, it may be considered
either generally, or specially; specially, either as it concerns the male, or
the female.

The male is commonly situated in the right side of the womb, the female in
the left.

The general situation of the child, either male or female, in the womb, is
always the same. Which has been observed and seen to be in this posture, when
the infant lies with his back and his buttocks, leaning against the back of the
mother, the head inclined, and touching his breast with his chin; resting his
two hands upon his knees, his navel and his nose between his two knees, with
his two eyes upon his two thumbs; his legs folded backward, and touching his
buttocks with each leg.

This figure is the most natural, as being least subject to suffer any
accident, being less inconvenient, and less troublesome to the mother.

The most natural form for the child to come into the world, is when the head
comes forward, the hands being stretched upon the hips.

The things which are the causes of a woman's delivery, are three; first, the
want of respiration and air, for the infant. The second is the want of
nourishment, of which when the infant finds a defect in his mothers womb, he is
forced to seek it in another place. The third is the narrowness of the place
where the infant lies, so that he is forced to seek room other-where, which
makes him to break the membranes wherein he was contained, pressing and
constraining the mother by the sharpness of those waters, to do her duty for
his release. Now as some say, there are three ways or manners of childrens
coming upon the earth; first, when the head comes foremost, and then the woman
is easily delivered; the second, when it comes forth a cross, or one side, or
the feet foremost, and then the woman suffers much, and either they both dye,
or one of them. As for those births which are unnatural, we shall in another
place treat of them, and their remedies. In this combat, the infant and the
mother suffer very much, by reason that woman is a creature delicate and
timorous, and not patient, of much labor; or because that women great with
child live a lazy and sloathful life; and besides that, many times they eat
bad victuals, which increase humors and superfluous excrements, which quantity
of humors makes the woman to breath short, which is a thing very troublesome
to the infant; for a woman that will expel the birth quickly, ought to keep her
breath in, as much as she can.

The third reason of the pain in women's travail, is by reason that the head of
a child is bigger, being compared to the members, then the head of any other
creature, which makes a greater opening and dilaceration.

But the women that suffer most pain, are they who were not delivered before,
having not been accustomed to the sufferance of that labor; as also elderly
women, by reason that the bone of the pubes, the bone of the hip, and the Os
sacrum, are not so easily separated, the ligaments being more strong and hard.

Now in the contention which the child makes to issue forth, the head comes
first, by reason of the weight, being more heavy then the other members.

SECT. V.
CHAP. I. Of Midwifes.
ALthough in these days there are many unskilful women that take upon them the
knowledge of Midwifry, barely upon the privilege of their age: yet there are
many things which ought to be observed in a Midwife, that they are utterly
wanting of. Let us therefore consider of the things required in a midwife, in
relation both to her person, and her manners: as for her age, Her Age.
she ought to be neither too young, nor too old, in a good habit of body, and
not subject to diseases, not misshapen in any parts of her body, peculiar in her
habits and in her person; her hands must be small, with her nails pared close,
without any rings upon them, in the time of her duty, nor bracelets upon her
wrists; she must be cheerful, pleasant, strong, laborious, and used to
travail; it being required that she should be stirring at all hours, and
abiding long time together with her patient.

For her manners, Her manners.
she ought to be Courteous, sober, chaste, not repining, choleric, arrogant, or
covetous, nor apt to talk of what she sees done in the houses where she has
to do.

Her Spirit.
For her spirit, she ought to be prudent, wary and cunning, often times to use
fair and flattering words.

She ought moreover to know, that God has given to all things their
beginnings, their Increasings, their Estate of perfection, and declination:
Therefore the said Midwife, nor any of her assistants, must not do any thing
rashly, for to precipitate or hasten nature.

CHAP. II. What ought to be observed, when she is near the time of her lying
down.
Of women near the time of their lying down.
THe hour of the woman's Lying down approaching, the woman with child ought to
prepare her self in this manner, she must presently call her midwife and
assistance to her, it being requisite to have them sooner then later.

Her Bed.
She ought to prepare a little bed, or couch, of a moderate hight, as well for
the convenience of the midwife, as for the ease of herself, and others that
shall be about her to assist her in her travel: This must be situated in a
place convenient for people to pass up and down, near the fire, and far from
doors: It will be requisite for her to have change of linen, as also a little
cricket for her to rest her feet on, having more force when her feet are bowed.

When she finds her pains growing, In the time of travail what to do.
it will be necessary for her to walk leisurely up and down the chamber,
afterward she may lie down warm, and then rise and walk again, expecting
the coming down of her waters, and the opening of the womb. For to keep
herself long a bed, is very troublesome. Though when she is a bed,
notwithstanding that she has some certain pains sometimes, yet she may lie
and rest herself, and now and then take a nap. By which means, both the
mother and the Infant do with greater strength endure their succeeding
hardship; besides that, her waters do come down better. If her travel be long,
she may take some broth or the yolk of a poched egg, with some bread, or a cup
of wine, or distilled water; yet she must have a care left she overcharg her
self, either with meat or drink.

It is certain, that all women are not delivered alike; for some lie in their
bed, others sit in a chair, being supported and held up by others, or else
resting upon the side of the bed, or chair; others upon their knees, being
upheld under their arms; but the best, and safest, is to lie in their beds; and
for her good and convenient delivery, let the Midwife, and others, observe what
follows.

Certain Rules.
First, the woman that is in travail, ought to be laid upon her back, her head
being lifted up a little higher, with a pillow, having also a pillow under her
reins to sustain her back; under her buttocks and Os sacrum, she must have a
larger pillow, to raise them a little, and that her rump may be elevated; for a
woman that lies low in those parts, can never be well delivered for the
avoiding of which, this situation is very convenient. Her thighs and knees
must be a good way separated the one from the other, with her legs bowed and
drawn up toward her buttocks, the soles of her feet, and her heels, being fixed
upon a board, laid thwart the bed for that purpose.

Secondly, To some women they do use a swath-band, four double, this
swath-band must be a foot broad, or more; which being put under her reins, is
to be held up straight, by two persons standing on each side, just at the time
of her pains; both of them, at the same instant, heaving up both ends, with an
exact cavenness; for otherwise, it does more harm then good. It is also
requisite, that two of her friends should hold the upper part of her shoulders,
that she may be able to force out the birth with more advantage; And it will
not be amiss, for some of her friends to press the upper parts of her belly, so
to thrust down the infant, by little and a little, such a soft compression,
will much facilitate the travel and give ease to the woman's pains.

Thirdly, As for the woman herself she must be of a good heart, and force her
self by striving as much as possible she can, stopping her mouth, and keeping
her breath, as if she were doing the ordinary deeds of nature.

As for the colic, if it seize women in travail, you may read the remedies
in the following chapter.

CHAP. III. How to expel the Colic from. women in Childbed.
There are some women, who at the same instant that they are in travail, are
taken with fits of the colic, which is often caused by the crudities, and
indigestions of the stomach, which do torment women so extremely, that it
exceeds the pain of their travail; and while this pain lasts, a woman
advances nothing toward the end of her travail, the pain of travail being
hardly to be distinguished from it.

For her ease therefore, the woman ought to take these remedies; two ounces of
oil of sweet Almonds, with an ounce of Cinnamon Water, or else some wind
dispelling Glyster, and if the first time suffice not, you may reiterate it;
sometimes fomentations, that are proper for the dispelling of wind, are very
necessary for this purpose.

CHAP. IV. How the Midwife may know when the pains of travail do seize a woman.
When the woman begins to cry out, and has sent for her Midwife, the first
thing that the Midwife is to ask, is, when she did conceive? 2. Then is she to
look diligently upon the belly of the woman, and to mark it well, for if she do
behold the upper parts of the belly sunk and hollow, and the lower parts of the
belly full and big, she may then conclude that the child is fallen down. 3. She
ought then to ask her some questions concerning her pains; for if they be quick
and strong, beginning at the reins, and sliding down all along the belly,
without ending at the navel, but still falling down upon the groins, and
inwardly at the bottom of the belly, below which is the interior neck of the
womb, these are certain signs that the woman begins to be in labor.

4. But for more certainty, the midwife may put up her hand, being anointed
first with fresh butter, and if she perceive the interior neck of the womb to
dilate it self, it is a certain sign that the pains of childbed are upon the
woman, or if she perceive any thing to push forwards, her travail is also
undoubtable.

CHAP. V. Of the falling down of the waters, a good while before the woman
travails.
There are some women, who have their waters come from them, a long time before
their travail, sometimes twelve days, sometimes eight days, sometimes six, and
sometimes four; though the ordinary time be not above three hours before her
travail: they remaining for the most part not above twenty four hours. This
is caused by some ruptures of the membranes, where from the beginning of the
formation of the child, the humor is contained, rather then by the abundance
of humors; and therefore though a woman that has abundance, and that the
membranes containing them, are so strong that they will not break sudden,
though the woman shall not travail till they break, yet the midwife ought not
to break them, but rather hold the woman over a vessel of warm water, and also
use some softening linniment, to soften the membranes, that so the mother
straining the head or other member of the child, may break them more easily.

But for those women that have these evacuations so long before they travail,
they must refrain going into the air, for fear of injuring themselves, the
passages being open; for though the air cannot hinder the child from coming
forth, by reason of its weight, yet often times getting within the secondine, it
not only streightens the vessels, and mouths of the veins, that are at the
bottom of the womb, but also causes several convulsions, to the great danger of
the woman: but it is an easy thing to remedy these accidents, by keeping close
in her chamber, having also a special regard to distinguish, whether they be
the waters of the birth, or any Hydropick humor of the Matrix.

CHAP. VI. What the Midwife ought to do in time of travail.
THe Midwife seeing the birth come naturally, the pains now coming thicker and
thicker, the womb also opening to be delivered of its burden, and the
endeavors of the child being seen to come forth; The Midwife must now
encourage her patient, admonishing her to shut her mouth, and to hold her
breath, and to strein and endeavor with her lower parts; Neither ought the
Midwife be too hasty, either to widen or force the passage of the Infant, or to
break the membranes, but to stay till the membranes do burst of their own
accord.

And here is to be noted, Note.
the ignorance of some women, who for haste to be gone to other women, do tear
the membranes with their nail, to the danger, both of the woman, and of the
child, which then remains dry, without that moisture which makes the passages
slippery; which must of necessity augment the pain of the woman.

When the head comes forth of the womb, the Midwife must take it gently between
her two hands, and then when the pains increase, slipping down her hands under
the arm-holes, gently drawing forth the Infant, yet staying her hand always,
but when the pains come upon the woman. This must be done with a very delicate
and tender hand, lest the child, by any rude or harsh handling, should receive
any deformed shape of body.

When the child is come into the world, which is commonly with his face
downward, it must be suddenly turned upon his back, lest it should be stifled
for want of air. Then let her cut the navel-string, leaving the length of four
fingers, tying it with a silk thread, as near the belly as may be: Which done,
the child if it be well, may be laid aside, only care must be had, that the
head and the stomach be well covered, and that nothing come upon his face.

CHAP. VII. How to draw forth the Secondines.
THis child being thus drawn forth, and in safety, the midwife must now apply
her self to the drawing out of the secondines, which must be don by wagging
and stirring them up and down, and then gently drawing them forth, causing the
woman to take salt in both her hands, and to shut them close, and then to blow
in them, whereby you shall know whether they be broken or not: it may be done
also by causing her to put one finger in her mouth, to provoke a desire of
vomiting, or else by stirring, as when she is doing the ordinary deeds of
nature, or as nature it self constrained her to do, before the head of the
child was come forth. All this must be don speedily; yet if this be not
sufficient, she may take the yolke of an egg raw, or she may take a small
draught of raw elder-water, or you may cause her to smell to a piece of Assa
Foetida. If she be troubled with wind collicks, or have taken cold, which
often times does breed wind, which is a great hinderance to the coming forth of
the secondines. The Midwife ought to chafe the woman's belly with her hand,
which does not only break the wind, but causes the secondine to come down. If
this fails the midwife may with her hand dilate the exterior orifice of the
womb, drawing it forth gently and by degrees.

CHAP. VIII. What may be given to a woman in travail.
In the first place hot and violent remedies are to be avoided, Hot things to
be avoided.
but in cases of great necessity; for it many times happens that they are the
cause of dangerous fevers.

Two other things are also very dangerous to a woman in Travail too much
repletion, As also emptiness and fullness.
and too much emptiness, for the stomach of a woman with child does not digest
her meat in so short a time as women that are not with child do; Therefore the
midwife ought to inform her self how long it was since she eat, and in what
quantity; and if it were long since she did eat, and that she grow feeble.
they may give in the intermissions of her pains some warm cherishing and
cordial broths, or the yolke of a potched egg. if her travail endure long;
then to strengthen her and comfort her, she may take a draught of Cinnamon
water, not exceeding an ounce, or at twice a dram of the confection of
Alkermes; dissolved in two spoonfulls of Claret wine; and not more then one of
these three things. For if they take too much, as is before said, it causes
fevers, and heats the whole body, of which follows many inconveniences; for it
stopps the purgations, of which many strange diseases ensue.

CHAP. IX. How to put the Womb again in its place.
SOme women newly brought to bed, are many times afflicted with greater pains,
then those of their travail, by reason that the womb is not well put into its
place, or if it have, the swath-band being loose, it is apt to roll upwards in
the belly. This happens to women that are not well purged after their
deliverie; for remedy hereof, having put the matrix right into its place,
roll up two linen swathes, pretty hard, bringing them also round the hipps;
then take whites of eggs, beaten, and a dram of Pepper in powder, which being
spread upon Toe, is to be applied warm to the navil; then let the belly be
well swathed; this is the only remedy to ease the pain.

CHAP. X. Against the extreme loss of blood, which happen to women, immediately
after their delivery.
THere are many women who immediately after their delivery, do suffer great
loss of blood, which proceeds from a great plenitude, or fullness, or by
reason that in their travail, they took too many hot and corosive medicines,
or by streining themselves too hard, overheated the blood, so that after
travail, it runs from them in great quantity. To remedy this, the woman
ought to take often a small quantity of wine, in a spoon, and if the weakness
be much, let her mix half a dram of Alkermes, with a draught of wine, and
take care that she be well swathed upward; for that presses down and
streightens the vessels, and hinders the violent flux: give her also the yolke
of an egg to take, for that recalls the natural heat to the stomach, which was
dispersed through the whole. It would be necessary also, to spread a long the
reins of the woman, and all along the backbone, by reason of the hollow
vein, a napkin dipped in Oxicrat, or water mingled with vinigre. You may also
lay upon each groin, a skeine of raw silk moistened in cold water. Take also of
that well tempered earth, of which they make the floor of an oven, and steep it
in strong vinigre, then spread it upon a linen cloth, and lay it upon the
reins; this moderates the heat of the blood, and stoppes the violent flux of
it. Great care must be also had, that all the while the Blood comes from her,
she do not sleep, for many times they are taken away in that weakeness when the
people think they do not take their rest, but when you see this great flux
moderated, you may take away the astringent medicines by little and little,
that so the blood may cease running by degrees, lest any blood should be
retained that may chance to do mischeife.

CHAP. XI. What is to be done to a woman, presently after her delivery.
PResently after a woman is delivered if she have had a sore travail, they
ought to cast her into the skin of a sheep flead alive, and put about her reins
as hot as may be; Upon her belly also lay the skin of a Hare flead alive,
having cut the throat of it afterward, and rubbed the skin with the blood,
which is to be clapped as warm as may be to her belly.

This closes up the dilatations made by the birth, and chases from those parts
the ill and melancholy blood. These remedies are to be kept on two hours in
Winter, and one hour in Summer.

After this swath the woman with a napkin about a quarter of a yard large,
having before chafed the belly with oil of St John's wort. Then raise up the
Matrix with a linen cloth many times folded, then with a little pillow about a
quarter of a yard long, cover her flanks, then use the swath, beginning a
little above the hanches, yet rather higher then lower, winding it pretty
tight. Lay also warm clothes upon the nipples, letting alone those remedies
which are proper for the driving back of the milk, which are not so soon to be
applied, for the body is now all in a commotion, and there is neither vein, nor
artery which does not beat, wherefore those remedies that chase away the milk,
being all dissolving, therefore it is not proper to put such medicines upon the
breast during that commotion, for sear that those medicines, should make a stop
of any thing hurtful in those parts, and therefore it is better to give ten, or
twelve hours for the blood to settle in; as also for that which was cast upon
the Lungs by the agitation of travail, to distill down again into its place.

You may also make a restrictive of the white and yellow of an egg beaten
togeiher, with an ounce of oil of St John's wort, and an ounce of oil of roses,
an ounce of rose water, and an ounce of plantine water, beat all these together
very well; in this you may dip a linen cloth folded double, and apply it
without warming of it to the breasts, this comforts and eases the pains of that
part.

She must not sleep presently, but a matter of four hours after her delivery,
you may give her some nourishing broth or candle, and then if she will she may
sleep.

CHAP. XII. Of women that have a great deal of blood, and purge not, neither in
their travail nor after.
SOme women have great superfluity of blood, and yet purge not at all, neither
in their travail, nor afterward; to which if remedies be not applied, the
women do run great hazards and dangers in their lying in, great suffocations of
the matrix, and continual fevers; this may be remedied, being first informed
of their natural disposition before they were with child; knowing that when they
had their purgations, they had them in great quantity, and for a good while
together, as also when they came, being a gross and thick blood; and therefore
seeing that now they do not purge in great quantity, and that they have diverse
unquietnesses, weaknesses of the stomach, and pains of the head; wherefore you
may give her in the morning, a little syrrup of Maidenhair, and Hysop water
mingled together, and syrrup of Wormwood, with White Wind, in their broths you
may boil Jacines and opening herbs, keeping the belly soluble with Glysters,
they must eat no solid meat, she must be well chafed from the groines down to
the very ankle-bone, always stroaking and carrying the hand downward; blood
letting also in the foot in the morning is not amiss, as also some fumigation,
that Cleanses the matrix, and draws down the blood; yet care must be had, that
these last remedies be not used before the Matrix be put into its place, for
fear that these remedies should draw it down too low, but about eight or ten
days after the Matrix was put into its place; for cleansing the matrix, you may
use this receipt.

Take Pellitory, Sanicle, Camomile, Melilot, green Balm, red Balm, whit
Mulleine, Mallows, Marsh-mallowes, Betony, Margeram, Nipp, March, Violets,
Mugwort, take of each a like quantity, and cut them small, and let them boil
in a new pot, with three pints of good white wine, let the woman take the fume
of this receite three times in a day; if she have any gross blood in the
matrix, it will undoubtedly bring it down: You may also chafe the woman's belly
with oil of violets, this helps the purgations being once dissolved. The
reason why this thick blood stays in these parts, is, because the woman
having it before she was with child, the heat of the womb when she is with
Child redoubling, thickens it more, so that when she comes to lie down, it
cannot flow, so that it is to be taken away as much as may be with the
aforesaid reasons. Mollifying fomentations are also proper for this purpose,
while the woman sits over the fumigation.

CHAP. XIII. For those who have but a little blood.
THose women that have but little blood, ought not to live in their beds as
those who have a great deal. They out to take good nourishment in a little
quantity. As eggs well boiled in the shell in a morning: The juice of Mutton
and Veal squeezed out, and Mutton broth, and all these being mingled together,
nourish very much, and make very good blood, as also Pigeons, Partridg, Mutton,
Quail, and such other meats good for the stomach.

CHAP. XIV. What is to be done to the Infant.
THe Midwife having tied up the Navel string, as is beforesaid, she ought next
to cleanse the Infant not only in the face, but also over the whole body;
anointing the groins, hips, buttocks, thighs, and joints with oil of sweet
Almonds or fresh Butter, this makes the skin more firm, shuts up the pores of
the skin, so that the exterior air cannot come to hurt it, and besides this,
it strengthens all the parts of the body.

It would not be amiss to make a bath or decoction of Roses and Sage in Wine,
and with that to wash the Infant every morning.

After the Infant is thus well anointed, and after that well dried and wrapped
up, you may give to the Infant a little Sack and Sugar in a spoon, or else the
quantity of a pease bigness of Mithridate or Treacle dissolved in wine, with a
little Carduus water.

CHAP. XV. How to govern women in Childbed.
THere is great difference in the governing women, in Childbed, for she that
thinks to order, an ordinary laboring, or country woman, like a person of
quality, kills her; and she that thinks to govern a person of quality like an
ordinary Countrie-woman, does the same to her: for the stomach and
Constitution of the one is tender, and weak, and the Constitution and stomach
of the other strong, and lusty; which will not be satisfied with ordinary
viands, for if you give to one of these strong stomachs presently after their
delivery, any strong broth or eggs, or a draught of milk, are like mills that
allways grind and empty as fast as they pour in, and that that gives one woman,
a fever, keeps another from it; and therefore women in Childbed are to be
governed by their several constitutions. As for women that are delicate, and
have been accustomed to live delicately, greater care must be taken of them,
giving them meats that breed good nourishment, and do not clog the stomach,
forbearing also to give her those meats to which she has too great a dislike,
agreeing to her humor, provided that the meats which she loves be not hurtful,
and giving her for the first eight days of her lying in, boiled meats rather
then roasted, as gellies, etc. the juice of Veal or Capon, but not mutton, it
being too feverish, giving her to drink barley water, or else water boiled,
wherein is boiled a dram of Cinnamon to every pint, and two ounces of sugar
dissolved, or if she do not love sugar, Coriander seed water, if she drink
wine, let it be two thirds of water to one third of wine, giving her in the
morning White wine, and in the afternoon Claret, taking care of eating any
thing that may breed any crudities, she may also take at the discretion of
those about her, Almond milk now and then. There are some women that cannot be
kept from sleeping, and others that cannot sleep at all. It will not be amiss
to give to those that cannot sleep, French barley water; the way to make it
well, is to let it boil well, and to take the broth without streining it;
neither ought it to be taken after the eight days are past, by reason that it
nourishes exceedingly, and does not a little obstruct the Liver.

CHAP. XVI. Of the bathings that a woman is to use for the first eight days of
her lying in.
TAke a good handful of old or new Chervil, and boil it in a sufficient
quantity of water, then taking it from the fire, add to it a spoonful of Mel
Rosatum, or honey of Roses, this draws down the purgations, clenses and heals
the parts. The herb it self may serve for a fomentation, to take away any
inflammation. There are some that use milk to the purpose aforesaid, affirming
that it is a great asswager of the pain; but that having been proved by others,
has been observed rather to engender filth, then to be any way a clearer, by
reason that the sharp humor causes it to curdle.

CHAP. XVII. How a woman ought to govern her self, in case a woman be to be
delivered of two children.
THe travail of a woman bringing forth two Infants is more tedious, and it
many times happens, that one of the children comes forth very well, and the
other comes forth very scurvily; And this is certain, that that which comes
forth first, is always the strongest, having the power to go before the other,
and to break the membranes that enveloped it. And ofttimes while the second is
born, the other remains behind wrapped in such membranes as the former was, so
that it remains a good space behind the other, sometimes two hours, and yet it
has bin very well borne. Now knowing that, that which came first was the
stronger, it would not be amiss to assist the other in coming forth, by
breaking the membranes that contain the waters, and if that fail, by giving
strong Glysters to excite the pain; which were it not many times done, the
child would never be able to endure the pain of coming into the world, by
reason of its extraordinary weakness; which is so great sometimes, that the bone
of the forehead is divided, and separated down to the nose; although the Infant
being born, it joins together again, and the Infant does very well, which if
it happen, you must have a great care, to bind some kind of soft pillow upon
the place, that the air may not enter in. If the second Child come forth ill,
you must not delay to break the membranes, and to draw the Infant gently out
by the feet, for having used all its endeavor to come forth, to keep it there,
or to prolong the travail any longer, is more dangerous then profitable;
sometimes two come so suddenly the one after the other, that there seems to
be but one deliverie of both, there being but a little membrane that separates
them; In this case holding the first, you must cut the navel string, and bind
it about, and tie it about the Hipp, while they draw forth the other Infant,
which by a longer stay would be much weakened.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the danger that a woman has, to purge her self for the first
days of her lying in.
IT is an ordinary thing for women that lie in, by reason of their bed, to
loose the benefit of their bellyes, which hinders the evacuation of their
milk, which causes fevers, by sending gross vapors to the head, yet can they
not be freed by any purgation taken in at the mouth, but it would be much to
the purpose to take pertinent Glisters which hinder the foresaid evils,
causing their breasts to become full, and to be come stiff, taking them as
ocasion requires, once in two or three days. There are some unskilful women,
that not understanding the ill consequences which may follow, who do give Seen
to women in the first days of their lying in; of which some have bin very ill,
and others have dyed. For nature is now weakened, by the travail, and while it
is laboring to restore the body to its former Estate, is not to be disturbed
with violent purgations. And therefore Glisters are always most proper. Neither
are laxative broths, nor the broth of prunes, nor baked apples fasting for
these things do engender wind, but rather some good suppositories would be
more useful.

CHAP. XIX. Of the second washing for women.
THe second washing for women ought to be with Province roses, put into little
baggs and boyld in water and wine, of each a like proportion; and this to be
done for the second eight days.

CHAP. XX. What is to be done to Infants, as soon as they are born.
IT is an approved Maxim, that as soon as a child is born, you ought to give
it a spoonful of pure wine, for that assists and helps the child to regaine
its spirits. Another advantage is this, that the wine cutts the phlegm which
the Child has in its throat; besides the spirits of the wind rising up to the
head comforts, and strengthens it; and them less subject to be drunk; it
hinders them also from the Epilepsie, which proceeds from the debilitie of the
brain.

This being done, and the Mother fully delivered, you must tie the Navel Vein
with a silk well twisted, and many times doubled, and if there be any blood in
the vein, you must be sure to empty it, for fear if it should be left, it
should turn into corruption; then it must be well dried with powder of rotten
wood: you must tie it, two fingers breadth from the belly, and leave it long,
three fingers breadths above the tying place, and if it be fatt, you must close
it over and above, that the vein may be well closed, then wind the string
twice about it, knitting as many knots; but if the child be come a fore its
time, you need not tie it so strong for fear of cutting it with the silk; but
if the Navel vein be full of water and wind, you ought then, having tied it
one time and wrapped a linen cloth about the end of it, which is still to be
held upward, to uncover it again, about half an hour after, and then to tie it
and wrap it about again, still keeping the end up for fear, that if the vein
were not fully closed, that there might be some danger in the bleeding.

Some people give to the Infant Treacle dissolved in wine; but this must be don
warily in a very small quantity, and that not commonly neither.

The Infant must be washed with water and wine luke warm, to cleanse it; After
wards wash the face, as also chafe the throat, the Arms and hands, with oil
of wallnuts, drawn without fire, which some say will keep them from sunburning,
then put one hand upon the bone of the forehead, and another upon the bone
called the Coronal bone, and softly close up the gap which was made during the
time of travail, closing also the suture one against another exactly; then
gently put your finger under the tongue, to see if the Infant have the string
or no; and if it have, it may be clipped away with the point of a pair of sharp
cizers, without danger There are some that think they can shape the head and
nose of a child as if it were of wax. But let such take notice that have flat
nosed Children, rather to let the nose alone, then by squeezing and closing it
too much, to render the nose obstructed; for that compressing the Gristles of
the nose renders the child liable either to speak always in the nose, or to
lose his smelling, There are some children that are borne with their noses
awry, for the help of which you may with your finger moystened in fair water,
gently stroke the nose, but lay no stress upon it. That happens by reason that
the nose of the child lights upon some bone of the Mother as it was coming
into the world.

CHAP. XXI. Of the last washing for Women.
THe last washing for women, is to be for four days, with Province Roses boiled
in wine and Myrrh-water.

CHAP. XXII. Of an Astringent for Women when they shall have occasion.
Take Galls, Cypress nuts, and Pomgranate flowers, Roch Alome, of each two
ounces, Province Roses, four ounces, knot grass, a good Handful; the rind of
Cassia, the rind of Pomegranates, Scarlet berries, of each three ounces, the
nature or sperm of a whale, one ounce, Rose water, Myrrh water, and Burnet
water, of each an ounce and a half, wine and water of a smiths forge, of each
four ounces, and a half, then make two little baggs about a quarter of a yard
long, and half a quarter of a yard broad, then boil all these in the foresaid
water in a new pot, using the baggs one after another as occasion serves.

CHAP. XXIII. To make searcloaths for women.
TAke white wax, half apound, the sperme of a whale, and venice turpentine,
well washed in rose water, plantaine water, of each an ounce and a half, then
melt all these together, then mingle with them an ounce of venice white Lead,
then order you your cloth as you please, making some for the belly, and some
for the nipples, having first rubbed it over with oil of Acorns, or the sperme
of a whale.

CHAP. XXIV. To cleanse a woman before she rises.
TAke bitter Almonds and peel them, make thereof a past with the powder of Iris
and the yolk of eggs, and put it in a little bagg of Tammy, and temper it
within the bag, with black wine lukewarm, and afterward use it upon the
places where the sear-clothes have been laid, then wash the places with black
wine mingled with orange flower.

CHAP. XXV. How a woman lying in of her first child, may avoid the gripings of
her belly.
THere are some women lying in of their first child, who are troubled much
with gripings in the belly, and these women commonly endure pains when their
terms come down, by reason of the smalness of the veins which conveigh the
blood into the Matrix; such women have griping in their bellies when they lie
in of their first child, which other women are not troubled with, by reason
that they have larger vessels; yet although they have them not in their first
lying in, it would not be amiss to use some proper remedies, that so they may
be never troubled with them, which if they receive not at their first lying in,
they will be incapable of receiving them ever after, for though they may take
remedies afterward to lessen the pain, yet they can never cure it wholly.

Now that which is ordinarily done to women is as soon as ever they are brought
to bed, is to give them two ounces of oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire,
with two ounces of syrrup of Maidenhair; it is true this is good to make her
purgations part away, but not to remedy the griping.

Some there are that do take two drops of the blood which comes out of the
navel-string of the Infant, and give it mingled to the woman in the foresaid
syrrups, though there is much fault to be found with this by reason of the
nastiness of it.

Others do boil a white Chicken, in the which they do put two ounces of Sugar,
a dram of fine Cinnamon, half a Nutmeg grated, two or three Dates, five or six
Cloves, the Fowl being boiled, you may put into it a small quantity of Claret,
then boil it altogether again, letting it boil till the Fowl be well soaked,
then strain it, and give it to the woman as soon as she is laid down; for want
of a white Hen you may take a Pigeon, or a red Partridg for want of either;
Only take heed to give her this if she be feverish, because it is something
hot.

The seed of Savory taken in warm broth is very good, and it is also very good
for those that have the colic.

The Queen of France her Receipt.
Take a dram of the root of the greater Consound or Comfrey, one of the kernels
of peaches, nutmegs, of each two scruples, yellow Amber half a dram,
Amber-grease half a scruple, mingle all this together and give it to the woman
as soon as she is laid down, the quantity of a dram mingled in white wine, or
if the woman be feverish, in some good warm broth.

CHAP. XXVI. Certain precepts hindering the delay and, difficulty of bringing
forth.
BEing now come to talk of the impediments of the birth, you must know that
the birth is hindered by a twofold manner, the one natural, the other not
natural; of the unnatural we shall treat of in its place; for the natural take
these following directions: But in the first place let the Midwife be very
skilful, that she may decline as much as in her lies, all the impediments that
may be avoided.

If the birth be hindered by the dryness and straightness of the neck of the
womb, take a little beaten Hellebore or Pepper, and blow it into the nostrils
of the mother. Her mouth must be held close, her breath kept in, and sneesing
must be provoked as much as may be, whereby the spirits being forced to the
lower parts, may be the more available to force down the child. You may also
give her Shepherds-purse dried in a little broth or wine; also a little
quantity of honey mingled with twice as much lukewarm water and give her, will
not be unprofitable. The milk also of another woman mixed with maidenhair, and
applied warm to the navel. She may take also oil of Laurel in wine or warm
broth, two grains of Pepper being taken inwardly do not only force out the
birth, but also drive out the secondines.

This is also an excellent remedy against a difficult travail.

Take Trochischs of Myrrh one dram, grains of Saffron ten, Cinnamon one
scruple, mingle all this with two ounces of Peny-royal water, and give it the
woman to drink.

Let her drink it warm, and let her go to her bed for an hour, till she finds
the operation of the drink moving her to her labors. If this profit, and that
the Infant coming with his head foremost stick in the womb, you may use these
pills, of which she may take seven and then rest.

Gum, Bdelium, Myrrh, Savin-seed, Liquid Storax, or Stacte Castor, Agaric, of
each half a scruple, Diagridium six grains, mingle all these with Cassia
extracted, as much as suffices, and make up pills about the bigness of pease.

You may also use a pessary, as long and as thick as your finger, of pure wool,
which must be covered over with silk, and dipped in the juice of Rue, where
Scammony has been dissolved, and so used. If these things prove without
effect, she may use this ensuing bath above her belly.

Take of the root and herb Althea six handfulls, Mallows, Camomile, Melilot,
Parsley, of each four handfulls, Line-seed, and seed of fenugreek, of each two
pound, Lavender, and Laurel leaves, of each two handfulls.

Let all these things be boiled to gether in water, where in the woman is to
sit, or else to have those parts well wet and moistened with spunges, which
being done, and the woman well dried with warm clothes, let her be brought to
the bed, and anointed with this ointment.

Take oil of sweet Almonds, Hens fatt, Oil of Lillies, Muscilage of Althoea,
of each half an ounce. Mingle all these with as much wax as is sufficient, and
make an ointment: This being done give her this little doss.

Take two yolks of eggs, and boil them in old wine, then mix with them
these spices, Cinnamon half an ounce, rind of Cassia two drams, or you may leave
out the Cassia, and instead thereof put in the more Cinnamon, saffron half
ascruple, Savine, Betonie, Venus-haire, Dittanie, Fenugreeke, Laurel berries,
Mint, of each one dram: The bone of the heart of a Heart, Pearls prepared,
Mingle all these with sugar, and make a thick powder and give it.

If the secondine come before the child, and hinder the egress of the child, it
is to be cut of, and this following pessarie to be put up.

Take Marshmallows, with the roots two hand fulls, Mother wort one handful,
Rue one ounce and a half, Fenugreek, Line-seed, of each an ounce, ten figgs,
make of these a decoction, with as much water as is sufficient, and when you
have streined it, add this to it, Oil of Lillies, oil of Line, of each two
ounces, Musk one grain: In this decoction, let the pessary be dipped and put up;
she may afterward use this electuarie.

Take Myrrh, Castor, Calamum, Arom, of each two dramms, Cinnamon, one ounce,
saffron half a scruple, Mace, Savin, of eace a scruple clarified honey half a
pound, you may also make an electuary with the water of Thyme, and mother
worte, wherein have bin boiled Fenu-greek, Line-seed, Grains of Juniper, of
each one spoonful.

Now after that the woman has bin weakened with these impediments, you may give
her in broth, species Loetificans, or Manus Christi or Diamargaritont

CHAP. XXVII. How the secondines are to be hastened out.
THe secondines before that the Infant is born, may be many ways hindered; first
by the debilitie or weakness of the Matrix, which happens by the frequent motion
and endeavoring of the Infant, as also by reason of the difficulty of the
birth, or by reason that the womb does not continue distended, or because it is
many times streightened, by which the womb is so weakened, that by its own force
it is not able to expel the secondines; Besides the secondines may inwardly
stick close to the womb, which happens many times through the abundance of
superfluous humors that are retained in the matrix, by reason of which
Glutinous humors, the secondines stick to the Matrix. These are noe way else to
be pulled away, but by the hand of the midwife. Thirdly, the secondines are
hard to come away, if all the waters come away with the Infant, for then the
secondines being left without moisture, cannot come away by reason of the
drines of the womb, besides that the Matrix and the neck of the womb are
rougher by reason of the dryness thereof. for these waters render the way
slipperie and easy both for the infant and for the secondines, which being
slipped away, the womb is to be anointed with juices and oils. Fourthly, when
the mouth of the Matrix, by reason of the pains of childbearing, swells, as
often happens, unless there be a provident care taken to prevent it. Fifthly,
when the neck, of the Matrix is streighter and more close, and for that reason
fat women travail with much more difficulty, Therefore when the secondines
do make any extraordinary stay, the Midwife is to use all her endeavor to
make way for them. for that retention causes suffocation and diverse other
evils, for being long detained, they putrify and cause an evil smell, which
ascending up to the heart, liver, stomach, diaphragma, and so to the brain,
cause pains in the head and lungs, shortness of breath, faintness, cold sweats;
so that there is great danger, and also Apoplexies, and Epilepsies, are not a
little to be feared. Now in all the time of their stay, the women are to be
refreshed with convenient food, to add strength to them, giving them sometimes
the yolks of eggs boiled in old wine with Sugar, and sprinkled over with
Saffron and Cinnamon, or some broth made of Capon or Hen, seasoned with Cinnamon
and Saffron; It may not be amiss to make certain perfumes for the woman to
receive up into her womb, made of Saffron, Castor, Myrrh, annd Cinnamon, of each
the quantity of a bean, and care must be had that the fume pass no further then
the Matrix, and this may be done till the fume of these spices shall cease.
After this a little sneezing-pouder is to be put into her nostrils composed of
Hellebore or such like, the woman shutting her mouth hard, and keeping her
breath; If these things prevail not, give her this following potion,

Trochisch of Myrrh j, ten grains of Saffron, one scruple of Cinnamon,
Peny-royal two ounces; make of this one draught and give her; after she has
taken this and rested a little while, let a pessary of Hellebore and Opoponax,
wrapped up in pure wool, be thrust up into the neck of the womb. This will
certainly bring down the seconds, for it is of so great virtue, that it is
efficacious in expelling the child which is dead, together with the seconds.

Take Mallows, Hollihock, Wormwood, Mugwort, Calamint, Origanum, an. M. j. make
a bath, and let her sit therein up to the navel, and stroke ever downwards with
her hands, and give her inwardly Myrrh i j. Cinnamon powdered in Nutmeg-water or
wine, or drink Calamint or Penyroyal in wine.

Neither will it be amiss to anoint the Matrix with the ointment called
Basilicon, if this does nothing avail toward the bringing down of the seconds,
and that the woman is in great danger of her life, then with the consent of her
husband and kindred, give her seven of the following Pills, which being taken,
let her lie still, till the virtue of them do provoke new pains; for they are
of so great virtue also, that they do expel the dead child, together with the
secondines; yet herein it will not be amiss to consult the skilful Physician.

The Pills are these.
Of Castor, Myrrh, Liquid storax, of each a scruple, the bark of Cinnamon, or
Cassia, and Birthwort, of each half a scruple, Agaric half an ounce, Diagridion
six grains, Saffron, Siler of the mountain, Savin, of each three grains,
Thebaic Opium, Assa faetida, of each one grain, mingle all these with as much
extracted Cassia as is sufficient, and make of them certain Pills as big as
pease, and give them to the woman in a small quantity of Peny-royal-water. It
may be also expedient to apply this ensuing plaster.

one part of Coloquintida boiled in water, and as much of the juce of Rue, with
these mingle Line-seed, Fenugreek, Barley of meal, of each a spoonful, let them
all boil together, and the plaster made of these must be laid upon all that
part, from the navel to the privities.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cases of Extremity, and first, what is to be done to a woman,
who in her travail is accompanied with a flux of blood, and with convulsions.
IN the first place, great care must be had, as to the situation of the woman:
The woman in this case must be laid cross her bed where she must be held by
some one that has strength, that she may not slide or move her self in the
operations of the Surgeon. Her thighs must be held hard and wide abroad,
with her legs bent backwards toward her hipps, and her head leaning upon a
bolster the reins of her back, and her Crupper, being alittle elevated, with
certain pillows put under neath her thighs; besides this she must be well
covered with linen clothes, laid upon her stomach, belly and thighs, to
defend her from the cold and wind: Being thus situated, the Surgeon ought to
putt up his hand, being first well opened, with in the neck of the womb, to
remove all those clotts of blood, which may lie there to obstruct the passages
of the blood. He may then try if the interior neck of the womb be sufficiently
dilated, that he may put in his hand and move the Infant, if it be needful,
which must be done as gently and with as little violence as may be, he must
anoint it on all parts with sweet butter, or good Pomatum, and so opening it by
little and a little, he may put his hand quite in; and if the waters are not
yet come down, he may without any difficulty let them forth, and then at the
same instant, if the Infant Come with the head forwards, he shall gently turn
it, to find out the feet and when he has found one of them, he shall gently
draw it forth, and immediately tie a riband about it with a knott hanging down
ward, then let him put it in a gain, suffering part of the riband to hang out,
that he may more easily be able to find out the other foot, which he shall
quickly do, by thrusting up his hand a long the thigh of the Infant; when he
has found it he shall take the other foot, and draw them both together at an
even length, giving the woman now and then some leisure to breath; but urging
her still to streine her self when she feels the pains coming on her, then
shall the Surgeon or midwife take a fine linen cloth, and wrap about the
thighs of the child, least by taking it naked, his fingers should slip, in that
manner drawing it forth, till it appear all come forth, observing still that
the belly and the face be still kept downward.

Now if the woman have a flux of blood, and that the neck of the Matrix be
open, the Surgeon ought then to consider, whether the Infant or the
secondine come forth first of all, for it oftentimes happens, that the
secondines passing toward the mouth of the Matrix, do so stop and obstruct it
that they do not give leave for the child or the waters to come forth, so that
some perceiving that softness, are presently of opinion that the mouth of the
womb is not open. But this the Midwife or Surgeon may easily discern by
thrusting up the middle finger as high as may be, and feeling therewith the
circumference of the neck of the womb, by which they will soon perceive whether
the womb be dilated or no, and whether it be the secondines that present
themselves. Now when it is found to be the secondines, and that they cannot
easily come forth, the Midwife may with her two fingers widen the passage, that
he may have thereby the liberty to put up his hand, and seek for the Infant.
Now if the secondines are not placed in the middle, they must be turned a
little, as quickly as may be, that you may more conveniently seek for the feet
of the Infant, to draw it forth as we have said.

In such a case as this, all care must be had that nothing be broken, and that
every thing be brought out whole, for so though the woman should dye, the
Midwife or the Surgeon would be blameless.

If the secondines come first, the best way is to deliver the woman withal the
expedition that may be, by reason of the great fluxes of blood that will follow
by reason that the veins are opened but here are two things to be considered
the first is whether the secondines are much or little come forth; if they are
but little advanced, they must be put back with care and diligence and if the
head of the child appear first it must be guided directly toward the neck of
the womb; as in the most natural birth, but if there appear any difficulty in
the birth, by reason of the weakness either of the child or of the mother,
then the most convenient way will be to seek for the feet, as we have said
before.

Another thing to be observed is, that if the secondine be so far advanced that
they cannot be put back, and that the child follows it close, then are the
secondines to be pulled away with all the care and expedition that can be, and
to be laid aside without cutting the entrail that sticks to them, for by that
you may be guided to the Infant, which whether it be alive or dead, it is to be
pulled out by the feet with as much care and quickness as may be; though it is
not to be done but in cases of great necessity, for otherwise the secondines
ought to come last.

If the child be dead in the womb of the mother, Of the child dead in the
mothers belly.
the woman is then to be situated in the same posture, as when she is troubled
with a flux of blood.

If it present it self dead, with the head foremost, and that there is little or
no hope that the woman may be delivered without assistance, and that her
strength begins to fail her, the most certain and safe way is to put up the
hand, for the Surgeon must then slide up his left hand being hollowed, as
when a man strives to hold water in it, causing it to slide in the neck of the
womb, along the lower part thereof toward the feet, and that between the head
of the Infant, and the neck of the Matrix, and having thus opened the womb with
his left hand, he shall with his right put up his hook above his left hand,
between the head of the child, and the flat of his hand, and fix it in the bone
of the temples, toward the ear, or else in the hollow of the eye, or in the
Occipital bone, keeping his left hand still in its place; after this gently
moving and stirring the head with his left hand, with his right hand holding
the hook well fixed, he shall draw the child forth by degrees, exhorting the
woman all the while to force and streine her self with all her power; and then
is the best time to draw forth the child, when the pains shall seize her; now
if it happen that he loose his hold in one place, the danger is nothing, for he
has the liberty to fix his instrument better in another place. The head being
thus drawn forth, he must with all speed that may be, slip his hands down the
child's armeholes, to draw forth his shoulders, and the rest of his body: In the
mean while it will be requisite to give the woman a small draught of wine, or
a Tossed sopt in wine or Hipocras.

Another way.
If after these Medicines following adhibited, the child make no have into the
world, but lies unmoved in the womb, then you may proeeed to instruments after
another manner. First of all, as soon as the woman is brought to the bed, let
her take this following potion hot, and abstain from all other meat, and
remain quiet for the space of an hour or two, till she feel the power and
efficacy of the medicine.

. Seven cut Figs, Fenugreek, Motherwort-seed, and Rue, of each two drams, Water
of Penyroyal and mother wort, of each six ounces, boil all these to the
consumption of half, strein them and to the straining add Trochischs of Myrrh
one dram, three grains of Saffron, Sugar as much as is sufficient; make one
draught of this, and spice it with a little Cinnamon.

After she has rested a little upon this, let her again return to her travel,
at what time certain perfumes must be made ready of Trochischs, composed of
these following spices, to be cast on the coals, and so used as that the
perfume may only come to the Matrix, and no further.

Take Castor, Sulphur, Galbanum, Opoponax, Pigeons dung, Assa-faetida, of each
half a dram, mingle all these with the juice of Rue, and make a Trochisch of
them in the form of a filberd.

If these produce no effect, you may use this following Emplaster.

Take Galbanum an ounce and a half, Colocinthis without the grains two drams,
the juyces of Rue and Motherwort, new Wax, as much of each as is sufficient, of
each make a plaster. Let this be spread upon a cloth to reach from the navel to
the privities, and in breadth to both the sides, which she may keep on for the
space of an hour or two. A pessary may be also convenient, made of Wool, and
closed over with silk, and then moistened in the following decoction.

Take of Round birth-wort brought from France, Savin and Colocynthis, with
grains, Staves acre, black Ellebore, of each half a dram, bruise these together
and make a pessary, with as much of the juice of Rue as is sufficient.

But now if all these things avail not, and that the Midwife is not able to
dilate the passage for the infant, then you must have recourse to the
Surgeon; To which purpose she is to be placed in a seat, so that she may
turn her crupper as much from the back of the chair as may be, drawing up her
legs as close as she can, but spreading her hips abroad as much as may be. Or
else if it seem more commodious, she may be laid upon the bed, with her head
downwards, with her buttocks raised, and her thighs drawn up as much as can be,
then you may go to work either with your speculum matricis, or his Apertory, so
that the womb being sufficiently widened by the help of these instruments, the
birth may be drawn out by the hands of the Surgeon, together with the
seconds, if possible may be. The womb must then be washed and anointed, the
woman then must be laid in her bed, and well comforted with spices, as also with
some comfortable meat and drink. This course must be taken with all dead
infants, and also with moles and secondines, which are hindered in their coming
forth naturally.

If by these Instruments the womb cannot be sufficiently widned for the egress
of the infants, there are yet other Instruments, by which the womb may be
widened with damage to the mother, and birth be brought forth, such as are
Drakes bill, and the long Pincers, by which the womb is not only widened, but
the birth taken hold of by them for the more forcible drawing it forth.

If there be any swelling, or inflation, or concrete blood gathered together in
the preputium of the Matrix, under the skin, those tumors either before or
after the birth, where the matter appears thinnest and ripest, the midwife may
cut with a pen knife and squeeze out the matter; anointing it afterward often
with a pessary dipped in oil of roses until it be whole.

If it happen that the child be swollen in the womb, in any part of it, by
reason of wind or any watrie humor, yet if it be alive, such means are to be
used, as may be least to the detriment of the child and of the mother; but if
it be dead, in what ever part those humors be, either in the breast arms or
legs, the midwife may then put up her hand, and with a little knife for that
purpose, cut the swollen, that by letting out of the wind or humor, the child
may grow less, and be brought forth with less difficulty.

Many times it happens that the child comes into the world with the feet
foremost; and the hands dilating themselves from the hipps. In this case the
midwife ought to be well furnished with ointments, helping the egress of the
Infant, by anointing and stroking it, least it be carried backward. Having also
a great care to take hold of both the arms of the Infant, and keep them close
to the hipps, that the child may come forth after its own manner. If by reason
of this deduction of the arms, from the sids of the Infant, and the narrowness
of the Matrix, it so happen that the child cannot make a total egress, the womb
of the woman, and the Infant it self and child, are to be well anointed,
sneezing powders being administered to the woman, to help her endeavors, the
womb is also to be pressed hard with both hands, that the child make no
retirement back, but may still move forward.

It happens sometimes that the child comes forward with its feet, with the
arms not close to its sides, but extended above its head; which when it comes
to pass, the midwife is by no means to receive this birth, unless the child be
very small, and the Matrix so wide, that it may afford an easy passage to the
child; yet may she not then receive it, till she has well anointed both the
child and the Matrix. But it would be much more safe and convenient, for both
the child and the Mother, to put back the child into the womb, and bring it to
its natural form, which may be done in this manner; the woman must lie on her
back upon her bed, with her head downward, and her buttocks a little elevated,
which being done, the midwife shall gently 3 2 1 6 5 4

depictions of fetuses in the womb compress the belly of the woman toward the
Midwife, thereby to put back the Infant into the womb. But above all things let
her take a care that she turn the face of the child toward the back of the
mother, raising up the thighs and buttocks of the child, toward the navel of
the mother, to bring the child to a more legitimate and natural production.

If the child happen to come forth but with one foot, the arm being extended
along the sides, with the other foot turned backward; the woman is instantly to
be brought to her bed, and laid in the same posture as we have before told you,
and then is the other foot which came forth first, to be put back into the
womb; which being done, let the woman rock her self from one side of the bed to
the other, (lying always with her head low and her buttocks raised) till she
apprehend the child to be turned, upon which she may immediately expect her
pains with all the assistance that may be given; and in the mean while to be
comforted as much as may be with cordial potions, and wholesome medicines.

Many times it happens that the child lies athwart, and falls upon its side, If
the child lie athwart
which when it comes to pass, the mother is not to be urged to her labor,
neither is the birth to be expected after that manner, for it is impossible
that the child should be so born without some conversion; and therefore the
Midwife is to do all she can to reduce it to a more natural form of birth, by
moving the buttocks, and steering the head to the passage; if this succeed not,
let her try by often rocking the woman to and fro, to bring the child to its
natural form of being born.

The fifth unnatural form.
If it happen that the child hasten to the birth, with the legs and arms
distorted, the Midwife ought not to hasten the woman, but immediately cast her
on her bed, where she may direct the woman to roll her self to and fro; or else
she may gently stroke the womb of the woman, as she lies till she have reduced
the Infant to a better posture; If this profit not, the Midwife must take the
legs and close them together, then if she can she must get her hand about the
arms of the child, and in the safest way she can direct it to its coming
forth: though it be the safest way to turn the Infant in the womb, and by that
means compose it to the natural birth.

The sixth form.
If the infant come into the world with both knees forward, with the hands
hanging down upon the thighs. The Midwife may then put up both the knees,
upward, till the feet happen to come forward, and then with her left hand let
her take hold of the feet, and keep her right hand about the sides of the
child, and in that posture endeavor the birth of the child; but if that
succeed not, let the woman, as is said before, be brought to her bed, and there
wallow from side to side, till she have moved the child into a better posture.

9 8 7 12 11 10

depictions of fetuses in the womb

But when it happens that the child hastens forwards with on arm extended upon
the thigh, Of the seventh form.
and the other stretched over the head, the feet being stretched out at length
in the womb, the Midwife may by no means receive the child in this posture,
but must lay her patient upon the bed, as we have said before; then must the
woman's belly be gently pressed backward, that the infant may retire into the
womb, and if it give not backward of its own accord, the Midwife may with her
hand gently thrust back the shoulder, and bring the arm that was stretched back
to its right place.

The most dangerous of all those that we have spoken of is this, The eight form.
and therefore the Midwife must take great care to put back the Infant in this
case into the womb: first of all therefore anoint well her hands, as also the
womb of the woman, then if she can let her thrust in her hand near the arms of
the Infant, and so move the shoulders that the infant may fall back into the
womb; and then to bring it to the natural form, let her thrust up her other
hand, and reduce the arms of the infant to the sides of it; If this succeed
not, the woman must be laid on her bed, and after a little rest, she must be
ordered as before we have said: If this avail not, she must be brought back to
her seat, as we have before rehearsed; then must her womb, by the help of those
women that assist her, be gently pressed downward, and on both sides, while the
Midwife having anointed the matrix, and both the arms of the Infant, joins
them as close together as she can, and in that manner receives the Infant. And
there is the less danger in this form if the Midwife be diligent and the child
slender.

The ninth form.
If the Infant thrust it self forwards with the buttocks foremost, the Midwife
must put her hand well anointed, and so by heaving up and putting back the
buttocks, strive to turn the head to the passage. Yet overmuch haste must not
be made, lest the Infant should fall back into some worse posture; and
therefore if it cannot be turned by putting up the hand, the woman must be
brought to her bed, and ordered as we have often said before, comfortable
things being conveniently ministered to her.

The tenth form.
If the child come forward, with the neck bowed and the shoulders forward, with
the hands and feet stretched upwards; in this case the Midwife must carefully
move the shoulders backward, that she may be able to bring the head forwards,
which may be easily done, for the shoulders being removed, the head will soon
appear foremost, yet if this suffice not, the woman must be laid on her back
upon the bed, and ordered according to the former precepts.

The eleventh form
When the Infant thrusts forth the hands and feet foremost, care must be had to
avoid the danger of this misshapen posture, and therefore the midwife must strive
by removing the feet, to lay hold on the head, and as much as in her lies, to
direct it to the passage; the hands are also to be removed, unless of their own
accords they fall down to the sides. If by this means it cannot be done, the
former precepts of converting the child are to be observed.

Sometimes it happens that the child strives to force its passage in this
posture which is very dangerous. First of all therefore, The 12th form.
let the midwife anoint her hands well, and the womb of the woman, which being
done let her put up her hand, and seek for the arms of the child, which when
she has found, let her hold them fast till she has hold of the head also,
which she must with all her skill endeavor to bring foremost, then let her
remove the hands of the Infant, and fix them upon the sides of the Infant. Yet
if this do not avail, it will be the safest way to lay the woman on her bed,
and to proceed according to the former precepts, to try if by that delay she
may have the more advantage to proceed as before.

The same method which is to be observed in single birth, The 13th form.
is also to be observed in case of twins or of triple birth: for as the single
birth, has but one natural way, and many unnatural forms, so is it with the
birth of more children; and therefore when it happens, that when twins appear
coming into the world according to the natural form, the midwife must observe
to receive that first which is nearest the passage, yet be sure not to let go
the other, lest it should fall back into the womb, and tumble into some other
form, but the one being born, immediately to receive the other; this birth is
the more easy, in the natural form, because the first child widens the passage
for the latter, but in unnatural births there is most difficulty in the passage
of the second child. care must be also had in the birth of twins, that the
secondines be maturely brought forth, least the womb being delivered of its
burden should fall, and the secondine by that means be delayed to the damage
of the woman in childbed.

The fourteenth form.
If there be twins in the womb, and one of them endeavor to come forth with the
head foremost, and the other with the feet; First of all the Midwife must
consider which of the two the woman may be delivered of with most expedition;
if the head of the one be less forward then the feet of the second, it will be
most convenient to draw that forth by the feet, turning the head of the other a
little to the other side, and that being delivered, she must presently lay hold
of the head of that which is within, and direct it just to the passage of the
womb; which may be done with more ease, by reason of the gap which the foremost
has made.

If it happen that in drawing forth the first by the feet, that the other chang
its situation, the midwife may then draw forth the other by the feet, as she
did the first; and if the head of the first be more forward, then must she put
back the feet of the first, and receive that which comes with the head foremost.

If both of them press together to the passage of the womb, the midwife must
take great care; and therefore she must put up her hand to see which of them is
most forward, as also to try whether it be not some monstrous conception, as
two heads upon one body, or two bodies joined in one, either at the shoulders,
or at the sides, which may be known, if she put up her hand gently between the
two heads as high as she can, and if she find that they are twins, she may
gently put the one to one side, to make way for the passage of the other, which
is most advanced, which must be directed just to the orifice of the womb,
having a great care that she do not change the situation of the second; and as
she feels the pains of the mother coming on her, she must by all means bring
forward the child, that she would receive, still keeping the other back, with
two or three fingers of the left hand: and thus having delivered the first, if
the second be not well situated, she must bring the head to the neck of the
womb, where it will find the passage open to it, by the delivery of the first.

Now lest the first child should be in danger of its life, you must take it
from the mother, and carefully tie up the navel string, as is formerly
mentioned, and also bind again with a large and long fillet, that part of the
navel which is fast to the secondines, that they may be the more easily found.
Then the second child being born, the Midwife must see if there be not two
secondines, for by reason of the shortness of the ligature, it may have
happened to retire back again, to the damage of the woman; and therefore the
secondines must be hastened forth as soon as may be, least the womb should
close.

If the two Infants have but one body, the better way is to turn the head
upwards, and to draw it forth by the feet, then by the head; taking care when
you come to the hipps, to draw it forth as quick as may be.

The fifteenth form.
The second form of the unnatural birth is very dangerous, and therefore
requires the greater care of the midwife. First therefore, let her well anoint
the womb of the woman, that the passage may be more slipperie, which being
done, let her take hold of the hands of one of the Infants, and keeping them
close to the sides, direct the head to the orifice of the womb; that being
born, let her proceed in the same manner toward the other. If she cannot come
to take hold of either of the Infants arms, she must bring the woman again to
her bed, and try if by the foresaid Agitation of her body, the infants may be
Brought to a more convenient form of delivery.

CHAP. XXIX. Of ordering the woman after she is delivered.
IN the first place she must keep a temperate diet, having a great care not to
over fill her self after so great an evacuation; and indeed her diet must be
like that of wounded persons; neither are the tales of Nurses to be believed,
who exhort them to fill after so great an emptines, telling them that the loss
of blood must be restored; for these are mere fooleries; for as for that blood
which she has lost, it is but unnecessary blood, such as is usually kept for
the space of nine months, which to void, is much conducing to her health;
besides their nourishment for the first days, must be but slender, for fear of
falling into a fever; besides the abundance of milk which it would bring into
the breast, where it might be in danger of curdling, or apostematizing, and
therefore for the first five days, let her use broths, Panadas, potched eggs.
Gellies, abstaining from flesh, or french Barley, In the Morning, broth will be
expedient; at dinner, broth or eggs or Panada; and at supper, the same, with
some Gellies for her second courses. If she intend to nourse her child, she
may feed more plentifully; and drink some Barly-water where in some corianders
or fennel seed may be put.

In Italy the persons of most account do use this water. Take two Capons, the
feathers being well pulled of, and the bowels wholly taken out, which you shall
boil in a glazed earthen pot, in a sufficient quantity of water till they be
half boiled then must they be taken out of the pot, together with the broth;
and being cut to pieces are to be put into a Lembick in manner following.

. Bugloss, Borache and Time, two good handfulls, and with that cover the
bottom of the shell, then lay upon that a row of flesh, then upon that a rank
of leaf gold, with a dram of powder of pearls, and upon that pover the broth,
let all this be distilled in Balneo Mariae, drawing forth a pint at a time,
which you shall reiterate as often as you have any thing left, to give to the
woman in childbed, for the space of ten or twelve days. This water must be
drawn six weeks or two months before it be used; If the woman be not troubled
with a fever, let her drink a little white wine or Claret, with twice as much
hot water; If she have a mind to drink between meals or at night, it may be
convenient to give her some syrrup of maidenhaire, or any other syrrup that is
not astringent, with a little boiled water. After the suspicion of fever, or
heat of her breasts is over, she may be nourished more plentifully, and you may
give her, together with her broth, some other meat, as Pullet, Capon, Pigeon,
Mutton or Veale, boiled. After the eight day is past; at what time the Womb is
well purged and discharged, it will be expedient to give her cold meat in
greater quantity, that she may be enabled to gain. strength; during all this
time, she must rest very quiet, and be free from all manner of disturbance; she
must sleep as little in the day time as may be. If she go not well to the
stool, she may have some such kind of Glyster as this.

. of mallows, Marshmallows, and Pelitory of the wall, an. one handful, Flowers
of Camomile, and Melilot, of each a small handful, Aniseeds and Fenell seeds,
of each two ounces, boil these in the decoction of a wethers head, take of
this three quartaries and dissolve in them of course sugar and common honey, of
each two ounces, new fresh butter three ounces; of this make a Glister, and if
occasion serve, add to this an ounce of Catholicon.

What is to be done to the Breast, Belly, and lower parts of the Woman in
childbed.
IN the first place you may lay the skin of a hare or sheep for the space of
four or five hours, which being taken away, you may then anoint it with this
following ointment, and then lay a linen towell all over her belly and hipps,
which must be continued on for the first seven days, looking after and turning
every morning.

The Ointment may be this.
the oil of sweet Almonds, Camomil and Hipericon, an. one ounce and a half,
Spermaceti two ounces, Goats fat one ounce, oil of Myrtles half an ounce,
melt all these and make an ointment to anoint the belly, Now before the cere
cloth be put on, you must apply a little plaster of Galbanum, about the
bigness of two or three fingers to the navel, in the middle of which may be put
two or three grains of civet, yet so as that the woman may not perceive the
sent of it. The cere cloth may be this.

. White wax four ounces, Pomatum without musk, Calfes greass, of each an ounce,
Spermaceti an ounce and a half, oil of Hipericon and sweet Almonds, of each
one ounce, Venice Turpentine, washed in Pellitory water, half an ounce, melt
these in Balneo Mariae, and spread them upon a cloth about the bigness of the
belly, and when it is cool apply it.

The next care is to be had of the breasts, upon these some put round cere
cloths, made thus, take six ounces of new wax, oil of Myrtle, roses and honey
of Narbon, of each two ounces, melt these all togethe^, and make a cere cloth;
Let them have holes in the middle for the nipples to go through.

This ointment is also very good to keep the milk from clotting.
. Ointment of Populion one ounce, Galens refrigerating ointment half an ounce,
oil of roses six dramms, vinegar a small quantity, melt them together and
make an ointment.

This fomentation is also much commended.
. Fennel, Parssely, Petroselinum, Mallows, Althea, of each a small handful,
Laurel and Camomile flowers, of each half a handful, boil these according to
art, and make a fomentation for the nipples. After this fomentation, anoint
them with oleum rosatum omphacium, and then apply this following plaster.

. Venice Turpentine four ounces, well washed in strong wine and rose water,
adding to it two whole eggs, and a scruple of saffron, with as much wax as is
sufficient, spread this upon a linen cloth, and apply it: as for the lower
parts, for the three first days, they are to be fomented with a certain
fomentation of milk, where in has bin boiled a few roses, some chervil, and a
little plantaine. From the next day to the eight day, you may use this bath;
wine and water, of each half a pint, red roses, and flowers of Hipericon, of
each two handfulls, Agrimony one handful, make of this a decoction; after
bathing once or twice lay this following ointment along the lips of the
privities, upon a linen cloth.

Oil of Hipericon two ounces, Spermaceti an ounce and a half, a little white
wax, mix all these together melt them and make an ointment.

After the eight days are past, you may lay upon her belly this following
plaster.

. Oil of Hipericon, Camomile, and aniseeds, of each one ounce, oil of
Mastick, an ounce and a half, oil of myrtles six dramms, Spermaceti two
ounces, the fat of the reins of a goat an ounce and a half, Dears suet one
ounce, of this make an ointment to anoint the belly of the woman in childbed,
and then apply this following plaster.

. Oil of myrtles, and Hypericon, of each an ounce and a half, oil of Nippo
one ounce, Venice Turpentine, washed in water of Motherwort, four ounces, melt
all these together and put them upon a hempen cloth, that may cover all the
belly, and let her wear it the space of eight days.

These fifteen days being past, for the space of eight days more, you may lay
upon her belly and her hipps, this following plasters.

. Oil of Mastick, myrtles, Iasmine, and Quinces, of each an ounce and a half,
oil of Acornes two ounces, spermaceti one ounce, Venice Turpentine, washed in
Plantaine water, half an ounce, wax six ounces, melt all these together, adding
powder of Mastick, and Terra sigillata an. half an ounce, florentine, Orrice
one ounce, spread all these upon a hempen cloth, and lay it on her belly, to
be kept there for the space of eight or ten days; for the lower parts this
fomentation may be needful.

. Leaves of Plantaine, Mulleine, Centinody and Horstaile, an. one handful,
Cypress leaves a handful and a half, of the rind of Pomgranates, cypress
nuts; and Pomgranate flowers, of each half an ounce, red roses, Camomil and
Melilot, of each a handful, roch Alum two ounces, calamus aromaticus, and
florentine Orrice, of each three drams, Gilliflowers one dram, make of these
two sacks, and boil them in like quantities of sower wine, and smiths water,
for the exterior mouth of the neck of the womb.

Of the choice of a good Nurse.
THe choice of a good Nurse is very important, and therefore you must first
look upon her aspect, and see whether her sight be no way imperfect, as whether
she be squint-eyed, or have a down-cast look; you must have a special care that
she be not red hair'd, for their milk is extremely hot; see moreover whether
her teeth be sound and white and well set, know whether she come of parents
that have been troubled with the consumption; and if she have not, nor be
exsumptive herself, you may judge of her stomach, and whether she be subject to
catarrhs; you must also take heed that she send no stinking breath, either from
her mouth or nostrils, for that corrupts the Lungs of the Infant. Enquire
whether neither she nor any of her kindred have been troubled with leprosy, by
reason that it is very contagious, or with the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness.
And therefore those women that either cannot, or will not nurse their own
children, must make use of such women as are most fit to the humor they would
have the child to be of, for the nurse is now to be the second mother of the
child, from whom the Infants draws all her conditions, be they good be they
bad; and it is often seen that children do partake more of the conditions of
the Nurse then the Mother, and therefore care must be taken, that the Nurse be
good conditioned, good teeth, brown hair, of a healthy generation, that neither
she nor her husband may have had the French disease, that she be not peevish
nor choleric, that she have milk in abundance, and a good fleshy breast, that
her breast be not over-fleshy, that she be not too fat, and above all, that she
be not of too amorous a humor, and desirous to be with her husband, for that
is perfect venom to the milk.

What is to be done in the extreme pains of the child.
IF a child have extreme throws presently after it be born, you must rub it
with Pelitory and fresh butter, or Spinach, or else with Hogs grease, and apply
it upon the navel, having first a great care that it be not too hot. Or else
make a little cake of eggs and oil of nuts, and apply in the very same place;
if this avail not, give it a little Glyster of milk, the yolke of an egg and a
little Sugar, this eases the pain of the intestines.

What is to be done with those children that are troubled with phlegm.
THere are some children born of ill constitution'd women, or else of women
that have not used good nourishment in the time of their being with child, who
are very full of phlegm, these you must lay upon one side, and sometimes upon
the other; for if you lay them upon their backs, you may perchance choke them;
you must be sure to keep their bellies soluble, causing them to void that blood
kept in the entrails from the time of their being in the womb, by giving it a
little suppository of black soap well rubbed in fresh butter, to take away the
Acrimony of it, then give it a spoonful of syrrup of violets; this causes the
phlegm to pass down; if you perceive that the Infant has not much heat, you may
mix with it half the quantity of oil of sweet Almonds, and half of the syrrup
of violets, and continue it, stroaking the stomach and the belly of the Infant
with fresh butter, every time that they undress him.

That which ought to he done to children, that have their cods full of wind.
When Infants have their cods full of wind, ye must examine whether it be with
wind or water; if it be water, by rubbing and chafing the skin with fresh
butter, the waters will sweat out; if it be wind, the children must be stirred,
and swung gently, mingling in their drink the decoction of aniseeds.

How to take away the canker from the mouths of Infants.
THere have been known certain children which have been nourished with cold
milk, which has bin thick and in great quantity, which a few days after its
birth, has heated the mouth of the infant in such a fashion, that it caused a
white canker, which presently possessed the tongue, palate, the gums, the
throat, and all the mouth, whereupon it was taken with a fever, and it could no
longer suck, all the assistance that could be was still applied, and when no
other medicine did avayle, there was found one, a particular remedy, which
was, half a handful of sage, a handful of cherveil, bruised a little, and
boiled in a sufficient quantity of water, a bout a dozen seethings, to which
you must add a spoonful of vinegre, when you have streined it, you must put to
it an ounce of mel rosatum, then you must have a little hooked stick, with a
little piece of scarlet tied at the end, then putting the water in a sawcer,
dip the end of the stick where the scarlet is tied, and then rub the place
affected gently, and you shall find the cancer to assuage by little and a
little.

What is to be done to children whose intestines are fallen.
THere are a great many infants whose great gut falls, which is a thing very
easily remedyed at the beginning, and therefore you must put it up again,
first, lay the child with his head lowermost, then you must have a thick
cushion, soaked in smiths water, then you must have an emplaister made of the
roots of great Consound scraped, and put upon it as an ointment, then looking
to it every day, taking care that it cry but little, and never unbind him but
as he lies, lest the gut tumble down again, and so the cure be delayed, as
the child grows big the hole lessens, and the Intestine grows big. This is an
experienced way.

To make an ointment to strengthen the thighs and legs of a child, and make
him go.
TAke Sage, Marjoram, Dwarf, Elder-bruise them a good while together till you
have beaten out a good deal of juice, then put it into a glass viol, till it
be full, and stop up the hole, with past and round the sides also, put the said
past, put it then in an oven to bake as long as a good bigg loaf, then draw it
forth and suffer it to cool, then break the past which is round the viol,
break the bottle and keep up that which is with in, which you shall find turned
to an ointment, and when you would use it, you must add to it some of the
marrow of the hoof of an ox, melting it all together, and when you have so
done, you must rub the hinder part of the legs and thighs of the child. This
has been done to a child whom a famous Physician, after three years having in
hand, gave over, saying, that it would never go.

Of the relaxations of the Matrix, and the cause.
There are many causes of the relaxation of the Matrix, the one proceeding from
great fluxes which fall down upon the ligaments thereof, causing them to wax
loose; Others come to this disease by some falls, others by reason of carring
in their womb too great burdens, others by streining themselves in travail
before their time, and because the orifice of the womb is not open; sometimes,
and very often; by reason of the midwifes, who putting up their hands into the
womb, tear down they know not what, which is often times apart of the Matrix,
to the bottom of which the secondines adhere, drawing down part of the womb.
which they take to be the secondines, which is often times brought also to a
worse condition, when the unskilful women force her to the remedies, for
bringing down the secondines, as holding baysalt in her hand, streining to
vomit, and the like. For remedy whereof, all these relaxation of the Matrix, by
the same remedies, except those which are occasioned by strong fluxes, for in
this case other remedies are not sufficient, being that you are to take away
the cause of those defluxions, before you can proceed to the cure of the
relaxation. Among the rest I will relate one that has been found very
profitable and experienced, which is this astringent. Take Gall nuts, Cypress
nuts, and Pomegranate flowers, Roche Alum, of each two ounces, Province Roses
four ounces, Centinode, a good big handful, the rind of Cassia, the rind of
Pomegranates, Scarlet Grains, of each three ounces, the nature of a whale, one
ounce, Myrrh water, rose water, and sloe water an ounce and a half, thick wine,
and smiths water, of each four ounces and a half; then make two little baggs
of a quarter of a yard long, causing them to boil in the foresaid waters, in a
new pot, using one after another as you have occasion, leting it lie upon the
bone of the Pubes, passing in between the hipps, chafing her often, and holding
her head and her reins low, using in the morning, sometimes a little mastick,
in an eg, or sometimes plantaine seed: if the disease be not too old, it may be
cured by this means, but if it be of a long standing, you must make a pessarie
half round, and half oval, of great thick cork, peirced through in the middle,
tie a little packthred to the end, then cover it over with white wax, that it
may do no hurt, and to make it more thick, this must be dipped in oil of
Olives to make it enter, and it must be streit that it may not easily fall out,
and if it be too little, to have an other bigger, and when the woman goes to do
her necessary occasions, she must hold it in, least she should force it out;
the hole is made that the vapors of the womb may have a vent, and to give way
for her purgations to flow, neither must it be taken away till after the
purgations are passed, the thicknes causes the matrix to mount up as long, as
it is very thick, for the ligaments being close do then retire. If they be
women that bear children, the midwife ought not to suffer them to force
themselves, but as nature constraines her, having her own hand ready after the
throw, to put back the Matrix with her finger, and when she is brought to bed,
lay her low with her head and with her reins, raising her up, with pillows put
under her hipps; and for women that are troubled with this disease, they ought
not to lace themselves over hard, for that thrusts down the matrix, and makes
the woman pouch bellyed, and hinders the Infant form being well situated in her
body, causing her to carry the child all upon her hipps, and makes her belly
as deformed, as her wast is handsome.

Of a disease that happens by reason of the fall of the Matrix.
THere is sometimes a relaxation of the membrane, that covers the rectum
Intestinum, when the head of the child, at the beginning of the travail falls
downward, and draws it low; oftentimes it comes by reason of women with child
lacing themselves, which causes such a conflux of wind to these parts, that it
seems to the woman to be the head of the child, in so much that she is hardly
able to stand upright, neither can she go. For remedy hereof, you must keep
the woman soluble, giving her Anise and Coriander seeds to dissipate the winds.
You must take Sage, Agrimony, Mother-wort, balm, White wormwood, Margerome a
little rue, and a little Thyme, and Camomile, and having picked all the above
written herbs, you must cut them very small, and having well mingled them put
them into a maple platter, and then put hot cinders upon them, and upon those
another handful of herbs, covering the platter with a close cloth, that the
woman may receive the smoke; this is a remedy which has been much approved
and experimented.

To remedy the fall of the fundament in Infants.
TAke of the green shrub whereof they make broomes, and cut it small, and lay it
upon the coals, and set the child over the smoke thereof, and it will
certainly cure it.

Of the diseases of women, and first of the inflammation of the breast.
THe inflammation of the breasts is a hard swelling, together with a beating
pain, redness and shooting. The chief cause of this is the abundance of blood,
drawn up together in that place, though there be sometimes other causes also, as
the suppression of the courses, the Haemorrhoids, or a blow received upon the
breasts. The signs of it are easy to be known, that is to say, a certain
rednes and burning heat, oftimes joined with a fever. For the cure of this,
there are four sorts of remedies; first, as the order of diet, which must be
comforting and moistning, as broth of pullets, where endive, borage, lettice,
and purselaine may be boiled also; she may drink the juce of Pomegranates, or
barley water, with aniseeds boiled in it: the use of wine and all sorts of
spices are very dangerous, and if the woman go not freely to the stool, there
is nothing better then a lenitive glyster; she may sleep much, and must not
disturb her self with any passion. The next way of remedy is by diverting the
humors, which is done by frictions, letting blood in the foot, scarification
of the legs, or vesicatories applied to those places, especially if the flowers
are stopped or ready to come down; if not, it will be expedient to open a vein
in the arm.

You may also prepare the humor to void it out of the place affected, by
opening either the middle vein, or the Basilic, or the Vena Saphena, which may
be done two or three times, if occasion serve; after bloodletting, purge, but
let this be done with sweet medicines, such are Cassia, Manna, Tamarind, syrrup
of Roses, or Violets Solutive, having a little before used certain syrrups,
which may assuage and temper the humors. Take syrrup of Roses and Purslain, of
each one ounce, Endive water and Plantain water, of each an ounce, give this to
the patient; Neither will it be amiss to give her syrrup of Succory, or Endive,
or such like, for these syrrups have a cooling and refreshing faculty,
especially being mingled with Plantain, or Endive water, or such like, or the
decoction of the said herbs; now when the humor is thus prepared, you may give
her some gentle purges. As for example, take of the pulp of Cassia, and
Tamarinds, of each six drams, of this make a little bolus with some sugar, and
give to the patient, or with this potion.

Take of the Leaves of Italian Orach three drams, of Aniseed one scruple,
infuse these in four ounces of the foresaid waters. Into this being strained,
infuse an ounce of Cassia, and into the streining of this dissolve an ounce of
solutive Roses; of this make a potion and give it. The fourth way of cure
consists in Topics, such as may drive back and repress the humor, though care
must be had that they be not over strong, lest you thereby do cool the heart
too much, and thereupon drive the humor upon the heart it self. And therefore
temperate medicines are chiefly to be chosen, and such especially as are able
to digest and dissolve the humor: Wherefore it shall not be amiss to apply a
linen cloth dipped in white strong vinegar, and a little cold water, which must
be applied to the breasts, and often changed. Or else you may dip linen
clothes also in a decoction of Camomil flowers, and Violet flowers, with a
small quantity of oil of Roses, and a drop of vinegar or two; or you may use
this fomentation. Take of the juice of Nightshade and oil of Roses, of each an
ounce and a half, of the decoction of Fenugreek, Camomil and Lineseed two
ounces, vinegar one ounce.

This medicine you may use by dipping a sponge therein, and so washing and
fomenting the breast therewith.

Or you may apply this Cataplasme; take of the leaves of Nightshade and Melilot
half a handful of each, let them be boiled and extracted through a course cloth
then add to them bean meal two ounces, Oxymel and oil of sweet Almonds of each
one ounce; of this make a Cataplasm and apply it. If the disease be more
prevalent, you must use more forcible remedies, and among the rest this
fomentation. Take of the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Dill, of each one handful,
flowers of Camomil and Melilot of each a small handful and a half, boil these
together, adding to them a little wine and oil of Dill or Mustard; first let
the breast be fomented with this, and afterward with an ointment composed of
equal parts of new butter, oil of violets and Hens fat. But if these things
avail not to dissipate the humor, you must observe whether the inflammation
tend either to a suppuration or induration. If you find that it tends to a
hardness, you must try all means to hinder it by the way of mollifying
plasters, among which this is not a little experimented: Take the marrow of a
Calves leg two ounces, Sheeps grease one ounce, Saffron four scruples,
Cumminseed bruised, two scruples, mingle all these and make a plaster. If the
inflammation does not harden, but does altogether tend to a suppuration, which
may be known by these signs; that is to say, the increasing of the tumor, the
beating and excessive heat, and pain which rages about those parts so
vehemently, that do not admit them to be touched. But now the suppuration is to
be hastened with hot and moist medicines, which have an Emplastick faculty, for
which purpose this is much commended: Take the leaves of Mallows one handful,
roots of Althea one ounce, boil these together, and when they are mashed draw
them out, and add to them bean meal and Fenugreek, of each one ounce, the
whites of two eggs, myrrh and Assa faetida of each one dram, Saffron one
scruple, mingle all these together, and make a Cataplasm for your use; to this
you may either add Capons grease, Hogs grease, or fresh butter. If these
remedies do not suddenly bring the inflammation to a suppuration, you must then
take of the shells of snails bruised, and lay them upon the Cataplasm in such a
manner, that the snail shell may come to touch that part of the tumor which is
most elevated and pointed, whence it appears, that the matter will first issue;
If these remedies avail not, it will be necessary to open the said Apostem,
with a Lancet, and this must be done when you are sure that the matter is ready
to come forth, which may be known by these signs, when the beating ceases, when
the fever, the pain and the heat of the part do begin to diminish, when you
perceive the place pointed, and raised and enclining to a blackish color. When
the wound is open, you must first apply to it a digestive, composed of an ounce
of turpentine, half an ounce of oil of Roses and the yolk of an egg. After
this you must cleanse it with honey of roses, Turpentine and barley meal, or
with the ointment of the Apostles, or the ointment called Aegyptiacum, then you
may put on the top of the place, the ointment called Basilicon or Paracelsus
plaster which does digest, cleanse carnifie and cicatrize after a very
extraordinary manner. This is furthermore to be observed, that an ulcer in the
breast is not easily cured, if the milk be not dried out of the other breast;
and therefore the milk is to be dried up by keeping the child from sucking,
and by putting upon the breasts of the woman, clothes dipped in cold water,
together with bean barley and vinegar, and such like remedies.

THE COMPLETE MIDWIVES Practice.
Of windy Tumors in the Breasts.
THe flatuous tumor of the breasts is caused by a thick vapor which rises from
the menstruall blood which is retained or corrupted in the Matrix. The causes
of which are, first the suppression of the flowers; or when the flowers are not
discharged into their proper place, and in their proper time; as also from the
corruption of the humors by which are engendered diverse bad fumes and vapors;
for this being received into the breasts cause a distention much like a true
swelling. The signs by which it is known, is the pain which it brings along with
it, which is sharp and pricking, causing a distention of the part. The heart is
not a little out of order, by reason of the windinesses which lie so near it:
and commonly the left breast is most swollen, communicating its pain to the arm,
shoulder and ribs of the same side. And these signs differ from those of a
Canker; for in this distemper the breast is white and shining by reason of the
distention; and if you touch it, it sounds like a Drum. And if you press it
with your hands, you will find that it is sweld in all parts alike, and not in
one more then another. This is cured first by a good order of diet, taking
little victuals, whereby crudities may be avoided that do afford matter to the
obstructions, and increase windiness: for which cause she must also drink
little, and that, water boyld with Cinamom, Anis-seed, and rind of Citrons.
The next remedy is by using things which are good to provoke the courses,
[among which use this receipt; strein Selandine stamped into posset-ale, and
drink it four days before the new moon, and four days after.] And it will not
be amiss to let blood three or four times in the year, about the time that the
courses ought to begin. For by this means you may provoke the flowers, and
hinder the increase either of a Scirrhus, or of a Canker; to which purpose,
bathes, frictions, and infections are not a little to be used. In the next
place, you must prepare the humors that foment this windiness both in the
Matrix, and in the veins, and that by syrups which do expel phlegm and
melancholy: after which you must purge your patient; for which purpose you may
take of the leaves of Seen three ounces, Anis-seed one scruple; let them boil
in four ounces of Borage water; when it is streined, infuse into it
Confection Hamech without Scammony, Colloquint, and Cathol. Dupl. Rheo. of
each an ounce and a half; when it is streined, dissolve in it one ounce of
syrup of Roses solutive: this potion must be given two hours before eating. You
may also use this gentle Apozem: Take of the root of Tamarinds, Cypress,
Bugloss, of each an ounce and a half, flowers of Borage, Epithymi, Sen. of
each half a handful, flowers of Balm one handful, Raisins one ounce, Prunes
in number twelve, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water: and then in a
pint of the water dissolve four ounces of the syrup of Violets; make of this
an Apozem clarified according to Art, and sweeten it with a sufficient
quantity of sugar, giving four or five ounces at a time. In the next place, you
may use Topics to attenuate and resolve; to which purpose you may bathe or
soment the breast with a sponge dipped in Lie, and then lay upon it a linen
cloth dipped and moistened in Aquavitae, and dried in the shade; or else dipped in
fresh butter that has boiled a good while, or in oil of Lillies, or in oil
both of the root and seed of Angelica; or you may foment the breast with this
Decoction: Take Wheat-bran two handfuls, leaves of Dill and Melilot of each
half a handful, Anis-seed, Fenell and Cumin-seed, of each two drams, Camomill
flowers one half handful; boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water
and white wine, and let them boil to the consumption of the third part. In
this decoction you may wet a sponge, and wash or foment the breast therewith.
After you have fomented the part, you may put this ointment upon the part
affected: Take oil of Lilies and Elder, of each an ounce and a half, of the
best Balsam half an ounce, powder of burnt lead unwasht, Anis-seed one dram,
and as much Wax as is sufficient.

Of the watery tumor of the Breast.
THe watery tumor is engendered by a thick and watery phlegm gathered together in
great abundance in the breast and parts adjoining: and it happens many times
that this watery and flegmy substance is not always gathered to one particular
place, but also diffused through all the parts of the breast, which causes a
general swelling in that part. This swelling (that we may define it) is a
loose and soft tumor without much pain, yielding to the touch and pressing of
the fingers, so that the hole which is made by the pressing of the fingers
remains a pretty while after; yet it soon becomes painful, if there be any
acrimony joined with it; or if there be any distention by reason of the press
of vapors to that part. This oftentimes happens by reason of the suppression
of the courses; sometimes it is occasioned by reason of a clear and watery
phlegm which discharges it self upon these parts. This swelling is easily
distinguished from other swellings by reason of the loosnesse and softness
thereof, and by the pain which is always less then in other swellings: and in
this kind of tumor the pain ascends up to the arms and shoulders, and the
whole breast is altogether swollen and raised; and this pain comes at certain
times, chiefly when the flowers ought to come down, which being once come down,
the pain diminishes, by reason that the woman is then thoroughly purged. Yet
notwithstanding there does remain some certain kind of swelling, which happens
not in the windy tumors, by reason that the purgations of the flowers do
totally dissipate the matter of those swellings. These flegmy tumors do easily
turn into Cankers, and are therefore to be diligently looked after. As to the
cure of these tumors, there is required first an orderly diet, which must be
drying, her bread must be well baked and leavened, dried Raisins, parched
Almonds, Asparagus, roasted flesh, and small birds. Before meat she may take a
little honey of Roses upon a wafer cake. For her drink, let it be the decoction
of Anis-seeds, China root, Sassafras, and Sarsaparil. If the retention of the
flowers be the cause of this evil, let her then use rather boiled then roasted
meats, and then let her boil them with Sage, Betony and Hysop. All meats made
of milk are dangerous, as also sleep after dinner, and unleavened bread.

You may in the next place use things to divert the humor, as frictions and
baths: if her flowers are suppressed, let a vein be opened in the feet. Next
after you have prepared the humor by the use of syrups, as those of Mint,
Wormwood, Hysop, Licorass, Maidenhaire, honey of Roses, with fenel water, water
of Hysop, Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Mint, then may you use some purges with
those pills called Sine quibus, Agarick pills, and Cochie-pils. If the patient be
strong, and not to be worked upon by weak Physic, you may then add two or
three grains of Diagridion, or Alandaal Trochisques; these pills are to be used
for eight days, half a dram at a time. Another way may be by topics, to
attenuate and resolve: for which purpose the fomentations specified in the
foregoing chapters may be very fitly used, being prepared with Vine ashes, or
fig tree ashes, whereto a little Vinegar may be put; though the use of things
that drive back the humor are not here to be used; you may also rub and chafe
the breast with this Ointment; take of Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Line seed,
of each one ounce, ganders grease of each half an ounce, with a little
Diachylon instead of Wax; a plaster of great Diachylon would not be amiss in
this Disease; if the Woman feel any pain or heat in her breasts, let her
anoint them with Oil of Roses, a little burnt lead, and a little white wax; or
with a little Oleum Omphacinum, and oil of sweet Almonds tempered together in a
mortar. In the dispersing and resolving of the humor you may use baths of alum
and sulphur prepared with the decoction of Hysop, Mint, and Sage, and after
that such ointments as are most approved for the same purpose, always taking
heed of too boisterous Remedies: if you would suppurate or mature the swelling,
you must use such Remedies as we have described in the following, and
foregoing Chapters, the strongest of which you may here apply, because the
matter is more obstinate and tenacious, mingling with them for that purpose
other more effective Remedies, as are the Roots of Mallows, marsh mallows,
lillies, figgs, goose grease, and the like; when the sore is opened, you must
tend it after the same manner as is before rehearsed There are other Remedies
either to be taken inwardly, or to be outwardly applied, which serve to
fortify and comfort the stomach, as to take every morning a spoonful of
conserve of Rosemary, preserved Orange, or trochisques of Aromaticum: Rosatum,
Diagalanga, or diacuminum.

Of the kernels in the Breast.
THe kernels of the breast are little round bodies soft and thin, like a
sponge, which sometimes grow hard by reason of the phlegmie humor which is
sometimes purely so, and sometimes is mingled with other sharp and acrimonious
humors But sometimes it comes to pass, that not only the kernels of the breast
are swollen; but also that there do grow others which ought not to be there
which may not unfitly be termed a kind of the King's Evil, being a swelling
which proceeds of thick phlegm, or else of a thick mattrie blood hardened under
the skin; they are caused many times by the detention of the flowers, the blood
often times mounting up into the breast.

The cure of these is undertaken two ways; by softning the hard tumor, and
preventing the Canker; and then also a strict diet is to be observed, which
must be moderately attenuating, and by keeping themselves warm, which is
performed by moderate exercise before meals, as also by using sulphury bathes;
but full Diet, ease, idleness, and meats of hard digestion are very dangerous;
and indeed in all respects beside, the cure is the same as is set down in the
foregoing Chapter. But if the kernel be swelled up with a sharp humor, those
topics are to be used that are prescribed also in the foregoing Chapter: only
in case the fluxion remain any time, you may mingle those things which do a
little more refresh; such are oil of Roses, and oil of violets. When the flux
of humors ceases, you may then add oil of Camomil, and Lillies, and other such
like things, to dissolve and dissipate the humor. If you find that this kernel
is become a kind of Kings Evil, you must then use stronger Medecines; adding to
the forementioned purgation a dram and a half of the root of Mechoacan, or
three drams of Diaturbith. For topics you may use such as do soften and
dispel, but such as are stronger then these we have expressed in the former
Chapter. You must at length when all other ways do fail, use the operation of
the hand to take away the root of the disease; but this is not to be done til
you have used all other means to soften and dispel the humor, which may
perhaps be done by the use of Diachylon, or by a plaster of Melilot, to which
you may add half an ounce of Ammoniack, an ounce of Oil of Lillies, and an
ounce and a half of the root of Flower deluce of Florence; neither may this
following Plaster be amiss: Take of the roots of Althea two ounces, boil them
and strain them, and add to that oil of Lillies, Ganders grease, of each an
ounce, burnt lead, and roots of Iris, of each an ounce and a half; mingle all
these together, and make of them an Emplaster: if this avail not, the operation
of the hand must be used, in which the skill of the Surgeon must be very
able, and ready.

Of the Scirrhus of the Breasts.
THe Scirrhus of the breasts is a hard swelling without pain: Of this there are
two kinds, the one engendered of a Melancholy, and produced by a feculent and
gross blood, or else from a thick phlegm; now this exquisite Scirrhus is
without pain, in which it differs from the other; The other is not so
exquisite an hardness, perhaps because it is not yet come to its full maturity,
or else because it has certain other humors mixed with it. This exquisite
kind of Scirrhus is engendered, either because the spleen is obstructed, and
cannot purge away the melancholy blood, which for that reason abounding in the
body discharges and empties it self upon the breasts; or by reason of the
suppression of the courses, which causes the feculent and gross humor to
disgorge it self upon the breasts, gathering together in the Veins and flesh of
the same. Many times the ignorance of the Surgeon is the cause of it, when
they apply an unreasonable company of refrigerating medicines to the
inflammations of the breast, or too many resolving and heating medicines to it
in case the breasts be over hard. This Scirrhus is known by its hardness
without pain, from the unevenness of the body, and the color of the part
either inclining to black or brown. Now though the cure of these hardnesses be
something difficult, yet is there great hopes that they may be overcome; which
is to be done two ways, by mollifying diligently that which is hard, and by
taking that away which remains hard and knotty in the breast. And first of all
care is to be had to keep good order of diet; to which purpose she must use
wheaten bread, rear eggs, pullets, capons, partridge, veale and mutton, which
must be boiled with Spinach, Bugloss and Borage; she must abstain from Beef,
Venison, Hares flesh and Brawn, from Pease and Beans, and unleavened bread,
from all salt and smoked meats; as also from all things that have a sharp
biting quality; also she must abstain from all care and sadness, immoderate
exercise and going in the winds. If the monthly courses be stopped, you must seek
to provoke them gently, which may be done by letting blood in the foot, or to
let blood with hors-leeches; in the next place, it will not be amiss to purge
well with Seen and Rheubarb, to which you may add Catholicon, or Triphera
Persica, if you find that the disease needs a more strong purgation. Between
every purge it will not be amiss to take good cordial and comfortable things,
as confection of Alkermes, Triasantalon, Electuarium de gemmis, conserve of the
roots of Borage, conserve of Orange flowers. You may after all this use
Topics, that is to say, such medicines as heat and dry moderatly, being hot in
the second degree, and dry in the first; such are sheeps grease, especially
that greasy substance that grows upon the flank of a sheep, wax, oil of sweet
Almonds, oil of Camomil, oil of Dill, Capons grease, Goose grease, Hogs
grease, Bears grease, etc. Veale marrow, Dears marrow, emulsions of Mallows,
Lillies, and other things of more force, as liquid pitch, liquid Storax,
Galbanum, Cumin seed, Rue seed, Broom flowers, and Dill seed. If this swelling
come of a hard phlegm, which is known because it yields not so much to the
touch as the other; you must use the same topics to this, as to the watery
tumor before rehearsed. If melancholy be the cause of it, you may use a
fomentation of the leaves of Mallows, and Marshmallows, of each a handful and a
half, of Fenugreek and Lineseed of each two drams, Cucumbers, Bears foot, of
each two ounces; boil them in as much water as is sufficient, and foment the
breast with this twice or thrice a day. After that take this ointment: take of
the root of Mallows one ounce, when it is boiled and bruised, take it out, and
add to it sheeps grease, and Capons grease, of each two ounces, and with a
little Wax make an ointment. This you may use for some few days, after which
you may, if need require, use this ointment: Take Hysop leaves, Dill leaves,
and thyme leaves, of each half a handful, roots of Mallows, and Fenugreek seed,
of each half an ounce, boil them in as much wine and vinegar as is sufficient,
til half be boyld away; then take of the aforesaid vinegar, Goose grease,
Ducks grease, and the marrow of the leg of a Heart, of each two ounces, boil it
to the consumption of half the vinegar; you may add to this two drams of
Diachylon, and make it into the form of a plaster: You may also use for this
purpose plasters of Melilot, or Oxycroceum. At length if all remedies fail,
the operation of the hand must be the last succor, which we leave to the
Surgeon.

Of the Canker in the Breasts.
THe Canker is a venomous tumor, hard and very much sweld, hot and durable,
more exasperated oftentimes by remedies then assuaged. The Canker proceeds from
a feculent and gross humor, which being gathered together in the spleen, is
chased away from thence after it grows too hot; which when Nature cannot
void, it most commonly in Women empties it self upon the breast, by reason of
this cavernous and spongy nature: the matter of it is a hot melancholy blood,
and it is known by the crooked vvinding, and retorted veins that are about it,
stretching out long roots a good way from it, being sometimes blackish, and
sometimes inclined to black and blew. It is soft to see to, but it is very hard
to the touch, extending the pain as far as the shoulders. It will sometimes
remain for two years together, no bigger then a bean; afterward it grows to be
as big as a nut, then to the bigness of an Egg; and after that increasing daily
to a larger size. When the skin breaks, there issues out a great deal of
pestilent mattier thin and blackish, and having a very bad smell. The ulcer it
self is very unequal, the lips and orifice thereof being sweld with hardness,
and inverted; a light fever possesses the body, and often swoonings. And many
times the pestilencie of the humor having corroded a vein, there issues out a
great deal of blood. If the canker be ulcerated, or in any inward part of the
body, no medicine can prevail; for remedies do more exasperate then help it. To
burn it with iron is pestilent; and if it be cut with a penknife, it returns
again as soon as it is but skind over. But if it be an exulcerated canker,
(which is easily known, and arises from a more sharp matter, for then the flesh
is corrupted, sending forth a very noysom mattier, being very irksom to the
sight, and accompanied with a gentle Fever, and swooning, and issuing out of
blood;) The cure of this is to be done by drying and refrigerating medicines,
or by incision to the quick, and expression of the corrupted blood afterward;
after which the wound must be well cleansed; for which purpose the powder which
is called Hartmans blessed powder, is very prevalent. The diet must be of meats
that moisten and refrigerate, blood-letting also is profitable, as also
preparation of the humor with the juice of sweet smelling Apples, and extract of
Ellebore, and often purgation with Lapis Lazuli pills; and particularly if the
Canker be not ulcerated, you may apply this ointment: Take Litharge one ounce,
beat it in a marble mortar with a leaden pestle, incorporating into it two
ounces of Rose water and oil of Roses. In case the pain be great, use this
remedy; Take white poppy-seed one ounce, oil of Roses four ounces,
Henbane-seed and Opium of each a dram and a half, gum Arabic half an ounce,
a little wax, of which you may make an ointment. If the Canker be already
ulcerated, take this water: Take of the juices of Nightshade, Housleek,
Sorrel, Scabious, Honysuckles, Mullein, Figwort, dropwort, Plantain, Linarum,
Agrimony, of each half a pound, juice of green Olives one pint, the flesh of
Frogs and river Crabs, of each a pound and a half, the whites of six Eggs, Alum
three ounces, Camphire one dram; let all these be distilled in a leaden
Limbeck, and with the distilled water foment the part affected. Take also Alum
as much as a Nut, Honey two penny worth, red wine a pint, sees them together
till the fifth part be spent, strein it through a cloth, and wash the Canker
therewith.

Of the greatness of the Breasts.
THe greatness of the breasts is very unsightly, the cause of their greatness
is often handling of them, store of windy vapors, and retention of the monthly
courses; the cure of them is not to be neglected, because the lesser the
breasts be, the less subject they are to be cankered; they are cured by diet
first, wherein the use of astringent meats is to be recommended, so that they
be not windy by repercussion of the humors and blood which flow to that part,
such are the juice of hemlock, and the anointing of the place with partridge
eggs: or you may use this following cataplasm; Take of the juice of hemlock
three ounces, of white lead, Acacia and Frankincense, of each three drams, of
Vinegar one ounce, mingle all these together, to which you may add powder of
sponge burnt, alum, burnt lead, Bole Armoniack, and of these with a sufficient
quantity of wax and myrtle make a very profitable ointment. Thirdly, by the
discussion of that which is gathered together in that part; for which purpose
you may make an ointment in this manner; Take of the mood or lome found in
molis Tonsorum, two ounces, oil of myrtle one ounce, Vinegar half an ounce; or
thus, take of the same lome and Bole Armoniack, of each an ounce, white lead
two drams, oil of mastick two ounces and a half, of the emulsion of
henbane-seed one dram and a half, anoint the breast with this, and then upon
that put a linen cloth dipped in the decoction of Oak Apples. 4ly By compression
of the part, which is done by using a kind of plate of lead upon the breast
anointed within side with oil of Henbane-seed.

Of the defect, abundance, and coagulation of the Milk.
THe defect of milk arises from a double cause; for either it is a defect in
the blood, which is dried up by reason of some hot maladies of the body, either
through intemperancie of the Liver through fasting, or too much evacuation. If
the deficiency of milk come from these causes, it may be increased again either
by prepared crystal; the leaves also, root and seed of Fenel do avail much in
this particular, and the powder of Earthworms prepared and drunk in Wine, as
also the Electuary called Electuarium Zacuthi. There is another cause which
proceeds from the Lactifying quality, which is many times so weak, that it can
neither attract nor concoct the blood, by reason of some outward refrigerating
and astringent qualities, or by reason of some other diseases. The cure of
which being looked after in their respective places, much conduces to the
restoring of that defect. The redundance of blood proceeds from too great a
plenty of blood, and a strong lactifying quality. In the cure of which the
increase of blood is to be impeded, which is done by drying up that humor, and
diversion; to which blood-letting conduces much: Medicines also that drive it
back are to be put upon the breasts toward the arms; to which purpose Hemlock
boyld in Chervile water and vinegar, avails.

Curdling of the milk is, when the thinner part of the milk exhales, and the
more gross and heavy part stays behind, which many times is the cause of
tumors, kernels, and Apostems. In this case the infant is not to suck the part
affected; though that breast is also to be sucked, for fear lest the milk which
is newly generated should be curdled and knotted by that which is there
already, and so that part of the coagulated milk may be hindered from
putrefying. To the dissolving of the milk it much conduces to wash the breast
with water, wine and vinegar mixed together, as also a Fomentation made of the
decoction of Marshmallows, Fenugreek, and melilote, and then anointing them
with a liniment of Oil of Roses, Oil of sweet Almonds, juice of Parsley, and
Vinegar, wherein let the gall of a Hare be first dissolved. Hemlock water in
this case also is not a little commended.

Of the Diseases of the neck of the Womb: and first of the Disease called
Tentigo.
TEntigo is a Disease in Women, when the Clitoris increases to an overgreat
measure; the subject of this disease is the Clitoris or nervous piece of flesh
which the lips or wings of the privities do embrace, and which suffers erection
in the act of venery; the signs of it are evident, for it hangs below the
orifice of the privity as bigg as the neck of a Goose, the causes hereof are a
great concourse of humors or nutriment, by reason of the laxity of it, which
happens by often handling. The cure is performed by the diminution of the
blood, and drawing out of the other humors. A slender and refrigerating diet is
also necessary, and such things as have a discussive faculty, as the leaves of
Mastick tree, and the leaves of Olive tree. In the next place, by taking away
the excrescence; to which purpose gentle causticks may be first applied, as
Alum, and the Aegyptiac ointment, and that lie whereof soap is made, being
boiled with Roman Vitriol, to which at last you may add some opium, and form
the composition into Trochisques, which being afterward made into a powder, is
to be sprinkled upon the fleshieexcrescence: at length the flesh is to be cut
away, either by binding hard, or by section, care being taken that you avoid an
inflammation.

There is another disease which is called Cauda, which is a carnous substance
proceeding from the mouth of the womb, which sometimes fills up the privy parts,
and sometimes thrusts it self outward like a tail. The cure of this is the
same with the former; only if it come to section, it may be done either with a
horsehair, or a silken thread wound about it, being first dipped in sublimate
water; or else with a knife.

Of the narrowness of the neck of the Womb.
THis narrowness is either of the Womb it self, or of the orifice of the Womb;
the signs are the stoppage of the Courses, followed with a depressing and
weighty pain. The cause is partly natural from the nativity, and partly varies
according to the differences of the disease: the difference is in this, it
happening sometimes that this streightness consists in the exterior orifice,
whereby neither the flowers have free passage, neither can she enjoy coition,
or conceive with child, because she cannot receive either the man or the seed.
Sometimes the narrowness is in the interior orifice of the Womb, into which the
flowing retires back again, to the absolute hindrance of conception; sometimes
it is occasioned by way of compression, when the Caul being fatter then
ordinary lies upon the neck of the Womb. Sometimes the splaying of the thighs,
stone in the bladder, or some tumor in the straight gut. Sometimes it happens
by the clinging of other parts together, which happens either from the birth,
and then either the flesh which appears red, and is soft to the touch
intercepts the passage; or else the membrane which seems white feels hard being
touched. In the cure of this the use of moist fomentations is very prevalent,
and an insection is to be made perpendicularly, great care being taken for
fear of hurting the neck of the bladder. The humor is next to be provoked
forth, and a Tent dipped in some suppurating plaster is to be put up; the next
day it is to be washed with water and honey, and cicatrizing plasters to be
applied; if it come after the birth, it is either occasioned by an ulcer, and
then either the sides of the neck cling together, in which case either incision
or cauterization is to be used, or else there is a brawnie substance which is
to be cut away with a penknife; or else some spungie and luxuriant flesh, in
which case drying and discussing Medecines are to be used, as Birthwort
Frankincense, Myrrh, and Mastick; afterward you may apply things to eat it
away; and last of all to cut it away by incision.

Of Wheals, condylomas of the Womb, and of the Hemorrhoids.
THe Wheals of the Womb are certain risings in the neck of the womb, which by
their acrimony excite both pain and itching. The signs of them are an
itching, pain, and fall of scurf from that part, for the better searching of
which the instrument called speculum Matricis is to be used. The cause of this
are certain choleric, sharp and adust humors, and thick, which falling upon
these moist and loose places do there easily make their way. The cure depends
upon the consideration of the causes: Among the preparing Medecines syrup of
Fumitory is much commended, and Cichorie with a decoction of Lupines. Topics
also are useful that discuss and mitigate the humor, as baths, and insessions,
and the washing of the place with wine and Nitre, which is often to be used.
These wheals are divided into gentle, and venomous, which are said to be
contagious; they are to be washed in a water thus made. Take of Aloes the
quantity of a pea; of the flowr of brass the quantity of half a pea; powder
these, and mingle them in an ounce of white wine, Plantain-water, and
Rose Water, of each an ounce, which is to be kept in a glass vessel.

Condylomas are certain swelling wrinkles in the neck of the Womb, with pain
and heat. There is no need to tell the signs of these, for they are apparent to
the eye; the wrinkles are like those which appear in the hand when you close
the fist; but are much bigger when the courses flow: they are caused by adust
and thick humors; some of these are with an inflammation, which have more pain
and heat, and the swelling is hard: In the cure of which you must use
insessions, and fomentations that ease pain; sometimes they come without any
inflammatio^, which if they be new come are to be dried up; if they be old,
they are first to be softened, afterward to be digested and dried up; for which
purpose you may use powder of Eggshels burnt, or this Ointment: Take of the
Trochisques of steel one dram powderd, mixed with a little Oil of Roses, and
wax, with half an ounce of the juice of Mullein; if this profit not, the warts
are to be shaved away with a knife, and an astringent powder laid upon them.

Hemorrhoids of the Womb are little protuberances like those of the fundament,
produced in the neck of the womb through the abundance of feculent blood; the
subject is the neck of the womb* for where the veins end, there do grow these
extuberancies, just as in the Hemorrhoids.

The signs are evident, and easily seen by the help of the Speculum Matricis:
the women who are thus affected look pale, and are troubled with a weariness.

The cause is a Feculent blood, which flowing to these veins before its season
and settling there grows thicker, so that it cannot pierce the orifice of the
veins. They are cured by a revulsion of the humor, first by letting blood in
the arm; secondly, by drawing it to another part, as by letting blood in the
heel. Sometimes these Hemmorrhoids are very painful, and are distinguishd from
that menstruous effuxion, by the pain which they bring: they are cured by
mitigating and asswaging insessions; as also by opiates carefully applied.
Others are without pain, to which the foresaid Remedies may be applied.

Others are open, and do sometimes run moderately, and then nature is to be let
alone; or violently, so that thereby the strength of the person is impaired, in
which case a vein must be opened in the arm two or three times; purgation is
also to be used by Myrobalans, Tamarinds, and Rheubarb; and at length you must
apply those things which cease the blood.

Others are termed blind, out of which there issues no blood; they are cured
by blood-letting; the part is to be also softened and fomented with things that
soften and open the orifices of the veins, and dispel the humor; such are an
Ointment made of the pith of Colocynthis, and Oil of sweet Almonds, or the
juice of Capers mixed with Aloes; neither is the applying of Hors-leeches amiss.

Of the Ulcers of the neck of the Womb.
THe signs of these Ulcers is a pain, and perpetual twinging, which
increases, if any thing that has an abstersive quality be cast in; the issuing
out of putrid humors, and mattier with blood, if the Ulcer be great, or the
flowers come down; often making water, and the water hot; as also a pain in
the fore part of the head toward the roots of the eyes; as also some kind of
gentle Fever.

The cure of this is hard, because of its being in a place of so exquisite
sense, and moist, and having such a sympathy with other parts of the body; for
the easing of the pain, Chalybeated milk is very much conducing; and to the
drying of them up, drying baths are the best and most prevalent Remedy. These
differ much, coming either from external causes, as rash physic, hard labor,
and violent coiture: or from internal causes; as the corruption of the
secundines, the courses retained, and the uterine flux, a virulent Gonorrhea,
the pox, inflammations turned into Apostemes, Humors flowing from other parts
of the body, and there settling; all which must be duly considered in the cure;
Others are in the outward part, and may be easily come at with medecines:
others deep, and must be come at only with injection; for which purpose use
this following.

Take whites of four Eggs, beat them well, and put to them an equal quantity of
Rosewater, and Plantain-water as much in quantity as they come to, Camphire,
Ceruse, Litharge of gold, and Bole Armoniack, of each a little quantity, green
Copperas half as much as of any of them, beat all to powder, mix it, and strein
it through a cloth, and make your injection til the part affected be whole; and
if there be any pain, sometimes inject a little new warm milk.

Others are more gentle, with a little stinking mattier flowing from them. For
the cure of which gentle abstersives are profitable, as honey of Roses with
Barly-water, whey with sugar, and the decoction of Lentils: after these gentle
astringents must be applied. Others are sordid, with much mattier flowing from
them: In which case stronger medecines must be applied. Others do eat into the
flesh, having a colored green and stinking mattier flowing from them. For the
cleansing of which Aloes and wormwood are very much commended, or the foresaid
injection.

There are another sort of ulcers little and long, which eat the skin of the
neck of the womb; they are known by the pain and blood which they produce
immediately after congression; they are seen also by looking into the neck of
the womb, being much like Childblains that come upon the hands in Wintertime.
They are caused diverse ways, either by a difficult lying in, or by a violent
coiture, and cured by an astringent Clyster: or they are produced by some
inflammation, or Flux of sharp humors; purgations are here needful, before
Topics be applied, among which is much commended the grease that fries out of
wooden ladles, much used in Kitchins, being held to the fire; as also the
ointment called Pomada.

Of the diseases of the Womb.
Of the Womb being out of temper.
THe intemperance of the womb is when it has lost its natural temper, and is
affected with a preternatural intemperancy arising both from inward and outward
causes. The one of these is hot, and is known by the woman's pronenesse to
Venery, by the small Flux of the monthly courses, by their adustnesse,
sharpness, inordinate and difficult flux. (Hence in process of time they are
very hypochondriack) by early growing of the hairs about the privities, by
redness of the face, and dryness of the lips, and frequent pains of the head,
and abundance of choleric humors in the body; it arises either at first from
the birth, which causes women to be Virago's, and to be barren; or after their
nativity, from outward causes, as the use of hot things, overmuch Venery, and
such medicines as bring the heat and blood to the womb. The cure consists in a
contrary diet, and cooling medicines, both internal and external, which are to
be applied to the back and sides; which must be very moderate, that the heat
which is necessary for conception may not be weakened, and the cold and
membranous substance of the womb come to any harm; or lest the vessels which
serve for the carrying away of the courses should be thickened, and the nerves
of the back and sides be any ways mischieved.

The next way of cure is performed by evacuating medicines, namely Rheubarb and
solutive syrup of Roses, Manna also profits much; the flower of Vitriol of
Venus and Mars taken from three grains to six, and put in any proper syrup,
purges the womb.

There is another intemperancy which comes of cold, which is known by a lesser
pronenesse to Venery, and little pleasure taken in it, a settling in the
courses, with a slimy and phlegmy matter mixed, and an inordinate flowing of
them by reason of the plenty of humors collected in the womb, which causes
obstructions by reason of abundance of windy vapors in the womb, crudity and
watrinesse of the seed, which causes it to flow without any pleasure, a pale
color in the face: it arises from causes contrary to the former; it is cured
by contrary diet, by hot medicines applied to the womb, among which the roots
of Birthwort, Clove-Gilliflowers, Angelica, and Eringos, are very much
commended. The leaves also of Mercury, Baulm, Dittany, Penyroyall, Sage,
Rosemary, Mugwort, flowers of Centaurie, Marigolds, Sage, Rosemary, Borage; and
sundry spices, as Nutmegs, Cubebs, Saffron and Cinamom. These kind of
compounds are also very useful, as oil of Mace, oil of Amber, oil of
Myrrh, and of Cinamom.

There is another intemperancie of the womb, which comes of moisture, and is
joined most commonly with the cold intemperancie: it is known by the plenty of
the courses, and by thinness and watrinesse of them, as also the moistness of
the privities by reason of the moistness of the excrements, no pleasure in the
act of venery, and pronenesse to abortion by reason of the growth of the birth.
It has the same original with the frigid intemperancie, and happens most
commonly to women who are lazy and sedentary: it is cured with the same
medecines as the former; only this may be added, that a fume may be made of
the shavings of Ivory: and the decoction of Sage being received into those
parts before supper is very much commended. Baths of Sulphur do also profit
much.

There is another distemper of the womb which is dry, which is discerned by the
want of seed, and the defect of the courses, by slownesse to venery, dryness
of the mouth of the womb, by a blackish color of the lower lip, which is
always chapt. It sometimes arises from the very nativity, which causes a dry
and lean constitution of body; sometimes through age, and then women cease to
bring children; sometimes from inflammations, and such like diseases; sometimes
from a defect of blood which ought to moisten the parts; which happens either
through a narrowness and obstruction of the veins, or else because it being
voided out at the neck of the womb cannot pierce to the bottom. The cure of
this is performed first by a contrary diet, where you must also avoid much
labor, watching, hunger, and sadness. Secondly, by the use of moistning
things, amongst which are most commended Borage, Bugloss, Mercury, Mallows,
Violets. Among outward means, Bathes of sweet water, and unctions with oil of
sweet Almonds, oil of white Lillies, Hens-grease, and the marrows of Calves
legs. The cure is the more hard, if the dryness have been of any long
continuance.

There is another which is a compound distemper, which is most often cold and
moist, which is discerned by comparing the signs of the simple distemperatures
together. It arises from flegmie humors: The cure is performed by preparing the
matter with hot things, by evacuation of the matter with such Medecines as are
most proper to purge phlegm: as also by a particular pargation of the Womb it
self; to which purpose pessaries do very much conduce; as also sulphury and
drying baths; as also the use of sudorificks, or things that provoke sweat may
be very profitable, as the decoctions of Lignum sanctum, China, Sarsaparilla,
and mastick wood.

Of the narrowness of the Vessels of the Womb.
THe signs of the narrowness of the vessels of the Womb, are partly the
retention of the flowers so that they cannot flow, as also the hindrance of
conception, by reason that the passage of the blood is intercepted.

The causes are partly external, as from astringent baths, and Medecines, which
is known from the relation of the party affected; it is cured more easily by
moistning and mollifying medicines.

The other causes are internal, as from flesh or membrane, clinging to the
orifices of the womb, or by a closing up of the orifices of the veins by reason
of some violent extraction of the secondines, which is commonly incurable; the
only cure which may be tried is by mollifying applications. Another cause is
deduced from obstruction, which arises from certain thick viscous and copious
humors flowing from other parts of the body, the heat of those places not being
able to attenuate them, or else gather together in the womb it self by reason
of the weakness of the heat of that part: it is discerned by the same signs as
the cold distemper, there being also a slimy matter which now and then comes
down from the womb: It is cured as other obstructions, by sharp and bitter
Medicines, and steel wine, as also baths made with opening and mollifying
things.

Sometimes this narrowness arises from a compression of the parts, occasioned
either by some swelling, or Scirrhus, either within or without the womb; if
this be, there do appear manifest signs of swelling: it is an evil for the
most part incurable; many times it is occasioned by an over fatness of those
parts, which is plain to the sense.

Of the puffing up of the Womb.
THe puffing up of the Womb is a windy swelling of that part, occasioned from a
cold, flegmie, and flatulent matter, which is increased through the defect of
natural heat in the Womb: This is called the windy mole, it giving hopes of a
conception. The signs of this are a distention of the womb not far from the
midriff, which is now increased, now diminished; sometimes extending it self to
the navel, sometimes to the loins, and Diaphragma. It differs from the Dropsy,
partly because the swelling is not so great, and the party affected is not much
troubled with thirst, by the increasing and diminishing of the tumor; and by
the upper parts, not being so lean.

It is distinguished from the Dropsy of the womb by the fore-apprehension of
the causes that beget those windy vapors, by the sound and less ponderosity,
as also by a feeling of an extensive and pricking pain in the womb, and parts
adjoining. It is also distinguished from an inflation of the intestines,
because here is no great pain, neither is the Patient hard bound, yet the
Flowers are suppressed, and the feet and hollow of the eyes do swel, and the
color of the body is changed, the woman draws her breath short, and is sad,
and when she awakes is fain to lift up her head to take breath. It differs from
a mole, because there is not that heaviness and ponderosity in the womb;
besides, the woman does not feel the burden of her womb tumble from one side to
the other: It is distinguished from conception, by the sound, and by the
increasing and decreasing of the swelling, and by the deadness of the motion,
not like that of a dead infant: For if the Midriffe be violently compressed,
the wind being then compelled to the part adjoining, there is a kind of
palpitating motion perceived through all the Midriff.

The matter of this distemper is generated either in the womb it self, or by
reason of the suppression of the courses, or by the interception of due
purgation after delivery. Many times it comes through the veins and seminal
vessels. Now the weakness of the heat proceeds sometimes from the external
air, sometimes from hard delivery, from the suppression of the courses, from
abortion, etc. The cure is performed after the same way that other cures are
remedied: among those things that purge, Species Hierae, and Diaphaenicon, with
Castor, are most commended; for Fumes, Nutmeg is counted the best; for potions,
Nutmegs bruised and boiled with the roots of Mather, and drunk in six ounces of
wine, and two drams of sugar. Sometimes this wind gets into the cavity of the
womb, and then the neck and orifice of the womb is closed, so that nothing can
go forth, when the woman is moved, or when the Midriffe is pressed down with
her hand, and then a kind of noise and sound is perceived. Sometimes the wind
gets into the tunicles of the womb, and then the mouth of the womb may be open;
by reason of the shutting up of the windy vapors in a narrow place, there goes
a noise forth, and the pain grows greater, and extends farther. This is more
hard and difficult to be cured then that which is in the concavity of the womb.

Of the inflammation of the Womb.
THe inflammation of the womb is a swelling of the same through the
putrefaction of blood which is fallen down into its substance, having many
symptoms, and now tending to a Scirrhus, now toward an Apostem.

The signs are various; There is a swelling in the womb with heat and pain,
and a retraction of the womb to the more inward parts; the neck of the womb
appears red, with little veins scattered up and down in it, like the web of a
spider. There is sometimes a difficulty of breathing, with some kind of
pleurisy, because the interior tunicle of the womb being extended, which rises
from and is joined to the Peritoneum, the parts also to which that coheres, are
stretched. The excrements of the belly and bladder are detained by reason of
the heat and dryness of the belly, and the compression of the passages.
Sometimes the whole body of the belly seems empty, and filled with water, and
the navell hangs forward, and the mouth of the womb is made very slender and
close; and upon a sudden a few depraved courses come down: then happens a
burning Fever by reason of the great sympathy with the womb and the heart
occasioned through the Arteries and great vessels. There is a pain in the
breast^, with a swelling in them, by reason of the consent and agreement
between the groyns, the hips, the septum transversum clavicularum, and the
forepart of the head, which is extended to the roots of the eyes; as also from
the vapors which rise from the putrified blood to the head, through the
arteries that run along through the neck, passing by both parts of the
infundibulum into the forepart of the head.

The cause of this consists in the blood, which is sometimes mixed with choler,
and sometimes with melancholy.

The cure is difficult, if the blood in that part be wholly putrified; for that
causes a sordid humor which consumes the patient with a continual Fever. If
it be an Erisypelas, or St. Anthonies fire, there is no cure at all, because
the Birth dies by reason of the excessive heat which causes abortion to follow,
which kills the woman; if it turn to a gangreen, it is deadly: it is cured as
other inflammations, which may be observed in the following Chapters. Only
observe that for revulsion you must not let blood in the vein^s of the thighs,
for that draws down the blood to the womb; but in the arm, the blood flowing
from the liver, and the parts adjoining. For deriving of the matter, you may
cut a vein in the hamm, unless the woman be with child, for that will cause
abortion: Refrigerating and moistning topics, without any binding faculty, may
be well applied; to which purpose the decoction of Serpillus prepared with
Chalybeat water, and outwardly applied with a sponge, is an excellent Remedy.

These inflammations sometimes affect the whole womb, and sometimes either side
of the womb, which causes the heat to descend into the hip, because of the
ligaments of the womb which are carried thither; the thigh is difficultly
moved, and the groins are inflamed; sometimes the inflammation possesses the
posterior part, which causes the Belly to be bound, and a pain in the loins,
and back bone; sometimes it possesses the forepart, which because it coheres
to the Bladder, the urine is suppressed, or made very difficultly; and the
pain is extended above the privities: sometimes it possesses the bottom of the
womb, which causes such a pain in the lower part of the Belly, that it is
hardly to be touched, and the pain extends to the navel.

There is another inflammation which degenerates into a Scitrhus, where all the
symptoms are not so dangerous, yet there is a great heaviness perceived in the
parts adjoining. This evil is diuturnal, and commonly ends in the Dropsy;
sometimes it turns to an Apostem, swelling til it break: In this case the body
is troubled with a shivering, especially toward the evening; when the Apostem
is broken, sometimes it empties it self into the concavity of the womb, wherein
there is less danger; and sometimes into other parts of the body; which causes
sometimes a stoppage in the Urine, and sometimes in the belly, with a swelling
of the hairy parts, and the feeling of something floating up and down.

Of the Scirrhus of the Womb.
THe Scirrhus of the Womb is a hard swelling of the said part without pain,
begot by some thick earthy and feculent humor; the signs, ^esides others that
are general, are these in particular; The flowers at the beginning are either
wholly stopped, or flow very sparingly, the evil increasing, there is a great
Flux of blood by intervals, the mouths of the veins being opened more then
ordinary, or because the Womb is not able to receive, or to retain its wonted
proportion of blood: it is distinguished from the Mole, because in that
distemper the Flowers, if they flow, flow inordinately; the breasts swel with
milk, which in the Scirrhus grow very lank.

The cause of this is a gross feculent humor, being a thick blood, sometimes
Flegmy, sometimes Melancholy, which happens to those who decline in their age;
or to those who have been troubled with a squeamishand naught stomach often it
arises from an ill cured inflammation, through the use of medecines that cool
too much.

The cure is difficult, either because having been dried for a long time they
cannot be softened, or because the natural heat in those places where the
Scirrhus is, is for the most part extinct; and then because while the humor is
mollifying, if it have conceived any putrefaction, it easily turns to the
Canker: for the cure, it is the same as of the Breasts.

It differs either as being in, and possessing the substance of the womb, which
causes the womb to lean downward upon the hip, and back, and there begets pain;
sometimes possessing the neck of the womb, which is discerned by touching it,
and is cured more easily then the former: if it be in the upper part of the
neck of the womb, the Woman is hindered in the lower part of the neck of the
womb, the straight gut is affected.

Of the Dropsy of the Womb.
THe Dropsy of the womb is a distemper from water collected in the womb,
either by some fault in the part it self, or in the parts adjoining. The signs
of this are a loose swelling at the bottom of the Belly, extending it self
according to the proportion of the womb; the fewness and naughtiness of the
Courses; a moistness, and slenderness of the neck of the womb, softness of the
Breast, want of Milk, a shivering in the body, and sometimes a Fever: It
differs from an inflammation by the symptoms above related; and from an
inflation, in the defect of sound and distention; from a Mole, because in this
there is a greater weight perceived at the bottom of the Belly, and the Breasts
at the time of delivery are not without Milk. It differs from Conception,
because in the Dropsy the swelling is just according to the form of the womb;
but in Conception it is always sharper. In women with Child the flowers do not
flow; but in this disease there flows such a certain bloody vicious humor,
without any order, which ceases quickly. It differs from the Dropsy of the
Belly, because the face of the Patient is colored, unless the liver be any way
affected, the want of thirst, and the ascent of the swelling from the lower
part to the upper.

The cause of this is a water gathered there through some defect of the Liver
or Spleen, or through some weakness in the womb; by reason whereof it is not
able to concoct or expel the excrements; or through a too immoderate defluxion
of the courses, which oppresses the natural heat; or through a suppression of
them, which suffocates the heat.

The cure is to be performed by the eduction of the water, and strengthening of
the womb; for which purpose the use of Antimonial pills is not a little to be
commended. Her diet must be of meats that breed good juice; she must drink
little; she may use in stead of drink a Ptisane or Barly-broth, made with
sassafras, or salsaparil; if her courses be stopped, you may let her blood in the
foot: if the repletion be great, then to let her blood in the arm will not be
amiss. Some have commended the decoction of the root of Fugere, to take at
meals, and between meals, without any other drink. The use of Clysters is not
amiss, and Fomentations are also very necessary, made with the decoctions of
Broom, wild Cucumbers, flowers of Camomill, Melilot, with Origan, Cumin, Fenel,
Anis-seed, of which you may make several injections. Ointments also may be
useful made of oil of Lillies, or oil of Dill: then may you apply upon the
belly this plaster: Take of the emplaster of Laurel berries, two ounces; oil
of Camomill and Melilot, two ounces and a half; Pigeons dung and Goats dung, of
each half an ounce; mix them all together, and make a plaster, adding thereto
a little Venice Turpentine.

Of the falling of the Womb.
THe falling of the womb is the falling of it down below the Abdomen, or
Midriffe, proceeding from a loosnesse of the Ligaments.

The general signs of this are, a pain in the loins and hairy parts, and of
the Os sacrum, or holy bone, to which the womb is fastened; at the beginning the
pain is not very great, nor after long continuance, by reason of use: the
weight thereof being only troublesome, which is an impediment to the patient in
going; the particular signs do vary, according as the tall is greater or
less: for in the one the womb descends to the middle of the Hips, and lower;
in the latter there is perceived the distention of the skin, and as it were the
weight of a good big Egg about the privities.

The cure of this is difficult, if there be the greater falling of the womb, if
the woman be in age, if a Fever, Convulsion, or other symptoms happen; if that
be in women with child, it is deadly; and sometimes it is corrupted by the
ambient air, and turns into a Gangrene. The cure consists in the reputting of
it into its own place; where you must observe first, to stop the inflammation,
if there be any; or if there be any swelling caused by the cold air, you must
foment the part first with the decoction of Mallows, Marsh Mallows, flowers of
Camomill, and Laurel-berries. If there be any wind or excrement in the gut,
you must use Clysters first; it is also to be fomented and anointed with
agglutinating and astringent or binding medecines; there is a Fumigation to be
made of the skin of a salt Eele dried and powdered. When it is to be put into
its place, the woman must be laid with her belly upwards; then must the
Midwife, or other party employed, with a linen cloth dipped in oil of Roses a
little warmed, gently thrust up the part which is fallen, as gently as may be,
turning it a little. Now to keep it up, the woman must be kept lying on her
back, with her thighs stretched out, and one laid upon another acrosse; the
belly must not be too much bound, lest in the ejection of the excrement the
womb should be again precipitated; neither must it be loose, lest the membranes
binding the womb should be unloosed: then must you use agglutinating medecines,
Pessaries, Fomentations, and Injections; yet great care must be had lest you
suppress the courses. Of this there be some differences, either by reason of
the loosnesse of the Ligaments which are four, which is discerned in that it
is generated by degrees, and with less pain: It arises either from hard
labor, or a ponderosity or heaviness of the child, or from the concourse of
flegmie humors; it is cured by the evacuation of humors, and by the use of
astringent and corroborating Medecines; such as are the decoction of musk of
the Oak* Hartshorn, Laurel leaves, and the Astringent plaster.

Another cause and difference arises from the rupture of the Ligaments; which
is discerned by this, that the evil comes suddenly, and is more painful, and is
sometimes followed with a flux of Blood; it arises from the heaviness of the
Birth, or from a difficult labor, or from Abortion, or a difficult and violent
extraction of the secundines.

Sometimes it happens because the ligaments are eaten away, and then tne signs
of some ulcer are discerned by the flowing forth of mattier.

Sometimes it happens because the ligaments are eaten away, and then the signs
of some ulcer are discerned by the flowing forth of mattier.

Of the ascent of the Matrix, as also of the Wounds and Ulcers of the same.
SOme have thought that it is possible for the womb to ascend up to the
stomach, which opinion is altogether false; for first it is tied so fast with
four Ligaments, that it is impossible for it to move to the upper parts:
Besides, suppose it had a natural motion by the Fibers, yet the womb being so
firmly annexed to the right gut, and to the privities, it would necessarily
follow that those parts should be also stretched. And though it happen to be
stretched and distended by the windy vapors, yet it follows not that therefore
it should be moved upward: and whereas women do say that they do sometimes
perceive a certain round body moving about the region of the navel, that may
rather be said to be the stones, and that blind vessel, then the womb.

Of the wounds of the Matrix this must be noted, that they are very difficult
to be cured. Yet the cure is to be assayd five manner of ways; by the use of
things which do evacuate the peccant humor, which is done partly by a good
order of diet, and living in a dry and temperate air; Longer sleep then
ordinary, and the avoiding of exercise in this case is to be observed, and
instead thereof to use moderate frictions: all repletions, and a loose Belly
are naught; the meat that she eats must be little, and contrary to the humor
that offends, as rear eggs, Milk, Chicken Broths, and the meat of them, dry
Raisins, Almonds, and Pistaches. For her drink, it ought to be chiefly the
decoction of Barley, or liquorice.

In the next place, it will not be amiss to let blood in the Basilick vein: let
her take some convenient purge according to the humor which abounds: Vomitings
also and frictions may be used, and the provoking of sweat by the decoction of
Guaiacum, Sarsaparil, and China root, which are very proper to turn away the
humors from the Matrix.

Sometimes this happens from an intemperancie of the womb, which if it be cold,
the womb is not able to concoct sufficient quantity of nourishment, and
therefore heaps up together many excrements; if it be moist, it is not able to
contain either the blood, or the seed, or the birth, as it should do. The cure
of this is above touched in the chapter of Distempers.

There is another difference which is taken from the occult qualities which the
womb is seen to have, there being a sympathy and antipathy between that and
diverse things, as to covet the seed of man, and to love sweet things; and then
the affection arises from no evident cause, there being no excess of coldness
or moisture to be apprehended. The medecines which are to be applied for the
cure of this, must be proper in their whole substance.

Sometimes the difference arises in this, that the natural heat is either
suffocated or dissipated; this affection is something dangerous, because it is
a difficult matter to restore the natural heat. In the cure of this
restoratives must be notwithstanding used; such are Cinamom, Nutmeg, Species
diaxyloaloes Aromaticum Rosatum.

Of the pain of the womb.
THere is no need to give other signs of this then the complaint of the woman;
it affects women that are both free, and women that are with child: It happens
sometimes from corroding humors, especially caused by ulcers or vicious
flowers. The cure whereof is referred to these heads; sometimes it happens from
a distention caused either by some curdled blood sticking in the cavity of the
womb, and then there is a copious flux of blood out of the womb, and the pain
is fixed chiefly about the orifice of the womb; the right gut and the bladder
being affected by reason of the continual desire of expelling forth the humor.
In the cure, first you must seek to dissolve the clotted blood, which is done
by the use of Treacle dissolved in wine; and then to evacuation, which is
performed with Agaric, Aloes, with the juice of Savine, decoction of Rosemary,
with the flowers of Cheiri, in wine. Sometimes it is caused by the menstruous
blood, when the vessels are more open, or the blood too thick; which happens
through the overmuch use of cold drink, especially when the woman is hot. The
cure may be found in the cure of the suppression of the flowers. Sometimes it
is caused by other vicious humors collected in the concavity of the womb, or
adhering to the other vessels; and then these humors are to be removed with
purging and evacuating medecines. Sometimes windy vapors are the cause hereof,
arising from the heat of the vicious humors caused by copulation. It is cured
by things that discuss the wind; to which purpose it may not be amiss to use
a Clyster made of Malmesey and oil of Nuts, of each three ounces, of Aquavitae
one ounce, of oil of Juniper and distild Rue, of each two drams, and applied
warm; or a mixture of spirit of wine, and spirit of Nitre, of each half a dram,
or two scruples, exhibited in spirit of wine; Sperma Coeti, with oil of sweet
Almonds, or a plaster of Caranna and Tachamahacca applied to the navel.
Sometimes it is occasioned by the retention and corruption of the seed. For the
cure, look the Chapter of the suffocation of the Matrix.

Of the suppression of the Flowers.
THe suppression of the Flowers is the retention of the menstrual blood, either
by reason of the narrowness of the vessels, or through some corruption of the
blood. The signs are evident from the relation of the woman; yet if they are
loath to confess, it may be discerned by this; For in virgins the suppressed
blood wanders up and down the veins, and begets obstructions, changing the
color of the body, and causing Fevers. In women, because the blood is carried
down to the womb, where it begets many diseases; it is distinguished from
retention after conception, because women with child find no alteration of
affections of the mind, and retain the native color of their bodies; and in
the third month they shall perceive the motion and situation of the Infant; and
lastly, the mouth of the Womb is closed up.

The causes of this distemper are the narrowness of the veins, and the
vitiousness of the blood. The cure of this must be hastened, because this
suppression if it stay long begets many more diseases, as Fevers, Dropsies,
Vomiting of blood, and the like; the cure is hard if it be of any continuance,
and if it stay beyond the sixth month, it is almost incurable; especially if it
happen through any perversion of the neck of the womb; for then the Woman is
troubled with often swooning, and vomiting of blood, and a pain seizes the
parts of the Belly, the back, and the backbone, which is attended with a
Fever, and the excrements of the Belly and bladder are suppressed; a weariness
possesses the whole body, because of the diffusion of the retained blood
through the whole body, and especially the hips and thighs, because of the
sympathy of those parts with the veins of the womb. In the first place, the
letting of blood is commended; for the blood which every month stays in the
body, and sticks in the veins, is to be provoked downward to the womb; and
therefore a vein is to be opened in the heel, for so the plenty of blood is
diminished, and the motion of the blood is made toward the womb; if necessity
requires that it should be done more then once, one day a vein must be opened
in one thigh, and another day in the other; and that which is opened for
evacuation must be first opened, yt which is opened in the hamm or heel, must
be done after purgation, 3 or 4 or five days before the time that the
accustomed evacuations of the Woman ought to come down. Cupping-glasses also
are to be applied first to the more remote places, as to the thighs; and then
to the nearer parts, as to the hips, ligatures or bindings and frictions, at
the time of the coming down of the flowers, after purgation of the whole Body,
are not to be omitted. In the second place the matter is to be prepared, for
which purpose, in bodies troubled with phlegm, the decoction of Guaiacum, with
Cretan Dittany, does much avail without provoking sweat. In the third place
evacuation is to be made at several times. Among evacuating Medecines are
commended Agaric, Aloes, with the juice of Sabina, and these pil^; Take Aloes
Succotrine three drams; the best myrrh one scruple, extract of Calamus
Aromaticus, Carduus Benedictus, Saffron, of each three drams; roots of Gentian
and Dittany, of each five grains; make them up with syrup of Laurel berries,
taking the quantity of one scruple at evening before supper. In the
fourth-place, by an obstructing the humor by those things which provoke the
flowers; of which these are most to be commended, the decoction of Rosemary
with flowers of Cheiri, Peny-royal water twice distilled, and mingled with
Cinamom water; Extract of Zedoar, Angelica, and Castor, and the earth which is
found in iron mines prepared in the same manner as steel, spirit of Tartar, the
fat of an Eele, Colubrina with the distilled water of Savine: and in the fifth
place, by the discussion of the dreggs and relics that remain by sudorificks,
or things that provoke sweat, with a potion made of a Chalybeat decoction, with
spirit of Tartar, etc.

The differences of this disease arise, partly from the obstruction of the
veins of the womb, caused by a cold and thick blood, and thick slimy humors
mixed with the blood, and coming either from some hot distemper of the womb,
which dissipates the sharp and subtle humors, and leaves behind the gross and
earthy parts; or from the cold constitution of the liver and spleen; especially
if at the time of the menstrual flux (at what time the flux of blood is more
violent) those subtle humors happen to be dissipated, and then at the time of
the monthly purgation the party affected feels a great pain in the loins, and
parts adjoining; and if any thing come down, it is slimy whitish and blackish:
the whole Body is possessed with a numness, the color pale, a slow pulse, and
raw urines. The cure is the same with the former, great care being taken of a
gross and ill diet.

There is another difference of this disease when it happens by compression,
which arises from external causes, as the Northern wind, and long standing in
cold water, which may be knwn from the relation of the sick person. The blood
in this case is to be drawn to the lower parts by Frictions and Baths; or from
internal causes, as fatnes, or swelling of the womb, or of the lower parts; in
which case Medecines must be applied that assuage the swelling. There is
another difference which is in the hardness of the skin, which happens either
from the first nativity, and then the disease is not easily taken away; or long
after from some cold and dry distemper: concerning which look the former
Chapters.

Another difference there is, when there happens a closing up of the skin,
which is caused after cicatrising of an Ulcer, or by reason of some skin or
membrane growing to the vessels of the womb: or by reason of frequent abortion;
after which these veins to which the secundines adhere, do grow together so
close that they cannot be afterward opened.

Another difference of this disease there is, when it happens through want of
blood, which is not generated either by reason of external causes, as famine,
over much evacuation, issues, and such like; or through internal causes, as a
frigid constitution of the principal parts, old age, and fevers; or when it is
converted to other uses, as before full growth to the nourishment of the body:
in women with child, to the nourishment of the birth: in those that give suck,
to the increase of milk: and in fat people, to the augmentation of the fat: or
when it is consumed either by external causes, as overmuch exercise,
affrights, terrors, sadness, bathes, overmuch sweating, which do consume the
serous quality of the blood: or through internal causes, as are hot and dry
diseases, or over great evacuations in other parts of the body. Sometimes
another difference of this disease proceeds from the dryness of the blood,
which happens to women who in the winter time do too much heat their lower
parts, by putting coals under their coats. For the cure thereof you must use
refrigerating and moistning medecines.

Of the dropping of the Flowers, and the difficulty of their coming down.
THe dropping of the flowers is, when they are coming down for many days
together drop by drop.

This happens both from external causes, as over-hard labor, etc.

And sometimes from the drossinesse of the blood, the passage not being wide
enough. For the cure of this, it is convenient to open a vein in the arm, with
gentle purging, as in the former chapter.

Sometimes from the weakness of the retentive faculty, there being at that
time great plenty, thinness and serosity of the blood. In this case there is
no pain; Medecines that bind and corroborate the stomach here must have place.

The difficulty of the Flowers is when they come down with pain and trouble,
either through defect in the veins, or in the blood. The signs of this are
gathered from the relation of the sick person, who is then much troubled with
pain in the head, stomach and loins, and lower parts of the body. And they do
either flow altogether, or drop by drop, as in the former disease: it is a
disease more incident to maids then married women, because the veins of the
womb are less open in them then in those who have brought forth children.

It happens sometimes from a corruption of the blood, that is, from the
drossiness and thickness thereof, and then the blood clots together; and there
is great pain long before the flowers begin to come down. The cure of this is
performed by attenuating medecines. Sometimes from the sharpness and acrimony
of the blood, which proceeds from a mixture of sharp humors with the body, and
then the genital parts do itch. It is cured by those medecines that temper the
sharpness of the humor, as the four greater seeds, violets, and flowers of
Nenuphar. Sometimes from windy vapors, and then the pain comes by intervals,
and is suddenly exasperated, rumbling up and down; and when the wind is forth
the pain cease. The cure hereof is procured by evacuation of the matter, and
dispelling of the wind, as is before declared.

Of the discoloring of the Flowers.
THe discoloring of the Flowers is when their right color, which ought to be
red, declines either to palenesse, whiteness, greenness, yellowness, or
blewishnesse, through some defect or vitiousnesse of the blood.

The signs are apparent by the sight of the blood; besides that it is
accompanied with an ill smell; many times also it is the cause of Fevers,
trembling of the body, loathing of the meat, pain in the stomach, etc.

The differences of this disease consist first in the vitiousnesse of the
blood, which is caused through some distemper either of the whole body, or of
some part thereof. Sometimes the blood is affected by reason of some stoppage
thereof, and then the flowers are suppressed, which causes pains in the
breast, and strong beating of the breast; and if the woman begin to amend, the
blood flows out with a stinking putrefaction, which continues till the eighth
day; or it may be, because the blood is fould by the womb, being full of
excrements; and then you may perceive the signs of a foul womb.

Sometimes the difference of this disease consists in the mixture of the blood
with other vicious humors. The cure consists in preparation and evacuation;
but care must be had, that because the thick humors need attenuation and that
over-attenuating things, do melt the serous humor, that you therefore do not
use over-attenuating things, as vinegar, etc.

Another difference is, when the flowers decline to a whitish color, which
proceeds from abundance of phlegm, or from putrefaction, and then ulcers follow
in the womb, and barrenness follows; unless the woman's flowers do happen to
flow for seven or eight days together, by which the woman is freed from the
disease; or else they break out to the parts above the groyn, without any
tumor, and burst forth a little above the Hypochondrion, and then the woman
seldom lives: or else there will appear after some few days a great swelling in
the groyn, without a head of a red color, because the flesh is there filled up
with the blood.

When it inclines to yellowness or greenness, the distemper comes of choler;
when to a blackness and blewnesse, from melanlancholy.

Of the inordinate flux of the Flowers.
THe disorderly flux of the courses is either the coming of them down before
their time, or else the stoppage of them for some time after the usual course
of nature. They come down sometimes before their time, partly by reason of
internal causes, and partly by reason of external causes, as falls, blows, and
such like casualities that open the veins: Or from the expulsive faculty of
the womb too much provoked; 1. by the plenty of blood, which is known by this,
that the blood which is sent to the womb from all parts is fluid, and of its
natural constitution; signs of a Plethora, or fullness of blood, are apparent
in the woman. It is cured by blood-letting if the blood abound, by good diet,
and frequent though gentle exercise. Secondly, it proceeds from the acrimony
and sharpness of the blood, which is known by the hot temper of the body, the
blood it self is more thin and yellowish. It must be cured by evacuating
medecines, as Rheubarb, and such things as temper the blood, whereof we have
already spoken.

It comes also when the retentive faculty of the womb grows lank, which may be
known by the looseness of the vessels of the womb, besides a moist and faint
habit of the Body: in the cure beware of things which are too astringent; baths
where in the force and strength of iron may be effectual may with safety be
used. The subsistence and stay of the courses beyond the accustomed time,
proceeds from a frustration of the expulsive faculty; as when there is small
store of blood, which is known by this, that the Woman is not troubled with the
stay of the Courses; and especially, if she have over-exercised her self, or
used a spare diet before. Secondly, the thickness of the blood, which is known
by the whitenes and clammines thereof. In the performance of the cure, you must
purge before too much blood be gathered together: next, the Courses are to be
attenuated, for the performance of which Calamint and Mercurialis are to be
most commended. In this case scarification of the heels is not amiss.

There is another difference of this disease which arises from the weakness of
the expelling faculty, caused either by the frigid distemper of the Womb, of
which we have spoken already; or by a kind of numness thereof, of which we shall
speak anon.

Of the over-abundance of the Courses.
THe overmuch flux of the Courses is either a more abundant, or a more lasting
purgation of the Courses, through some defect either in the Blood, or the Womb,
or the veins of the womb.

The signs are evident, viz: want of appetite, crudities, a bad color in the
face, a swelling in the feet and rest of the body, a waxing lean of the body;
and in brief, a general ill habit of body.

The cure (if it be of any continuance) is difficult; if it happen to an aged
Woman, there is none at all. It requires a revulsion or drawing back of the
blood, interception, and incrassation or thickning thereof, and a closing up of
the vessels by astringent medecines. Yet observe that they must be stopped by
degrees. To this effect you may take this powder.

R. Of the seed of Hyoscyam. alb. red Coral, of each half a dram, Caphura half
a scruple, and give the quantity of half a dram at a time, powder of Amber,
Dragons blood, Lap. Haematit. Red Coral, Lettice seed, of each one dram,
Balaust two scruples, Bole-armoniack two drams given in three ounces of
Plantain water, Asses milk heated with steel. You may externally also apply a
girdle made of the bruised leaves of Helleboraster.

Of this disease there are many differences: sometimes it happens from the
blood which is derived from the bottom of the Womb, where for the most part
lies the blackest and most clotted blood; or from the neck of the womb, which
is more red, and fluid. Another difference arises from the plenty of blood,
which appears by this, that the vessels are either broken, or much opened,
especially in those Women who have had a stoppage of their Courses for a time,
which presently break out again. The signs of this are evident; that is to
say, a fullness of blood in the body; besides that the blood which comes forth,
easily curdles.

In the cure, you must have recourse to blood-letting, which if you do for
evacuation, it must be done in the hepatick vein: if the Woman be weak, in
Salvatella of both hands. In the next place the use of Cupping glasses is to be
commended, being applied with scarification to the back, etc. or without
scarification to the Breast, being taken away again when the Woman is troubled
with difficulty of breathing. In the third place, ligatures and frictions of
the arms are to be used.

Another difference of this disease arises from a sharp blood, which is known
by the gnawing of the humor upon the vessels. In the cure you must purge with
syrup of Roses solutive, or with leaves of Seen; a pessary of sows dung, and
Asses dung, which is made up with Plantain water, and the muscilage of the seed
of Quinces, is here of use if need require.

Another difference arises from a serous and watery blood; for either the liver
is weakened, or the veins so debilitated, that it cannot attract the serous or
wheyie humor in the blood; in this case the blood flows not forth in such a
quantity, nor is easily curdled; if a cloth be dipped in it, and then dried in
the shade, it presently discolours. In the cure hereof you must look to the
rectifying of the weakness of the reins and liver with convenient remedies, for
which purpose the livers of Foxes, Calves, Hens, etc. are very good.

Sometimes from a rupture of the veins, which proceeds either from a fullness of
blood, or from causes that do vehemently stir up the blood, especially from
hard labor: if it be needful, you must let blood, and apply conglutinating
medecines.

Or from a gnawing of the vessels, which is known by this, that sometimes there
flows forth little blood, and that purulent, and full of the wheyie, or serous
humor. It arises from a sharp and corrupt blood, and sometimes from the use of
sharp medecines. Among the astringent medecines, the root of Filipendula is
much to be commended, or a decoction of the same root.

Of the Whites and Gonorrhea in women.
THe Whites is an inordinate eruption of an excrementitious humor collected
together through some vitiousnesse of the blood. It affects women chiefly, and
sometimes also Virgins, of which there are examples: yet it is more often in
women, especially if they be of a moist constitution, and live an idle and
delicate life, eating such things as are cold and moist. Old women also are
affected herewith through the abundance of phlegm, and the weakness of the
concoctive faculty.

If differs from the Gonorrhea, because in that the seminal matter is white,
and thicker, and flows by longer intervals, and issues forth in a lesser
quantity from a nocturnal pollution; for that is joined with venereal
imaginations, and only happens in the time of sleep. It differs from the
discoloring of the flowers; for they, though not exactly, do always observe
their times of flowing. Besides, they happen not to women with child, or such
whose courses are stopped. It differs from the putrid humor that issues from
the ulcers of the womb, because that is joined with the signs of an ulcer, and
the putrefaction is thicker and whiter; if it be mattrie it is colored with
blood, and issues forth with pain.

The cure of this must be hastened, because in a short time it endangers the
making of women barren, causing them to be lean, to fall into a consumption,
melancholy, the dropsy, fall of the womb, swoonings and convulsions; which is
the cause that though it be not hard to be cured in the beginning, yet it is
afterward very difficult: for by this means the whole body accustoms it self
to send forth its excrements this way, and the womb being now weakened gathers
excrements apace.

Sometimes it proceeds from the whole body, and then you may perceive the
signs of an ill humor through the whole body. In the cure of this you must
avoid blood-letting, for that the bad humors must not be recalled to defile
the blood; besides that the disease is a sufficient weakening and consuming of
the body. The humor is discussed by the decoction of Guaiacum and China, and
Lentisk wood. For the drying up of the humor the root of Filipendula does very
much conduce. For astringent medecines you may use chiefly the powder of dead
men's bones, the ashes of Capons dung in rainwater. The patient must avoid
sleeping upon her back, lest the heat of the Lungs should carry the humors
toward the womb; Frictions also of the upper parts, for the diversion of the
humor.

Sometimes it is caused by the womb it self, and then there will appear signs
of the affection of the womb, and the flux is not so great. For the cure of
this, suffumigations of Frankincense, Ladanum, Mastick and Santalum are very
requisite.

Of the Green-sicknesse.
THe Green-sicknesse is a changing of the color of the face into a green and
pale color, proceeding from the rawnesse of the humors. The signs of this
appear in the face, to which may be added a great pain in the head, difficulty
of breathing, with a palpitation of the heart, a small and thick beating of the
arteries in the neck, back, and temples; sometimes inordinate Fevers through
the vitiousnesse of the humors, loathing of meat, vomiting, distention of the
Hypochondriack parts, by reason of the reflux of the menstruous blood to the
greater vessels; a swelling of the whole body by reason of the abundance of
humors, or of the thighs and legs above the heels, by reason of the abundance
of serous humors.

The cause is the crudity and rawnesse of the humor, and quantity withal,
arising from the suppression of the courses, through the natural narrowness of
the vessels, or through an acquired narrowness of the vessels by the eating of
oatmeal, chalk, earth, nutmegs, and drinking of vinegar; or from the
obstruction of the other bowels. Hence arises an ill concoction in the bowels,
and the humors are carried into the habit of the body, or become habitual
thereto.

The cure is performed by the letting of blood, especially in the heel; if the
disease be of any continuance, by purgation, preparation of the humor being
first considered; which is performed by the decoction of Guaiacum, with Cretan
Dittany; purging of the humor is performed with Agarick, Aloes Succotrin, with
the juice of Savine; for the unobstructing of the humor, prepared steel, the
root of Scorzonera, Bezoar stone, and oil of Crystal; in diet, vinegar is
utterly to be avoided.

Of the Suffocation of the Matrix.
THe signs of the suffocation of the womb, are a wearines of the whole body,
with a weakness of the thighs; a palenes and sadness of the face; a
nauseousness, though seldom vomiting; oftentimes a loathing and distaste of
meat, and that sometimes with a grumbling and noise in the belly, and sometimes
without.

The signs of the present disease are, that when the vapors are carried up to
the heart, and do there stop the vital spirits, a light swooning follows, the
pulse changes, and is little, the body grows cold, all the spirits flying up
into the heart; the vapor being thrust up to the head and chaps, the chaps are
many times set fast, the Patient seeming to be stifled; the motion of the
breast and Diaphragme is disturbed and hindered, so that the breath is almost
stopped, the Patient living only by transpiration. Sometimes there is joined with
it a kind of uterine fury, with talking and anger; sometimes it causes other
madnesses; sometimes the Woman falls into a dead sleep, which makes her seem as
though she were dead.

It differs from the Epilepsie, because in that the convulsive motions are more
general; nor is there any memory of those things which happened about them after
the Fit; the pulse is great, and the mouth of the party affected fomes with a
froth: it differs from the Apoplexy, because in that the fit comes suddenly
without any notice, and the Patient is affected with a kind of snorting, and
there is such a resolution of the parts, that they feel not although they be
pricked: from a Syncope, in that there are no signs when the fit will be, the
pulse ceases to the apprehension, and the Patientis troubled with cold sweats.
They differ from dead people by sneezing, which may be provoked by putting
something for that purpose into the nose.

The cause of this is a venomous, subtle, and thin vapor, piercing in one
moment through the whole body, and carried up from the matter in the womb,
corrupted after a peculiar manner either by it self, or from external means;
such are perfumes, anger, fear, etc. and not only ascending through the veins,
but also through all the other breathing holes, and secret passages of the body.

The cure is doubtful if it have possessed old Women for any time, for it
begets weakness, consumes the strength, and shows abundance of humors; or if it
possesses Childbearing Women, either after a difficult travel, or after an
abortion; or if it possesses Women with child, because it induees a fear of
abortion; there is more hope, if the act of respiration be not too much
impeded, and if the Fits do not return too often.

The cure regards first the time of the fit, being performed first by means of
interception, which may be done by binding the belly under the navel with a
girdle made of the skin of a Heart killed in the very act of copulation. Secondly,
by keeping the natural spirits awaked and rouzed up, by painful frictions, by
pulling the hairs of the privities with violence, and suffumigations made with
Partridge feathers burnt, as also Eel-skins, and the application of
Assa-faetida and oil of Tartar to the mouth. Thirdly, by way of revulsion of
the humor, by Frictions and Clysters dispelling the winds, and the
application of Cupping-glasses with much flame first to the thighs, and then to
the hips, putting sweet things into the privities; such as are oil of Sivet
half a scruple, oil of Nutmegs one scruple. Fourthly, by discussion of the
humor, which is performed inwardly by the oil of white Amber, with the powder
of Wall-nut flowers, extract of Castor; externally by an Emplaster of the fat
of a black Heifer, Sclarea boyld in butter, adding to it a sufficient quantity
of Tachamahacca and Caranna: After the fit is past, evacuation is to be
regarded, first with purgation; for which purpose it will not be amiss to use
these ensuing pills, Take Siler mountain, penyroyall, madder, the innermost
part of Cassia pipe, Pomegranat kernels, Piony roots, and Calamus, of each
three drams, Muscus* and Spike of India, of each half a dram; then make pills
thereof with the juice of Mugwort, of which she may take every day, or every
other day before supper. If the disease proceed from the terms, let the woman
affected take an ounce of Agarick powdered in wine or honied water, or a dram
of Agnus Castus powdered with an ounce of honey of Roses: the womb is also to be
strengthened by the internal and external application of such things as
resist the malignity of the disease; among which are numbered Faecula, Brioniae
and Castor. The difference of this disease consists in this, that sometimes it
happens that it is occasioned by the retention of the seed, which is known by
this, that the symptoms of the disease are more violent; and after the fit is
past, there flows out of the womb a matter like to that of the seed. It is
cured by evacuation of the seed, such as are Rue, and Agnus Castus, and
anointing with odoriferous salves, especially if the woman be to live without
the use of man,

If it come from the suppression of the terms, which is known by the courses
being mingled with a melancholy blood, take powdered Agarick, a dram of Piony
seeds, or the weight of a dram and a half of Triphera magna.

But to conclude this Chapter, take this for a secret, that for a married Woman
in case of the present suffocation, there is nothing better then for the man to
anoint the top of his Yard with a little oil of Gilliflowers and oil of sweet
Almonds together, and so to lie with her; for this assuredly brings down the
Matrix again.

Of Barrenness.
Barrenness is an impotence to conceive, coming from defect either of the
Genitals, or of the blood, or of the menstruous blood.

First, through the defect of the Genitals, either by the closing up of the
Orifice of the womb, which may be cut and opened by Art; or through the
narrowness of the parts, for so they will not admit the yard; or by reason of
some Ulcers or Excrescences in the neck of the womb.

Or by reason of some fault in the seed, either the woman being too young, or
too old, or through some distemper in the vessels dedicated to generation; and
then the woman perceives very little or no pleasure in the act of copulation.
The cure of this is referred to the chapter of the Distempers of the womb.

Or when there is not that due proportion of seed which ought to be in both
parties, which chiefly arises from the use of those things that extinguish
barrenness, as Mint, Rue, Camphire.

Or from enchantments, and then the man cannot lie with his wife, or though he
should, yet cannot emit the seed; against which, it is affirmed that the
drinking a draught of cold water that drops from the mouth of a young stone
horse as he drinks, and saved in a little vessel, is very potent.

Or when the womb does not draw the seed which is ejected, and that by reason
of some cold and moist distemper; in which case all sorrow, anger, and much
sleep, are to be avoided: as also the eating of milk, fresh cheese, and any
thing that is made of dough. Neither is she to eat Endive, Spinach, Beets,
Lettice, Nuts, Cherries, Purslane, Onions, Garlic, or such like; as much
hurtful to he are much broth, vinegar, and fat flesh. In the next place the
womb must be cleansed from over abundance of moisture, such are syrup of
Wormwood, with the decoction of Hart's-tongue, Fenel, Cumin and Anis-seed.

After this, take once every fourteen days a dram of blessed pills, fasting
five hours after them.

Take also of these following pills, R. of Ladanum, Agarick, Wax, and sheeps
suet tried, of which you may make pills to take two or three of them every
morning; or use this confection: Take shaven Ivory, Ash keys, yellow and wild
Rape-seed, Siler mountain, with red and white Behen, of each one dram, Cinamom,
Galangall, long pepper, Cloves and Mace, Balsam wood, Ros^mary flowers, Blattae
Byzantiae, gentle Marjoram, penyroyal, of each four scruples, Baulme, Buglosse,
Citron pills, of each two scruples, Pearls one scruple, Musk two grains, white
sugar four and twenty ounces; sees this with Malmesey, and make thereof a
confection.

Or because of some diseases in the parts; where note, that too much fatness
of the Call does close the mouth of the womb: such women must not sleep much,
especially in the day time; they must use strong Clysters that are warm and
dry, and purge often.

Or when the womb does not attract the seed when it is cast in; which proceeds
from a moist intemperance, which is by the looseness of the fibers of the womb,
so that the womb cannot contract it self; which is cured as in the moist
distemper. Or by reason of the thickness of the womb; for then the blood which
increases the seed does not slide down to that place. The cure hereof requires
a thin diet, purging and sweating; or by reason of the slipperiness thereof,
which happens by reason of the running of the whites in women: The cure whereof
consists in the stopping of the whites, which has been already treated of; or
by reason of the gaping of the Orifice, which has been occasioned either by
difficult birth, or by some abortion. The cure is performed by astringent
medecines, among which the chiefest are the fomentation of Lentisk and Myrtle;
or by reason of some sudden cough or sneezing immediately after copulation, by
which the seed is shaken forth. Or when the womb does not alter the seed that
is cast in, through an immoderate cold distemper.

Sometimes through heat, and then it would be requisite to avoid hot air, and
keeping the parts about the womb complete, or the eating of hot meats and
spices; purge after blood-letting in the Basilick vein of the right hand, with
Electuary hom. de Epithymo, and juice of roses, of each two drams and a half,
whey four ounces, mix them well together, and take them in the morning, sleeping
one, and fasting four hours upon it. Purge also with Triphera Saracenica and
Rheubarb, with potions prepared and mixed with syrup of Roses, Violets and
Endive. Take Pistacia, Pingles, Eringus, of each half an ounce, of Saffron a
dram, Lignum Aloes, Galangall, Garyophyllata Mace, red and white Behen,
Baulme-flowers, of each four scruples, shavings of Ivory, and Cassia rindes, of
each two scruples, syrup of Ginger confected twelve ounces, white sugar six
ounces; sees these together with the syrup in 12 ounces of Baulm-water, until
it be all boiled away: when it is cold, put some more water to it and stir them
together: and last of all, mix with it a scruple and a half of Musk and Amber:
of this conserve let the woman take thrice a day, to wit, in the Morning, an
hour before supper, and an hour after dinner.

Or it proceeds from obstruction of the flowers, in which case first let blood
in the Basilic vein, then purge with Opoponax, and Hiera Composita, of each
half a dram, to be made up in seven pills, to be taken in the morning sleeping
upon them an hou^ and a half, with a draught of sugard water five hours after;
Or with a potion of syrup of Vinegar compounded, syrup of Eupatorie, of each
thr^e quarters of an ounce, Fever Mugwort, and Elecampane roots of each an
ounce, and mix them together: then she may put up into the womb a pessary of
mu^k, Amber, Aloes Wood, and Ash keys, of each three grains, Saffron half a
scruple, Hares-rennet as much as suffices, which being made up like a good big*
Tent she must keep a whole day in her body.

Of the bringing up of Children, and of their Diseases.
Of the Diseases of the Head.
THe Diseases common to Children are first certain little ulcerous risings,
chiefly in the Head; sometimes in the whole body; they arise from some vicious
humor either collected in the womb, or out of the womb, by reason of the
badness of the milk containing a serous, salt, and nitrous quality; if there be
no ill to be suspected, the humor may be driven forth by giving the Child some
syrup of Fumarie, or Hartshorn burnt: the Nurse is to be purged, and the
matter offending to be tempered with syrup of Borage, or Fumarie; if there be
much corruption under the crust of the scab, the head of the Child is to be
bathed with some softning decoction, and then to be anointed with some drying
Ointments.

Sometimes they are troubled with an inflammation of the head, with which is
joined a hollowness in the forepart of the head, and in the eyes; it may arise
from the milk, if the Nurse be subject to drink overmuch strong drink: in the
Cure you must beware of applying things which are too refrigerating.

They are also many times affected with a kind of Epilepsie, which proceeds
sometimes from extraordinary frights, from milk that lies corrupted in the
stomach, and sometimes from worms moving themselves in the guts; and sometimes
it is the consequent of other Diseases. The cure is to be observed partly in
the fit, and partly after the fit: the Smaragd-stone, and the hoof of a wild
Alx put into the l^f^ ear are very profitable, and take good effect; Vomiting
also, and this Emplaster of white Amber, Frankincense, and Mastick, of each a
dram and a half, Galbanum, Opoponax, of each a scruple, Visci of an Oak two
drams, Ambergreize six grains, Musk three grains, seed of male Peonie half a
dram, Ladanum one dram and a half, a little Oil of Nutmeg, and sprinkled with
the dust of Cubebs; the forepart of the head may be also anointed with Oil of
white Amber. Fears and startings in the Child's sleep, which being occasioned
from the putrid vapors which are carried up with the animal spirits, and arise
from the stomach; therefore they happen to Infants that suck greedily: in the
cure care must be taken that the Child do not fill it self too unreasonably, and
provide that good and sound milk may be generated, and that the Children be not
put to sleep upon a full stomach: the stomach of the Child anointed near the
orifice with Oil of Quinces* and mastick, and Oil of Nutmeggs. Before sleep
dissolve a little roll of Diamoschus in milk, and give the Child; and unless
the child be over much troubled with heat, you may give it a little Treacle
once in a week; overmuch watching or wakefulness, which is occasioned by sharp
vapors which arise out of the stomach by reason of the badness of the milk;
sometimes it is occasioned by Fevers, and pain of some peculiar parts; there is
nothing better then to anoint the soles of the Child's feet with marrow, which
has no danger in it, rather then to give the child stronger Opiates. A looking
a squint, which in newborn children is cured by putting a candle opposite to
the place where the Child casts its eyes.

Moistness of the ears by reason of the moistness of the head, which gather
quantity of humors together: the cure of this must not be over hasty; yet the
urine of children distilled, and dropped into the ear, is a very approved Remedy.

Bigness and swelling of the Head in little Children.
SOmetimes in children that are newly born the head grows to an extraordinary
bigness, which comes to pass either by reason of abundance of water contained
in the same, which water is contained either between the skin and the
Pericranium, or between the bone and the pericranium, or between the bone and
the membranes called the dura Matter, and the Pia Matter.

Or by reason of abundance of vapors gathered together between the bones and
the skin of the head, which cause the head to grow to such an extraordinary
bigness that it causes often times the death of the child.

If water be gathered together between the bone of the head and the membranes
of the brain, it causes a giddeness and Epilepsie to the Infant, without being
able to take any rest. For the cure of the windy affection you may use
fomentations, in case the wind be contained only between the skin and the
Pericranium; for which purpose you may take of the leaves of Sage, Betonie,
Egrimony, Calamus, and Origan, of each a handful, Anis-seed, and Fenel-seed, of
each two drams, Camomil Flowers, Melilot, and Red Roses, of each one handful;
boil all these in common water, adding to it a little wine, and thereof make a
Fomentation for the part affected, which may be assisted with a plaster made
of Oil of Anis-seeds, and bitter Almonds, of each one ounce, Oil of Camomil an
ounce and a half, Laurel and Juniper Berries, of each two drams, Anis-seeds,
and Fennel-seeds, of each one dram and a half, of the best Wine a pint; boil
them to the comsumption of the wine, adding to the rest half an ounce of Venice
Turpentine, and as much wax as is sufficient: As for the watery distemper,
though it be difficult to cure, yet you must try this Fomentation to digest the
humor: Take Wormwood, Betony, creeping Time, Penyroyal leaves, of each a
handful, red Rose leaves, and leaves of Stoechas, a little handful, Cypres Nut,
Orange flowers, and Florentine orrice, of each two drams, boil them all in a
lie made of Vine twiggs and stalks; after which you may use this plaster. Take
the powder of Betony, Sage, and Wormwood, of each two drams, Oil of Camomil and
Roses, of each 2 ounces, Vnguenti comitissae one ounce, as much wax as is
sufficient: but if these Remedies profit nothing, the only means left is to
open the head.

Of the diseases of the Eyes, Ears, and Noses in Children.
MAny times children are troubled with a light inflammation in their eyes, with
a certain gum and thickness which hinders them from opening the eyelid: the
most present remedies are either for the Nurse to wash the eyes with a little
of her breast milk, or else with a little Plantain and Rosewater mixed together.

Sometimes the nostrils are so stopped, that they are not able to draw their
breath but with much pain. For the cure of which the Nurse must moisten a linen
cloth in a little ointment of Roses, or a little very good Pomatum, till the
hard matter within be dissolved.

Many times there flows a moist humor from their heads, which happens to those
who have moist brains. In the cure of this, it must be the care of the Nurse to
cleanse the ears both within and without; afterward let her drop into them a
little oil of by ter Almonds, and honey of Roses mixed together.

Of certain Ulcers in childrens mouths.
THere do many times grow a certain kind of ulcers in childrens mouths: For
the cure of which the Nurse in the first place must use a good and sound diet,
then must the ulcers themselves be rubbed with a little Mel Rosatum, and syrup
of violets, with a drop or two of Plantain water; or you may wash them with
half an ounce of Rose Water, or Plantain water, in which put half a dram
D^aigret of vitriol; if they be very red and inflamed, take Brambles, flowers
of Pomegranates, Roses, Santall, of each two drams, Alum half a dram, boil
them in water, afterward strain them to the quantity of three ounces; in which
dissolve half an ounce of syrup of Mulberries.

If they be white, take Amber, Frankincense wood, Cypress nuts, Pomegranate
flowers, of each two drams, flowers of Roses and Myrtles, of each half a
handful; boil them in water to the consumption of four ounces, wherein
dissolve an ounce and a half of honey of Roses.

Of certain other Tumors called Paroulis and Espoulis.
PAroulis is a little swelling, red and inflamed, and is engendered commonly of
a hot choleric blood, or else from a salt phlegm that falls down upon the gums,
causing not only the gums, but the neck and chaps to be swelled. For the cure
hereof you may anoint the gums with this Ointment: Take of Amili 11 drams,
powder of Tragacant one dram, burnt Alum one scruple, Rosewater one ounce; if
there be any inflammation, rub the gums with a muscilage made of the seed of
Quinces, made with Rose Water, and Plantain-water, adding to it a little syrup
of Jujubes. If the swelling be obstinate, bring it to a suppuration with figgs,
Raisins, Jujubes, Licorass, and French barley well boiled; when it is opened and
lanced, cleanse and dry it with mel Rosatum, syrup of Roses and Cherries.

The Espoulis is a little excrescence of flesh happening in the lungs between the
teeth, but most commonly the great teeth. R. The root of Bugloss an ounce and
half, Plantain, Agrimony a handful, whole Barley a small handful, red Roses half
a handful, Pomgranate flowers two drams, four Dates, a dram and a half of
Liquoriss; make a decoction and strain it, and then add to it an ounce of
syrup of Roses, and Pomgranates to wash the place affected, you also may wash
it with this Remedy. Take of the juice of Pomgranates and Quinces, of each half
an ounce, juice of Berberies and Lettice, of each two drams, with a little of
the decoction of Lentils, and red Roses.

Of the two strings under the Tongue of a Child.
THere is one of these strings or ligaments which appears reaching from the
bottom of the tongue, and extending it self to the top of the tongue; this must
be cut off first with a pair of cizers, and the place rubbed with a litlittle
Mosche salt.

There is another Ligament which rises from the root and extends it self to
the middle of the tongue, which is more hard and large, which hinders the
tongue either from being stretched out, or to be moved in the mouth. The cure
hereof belongs wholly to the Surgeon.

Of the Cough in Children.
THe Cough in Children comes either from the distillation of some cold and
sharp humor distilling from the brain: if the humor be cold, the child is also
troubled with a viscous and slimy phlegm which lies in the passages of
espiration: if the humor flowing down be hot, the face of the Infant will be
red; if it come of a cold humor, the child must be kept indifferently warm,
giving it a little oil of sweet Almonds, and sugar candy; it will not be amiss
also to wash the feet of the child in ale wherein certain Cephalic herbs have
been boiled, and after that to anoint the plants or soles of his feet with
Gooses fat.

The breast of the child may be also rubbed with oil of sweet Almonds, and
fresh butter, and upon this put little linen clothes something warm. If it be
accompanied with any viscous matter or phlegm, you may give the Infant a little
syrup of Maidenhaire, or syrup of Liquoriss and Hysop mingled together; or give
the Infant this water to drink: Take of Rain water, and Fountain water, of each
a pint, white sugar one ounce, honey an ounce, Vinegar two drams; boil them all
together, and clarify them, and let the Infant drink it.

Of breeding Teeth.
IN breeding Teeth the difficulty and pain that the child endures is easily
perceived; and whether that be the thing which the child is afflicted with, may
be easily guessed at by the time of breeding teeth, which is about the seventh
month; beside the Infant is perceived to be often putting his fingers in his
mouth, and the Nurse perceives the infant to gripe her breasts hard, etc. the
place where the teeth are about to break out looks white, watchings, and the
sense of a very great pain. The swelling gums are to be anointed with Hares
brains boiled, or the fat of it. If they be inflamed, wash them with oil of
Roses, and white wax, and the juice of Nightshade: if they be exulcerated,
anoint them with butter that has no salt in it, with a little honey, and
powder of Frankincense.

Of the inflammation of the Navel-string in Infants.
SOmetimes after the binding of the Navel-string, it happens to exulcerate: For
the cure use an Emplaster of Pompholyx, or anoint i^ with oil of Roses, and a
little Populeon.

Of the Worms.
OFtentimes children are extremely troubled; they are generated of a viscous
and flegmie humor; they are sometimes round, and then commonly the children
are troubled with a Fever, and grow lean, their appetite fails them, they start
in their sleep, they have a dry cough joined with it, with a stinking breath,
and an ill color in their faces, the eyes hollow and dark, with a kind of
irregular Fever, which comes three or four times a night, and they often rub
their noses; if they be little worms, they have always a desire to go to the
stool, and their excrements are very purants. If the Infant be young the Nurse
must be sure to keep a good diet, abstaining from all raw fruits, pease and
Beans, and all milkie things, and any thing that shall be of a hard concoction:
next you may lay a plaster of the mass of Pills sine quibus half a dram, powder
of Wormwood one dram, myrrh and Aloes, of each two scruples, meal of Lupines a
dram and a half, the gall of an Ox as much as suffices; if the Infant be any
thing grown, you may give him in a little broth a small quantity of Hartshorn.
You may also give the Child if he be able to take it, a little of the decoction
of Pourpied, and the shavings of Hartshorn, adding to it a little of the juice
of Citron.

Of the Convulsion in Infants.
THe signs of Convulsion are the hanging backward of the head, insomuch that
the hinder part of the head seems to touch the shoulders; sometimes the head
and the neck hang so far forward, that the chin touches the breast.

The cure of this, if it come of too great abundance of humors, let the air
wherein the child is nursed be hot and dry, and exercise much; let her not
sleep long, especially after dinner; and let her diet be rather drying, then
any way moist. If the child do not suck, he must avoid meats that do trouble
the head, and fill it with vapors, or slimy meats that may stop the passages of
the veins; sweet things are very hurtful, but honey and water wherein a little
Sage and Betony have been boiled, it will not be amiss to give him: if purgation
be needful, let the Nurse rather then the child purge, which may be performed
with Cassia, or Manna

If the Child be any thing bigg, let his belly be kept loose by giving him a
little water wherein Sena has been steeped for four and twenty hours, tempering
therewith a very small quantity of the juice of Citron; or you may give him a
little of the powder of Diacarthamum in the pap of an apple.

If the Convulsion come of dryness, or emptines, or by reason of some great
evacuation, flux of the belly, vomiting, hunger, or the like, the child must be
nursed in an air more moist then dry, and his diet must be the same. The best
and most approved Remedy is to apply a cautery in the hinder part of the head
to the nook of the neck, between the second and third Vertebrae, which may be
done to newborn Children; Frictions also of the legs, backbone and thighs,
are very profitable; as also Cupping-glasses applied to the thighs and legs.

It the Convulsion come by reason of the Worms, you may give him this Clyster.
Take of simple Hydromel 4. ounces, new butter one ounce, powdered Aloes half a
dram, and make a clyster. Or you may give him two drams of Earthworms killed,
dried, and powdered, sugar powdered one ounce, and let the child take two drams
of it every day in a spoonful of Lettice water.

If any venomous vapor be the cause hereof, let him take six grains of
Treacle, or Mithridate in Pourpied water.

Of the swelling of the Hypochondria in Infants.
WHich causes children by reason of the narrowness of the mouth of the stomach
to be troubled with a difficulty of breathing: it arises from the greediness
of the Infant, which either sucks too great a quantity of milk, or of other
meats. The inward cure of this is performed by administering the powder of the
root of Orrice, or Paeonie.

Of Costiveness in Children.
THis proceeds from the unskilfulness of the Nurse in the dyeting of the child,
or from a cold and dry distemper of the guts, or from the hot and dry distemper
of the bowels; in this case the belly may be well loosened with Cassia, or with
a liniment composed of new oil of sweet Almonds, Goose fat, May-butter,
Ointment of Dial thea, of each two drams, Colocynth. gr. 16, one scruple of
salt, Species Hierae one scruple, Diagridion 4 grains, make of this anointment,
and anoint the navel.

Or it proceeds from a viscous phlegm which wraps about and holds the dreggs,
which may be remedied by a suppository of Mouse-dung, and Goats suet; or by the
use of an Emplaster of Aloes, Bulls gall, Myrrh, and May-butter, to be laid upon
the navel.

Of Looseness in Children.
LOoseness of the belly happens either in the time of Teeth breeding, or out of
the time; in the time of breeding teeth, either by reason of the corruption of
the nutriment, or by reason of overmuch watching through the pain of the
teeth, or by reason of a Fever, and some unnatural heat; it must not be
suddenly stopped if it be not overcopious, and that the infant can endure it; the
belly must be afterward cleansed with Roses solutive, and afterward stopped,
great observation being had whether the cause come from a hot or cold distemper.

Of Burstness in Children.
BUrstness happens to children either by reason that the peritonaeum is burst
through crying, or falling, or splaying with the thighs: For the cure whereof
the child must be kept quiet and still from crying; upon which after the part
affected is well bound up, you may give the child inwardly of the essence of the
greater Consound one spoonful, with two drops of Balsam of sal Gemma. You may
also foment the place with a Fomentation made of the roots of the greater
Consound, and Osmundi regulis, the bark of Elm, and Fraxi, of each half an
ounce, the leaves of Plantain, Mullein, Centinode, Herniar, Horsetail, flowers
of Camomil, red Roses, and Meliot, of each a handful and a half, Balust,
Cypress nuts, and acrons, of each two drams; put these into two sacks, and boil
them in equal parts of sour wine, and Smiths water, for a Fomentation to be
used for a quarter of an hour; then you may lay on a Plaster of the red drying
Ointment eleven ounces, powder of Mastick, Olibanum, and Sarcocol,
Cypress-nuts, of each one dram, with a little wax and oil of Mastick to make a
plaster, which must be put upon the place affected, and bound down with a
little pillow.

Sometimes this burstness proceeds from a watery humor abounding in the Abdomen,
which descending into the Codds causes them to swel; for which you may use
with good success this Ointment: Take of Unguent. Comitiss. and the red drying
Ointment, of each two ounces, Pigeons dung half an ounce, live Sulphur three
drams, powder of Laurel berries, and mustard seed, of each a dram, oil of
Dill, and Venice Turpentine of each 3 drams, wax as much as suffices: this is
also an extraordinary Remedy for the Burstness proceeding from wind.

Of the Inflammation of the Navell.
THe inflammation of the Navel arises when the blood gathers thither by reason
of some external hurt; the danger is very great if it should apostemate, and so
the guts fall down; and therefore suppuration must be hindered as much as may be.

Of the jutting forth of the Navel.
THis differs from the inflammation, because here the Navel does not give way
to the touch, neither is the color of the skin changed, neither is there any
very great pain or pulse, unless the intestines are very much fallen; it
proceeds from the ill binding thereof at first, which is incurable; or when a
greater portion then necds of the Navel string is left. Secondly, from a
laxation of the Peritonaeum, and then the tumor is equal, nor does the Navel
jut forth very far: in the cure hereof you must let the child abstain from all
windy meats and from much crying. Sometimes it is occasioned by the rupture of
the Peritonaeum, and then the swelling is hardly perceived when the child lies
upon his back, but increases and swells forward when he walks, sits, cries and
bawls: in the cure of this the moss that grows upon the wild Prune-tree is
very much commended; or you make little Swathbands of Leather, and anoint them
with Oxycroceum.

Of the Stone in the Bladder.
THis is known by the coming forth of the Urine by drops and with pain, which
is sometimes unmixed, sometimes containing a kind of serous humor, sometimes
dyed with a little blood; it is produced either by the milk which is ingendered
of meats that do increase the Stone, or through a hot distemper of the Liver,
which attracts the Chylus, and sends it unaltered to the bladder: for the Cure
you must use Baths, among which this is commended to anoint the bladder;
withal take Oil of Scorpions, oil of bitter Almonds, Conies-grease, and Hens
grease, of each an ounce and a half, and of the juice of Parietarie; Or take
sal Tartar one ounce, parsley-water a pint, mix them through a fine paper rubd
over with the rindes of Oranges, and give a small quantity thereof.

Of the not holding of the Urine.
THis arises either from the muscle which shuts the orifice of the Bladder,
which is so disposed that it is loosed upon the least exciting of the Urine,
and grows so into a habit, that it many times accompanies them to their graves;
or from the stone in the bladder, or from the weakness of the sphincter
proceeding from a cold and moist distemper; which is cured partly by the good
diet of the Nurse, and partly by convenient Medecines, among which a bath made
of Sulphur, Nitre, and the leaves of Oak, is exceeding good.

Of the Intertrigo.
WHen the little skin in the hips is separated from the true skin; it arises
first from the sharpness of the Urine, especially in children that are more
corpulent, by reason of the dirt which frets the skin, being gathered together
in the wrinkles. Bathe the place, and then sprinkle upon it either white
Nihili, or anoint it with oil of Litharge.

Of Leanness.
THis arises either from a subtle kind of Worms, which are generated in the
most musclely parts of the back, and arms, and consume the body; They break
forth sometimes like to black hairs; if you wash those parts with a Bath mixed
with bread and honey, they are taken away either with a Razor, or with a crust
of bread. Secondly, it arises from the small quantity of milk, which is
oftentimes remedied by changing the Nurse.

Of the difficulty which Children have to make water.
IF the Disease proceed from sharpness of the Urine, the Nurse must use such a
way of diet as is proper for the tempering and cooling of the blood; she must
be purged, and let blood, using afterward cooling and refrigerating broths. If
it proceed from any gross humor ingendered in the bladder, the Nurse must
abstain from all meats that do breed gross humors, as milky meats, Pease and
Beans, and such like.

If the child be troubled with gravel, which may be perceived by the whiteness
and rawness of the Urine, with a gravelly settling at the bottom, and the
continual pain in making water: if the Child be any thing bigg, let a potion be
given him of an ounce and half of sweet Almonds, an ounce of Pellitory water,
and two drams of the juice of Limons; use as much of this at a time as is
convenient. Or take of this powder, of the blood of a Hare six ounces, of the
root of Saxifrage one ounce, burn them in an earthen ^ot, and if the Infant
suck give him a scruple of this powder in a little milk.

Of the Inflammation of the Almonds of the Ears.
IF the child be very small. you must wash the throat as near the root of the
tongue as may be with a linen cloth tied to a stick dipped in this gargarisme;
take of new extracted Cassia one dram, syrup of dry Roses one dram and a half,
with six ounces of the decoction of Coriander. Or you may anoint the neck with
oil of Violets, and Camomil, binding the neck with a little roller well
anointed with the same; when the child goes to bed you may give him in a spoon
a little syrup of dried Roses, of Pavot and Nenuphar mingled together.
Oxycroceum alone does also make an excellent Gargarism.

If they come to a suppuration, you must use this gargarisme. Take of the
decoction of Barley, Plantain, Agrimony, Veronicae, Honysuckle and herb Rob six
ounces, in which dissolve mel Rosatum, and Sugar-candie, of each half an ounce,
to make a gargarism.

Of Vomiting.
IF it proceed from abundance of milk which the child sucks, you must take care
that the child suck less, and often.

If it come from any ill humor contained in the stomach, besides that the Nurse
must keep a very good diet, the Infant must be purged, with a small expression
of Rheubarb, giving it afterward a little Codignac to comfort the stomach,
mingling with it a little tablet of Diarrhodium, putting afterward upon his
stomach this plaster: Take of the pulp of condited Quinces two ounces, red
Roses, Wormwood, and red Sanders, of each two drams, Oil of Quinces as much as
suffices; make a plaster of this, and lay it upon the stomach of the child.

Of the Hicquet.
IF it come from an overmuch repletion, it will not be amiss to make him vomit
of whatsoever age he be; or if it be necessary that a greater force should be
used, you must try to make him vomit by putting down the throat a Fether dipped
in oil; if from the badness of the Nurses milk, she must be changed for a
better; if from the coldness of the stomach, you must use remedies to comfort
it, as little tablets of Diarrhodium, of which you must dissolve a scruple in
the milk of the Nurse; you must also chafe the stomach of the child with oil of
Wormwood, Mastick, and Quinces.

Of the pain of the Belly in Children.
IF the Disease come from indigestion, and moistness, the little Infant will
vomit, and be troubled with a flux of the belly, and the belly will be hard. In
which cases you may give the infant an ounce of sweet Almonds drawn with out
fire, and mingled with a quantity of Sugar Candy, or anoint the belly with this
Ointment; Take oil of Camomil, and oil of sweet Almonds, of each an ounce and a
half, mingle them, and therewith anoint the belly; if wind be the cause, you
may mingle a little oil of rue in the foresaid Ointment.

Of the Smal-Pox in Children.
THe signs of this Disease are pain in the head, accompanied with a Fever,
redness about the eyes, a dry Cough, and you shall mark in the skin up and down
the body certain little spots, upon the face, back, breast, and thighs; the
Smal-pox is dangerous if they come forth with much pain, if they be greenish,
bluish, or blackish.

For the cure of this, if the Infant suck, the Nurse must keep a good order of
diet, she may eat broth of Hens with Endive, Cichorie, Bugloss and Borage
boiled therein.

Now to make the Smal-Pox come forth the more quickly, if the Child be little,
the Nurse must drink this following Potion. Take of Caricarum Pinguium one
ounce, peeled Lentils half an ounce, Gum Lacca two drams, Gum Tragacant, and
Fenel-seed, of each two drams and a half; make of this a decoction in
Fountain Water, and strein it to the quantity of two pints, sweeten this either
with sugar, or syrup of Maidenhair; let her drink of this in the morning a good
glassful.

Or, you may give the child if it be able to take it, this Julep to be used
very often: take of Cordial waters two ounces and a half, syrup of Limons one
ounce, mingle it, and use it often; 4. or five hours after give him of powder
of Unicorns-horn, and Bezoar. Now to keep this venomous humor from attaching
the eyes, temper a little Saffron in a small quantity of Plantain and
Rose Water, and rub the eyelids: or you may anoint them with Tutie: For keeping
them from the nose, take Rose Water, and Betonie-water, of each an ounce,
Vinegar half an ounce, juice of Pomgranates six ounces, in which steep two
drams of Santalum, and two drams of the powder of Citron peel; add to this six
grains of Saffron, and make a medecin for the child to smell often to; the same
Medecin will serve for the ears, by stopping them with a little cotton.

To preserve the mouth, and throat, and tongue, take this gargarism; take whole
Barley one handful, Plantain leaves, leaves of Oxalis, Arnogloss, Agrimonie,
and Verbena, of each one handful, boil this to the quantity of six ounces,
dissolving in it syrup of dry Roses, and Pomgranates, of each half an ounce,
Saffron half a scruple.

To preserve the Lungs, use syrup of Jujubes, Violets, and Nenuphar: when they
are fully come out, to make them dye the more quickly, rub the face with oil of
sweet Almonds drawn without fire. Or use this Ointment; take old Lard, cut it
in small pieces, and melt it in a pot, then strein, then beat it, and mingle it
with water for your use.

When the Pox is totally dead, take this Remedy to take away the marks. Take
Halke the weight of two Crowns, clear cream 2. ounces, mix them together, and
with a Fether dipped therein anoint the face of the child two or three days;
this causes the skin to grow smooth, leaving not a pit in the face.

Certain other Instructions grounded upon practical Observations, fit to be
known by all Midwives, and Childbearing Women, etc.
IN the year One Thousand six hundred and Ten, a young Lady whom I was wont to
bring to bed, passing by my house came in to me, and told me that she was four
months gone, and that she perceived the Infant to stir; about a month after
she came to see me, and told me that she was in much pain, for that she had not
perceived the Infant to stir in two days, and that therefore she believed that
it was dead, by reason of a certain very great fright which she had had; for at
the time that she was frighted she perceived the child to move, but after that
never, and her belly began by little and little to wax less, and about three
weeks after she had that reflux of milk that Women use to have that lie in;
when this was gone she had no grievance; yet seeing her often, and knowing her
to be bigg with child, she asked me my advice, to know what she should do.
Whereupon I asked her if any ill vapors rose up into her mouth? she told me
no. If she had not lost her appetite? she answered that she never had a better
in her life; her heart was light, her body in good temper, so that there was
nothing that troubled her but an apprehension she had that the child was dead;
whereupon I made her try all means to make the Infant stir; but she
notwithstanding felt nothing, only she perceived that something did heave a
little upon the operation of the Remedies, which was nothing but the Matrix,
which* being now distempered and grown cold, did as it were answer the hot
Remedies, testifying thereby some good which it received thereby: I advised her
to be patient, and to wait Natures leisure, which is provident enough of it
self, telling her that I had seen an Infant which had lain a long time in the
Womb without budging, which for all that was not dead, although you could not
perceive in the Woman any thing but the signs of a dead child. I had oftentimes
brought the Lady to bed, and she still had very good deliveries, and very sound
children, of a good color; so that I believing her to be of a sound
constitution, thought that if the Infant were dead, that Nature which was very
strong in her would expel it in time convenient, and that she should not be
forced, not having given any testimony of defect; resolving also when her
Reckoning was out, if then Nature showed it self weak, that we would consult
her Friends, and Physicians. Many of her Friends told me that they doubted that
she was deceived in thinking her self to be with Child; to which I answered,
that they might be confident that it was so; in brief, she was brought to bed
sixteen weeks after the fright which she had. Now here arises a great doubt,
whether the Child dyed at the hour of her being scared, by reason that it did
not move in all the time. A reason that the child was not dead, may be because
that the Gentlewoman had not her milk til within three weeks afterward; and yet
I cannot but think that it dyed at the same time; for certainly by that fright
the vital spirits were ravished from it, and the blood of the Arteries retired
to the heart of the Mother, not being distributed to the Infant, but at the
good pleasure of Nature; the course of which being stopped, it retired to its
first source, through which the child suffering a suffocation, gave a violent
motion; and now after the Fright was come to her self, and that Nature would
have returned to finish her work, she was not received, because the vital
faculties of the Infant were extinct; and notwithstanding all this the Mother
not ceasing to retain the menstrual blood as she was accustomed, that finding
it self stopped, and still increasing without that use made of it that was wont,
it made a reflux to the breasts, which flowd down again in five or six days;
for the Infant coming to decrease in the Womb, now way was made for them, which
came not down for all that but in the Delivery and after, which was in this
manner: At the end of the sixteenth week after the fright, she had pains in the
night; she thinking to endure them well enough til morning, in the morning
caused me to be sent for. I came to her finding with her a Physician, and
sundry others of her acquaintance. The Physician that expected me had ordered
her a Clyster to give her, if I thought it to the purpose; I found her pale,
cold, and yet in a sweat, with so little pulse that I esteemed her dead; I
touched her, and found she had been in Travail, which had been too long
neglected; I called presently for a plain silver dish, into which I squeezed
the juice of half a Citron, and set it upon a Chafing Dish of coals; being
warmed, I caused her to take it, this restored Nature a little, and stirred up
her pains, and then I assisted her; notwithstanding some of the waters ran
down: after her first throw the legs and thighs of the Child came forth* now
finding the Infant to be dead, and seeing that she was troubled with no more
throws, I was afraid of drawing it forth, for fear it might be rotten: I did
give her a Clyster without moving her, the force of which bringing the Child
away, she was delivered of a dead Infant all over of a leaden color, without
any ill vapor; the Secundines sound and fair as you shall see, her purgations
as clear as could be, and she had as good and as happy a Lying in as any Woman
in the world; all which time she had not the appearnce of any Milk at all.
Hence we may admire the effects of Nature which are wonderful. But in such
cases Women must be sure in due time and place; for if a Woman do resist her
pains, and does not put her self in a right posture, she runs a great hazard
of her life.

A Second Observation of a Woman that had been in Travail nine days.
BEing called to the Labor of a Woman that had been in Travail nine or ten
days, of whom there was little hope, I went, and there found the Woman almost
dead, her eyes open and fixed, her nose shrunk in, her breath smelling like a
charnel-house; and she took nothing down into her stomach that she did not
instantly vomit up again; she had drunk up above two pints of water in an hour,
and by her bed there was a whole sea of those things that she had vomited up.
They gave her cold water, and the yelk of an Egg sometimes, though it came up
again at the same instant; she felt no pain of the Infant; but finding her
Womb was open, and her waters beginning to come down, I found that she had been
in Travail, only Nature was oppressed, and had not had any good assistance, so
that the Infant was retired back again which stifled the Mother, and provoked
her vomiting; upon which I gave my advice, and though I thought my self come a
little too late, yet I resolved to do what lay in the power of my Art; and
therefore I resolved to give her a good strong Clyster to awaken Nature, and to
bring the Infant lower, which it did according to our hopes; afterward to
drink a small quantity of Rhubarb-water which stayed with her; a little after I
gave her the yelk of an Egg which stayed with her also, causing her to drink
nothing but Rhubarb-water; and at every hours end I gave her the yelk of an
Egg, which did also stay with her; by this time Nature began to strengthen it
self, and the pains of the Infant came again; and in less then two hours after
the Clyster, and other nourishment given, when I saw her pretty well, and that
Nature strove to expel the Infant, I gave her half a dram of Confection of
Alkermes in a little Wine; and a little while after I caused her to take
another Clyster, into which I put a little Hiera, and a little Benedictus,
which finished the work; for She was then delivered of a very lusty child,
which lived about two days: I came thither about noon, and the was brought to
bed before 9. at night. I wrote this thus particularly, to let you know that
oft-times for want of knowing where the mischief lies, the Remedies are
mis-applyed; and indeed a Woman Travayling in the ninth month ought chiefly to
be succored with Clysters.

Of a Woman here in Town that bare her Child elevent Months, and could not be
Delivered.
BEing called to a Woman in this Town that thought her self three months and a
half gene, which is one of the Terms of time wherein commonly the Moles and
false births are delivered, having then some loss of blood and pain, I was
sent for, and judged it to have been some imperfect Conception, and therefore I
used all the means that art imposes to assist her, yet could she not expel it
for all these long pains: whereupon finding some strange apprehensions in her
I wondered; for in all the time of my practice I never knew such a thing as
that dangerous in my life. But I afterward found this apprehension to come
from a certain accident that had happened to a Sister of hers, who being with
child carried it very well to the end of the ninth month, at the end of which
she began to be in pain, as if she would have cried out; the pains were great
and long, which they were not at all astonished at by reason that it was her
first child; yet were not these pains accompanied with any signs of Labor,
as the opening the exterior orifice of the Womb; and they continued thus for
the space of two days and two nights; many Medicines were used to facilitate
the birth, but to no purpose; and now she felt not the child stir any more. And
now it was concluded that she had mistaken her time; and now being at rest for
four or five days, and growing weary of the City she went into the Country,
and being returned without taking notice that she had received any harm, she
was taken with the same pains as before, which continued a day and a night,
and then ceased as before; this was adjudged to be certain pains of the
colic: after this she endured one month longer in her former estate, which
was now the eleventh month complete; at the end of which she felt some little
pain like throws, which presently affected her heart, upon which she was laid
upon her bed, and they brought her Wine; but at the very instant she dyed,
without having any time to call for assistance: seeing her dead, they perceived
upon the right side of her belly a very black mark about the breadth of a
dollar; being opened they found the child all putrified. Hence we must observe
that in Women that are bigg with child, who have frequent pain, and nothing
coming forth, the Matrix that should open rather shutting it self closer,
whether it be at the time or no, you must imagine these to be clysters that
expel wind, which are to be reiterated as occasion requires; which rule if it
had been observed in this Woman, she nor the Fruit of her Womb had not perished
in that manner.

Of the common opinion, that a Woman seven months gone ought to walk very
much; and of the accidents that happen thereby.
IT is a common error among Midwives which is not to be passed by, that a
Woman with child when she has gone seven months of her time, is to walk
much; upon a conceit that exercise is very proper for her; for that they say
does loosen the child from the reins, and facilitates the birth; I confess as
to facilitating of the birth it may something avail; only I must add this also,
that it is better to dravv away the child then to break it; and moreover it is
better to be something longer in Travail then to incur 2. or 3. evils which
ordinarily happen; the first is, that the Child in the end of the eleventh
month does make certain endeavors to free it self from the belly of the
Mother; and without doubt his first endeavor is to turn himself in the belly
of the Mother; for the Infant turns himself a good while before the time of
Labor; and therefore I say exercise is very dangerous: the first reason is,
because by pushing dovvnvvard the belly is dilated, and especially in such as
carry their children lovv; and besides, oft-times the head drags down all the
body of the Womb, and loosens the ligaments in such a sort, that after Delivery
it can hardly be put into its place again. Besides the children having their
heads between the bones of the Mother, by much walking of the Mother they come
to be bruised, so that the Infants do many times dye, and no man is able to
give a cause why; for the branches of veins which are for the nourishment of
the brain open in an instant, letting out the blood which is contained in them;
and when the corruption is engendered, there follows immediately Fevers, and
corruption of the Infant: At other times Women coming to sit upon a hard seat
do bruise the head of the Infant, which causes like accidents; and in all these
accidents none but the Midwife is to blame, unless the belly it self be
spoiled. This they say is the fault of the Nurse who did not apply Remedies fit
to restore the fault. I must confess that Remedies do much avail to the
recovery of the foresaid malady, and do much avail to the healing of that
disease, and marring of the belly; but to restore it to such an estate as it
was in before, I say it is a thing impossible for Medecines to perform; for the
skin which is once separated cannot be closed again without a scar; I would now
not only blame those that assist them, but by putting the actions of people
before them, show them where lies the fault, and what reason I have so to do: I
must confess that false accusations have made the most able Midwives timorous,
for they lie liable to so many causes of detraction, that all that are either
but indifferent good, or else not good, are all accused alike, if any thing
fall out amiss with the Patient, as if they were the absolute causes of the
evil, or that it lay absolutely in their power to hinder it: it happens also
many times that a Midwife worthy of that name does deliver a Woman from death,
and yet in the place of much praise she incurs many times much blame; so that
they are oftentimes constrained (to avoid the scandal) to advertise the of
their ill procedures, and to give place to those that know not how to do things
with that sweetness and judgment. The fault is no where but in the ignorance,
scandal, and ingratitude of Women toward those of this Calling. Besides, there
are a company of young Women that because they have had one child, do give
themselves a great deal of liberty to talk of these things. Cries one, I like
not these Midwives that handle me; I will change mine cries another for that
trick also; so that many out of a kind of fear have a greater desire and will to
be complacent then to do well; and so ^itting with their hands before them
entertain their Patients with discourse, who for all that feeling their
pains, are constrained to thrust forward, upon which the head of the Infant
coming first, for the most part the womb serves for a Head-band, which comes
forth before it: whereas might the Midwife be permitted to touch the Patient,
they might put back the womb, and prevent many accidents that happen in lyings
in, which happens sometimes to be a total relaxation of the Matrix; of which
when the Women complain to their complacent and flattering Midwives, They
reply, why Mistress you know I did not touch; and besides I am not in fault if
you have been touched; this is the fruit of their reproaches: You will say
there are abundance of Country Women that the Midwife never touches at all,
and they do not know scarcely whether a Woman lie in or no, unless they see the
Infant appear; but they are not free from the disease whereof I speak; for I
have seen so great a company of them that I have been afraid to behold them.
This comes say the Midwives because they touched them not, and that it is
occasioned either because the Infant is too bigg; or they say it is a
burstness, or the coming down of the great gut; the most subtle put up a clew
of thread, the others a ball of wax, which eases a little while, but comes out
again every hour.

Of a Child which they thought sick of the Epilepsie, occasioned by the
sickness of the Mother, and of the cause.
ONe day there came to me a Gentlewoman to desire me that I would give her
something for her Daughter that was sick of the Mother: when her Mother related
what she ailed, I desired to see her, I saw her, and she had in one hour two
several fits, which was an affrightment, attended with very much yawning, after
which she remained in a very great weakness; all which time the mouth of the
child was drawn more to one side then the other; the eyes when she was out of
the fit were open and fixed in one place; I inquired of the Mother, at what age
her Daughter came to be first troubled with it; who answered, that she had been
in this Town for something more then a year, and that before that time she was
never troubled with any such thing: I gave her the best counsel that I could;
and first of all bid her to carry her again to the place where she was first
nursed, using some few Remedies that were convenient; which prospered so well,
that after she came thither she had but one fit, though she had them so
frequently before. Of this no other cause can be given, but that the place
where she lived for that year being thicker then that where she was nursed
caused in her a stirring of the humors, with which the mother was continually
afflicted, she being disposed naturally to that kind of disease.

Of a young Woman who being struck upon the belly by her Husband with his foot,
was in great pain, and could not be brought to bed without the help of a
Surgeon.
I Will here relate a thing which I have seen in a young Woman, that if the
like accident should happen, the same Remedies may be applied. There came a
Woman to me to declare to me a disease with which she was troubled, defiring me
to do my utmost, for that hitherto she could not lie in without the help of a
Surgeon, who had already killed two of her children. I knowing what an ill
Husband she had, and that he had given her a blow upon the belly with his foot*
and had broken the Peritonaeum, which was the reason that part of her guts hung
down upon the share-^bone like the bagg of a bagpipe; to which place being bigg
the Womb jutted out, so that when the time came, the Infant had not liberty to
turn it self; so that the Midwife seeing she could not have the child without
losing the Woman, was feign to make use of the Surgeon. I considered her
disease, and ordered her to carry a swatheband, such a one as Women with child
carry to support their bellies, only made a little more hollow; and I caused
her to wear it as they that are burst do wear half slopps, lying smooth with
cushionets within, and never to fig: 3

fig 4

diagrams of a pregnant woman and fetus's anatomy Explanation of the third
figure.
THis figure contains the birth at full, maturity, ready to come forth in the
truest posture. AAAA, the parts of the midriff dissected. BBBB, the body of the
womb dissected into four parts. CCCC, the Membranes or Filmes, called Chorion
and the Amnios, dissected likewise into four parts. D, the Birth in its
natural posture.
Explanation of the fourth Figure. This Figure contains the Navel vessels, and
the films or covering of the infant.
AAAA, the muscles of the midriff the peritoneum, and the skin it self
dissected into four parts. B, the Liver of the Infant. C, the urinary vessels.
D, the hole of the Liver into which the Navel vein does pass. E, the
Vmbilical or Navel vein it self. FF, the two Navel arteries tending downwards
to the small gut arteries. G, the passage for the urine proceeding from the
bottom of the bladder. H, the umbilicall vessels taken out of the body of the
Infant to show how they are joined together. I, the membrane that involves the
Navel vessels. KKKK, the guts or intrales of the Infant. LLL, the Navel vessels
extended from the children to the birth. M, the place where the branches of the
Navel vessels are first collected into one Trunk. NN, A branch of the Navel
vessels scatterd through the fleshy part of the Chorion. OOO, A branch of the
Navell arteries. PPPP, the conjunction of the umbilicall vein and artery.
QQQQ. the extremities of the Navel veins and Arteries, ending the fleshy parts
of the Chorion. RRRR, the membraine called the Chorion.
rise without this whether bigg or no; which she did, and still does, and bears
as fine children, and lies in as well as any other woman.

Of two Deliveries of one Woman.
THere was a Woman who being come to a sufficient age became big: she causes
two of the best Midwives of the Country to assist her in her Lying in; the hour
being come, they did as art commanded them, which was, the Child coming well
into the world, to keep her in a good situation, to cause her to eat things
which were only to the purpose, to keep her moderately vvarm, and then to
bring her pains to a good issue. I excuse the passion and impatience of
Friends, but I would not do any thing against my duty for complacency; a fault
that is soon committed, but not so easily repented of; This Woman was pretty
long, as most Women are of their first Children, in which time her Husband
altogether impatient, and seeing her to doubt the report of the Midvvives,
therefore said he, here is a Surgeon hard by, who may be sent for to
resolve the doubt of the Midvvives; he sent for him just about the hour that
the Woman was to be brought to bed: The Surgeon when he came savv that the
child was ready to come forth. The Midvvives who had given way to the
Surgeon, thinking to take their place again as soon as he had touched her,
to make his report, were deceived; for he seeing the business ready to be done,
told her Husband that it was necessary for him to operate, but that he would
proceed with so much industry that he would not only bring forth a sound and a
lusty child, but moreover that he would render his Wife also in a safe
condition. The Midwives when they would have spoken were put to silence. The
Gentlewoman was presently delivered, and he stayed but a little while to
receive: thus the Midwives that had attended long, and all the while of the
Travail were despised, and put off, and the Surgeon extolled and praised,
and well rewarded, with several most obliging and courteous invitations. About a
year after he was entertained upon the former score like a Prince; the hour of
her Labor came again, and the Gentleman was gone to visit some of his friends,
having such a confidence in the Surgeon, that he set his mind at rest for
any danger. The labor of this child was not like the labor of the other
child; for it came with the feet foremost; and when the whole body was come
forth, the head could not be got forth: he had brought with him no instruments,
thinking that this Delivery would have been like the other; but seeing himself
at a stand, he sent to a Surgeon not far off for an instrument: in the mean
time he sent into the kitchen for the ladle, with the hook at the end thereof,
to draw forth the child; he drew so well; that he drew away the life of the
child, and without seeking any further for any body to saddle his horse, or
bidding any body farewell, he fled his ways. This may be an instruction to
those that are so ready to entertain Mountebanks, and Empericks; then whom
there are no men more prodigal of the life of another for money.

Of a Woman that because she would not be ruled in her Lying in, dyed.
I Was one day called to the Labor of a Woman which had good Deliveries of
her Sons, and Daughters, at their due time, although her deliveries of Boys
were always more difficult then those of her Daughters; being come to her I
found her vvalking in the Chamber with her legs bare in a season that was not
over-hot. I caused her to be put into her bed to vvarm her again, but she
would by no means endure it; although I prayed her, she was angry with me,
and told me this was not the rule, to be constrained; the Mistress and the
Nurse combined against me, the night approached; the waters being come down I
feared the ill success of this business, that her disease would be
irrecoverable by reason of her self-vvilness: I desired her Husband to use his
endeavor, but he could do no more with her then I: about midnight I prayed
her to go to bed again, and to vvarm her self, and unless she could do so I
could do nothing: she told me I understood nothing in respect of a certain
Surgeon, who when she had such a kind of Labor before, only touched her with
his finger, and delivered her, and that she would have him: I was content, and
so she sent for him; he came very confidently, but his work was not at so
easy a pass as formerly: he put a good large Table Napkin before him, trussing
it up to his elbows, saying he was as able to deliver her as before; she would
no more see me after his arrival: the Surgeon to whom I represented (after
his arrival) all that I had understood and seen, and the fear which I had of
her, told me that all would be well. At day break a neighbor of mine calling
me away, I desired her Husband to let me go; but he was unwilling, unless I
would promise to come again, which I did; and as soon as the door was open,
one of the servants told me another Midvvife was sent for; her Husband desired
me again, that since the Surgeon failed of his skill, I would use my skill;
but it was too late, for the Surgeon left them, and the Woman dyed. See here
how ill a thing it is to be opinionated, for I could easily have delivered her
if she would have been ruled by me.

Of certain Women that bear Children and lie in before their time, and others
at their full time, who grow bigg, and full of humors, which causes the death
of the child presently after their Delivery, their children being nourished in
their Bellies like fish, only with water.
I Knew a Gentlewoman who had lain in three times, but yet none of her children
lived: I desired her to take a Physician that might give advice both to her and
me, and to ordain her some remedies, and a government of diet to keep her from
suffering the like accidents for time to come: we chose a Physician, who
prescribed certain Tablets or Trochisques to take from the time she began to
grow bigg, until the time of her Delivery, twice a week; as also to take the
water of Indian Bul-rush, and of Sarsaparilla, to mix in her drink, or broth,
as often as she would, having a due regard to the heat of her blood: she
observed every tittle of his directions, which made her to bear a Son alive
sound and healthful; she continued these Remedies four years together; but the
next time she grew big with child she thought that Nature of it self would be
sufficient: I counseled her to the contrary, but she he arkned not; so that
when her Time came* she was brought to bed of a dead child. I shall give you the
Receipt of the Tablets, and of the Water, for the benefit of Women that are
subject to an ill Delivery by reason of the great quantity of waters, which
hinders the child from turning in the womb: the water is made in this manner.
R. Two pints or 2 pints and a half of water, put therein half an ounce of the
root of Indian Bulrush, and an ounce of Sarsaparilla; put this in the drink,
and let it infuse one night; mix it with the drink, or else drink it pure. The
Tablets are made of this fashion. R. Mace, Saunders, Rhubarb, Pearl, and Coral,
Seen, of each 25 grains, with one ounce and half of sugar; let every Tablet
weigh 6 drams.

The observation of a Woman who was thought unable to bear, any more Children,
yet contrary to expectation was delivered of one, and the reason thereof.
THere are certain Women who have the neck of the Womb long and hardened, by a
cold humor that falls down thereon, and renders them incapable of conceiving.
One I have heard of who was afflicted with this disease, and voided a great
great deal of putrified blood, by a certain fumigatio that I taught her was
cured. I can say this of a certainty, that after this Woman had voided this
putrefaction she came to see me with a very lusty child, and was bigg of
another; for being discharged of the burden of putrified blood, she found her
self marvelously free for conception; for the Matrix that began to be ulcerated
was now fortified, and strengthened again, and the natural heat began to take
possession there again.

A good Observation in the choice of Nurses.
THere be two sorts of Nurses which I have found; the one is of such Women as
are of an ill humor, or juice; which humors settle all in the milk, for that is
the place where these fluxes discharge themselves; these Women are in a better
condition being Nurses, then when they are not Nurses; and being not Nurses are
subject to pains sometimes in the arms, and sometimes in the shoulders,
sometimes in one of their legs, or Thighs; or else they are subject to the
watring of the eyes, or swelling in the corner of the eye or nose: these are
good Nurses as long as children are fat; but the fat is soft, and the Infants
dull and sottish, giving no great signs of vivacity; coming to bear teeth are
very sickly, and do ordinarily dye, by reason of the flux, that pusheth out too
great company of teeth at once. The children that escape this are more il
juic'd in their infancy, then are their Fathers and Mothers in their old age.
If the flux that afflicts them be salt, the milk is of a blackish and bluish
color; if it be of choler, it is more dangerous then the other, for that is
very dangerous and venomous to the children. There is another sort of Nurses
more dangerous then these I have now spoken of, who presently after they have
lain in, that is, three or four, or five, or six months, are taken with their
purgations, a thing which never happens to good Nurses: for this is the course
of Nature, that all the blood which is retained is dedicated to the nourishment
of the Infants. This is caused by an immoderate heat which is in their blood;
and to say truth, as soon as ever this happens. the Infant must be taken away,
for they are more apt to conceive then to nurse; and if they continue Nurses,
they do but ruin the children; this is too much experimented, and I speak this
to save the lives of a great many children, when seeing them suck I have
discovered their want of milk; so that I may say, there dies a third part of
the children, for want of taking care in this particular, which seem fat and in
good case.

This is the cause of great cholicks, and vvindinesses in children, which kills
them in a moment; for the least Fever that takes them carries them away.
B^side this, there are some whose milk is so little, but vvithall so thick,
that it sticks upon the tongue, palate, and throat, which causes as it were a
white canker, which is more and more heated by reason of their forcible
drawing in vain, and possesses all the throat, whereby they are hindered from
sucking. These Nurses will milk after this a drop or two out of their breasts,
crying look ye the child cares not for sucking. I never knew more abuse in any
thing then in Nurses; for let them make what excuse they will, it is nothing
but necessity that reduces them to be such, although the greatest part do say
that it is to get acquaintance: yet when they have a child, whether they
have milk or no, yet they desire not to part with it, no more then they do to
drown themselves; whereby the Parents are often deceived. And therefore the
mothers ought to have a great care, and to make it their business to surprise
the Nurses at their own houses, that if there be any miscarriage, they may
find it out. And indeed it is very reasonable that the cause of these poor
creatures that cannot complain should not be neglected, and these she-murderers
be made known, that they may not go unknown.

Of a Woman which I laid two several times, and of the difference of her
bearing of two children, proceeding from several causes.
I Was called to lay a Woman, who said she was gone her full time; she had the
same pains that Women are wout to have in the time of Travail, but her waters
came not down; at one forcible throw she cast forth a great membrane like a
hoggs bladder, all united within and without, only that it had diverse branches
of veins, as you shall see in a bladder; which I presently cut, and found
therein a little Infant well shaped swimming in black waters: it had gone its
full time, and was so lean that it resembled a mere picture; it had the
Navel-string holding fast to the bladder, where it is to be supposed those small
branches of the veins do end; here as I guess, as long as it found any blood,
it lay languishing; but that beginning to fail it dyed, and presently voided
those excrements that were contained in the Intestines, which being mingled in
the waters made them black: and as for the Woman her self, she was the fullest
of humor that ever I saw in my life. Another time I brought the same Woman to
bed, who was delivered of a child that came the ordinary way into the world
with the head foremost; now I perceiving her in Labor, found nothing at first
but a certain softness, as if the waters were coming down; afterward I
perceived a certain bag with hair, a thwart which I saw certain great knobs or
heads; the Infant being come forth was not yet formed; the face and the head
were like vizards more then any face; it had the form of a nose, but it was
so^t like wool: the head was full of water, and those knobs which appeared were
nothing but the futures of the head, which the too great abundance of water had
disjoynd: in the hands it had nothing but hair in stead of bones, and the toes
were of the same; the Woman her self was said to be extremely choleric, and
moist.

Instructions of a famous, and dying Midwife to her Daughter, touching the
practice of this Art.
DAughter, if the excellencies of what is to be known in this world are to be
found not in one, but in several Countrics, certainly they are most able to
instruct who have had the greatest experience, and longest travel in the world;
which is the reason, that in this small Treatise I have not tied my self up to
the rules solely of my own Nation, but have searched the studies also of other
Nations, that thou may be bettered not only by my experience, but by the
labor of others.

In the first place therefore I exhort thee to be diligent, and to leave
nothing unsearched that may tend to the advantage of thy practice. And to this
end be always learning to the last day of your life; which that thou may not
cease to do, be always humble; for those that are proud and obstinate never
gain upon the hearts of those that are knowing in secrets. Be sure thou never
make trial of any new Remedy or Receipt, either upon poor or rich, if thou best
not assured of the quality and operation thereof; and that it can do no hurt,
whether it be applied outwardly, or taken inwardly. Hide none of those good
Receipts which thou know, either from Midwives, or Physicians; for otherwise
they will esteem them as little as those of Mountebanks, as if thou had but
one cure like them for all Diseases, and yet did bragg as they do of doing
wonders, yet still conceal their Receipts. Thou must speak freely of that which
thou know, and give a reason for what thou say. Be not negligent, but so
increase thy Talent, that people may say you are better then ever your Mother
was: I must tell thee, thou have taken a matter of great importance into your
hand, and that in this Art there are two ways easy to take; the one, to save
thy credit, and the other to lose it. Above all things, you must beware (for
any treasure in the world) of adhering to one vice, such as they are guilty of
who give Remedies to cause abortion: for those that do ill, and those that seek
a damnable remedy, are wicked in a high degree. But it is a higher degree of
wickedness for those that are no way engaged in the business, for lucres sake
to kill both the body and soul of an infant. This I do not speak, that thou
should refuse to give Remedies upon just occasions; but to take heed how you
be cheated by subtle persons who shall tell you fine stories of the diseases of
their Wives or Daughters, which they may say are very honest, hoping from you
some Receipts to effect their wicked designs: send them to the Physicians, for
you may give them a lawful excuse in saying that such matters do not belong to
your charge. Never keep the cawl called Amnios, which covers the head and
shoulders of the child, for Sorcerers to make use of.

If you are sent for to any house, inform your self of what condition they are;
and whether they be rich, or whether they be the poorest creatures in the
world, serve them with like pains and affection; and if you find them to be
very poor, take nothing; for to them a little is a great deal: visit them also
afterward with diligence, that for the small time wherein they keep their bed
you may be assisting to them, in strengthening and recovering of their healths.
I charge thee Daughter, that in all thy life thou never receive a Woman into
thy house to lie in; for that is but a kind of Panderism clothed in some
pretense of charity; neither does thy profession oblige thee to do it; if it
chance to be a Woman that is not wholly betaken to whoredom, that there is some
hopes of recovering her from that lost condition, if then she desire you, out
of a belief of your sufficiency or secrecy, you may then go to her in an honest
place. You must comfort her if she be afflicted, and to put her in the right
way, exhorting her never to commit the like again; but to receive such persons
into your house is but a means to encourage evil, as the receivers of stolen
goods are a means to encourage thieves; And so the Midwives that bring such a
stench to their house do assist and abet the evil which they do, whilst they
know where to discharge themselves of the like burden again. At the first when
I took upon me this Calling, I took two into my house, the one of quality, the
other of an ordinary condition; I saw them sometimes in such fits of despair,
that I could hardly bring them out of them again; Those from whom the evil
came, upon whose account I had received them, came now and then to see them,
because they brought them maintenance; I was continually faign to keep watch
with them, for fear they should do any evil in the house: And I must needs say
I had better have kept a herd of swine. Such unrests as these ought not to
enter into the breast of a Midwife; for her mind ought to be free and at peace.
Beside, that a custom of laying Women of an ill life spoils the reputation of
a Woman, and oft-times endangers the health also. To confirm which, I knew an
honest understanding Midwife that laid a Courtezan that seemed to ayle nothing
at all; but she having an inveterated Pox, she gave it to the old Midwife upon
her right hand, upon which there came a red Bubo; for all which she being
unwilling to leave off her Calling, she spoiled after that above thirty
Households; for the Husbands got the Pox from their wives, and the children from
their Mothers.

Now let me tell thee Daughter, that thou ought not to take it ill to see the
condition of Midwives despised; neither let this hinder thy studies in the
perfection of this Art, which are not to be comprehended by those that despise
it: neither be dismayed if thou see people in this condition, that do not
deserve to be; for this does not at all diminish the honor of those that are
good: for it comes from hence to pass, because they that receive them for money
do as stablers do, put the good and bad hortes together; the good horses are in
no danger o be hurt by the Jades, but the Jades are in hazard of being kicked
and spoild by the good Horses.

Never think of any thing else but of doing well, and serving those that shall
call thee according to their own liking, if that which they desire be not
prejudicial to them; but if that which they desire be to their hurt, be sure
that thou discharge thy self of them, and especially excuse thy self to the
assistants, that thou may persuade them to reason. A sweet disposition in a
Midwife is much more commendable then a rigorous; the pain of Childbearing is
a very hard labor, which you must consider, and accordingly conform thy self
to the humor of the Patient, knowing your self to be called to comfort and
assist her.

Mark well entering into a house in what condition the Patient is; if the evil be
at hand you must encourage her, and prepare your self with those things that
are necessary; and first you must see that the bed be well made for the woman
that is to be brought to bed, and then to put on her little smock, and
wastcote, and other linen necessary; and if she be so opinionated as that she
will not, tell her how much you do it for the better; and how great a pain it
will be afterward; content her though, for you must make of a bad market no
more then you can. You ought to give order for things to be had from the
Apothecaries with her consent; or if she be young, with the consent of her
friends. You must take order also that some good broth be made for her to take
in the time of her Travail, if it should chance to be long; and also two hours
after her being brought to bed. Above all things I charge thee, that what ever
business thou may have there, that thou go not about them too hastily. For
there is nothing so nauseous to be seen, as the improvident actions of
over-busie Women. Never be dismayed if every thing go not well, for fear
disorders the senses; and a person that keeps her wits together, without
suffering them to be scattered by fear, is capable of giving assistance in
weighty affairs, and especially where things are done with leisure; for in such
cases Nature helps marvelously, when we are most at a stand. There is a great
necessity of prudence, especially in the Age wherein we live. There is now no
need of Coloquintida to render any thing, good in it self, bitter and
disagreeable to the taste. There are few Women now a days that do give that
respect, or have that kindness for them as in former ages; for then when their
Midwife dyed, they showed a great deal of sorrow, and prayed God that now they
might have no more Children: which though it were not well done, yet it showed
their affection. Now a days Women use them as mere Hirelings. There is a great
deal of artifice to be used in the pleasing of our Women, especially the young
ones, who many times do make election of men to bring them to bed. I blush to
speak of them, for I take it to be a great piece of impudence to have any
recourse to them, unless it be in a case of very great danger. I do approve it,
I have approved it, and know that it ought to be done, so that it be concealed
from the Woman all her life long; nor that she see the Surgeon any more: for
it is very inconvenient to Husbands, that (unless in cases of very great
danger) such th ngs concerning their own Wives should be communicated to any
other men but themselves.

To this purpose shall I tell thee Daughter, that being called to the Labor of a
friend where were none but two or three of her acquaintance, they asked me what
I thought of the labor: to which I answered, that the child did not come well,
but that I would do the work with the assistance of God without danger to the
child, or to the Mother; they desired me that I would let a Surgeon see her;
for their satisfaction I consented to it, provided that she might not see him;
for I was fearful lest she should dye with apprehension and shame; I persuaded
her to slide down toward the fee^ of the bed: I put the bolster upon the middle
of the bed, and darkened the room on that side where he was to come; at the feet
he touched her, and she was brought to bed without any other assistance save
that of God and Nature. Since these injuries have been put in fashion, there
have been observed greater hazards and dangers in lying in then before, which
might be remedied by persons capable of their profession, if they might be let
alone. But this detraction is so much in request, that among some kind of
people there is much ado to make them believe the truth, and especially where
they cannot get great advantage by so doing; and truly Honorable persons which
I have had the honor to serve make other Women seem monstrous to me. You shall
come into some houses where there are certain persons that hold such false
lights to the Mistress of the house, that she sees quite contrary to that which
is real; which persons if they are not humored, your business will be there soon
dispatched. Take great heed of coming there, for it may chance to gain you
nothing but a great deal of care. There are some Women that have no children,
at which they are very much troubled; which is so notwithstanding that they
might easily be helped, if they would tell an understanding Midwife where the
defect lay.

As concerning those who are sent for to lay Women in the Country, I must say
this, that as for those that are not very well experimented they may incurr many
hazards by reason of their ignorance, and the multiplicity of accidents that
may happen; and for those that are knowing, to leave their Patients in the City
is a thing that may displease and wrong many, and run the hazard of being no
more entertained among them, to their own ruin; neither is there any certainty
of a Woman that will run rambling into the Country. My last advice is, that thou
do well, and in so doing fear nothing but God, that he may bless thee, and thy
endeavors.

FINIS.
Now Published* that excellent and practical piece Entitled* Adam in Eden, Of
the knowledge of all our English Plants, with their ^ignat^res, physically
applied to the body of Man, that every man may be his own Physician, in Folio,
by W. C. M. D.* and others.


