THE CHARACTER OF AN Oxford-Incendiary.
AN Oxford Incendiary is a Court Salamander, whose proper element is Fire: An
Englishman, yet lives by Antiperistasis to his native Climate; and turns our
Northern-temperate into the Torrid Zone. All ancient Philosophers are by him
confuted; having made one Region more of Fire than they dreamed of: Nor is it
any wonder, seeing he creates new Prodigies every day.

I suppose him lineally descended from St. Georges Fiery Dragon; And if you
please to enquire of Doctor Heylyn, he may chance to make good the Heraldry.
But whosoever was the Sire, mother he has none that I can hear of; nor do I
believe, that Nature, our common-mother, will own the Monster. For his Name,
you may, (if you please) make bold with Ovid, and call him Phaeton; for he
rules the Chariot of the Sun, and having gotten the Reins in his own hand,
hurries all into Combustion: yet the desperate wretch cares not, so he may work
a Metamorphosis upon the Nation, or mingle his own with the Kingdoms Ashes.

His Birth place I take to be Mount Aetna; there Empedocles acted the
Man-midwife, and delivered him out at the Tonnels. If the Pope want a Leiger
for Purgatory, none can fit him better; he being of a Constitution and Religion
suitable to the Service.

But his employment must be altogether at home, else the Deluded Fraternity
will grow chill in their designs here; and to them there is no Sport without a
Fire-drake, or an Ignis Fatuus.

To be a little more plain; an Oxford-Incendiary is the excrement of
ill-govern'd Monarchy; the vast volume of Treason wrapped up in an Epitome; one
that feeds the Vulture Prerogative with the Carcass of the Commonwealth, that
it may disgorge into his own Coffers; and makes a Mule (to say no worse). of
Majesty, to carry him through all his own private designs against the Public.

Yet notwithstanding, his proper Sphere is the Court; there He shines a bright
Constellation of Royal Favor, though the whole Kingdom beside takes him for
a Prodigious Comet, and behold him with the same countenance, as they did that
in the year 1618. Nor is it without reason, when the meanest Prognosticator
cries, that he portends the ruin of some great Princes. Upon his Influence
depends the Almanac of Treason; exactly Calculated for the several Meridians
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; for from thence you may judge of all
Eclypses between King and Parliament, or tell what weather will be in Great
Britain the whole year following.

Thus Jupiter and Mars meeting in Conjunction at York, with a direful Aspect
threatened misery to the Nation; though it produced no effect, till an
Interposition of Malignants at Shrewsbury, and an oblique Course of Venus from
Holland, bade us expect a Deluge of blood.

Indeed it may serve for Great Britain and Ireland, with very little (or no)
difference; for the Tragedy and Actors are the same, only the Scenes are
several, the better to dress out the Plot, and make it seem more intricate:
Thus the rare Irish Commission was begotten of English parents, when the Earl
of Antrim was made a Godfather to the design; though Ormond had rather
forfeit his Honor and Conscience, than say they were English Hands which cut
the Protestants throats with an Irish knife.

But this is not all, the train of Gunpowder reaches to Scotland; and there
they light Matches to blow up the fidelity of that Nation: Which not taking
effect upon the Heads, then Squib-cracks are tied to the very Breech of Thule,
to set fire on the High-land Wilderness; for in such barren places is their
Harvests Rare Vipers! who thrive best out of the Sunshine, in the dark Caves
of Barbarism and Ignorance.

But stand off, or provide an Antidote: The most prodigious Serpent comes
crawling this way; some monstrous African or American, for sure it is not of
the British Broad; yet every Cavalier carries it in his bosom, like a
Tame-Snake: It is the Commission of Array, a very flying Dragon hatched in a
Conventicle of Spit-fires; an illegitimate By-blow to supplant the Militia. It
was spawned at White Hall; there the Cock-brain'd Crew engendered with their
Masters Female understanding: At York it became an Egg, O that it had then
been crush't! But afterward, scarce pen-feather'd, it ventured a flight toward
Hull; yet fell short, and was sore bruised. Notwithstanding this, it crept to
Nottingham; and there, in hope of recovery, voyded a Standard, with a
Declaration or two; evident Symptoms of a Bloody Flux at hand.

But the Leeches not able to draw blood there, betook themselves westward
toward Wales; and there fell to sucking at the ^^ther Posterne of the Kingdom:
It was time then to cast the water of the State, and purge out the ^^^^ments of
the Body Politic.

Now the Gain begins; Room for the Roman Actors: Here the Bishops wrack
themselves in a Pulpit, vomiting up Daggers (like Hocus) to amaze the People;
doctrine Cannon-proofe, and let the Devil make Application, so he can convert
all to his Majesty's use. If the Pope be Commander in Chief, it is but reason
they should be Major-Generals; and for Inferior Officers, Deanes and
Archdeacons the only Colonels; Prebends Lieutenant-Colonels; Big-bellied
Parsons Majors; Vicars Captains; Curates Eusignes: And for the rest, they
cannot be wanting, when there are whole Swarms of the same Breed of
Caterpill^rs in both Universities.

These are Spaniels to the Incendiary in hope of Preferment: He leads them in
Couples, breeds them to fetch and carry after his own humor, and to be at the
word of Command: But the sport is, to see a Dog handle a Drum-stick; yet
these docile creatures will do it, and beat up their Drums in all Churches and
Chapels, to alarm the People against Reformation and the Parliament. This
black Brigade are of the same lineage with the Incendiary; he hugs them as his
white-Boyes: And to say the Truth, there is not a hair^ difference between
them; the Chief of the Prelaticall Clergy being the principal, if not the
only Fire-men: And therefore it cannot be amiss to present them in the first
Rank of Tragedians, seeing our Scene is the precious University of Oxford.

As the Prologue before the Play, enter Canterbury, the Pope's Pigmie-Champion,
the meritorious Traitor, the Catholic Demi-Calvering, the reverend Granado;
who lived to set all on sire, yet escaped the Martyrdom of hanging to be
quenched upon a Scaffold; whereas the other kind of death had been more
suitable to his Life, having always been a Pendant in the ear of Majesty.
This is he that took water lately at the Tower, being bound for the Red Sea;
but that for his presumption in comparing himself with Christ and His Apostles,
and threatening Charon with the Star Chamber, he o're*turn'd the Ferry-boat, and
let him drop into Purgatory: Thus it is to quarrel with a Water-man.

A Broom, a Broom; Sweep the Stage: Here comes Religion in Slip-shooes and
Sandals; Mistress Novelties Gentleman Usher clad in Robes of Antiquity; the
Bel-man of the Jewish Temple; Aaron in the last Edition; Wren turned Robin
redbrest, as gay as the Bird of Paradise, with his man Pockly^ton at his
heels: These two (like Lightning and Thunder) never parted; two Dixesan
E^^^e^st^, that conjured away all godly Ministers by Bell, Book, and Candle:
Their Charm^s were so strong, that nothing could lay them but a Parliament, the
Kingdoms A^^id^^e.

Now single out Pockly^con from his Maste^, and couple with him Heylyn, two of
Canterbury's prime Beagles, and as famous as his Breed of Smyrna Cats. These
two held a Conspiracy against the Sabbath; helped to rear up an Altar, with
the Title of Christianum, set up the Ten Commandement^ over it, where they
might plainly read themselves Sabbath breakers and Idolaters; and yet
continued to worship both it and the Candle-sticks, committing Fornication with
Gold and Timber. Nor is this all; Heylyn can show more Tricks than ^ne for a
Bishopric: To make good the Ro^an Calendar, he will prove St. George a Real
Saint; and then upon this Sandy foundation, creates an imaginary honor to the
most honorable Order of the Garter; as if the Protestant Nobility of this
Kingdom would be taken with Romish Gu-gaws, or pleased with such trifling
fetches: Yet believe me, (as the times went) it was a politic fetch for
Preferment.

And now we talk of Preferment, enter Owen Glendour on Horseback, Brute's
Cousin-German, and the Top of her kindred, Welsh Williams, the Prelate of York:
This is the Pepper-^osed Caliph, that snuffes, huffes, and puffes Ingratitude
at the Parliament, though they freed him from Prison, and put his Adversary in
his room. Tell him of Reformation, and you transform him to a Turkie-cock; A
Jack-a-Lent made of a Red Herring and a Leek, will not more inflame him than
the name of Presbytery: So^e kind Heart take this Incendiary and cool him, or
vexation will consume him to Ashes.

But I wonder how it comes to pass that Armagh should be Ranked here: The case
stood otherwise once; nay, he Ebbed so far from his Archiepiscopall dignity, as
to turn Lecturer, and so brought himself into a possibility of Heaven, till
the old man began to dote upon the World again. I cannot tell to what I might
attribute his Apostasy; to his Climate, or his Conscience; his Country, or his
Religion, or both; yet we have found him a right Irishman, and a second
Spalato.

It is a rare Mystery, that this Pageant should be so persecuted by the Rebels,
as to fly for his life out of Ireland, and yet be able to digest them and their
Counsels at Oxford. But was it ever seen, that a Bishop would be out with any
that were in at the Court? This is the Prelates heaven; there they are all
Parallel; though distant in their ends, as in the Circumference, yet united in
the Center: Give their Ambition Line enough, and you may De-Coy them whither
you please: Thus our quondam Saint Patrick slip't into the Bogge at Oxford.

I should have done with them now, but that I find another in over head and
ears; I mean the Brew^r in Pontificalibus, Duppa the formal Dray-horse, that
carries about Holy Water in Rundlets, to furnish the Court, Camp, and
Vniversit: Davis the Barber shaves his Majesty with the very same; for there
need no wash-bals, when the Exorcisme scours beyond Sope-suds. This is he that
puts down Gunter in his Fire-work Protestations against the Protestant
Religion; and then (in His Majesty's name) charges them upon the People. For
the same purpose also he frames Enchanted Prayers for Christ-Church Chapel;
and so makes the Organs (at once) pipe out Impiety against Heaven, and Treason
against the State. God bless Prince Charles, for this is his Tutor: He cries
to him, when you pray, say thus; but what? A Paternoster or two, with a little
Collect and Letany, after the Tradition of his Fathers; from which (my Letany
shall be) Good Lord deliver him.

But if you would know him better, let Stewart (the Ghost of Arminius) appear,
to bring in the Catastrophe: These two are Brothers, both having the Whore of
Babylon for their Mother: and the sons of Pelagius by heretical adoption. The
foundation of old Rome (says History) was laid in blood; and these Romuli take
the same course to be Founders of new Rome here in England: The name of Peace
puts them into a Fit of the Colic; It stings like a Tarantida, for nothing
will cure them but the Music of war.

Now sound aloud; Avaunt ye Black-coats, the Court-Pag^ants are Entering;
Straford without a Head: But let him p^sse for a Dionbe show; the Tyrant has
had his Exit already by Order of Parliament.

Who comes next? What, Henrieta Maria! Sure our Incendiary is an Hermaphrodite,
and admits of both Sexes: The Irish Rebels call Her their Generalissima; what
She willed they acted: She set them on work, and they pay themselves their
wages out of the Protestants estates. Because the Pope is turned out of doors,
She makes the Fatal Sisters and Furi^s of her. Privy-Councell, and proceeds so
meritoriously manfull, that Kenelne Dighy consults now with His Holiness, to
have her set in the Rubric by the name of Saint Nemesis in Breeches. How many
Breeding Fits has she had since the coming over of Madam Bel-dame! And no
sooner Delivered of one Plot, but within the Month a Conception of another. I
wonder at Neptune's rage against these two, Mother and Daughter; for they never
crossed the Sea but a Tempest followed; which shows, that they were not of the
Halcyon Brood.

But the Flame rises not high enough yet; therefore hasten away the two
Bellowes-menders from Holland; Rupert and Maurice, Simeon and Levi: A miracle,
that a Phoenix should bring forth two such Vipers! If this be too bold, know
that the Gain is begun, and then all fellows at Football: But I spare them,
though they are so unnatural, as not to spare that Nation which bred them up.

Next, enter a Gentleman in disguise, newly landed out of the ship called the
Providence; Achitophel Junior, with store of Sampson's Foxes and Firebrands:
Pull off his Vizard, and his name is George Digby. This is the beardlesse
Solon; Lycurgus newly whip't out of long-Coats into the Privy Council;
Treacherie's Man-midwife, and Machiavel's Catamite; for by him were spawned
those desperate Aphorisms and Positions, of his Majesty's wandering from his
Parliament. What we wonder at in the rest is natural to him, being a native
Spaniard, to have an Antipathy to the weal of our Nation; for an Atheist that
has neither Religion, nor Conscience to sway him, follows the Constitution
and engrafted Principles of his Climate. The truth of this they knew well
enough, that fetched him out of the Senate to the Court; and the Spanish
Guilt-head swallowed the Bait immediately: Faces about; farewell to Religion,
Honor, Parliament, Common-honesty, and all; for he waited but for such an
opportunity, as well as Colepeper and Dering, though the latter miss^t it.

More Spaniards yet? Bristoll and Cortington, Rare Peccadillo's! Impes of
Sp^^^^le; two of G^ndemar's Jockies, that posted between White Hall and Matr^l
^^ill at length they morgaged England with the Protestant Religion, for a
pension of Spanish Gom^^s, and Bars of Silver; which they have stri^en since
to repay, together with the Interest of pernicious Counsels and secret
Practices. Upon a Return of the Indian Plate-fleet, these Hirelings will do any
thing, even sacrifice their Country to those Gods of America.

Here comes a Gentleman of the Long-Robe; Littleton, the egregious Pick-pocket,
that would have stolen away the Kingdoms Purse from the Parliament; which
renders him, by the known Laws, a most intolerable Traitor. He promises His
Majesty to make all good by ^aw; but first intends to banish Dalton, Cook, and
the rest, as Ho^erodox, Petty-foggers, and Sparious Authors. If no body will
believe he can maintain the Slander of Revels, yet his Impudence can disdain
all such Scruples, though with Arguments grounded upon a manifest Contradiction
to the States Fundamentals.

What he cannot do, Heath will: This Tetter converses altogether with Old
out-worn Records, to make good the Case: He might do well then to come and
search in the Tower, if he dare venture his neck upon the Point, in a legal
Trial. In him we find it true, that an old man is twice a child; for he stands
in fear of every bigger Boy at Court: Beside, he makes a sine Hobbyhorse of
the Prerogative; and tricks it ever and anon with illegal Richards. He
procreates Proclamations also in private, yet avowes the Spurious Issue as
legitimate as Acts of Parliament, and so (upon pain of high displeasure) the
subjects must own them; like the needy Fornicator, that lays his Bra^s at
other men's doors.

There are more Adulterers of the Law; but stay, here is a Poast come to Town
with ill News: Oh, Bristol, Bristol is lost! Up starts the Jews; West ward
hoy! Off goes their Parliament-purple, and away to Oxford. This rotten Limb of
the Representative Body boasts it self as healthful and sound as the whole;
and having been Catechized a while at Court, would answer to no Name but
PARLIAMENT. O prodigious! Nay, the R^^^ga^e Conventicle had the Impudence to
sit and Vote the Kingdom Slaves; and for this, thought themselves highly
recompensed with a Smile or two, from the Supreme P^^ticoa^e. No heaven now but
there; they offer Incense to Traitors, and have the conscience to Idolize and
Irish Rebel, a murderer of Pruestants; imitating herein the naked Indians, who
worship the De^^l for destroying their Kindred

But the best of it is, this Fire-work never did much mischief, though all
ways have been tried, from the Squib to the Cannon; for they never durst stand
to it yet: Always in motion; the Curse of Cain pursue^ them, as a just reward,
that these who chose to live, should also dye Run-aga^^s.

What think ye then of Mon^^osse? This Lapwing-Incen^i^^y ran away
balse-hatch's from Oxford, to raise a Combustion in Scotland: As his Totors in
England, so he thrives best there, where is most Ignorance. He raked up the
Remains of ancient Barbarism, and souder'd them togethen with Creatures of
like Metal from Ireland; the very Dross of both Cou^^^^ie^ coagulated into
an Army. The first sight of them would convert a Sa^ducee, and make him
confess a Resurrection of the old Heathen Picts and Kerns: Strange names they
have! And should: Herald venture to reckon the C^nealogy, he might he taken for
a Conjure^: The repetition of twenty Mac's O Connor's, O Brian's, and O
Donnel's, were a Charm for the G^^t on an Ague, beyond all the Magneticks in
Chemistry.

This Mountainous Breed of Pagans, like the old earth-born, Giants, figh^
against Heaven, bidding defiance to Christ and his Gospel; concerning which
they know no more than what belongs to Blasphemy: Miserable then is that
Prince, who counts such his best Subjects! Most abominable is that Cause, which
cannot stand but with such Supporters! Of late they Domincer'd with Superlative
Tyranny, and had in conceit swallowed all Scotland, but now the Monsters
surfeit, with their own blood, And if eyer they recover. their Stomachs, it
will be but for a running Banquet.

There Is Orm^nd too, the J^^gling Marquis, the new Popin-Jay Duke, and (to give
him all his Titles) Lord Protector of the Rebels; for the Wolves, are brought
now into the same Fold with the Sheep. They say commonly, now, that there is not
a Rebel in Ireland: Are they not good men then at Oxford, to fight so long till
they have left never a Rebel? But the late Peace confirms them good Subjects,
though Rebels before: Thus, by entertaining this Paradox for Truth, the
Pie-bald Marquis got his Dukedom of Ossory.

Antrim's a Rebel not worth the naming, nor that precious piece of Ironwork,
his Duchess; yet I must needs say, She was a Lady rarely marked out for two
eminent Husbands, the beds of Buckingham and Antrim; this latter more
pernicious than a bed of Scorpions.

Yet there is one Marquis more, a wise one (God wot,) Winchester, the man of
Basing; but let him pass, he has not wit enough to be an Incendiary. And for
Newcastle, He Is but a Counterfeit Marquis; at the best but a Play-wright; one
of Apollo's Whirligigs; one that when he should be fighting, would be
fornicating with the Nine Muses, or the Deane of York's daughters; a very
Thing; a Soul traducted out of Perfume and Complement; a silken General, that
ran away beyond Sea in a Sayler's Canvas: He with his Tinder-box of Authority,
first lighted the Fire in the North, yet was so kind to see it quenched again,
ere he left us.

But the Wester^^^ quib ( (...)) bolds (...) stills and r^g^^ beyond Gunpowder
with Aqua vilae; but there are other Ingredi^^ts of Atheism joined to him,
which make the Blaze in the West show so big, for he of himself is nothing
now: The man lives toward the Sunsetting, treads Antipodes of late to Victory,
and despairs of appearing East again; yet to comfort him, because the
Parliament lay claim to his Bald-pate, the King has given him a Perewigg of
Honor.

I had almost forgotten Goring, Her Majesty's Jeweller; She plundered the
Crown, and he conveyed away, converting all into Arms, and Gunpowder: Rare
Philosophical transinutation! But this is the least part of his skill; for in
time of Peace he was so expert an Alchemist, that he turned Rags and worse
things, into Gold and Silver.

There Is butcherly Jermyn too, contemptible Harry, the left Leg of a Lord; He
that wraps up his Treason in fine Linen: He Master of the Horse? Mount the
Chicken upon an Elephant; for he is a man of some Substance, though little
Revenue; somewhat too ugly (in my opinion) for a Ladies Favorite, yet that is
nothing to some; for the old Lady that dyed in Flanders, regarded not the
Feature. This Feather-bed Traitor must pass also for an Incendiary; for
Justice put the Gentleman into such a Fright, that to make one Shift he avoided
another, and at an ill Season took his long Journey in Spanish-leather Boots.

There are other Whelps of Catiline; but it were endless to reckon up all. I
shall conclude thus: What the Poets feign of Hercules his Hydra, is truth of
our Incendiary; It is a fertile Monster of many heads, for by lopping off one,
up starts a miraculous generation of many more: Then, as it cannot be imagined
how he conquered that prodigious Enemy, but by striking off all the Heads at a
Blow; So the ready way to quell this, must be to bring the whole Rabble at once
to Excecution.

FINIS.
London printed for Robert White.


