THE CHARACTER OF A believing Christian.

Set forth in Paradoxes, and seeming Contradictions.

Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.



LONDON, Printed, for Richard Wodenothe, at the Star, under Peter's Church in
Cornhill 1645.

THE CHARACTER OF A believing Christian.
A Christian is one that believes things his reason cannot comprehend, he
hopes for that which neither he nor any man alive ever saw, he labors for
that he knows he shall never obtain; yet in the issue his belief appears
not to be false, his hopes make him not ashamed, his labor is not in vain.

He believes three to be one, and one to be three, a Father not to be elder
then his Son, a Son to be equal with his Father and one proceeding from
both to be equal with both: he believing three persons in one nature, and two
natures in one person.

He believes a Virgin to be a mother of a Son, and that very Son of hers
to be her maker: He believes him to be shut up in a narrow room, whom heaven
and earth could not contain: He believes him to be borne in time, who was and
is from everlasting: He believes him to be a weak child carried in arms,
who is the Almighty; and him once to have died, who only has life and
immortality in himself.

He believes the God of Grace to have been angry with one, that never offended
him, and that God that hates sin, to be reconciled to him though sinning
continually, and never making, or being able to make him satisfaction: he
believes a most just God to have punished a most just person, and to have
justified himself, though a most ungodly sinner: he does believe himself
freely pardoned; and yet, sufficient satisfaction was made for him.

He believes himself to be precious in Gods sight, and yet loathes himself in
his own, he dares not justify himself (even in those things wherein he can
find no fault with himself) and yet believes God accepts him in those
services, wherein he is able to find many faults.

He praises God for his justice and yet fears him for his mercy: he is so
ashamed, that he dares not open his mouth before God, and yet he comes with
boldness to God and asks any thing he needs, he is so humble as to
acknowledge himself to deserve nothing but evil; and yet believes God
means him all good: he is one that fears always, and yet is as bold as a
lion: he is often sorrowful, yet always rejoyceing; many times complaining,
yet always giving of thanks: he is the most lowly minded, yet the greatest
aspirer, most contented yet ever craving.

He bears a lofty spirit in a mean condition, when he is ablest he thinks
meanest of himself: he is rich in poverty, and poor in the midst of riches:
he believes all the world to be his, yet he dares take nothing without leave
from God: he covenants with God for nothing, yet looks for a great reward.

He loses his life and gains by it, and while he loses it he saves it: he
lives not to himself, yet of all others he is most wise for himself: he
denies himself often, yet no man loves himself so well as he: he is most
reproached, yet most honored: he has most afflictions, and most comforts, the
more injury his enemies do him, the more advantages he gains by them: the more
he forsakes worldly things, the more he enjoys them.

He is the most temperate of all men, yet fairs most deliciously, he lends and
gives most freely, yet is the greatest usurer: he is meek toward all men, and
yet is inexorable by men, he is the best child, husband, friend, and yet he
hates father and mother, brother and sister, he loves all men as himself, yet
hates men so with a perfect hatred.

He desires to have more grace then any one has in the world, yet is truly
sorrowful, when he sees any have less then himself: he knows no man after
the flesh, yet he gives all men their due respect: he knows if he please
man, he cannot be a servant of Christ's, yet for Christ's sake he pleases all
men in all things: he is a peacemaker, yet is continually a fighter.

He believes him to be worse then an infidel that provides not for his
family, yet himself lives and dies without care: he counts all his
superiors, yet stands stiffly on no authority: he is severe to his children
because he loves them, and by being favorable to his enemies, he avengeth
himself upon them.

He believes the Angels to be more excellent creatures then himself, and
yet counts them his servants: he believes he receives many good things by
their means, and yet neither prays for their assistance nor offers them
thanks, which he does not disdain to do to the meanest Christian.

He believes himself to be a King, how mean soever he be; and how great
soever he be, yet he thinks himself not too good to be a servant to the
poorest Saint.

He is often in prison yet always at liberty, he is a free man though a
servant: he loves not honor among men, yet highly prizeth a good name.

He believes that God has bidden every man that does him good to do so, he
yet of any man is the most thankful, to them that do ought for him, he would
lay down his life to save the soul of his enemy, yet will not venture on one
sin, to save the life of him that saved his; he swears to his own hinderance,
and changes not, he knows his oath cannot tie him to sin.

He believes Christ to have no need of any thing he does, yet makes account
that he does relieve Christ in all the acts of charity: he knows he can do
nothing of himself, yet labors to work out his own salvation: he
professes he can do nothing, yet as truly professes he can do all things:
he knows that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet
believes he shall go to heaven, both body and soul.

He trembles at Gods word, and yet counts it sweeter to him then the honey and
the honey comb, and dearer then thousands of gold and silver: he believes
that God will never damn him, and yet fears God for being able to cast him
into hell: he knows he shall not be saved by nor for his good works, yet does
all the good works he can.

He knows Gods providence in all things, yet is he diligent in his calling
and business, as if he were to cut out the thread of his hap, he believes
before hand that God purposed what he shall be, and that nothing can alter his
purpose, and yet prays and endeavors, as if he would force God to save him
for ever.

He prays and labors for that which he is confident God means to give,
and the more assured he is the more earnest he prays for that which he
knows he never shall obtain, and yet gives not over, he prays and labors
for that, which he knows he shall not be less happy without: he prays
with all his heart not to be lead into temptation, yet rejoices when he is
fallen into it, he believes his prayers are heard, even when they are denied,
and gives thanks for that, which he prays against.

He has within both flesh and spirit, and yet he is not a double-minded man,
he is often led captive by the law of sin, yet it never gets dominion over
him, he cannot sin, yet can do nothing without sin, he does nothing against
his will, yet maintains: he does what he would not, he wavereth, and doubts,
yet obtains.

He is often tossed and shaken, yet is as mount Zion, he is a Serpent, and a
Dove; a Lamb, and a Lion, a Reed, and a Cedar: he is sometimes so troubled
that he thinks nothing to be true in Religion, yet if he did think so, he
could not at all be troubled: he thinks sometimes that God has no mercy for
him, yet resolves to die in the pursuit of it. He believes like Abraham
against hope, and though he cannot answer Gods Logic, yet with the woman of
Canaan, he hopes to prevail with the Rhetoric of importunity.

He wrestleth and yet prevails, and though yielding himself unworthy of the
least blessing he enjoys, yet Jacob like he will not let him go without a new
blessing.

He sometimes thinks himself to have no grace at all, and yet how poor and
afflicted soever he be besides: he would not change conditions, with the most
prosperous man under heaven, that is a manifest worldling.

He thinks sometimes the Ordinances of God do him no good, yet he would
rather part with his life, then be deprived of them, he was borne dead: yet so
as it had been murder for any to have taken his life away. After he began to
live he was a dying, and though he has an eternal life begun in him, yet he
makes account he has a death to pass thorough.

He counts self-murder a hainons sin, yet is ever busied in crucifying the
flesh: and in putting to death his earthly members.

He believes his soul and body to be as full of glory, as them that have
more, and no more full then theirs that have less.

He lives invisible to those that see him, and those that know him best, do
but guess at him, yet those many times, judge more truly of him then he does
of himself, the world will sometimes count him a Saint, when God accounted him
an Hypocrite, and afterward when the world branded him for an Hypocrite, then
God owned him for a Saint.

His death makes not an end of him, his soul which was put into his body; is
not to be perfected without his body, yet his soul is more happy when it is
separated from his body: then when his body was joined to it, and his body
though torn in pieces, burnt in ashes, ground to powder, turned to rottenness
shall be no loser.

His Advocate, his Surety shall be his Judge, his mortal shall become
immortal, and what was sown in corruption, and defilement, shall be raised in
incorruption and glory, and a finite creature, shall possess an infinite
happiness, glory be to God.

FINIS.

