A BANK-Dialogue: OR, Doctor Chamberlen's Land*Bank EXPLAINED, By way of
Question and Answer.
By a Friend to so Good an Undertaking.
WHat is the meaning or signification of the Word Bank?

England, though not now; but the more general meaning of that word, as now used,
is a place, where great Wealth is laid up together, to be Let out at Use, or
otherwise Disposed to Profit.

How comes it then to pass, that Dr. Chamberlen calls his intended Bank, a Bank
of Credit, intimating, as if Persons, who brought Wealth to his Bank, or Store
house, should receive nothing for it back again but Credit; which is a mere
empty Name, and ( as Merry Andrew says of Honor) will not pay for a Shoulder
of Mutton?

England is at present more than ordinarily unhappy by the want of Money in
general, and by having even the greatest part of that they do enjoy, so
Adulterated, or Clipped, that the Intrinsic Value thereof cannot be known,
unless you carry every Six-penny piece to a Say-Master, it is now more than
ever necessary that Credit should pass.

Upon what must this Credit be found^^ to make it good, and not subject to as
many Tricks and Inconveniences as Money?



How can Land possibly be brought into a Bank, or made a Security for Credit?



How must a Man receive Credit for his Land, so as that it may be known and
useful to him?



What do you mean by a Bill of Credit?



May any Body have Bills of Credit, that will come to Dr. Chamberlen 's Bank
for them?



To what Value may Landed Men have Bills of Credit upon their Land?

l. in Credit for every 100 l. a Year in Land.

Does the Landed Man sell his Land to the Bank for such Bills of Credit?



For how long time must the said payment of a Hundred Pound a Year continue, to
be made to the said Bank for 8000 l. Bills of Credit?



Why for a Hundred Years? That will come to ^0000 l. and Eighty Years will make
good 8000 l.

l. is to enable the Office to defray the Charges past, and for Management for
the Hundred Years to come; and the remainder, if any, is to be his Reward for
his many Years Labor, and Charges, in bringing this Bank to pass.

What must any Body do with these Bills of Credit when he has them?



Why do you say so? Will they pass in any payment as Money, and to any Person?



But may not this Office Issue out more Bills of Credit, than there is Land
tied to make good?



What is to be done with the Hundred Pound a Year, which is to be paid into the
Bank?

(in slatu quo) just as they are now; and in the mean time Landed Men may play
with Trade, and stake these Bills of Credit, as Counters instead of Money, and
make the ^ank their deposite, which will certainly fully Answer, and Satisfy
all the said Bills at the end of the Term.

May every Landed Man for a 100 l. a Year in Land, have 8000 l. Bills of Credit
presently down, to dispose of as he pleases?

l. at his own Disposal, and 3000 l. more in a Joint Stock, to manage a Trade,
of which he shall have the Sole Advantage and Management.

Why will the Bank be four Years in Issuing out the said Bills of Credit, and
not do it presently?



I am told every Landed Man must pay 1000 l. in Money into the said Bank, for
every 100 l. a Year that he settles, why must that be done?

l. of the 3000 l. Bills in the Joint Stock into Money, for which 1000 l. in
Money, they have 1000 l. in Bills of Credit, and so no hurt done.

What need is there of such chopping and changing, of Money for Bills, and
Bills for Money, since they are both of equal Value?



Why will the cross and ignorant bring their Bills to the Bank to be changed
into Money?



Why must the 3000 l. of the 8000 l. be put into a Joint Stock?

l. a Year, which is to be paid, to Answer the Bills of Credit Issued
thereupon; and so not to be alienated from that Land; at least it is in the
first place to make good the said payment.

Is not 10000 l. too great a Credit to Issue upon 100 l. a Year Land?

l. a Year, and not the whole 10000 l. at one payment.

But if any Person should make over an Estate to the Bank, which he is not
entitled to, how must such be made good unto the Bank?

l. such Persons has in the Joint Stock; which if it produce but Four per
Cent. per Annum, is sufficient; and I never yet heard of any Tradesman that
made so little.

If the Lands settled should fall in their Yearly Rent by Taxes, or otherwise,
will not the Bank, in such case, be a Loser?

l. per Annum is settled, to make good the payment of 100 l. per Annum, and for
150 Years to make good 100 Yearly payments, now 150 l. per Annum for 150 Years,
comes to 22500 l. which is above double what it is obliged to make good (...)
and no doubt but Land by this Bank, will be improved, and not lessened in Value.

Is not 100 Years too long a Term for any Landed Man to charge, or incumber his
Estate?



Will not the Issuing out so many Bills of Credit clog the Nation; and enhaunce
the Price of Goods?

l. a Year in Land, to raise such a number of Bills: And to continue Trade, by
employing those who are already employed, as well as such who are now ready to
starve for want of Employment, will need a further mighty Cash; and Foreigners
will come hither from all parts, when they are sure to be employed; which will
enrich and strengthen this Nation; besides every Year a hundredth part of these
Bills will be destroyed.

Can this Bank be Established without an Act of Parliament?



Why then did the Doctor Apply to the Parliament, to get an Act to Establish
this Bank?



Cannot the Parliament Suppress the Bank, and so force every one that has taken
the Bills to Lose by them?

A. to ^^joy B's Estate; which all who have treat^^ of the power of
Parliaments, say they cannot do; they are to preserve, and not to d^ destroy
Property; and I never yet heard it was a Crime for any Person to Len^ 10000 l.
upon 100 l. a Year Security; no^ for any one to Borrow so much, if he could.

Why should any Person make over their Lands to the Bank for Bills of Credit;
when they may have Money at any Scriveners upon them?

l. when the Scriveners will Lend but 1500 l. at most; and here they pay but 5
s. or a quarter of one per Cent. per Annum Interest; and the principal in 100
Years by 20 Shillings a Year for every 100 l. or which is the same thing, 25
Shillings a Year Interest for every Hundred Pound for 100 Years, and never
repay the principal: And at a Scriveners you must pay 3 l. per Cent. per Annum
at least, and the principal again. Which as will be Demonstrated by the Learned
in Arithmetic, makes the going to the Bank, above 60 times more Advantageous,
than taking Money at Interest any where else.

Do other Banks, namely Doctor Barebone 's, the Orphans, etc. do so as well as
the Doctor's?

l. upon 100 l. a Year, and Scriveners commonly Lend but 1000 l. and they take
but 3 l. per Cent. per Annum Interest, when Scriveners and Misers take 6 pound
and sometimes 20 l. per Cent. per Annum Interest Procuration and Continuation.

Will it not be Unjust for the Doctor to set up such a Bank now after other
Banks are set up before him, which must be ruined by this Bank?



Will not these Bank-Bills make Money useless?

l. pieces of Gold, and Farthings to Change Silver.

What shall great Monied Men do with ^^^ir Money?

l. per Cent. per Annum, which is a mighty Clog to Trade, and very unequal.

Cannot these Bills of Credit be Counterfeited?



How may any one that is not able to pay 1000 l. in Money, and yet can settle a
100 l. a Year in Land, come into the Bank?

l. comes too; else there are Persons that will do it for a reasonable
Consideration.

Where may such Persons be found, as will pay the 1000 l. in Money, and take
the Bills?



May any Person who has Mortgaged his Estate, come into the Bank?



But the Doctor proposes to pay down for Engaging 100 l. a Year, but 1000 l. in
Bills, and 400 l. must be paid down in Money, so that the Landed Man receives
but 600 l. down, and many times his Estate is Mortgaged for more, and how must
such be supplied?

l. if necessary, paying only discount at 5 l. per Cent. per Annum, for what
they shall so Borrow.

Where may one come to have the Benefit of this Bank?

Chamberlen's House in Essex-street, Mr. White's Chamber at Numb. 7. in the New
Buildings in Lincoln's Inn; and at Mr. Puckles, at the Outropers-Office on the
Royal Exchange.

Does this Bank issue out Bills of Credit already upon Land, or not; and if
not, when will they?

per Annum in Land is Subscribed?

When may that be reasonably supposed to be done?



LONDON, Printed for T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street; where
several Small Treatises of Banks may be also had. 1695.


