A VOICE IN RHAMA: OR, The Cry of Women and Children.

Ecchoed forth in the Compassions of PETER CHAMBERLEN, Doctor in Physic,
Fellow of the College of London, and one of his Majesty's Physicians
Extraordinary.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM BENTLEY: for John Marshall, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Hand and Pen in Cornhill, over against the Royal Exchange.

Anno Domini 1647

Imprimatur.

JOHN DOWNAME.

A Voice in Rhama.
Blood (which polutes a land, and cries aloud to heaven) runs yet fresh from
the innocent veins of Women and Children, for want of some charitable
Samaritanes to bind up the Wounds which Ignorance and Disorder amongst some
uncontroled femal-Arbiters of Life and Death, and others daily make. The
conscience whereof, as formerly it moved my pious Father to represent it to
King JAMES, so has it me to move it since unto the King my Master; who (by
mediation of that true-hearted Honor of Nobility, the Earl of Pembroke and
Mountgomery) read the Petition, and vouchsafed a gracious reference. And it
received the test and approbation of those two learned Columns of our
Faculty, Sr Theodore de Mayerne, and Sr Matthew Lister. The benefit being
computed (over and above the bettering of health and strength to Parents and
Children) to the saving of above three thousand lives a year in and about
London, beside the rest of England, and all other parts where the same Order
might have been propagated.

A design (I thought) so full of Piety that no man would, -- so full of
Innocence that no man could, -- so full of Importance and general concernment
that no man durst have opposed.

But the Prince of Darkness had an hour over the Lord of Life: much more might
this find enemies, though to their own hurt.

What discredit had it been for a Profession, which lies under common disgrace
and contempt, to attain to the Gravitie and Honor of Order and Government?

What burden had it been for a Calling, which requires knowledge, to be made
more knowing and full of experience?

What loss had it been to increase the number of the Living, which cannot but
be an increase of employment to all sorts of Trades and Professions whatsoever?
yea, to the very Grave-maker, had he but patience to suspend his Harvest till
the Young grew up to increase and multiply (not untimely but) more and larger
Graves? What shall I conclude? Folly is as certainly wedded to Wickedness, as
Wisdom is to Goodness.

They sold their Quiet for Trouble, their Credit for Shame, and their Gain for
Loss.

Yet are not some weary of contriving mischief, who (as if the poison of Aspes
were under their lips) cease not to defame, slander, and condemn all I have,
all I do: not sparing my very thoughts, and future intentions: degrading my
Titles, disabling my Practice, misconstruing all my Christian designs, and
limiting all my studies to the bare manual operations of Deliveries. And they
also scandalized with Uncharitableness and Avarice.

Nevertheless, I had patiented my self with silence had the Public Good gone
on: but finding the Commonwealth still wounded through my sides and so much
Blood at stake: I could do no less than remove that obstacle, by publishing a
free Relation of so much of me as concerns these particulars, or so much of
these particulars as may serve to satisfy all that love Truth: without barking
at them that bark, or wounding their Names so much as with their own infamous
Histories, or mention.

I know to whom Vengeance belongs, and I have not so learned Christ as to
invade his Prerogative. My duty is to do good for evil, and to enthrone each
Member of our Faculty in the true Orb it ought to shine in, were they as
willing to accept as I to offer my endeavors. For (alas) it is too grievous to
think what a Deluge of Blood lies on their Graves or Consciences since these
thirty years that my Father attempted this Charity, and thirteen years since
I, in his example, revived it. And it were a Querie worth laying to heart;
Whether ever these Wars, Plagues, and Troubles will have an end, till some
Compassion be had, and Remedy allowed against these Unprofitable unknown
Cruelties: But that is above. I come unto my self.

My birth was in May, sixteen hundred and one, in the Precinct of the
Blackfriars, London. I boast not the Norman Family of Tankervile, nor any
Lordly extraction of England. My rejoicing is to be of the Escapes of Parisian
Massacres, and of honest Parents, fearing God, for which beloved, and well
reported of by Neighbors.

They gave me education in Schools, Universities and Travels. The vacancy of
Schooling was improved to Galenicall and Chymicall Preparations, and some
Chyrurgicall Operations, by the assiduous care of an indulgent Father, of known
fame and success in all the Parts of Physic, besides the opportunities I had
from others of my Paternall and Maternall kindred, not lightly esteemed of in
the same.

At the University I piddled in Chyrurgery, amongst my fellow-Pupils of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge.

I did Public Exercises in Heydelberg and Padua: and (ere nineteen suns had
measured out my Nativitie) received the Doctorall Robes of that University,
and wore my Scarlet under that worthy Professor of Oxford Doctor Clayton,
and the next year under the Doctor of the Chair in Cambridge.

I confess, my Degree seemed big unto my self, and the pointings of the finger
dyed my Cheeks with the reflection of my Robes, Yet I was led into Practice,
which God blessed with Gifts of Healing.

Then Fame begot me Envy, and secret Enemies, which mightily increased when my
Father added to me the knowledge of Deliveries, and Cures of Women. Yet I was
admitted into the fellowship of the College of London, and became subordinat
unto my Seniors. Thus I grew up to Titles and Privileges.

But Titles give not Learning, nor Learning Experience: therefore if their
Lincius Dragon-eyes could have justly pried into the Deficiencie or Errors of
my Practice, I had (no doubt) more loudly heard on it. But to have left little
place to men of Learning and Experience to vant their Discoveries or Success,
where I have been gravel'd: and to have been constant to those Remedies which
now the Generality and best approved of our Faculty incline to (as by
Apothecaries books of thirty years past, compared with the present might
appear) secure me from just taxations, and vindicate me from the Crowd of the
Ignorant, where some pernicious tongues of impudence would rank me

I might question them what gross stupiditie they ever observed in me, that
being nursed up (as from the cradle) to all the Parts of Physic, and that in
Asclepiad-Families I should be wanting in the common knowledge of Clysters,
Apozemes, Potions, Pills, Juleps, Cordialls and the like, which they are ready
(how ignorantly or unjustly soever) to allow to young Apothecaries, and to
their very Apprentices. Or what supine neglect, that in twenty seven years I
might not have benefited so much by all my Books, Conferences, Observations,
and Practice, beside my former Studies and Travels, as to be valued with one of
seven years study of Physic in the University without Practice?

I might admonish them of the indignity they offer to the Universities, and to
the College of Physicians in London, by doubting my Title: intimating either a
Disability in them all to judge, or a Dishonestie in them all, to testify so
partially for Ignorance, and give it place among the Learned.

And for the Limitation of this Title to Deliveries, in regard I obtained the
one before I pretended to the other, and that none of the Professors were
versed in that way, this might seem to judicious men the most ridiculous
detraction of all the rest, and of greatest unlikelyhood. Yet this, by the
politic malice of the Ungrateful, and wilful ignorance of the Envious, has
taken greatest place, even amongst many, who ought to be better acquainted with
Academick proceedings. They cunningly allow me a transcendency in the
particular of Deliveries, that they may the more securely deny me my due in
Physic, as if the one were privitive or destructive to the other. And, having
thus denied me the general, some recoil back, and question even that
particular, till they leave me nothing at all. But these are Back-biters,
things, that hate the light: yet if any amongst them be of sufficient learning
and repute to come in competition, and have an itch to prosecute this Calumny
any further, I refuse not (the same as in former times) to enter the Lists (not
so much of learned noise and scolding, which commonly begins in Words,
multiplies to Names, and ends in Blows: being hardly determined by the learned,
and which I neither love, nor refuse, as) of real Cures, and written
Consultations, wherein both Learned, and Unlearned may be Judges.

No doubt but all that know me would wonder much to hear me thus plead my
Right, but that they cannot but wonder more that there is such occasion given.

Meum and Tuum divide the World into Factions, into Atoms: and till the World
return to its first simplicity, or (as in the morning of the Gospel) to a
Christian Vtopia, there will be repinings, and Covetousness will be the Root
of all Evil. This, This is the true Cause that fills their hearts with Malice,
and their mouths with Slanders: that what good soever I have done, or
endeavored to do is misconstrued, or forgotten; and the evil I never did is
laid to my charge, though I am not free from evil.

I am no Pharisee, yet I justify my dealings with Men before God and Man, and
plead not guilty of the sacrifice of Conscience to their grand Idol Avarice.

First, My Possessions cry not out against me, they being reduced nigh to
their first Principles, of mine and my wife's Portion. Only a better Portion
is added to us, of nine small children.

Secondly, The Poor cannot justly clamor against me, they having as freely
enjoyed my Counsels and Labors, both in Medicines and Deliveries, as the Rich;
even then when the burden of all the Midwives in and about London lay only on
my shoulders, what ever the virulency of tongues have blazoned to the contrary;
till some more eager of the employment than my self, and more knowing how to
make it gainful (after I had discharged my Conscience in my offer to the
Public) intruded into what I willingly refigned.

An Argument of no small force to prove the discontents I found in that kind of
Practice.

Thirdly, I could not well be guilty of exaction: 1 For that I seldom bargained
before hand, or not above twenty times when exceedingly animated by some fresh
injuries and gross abuses; although I hold not bargains unlawful, so long as
the Labourer is worthy of his hire. 2 They were entrusted with my Operations
before they rewarded me with their Purse. 3 I never arrested any for what was
due, whether by bargain, promise, or otherwise: although in all abused. 4 I
never demanded the full value of the Operation, if equally compared with other
matters of price, or other great Operations of Chyrurgery, or mine own
chargeable Education, or with any other Examples.

That Operation merits 100li. as well as other Cures or Operations, according
to the value of Lives and Estates. Yet for one who has paid me 10li. I have
delivered 100 for nothing, as many for little or nothing, and as many for less
than nothing; such as thought it a point of wisdom to save their Purse and pay
me with Lies and Scandals, insufferable Scandals, and so frequent till they
caused me abhor the work it self. Yea, my very Charity has been often, and is
to this day retorted as an Argument against my due: as if it were a part of
great Injustice to have given away or undervalued my Art to some, and not to do
the like to all. Because I considered the Case of the Poor, therefore I ought
not to be considered of the Rich.

And who will be rich in matter of payment? Truly, scarce an Alderman's fellow.
Perhaps some one Black Swan or Phoenix will be liberal, or pay his money
without abatement, or grudging: but 100 for that one, will either slip out of
the way, or pay half, or a fourth part (if any thing at all) and that
repiningly, and sometimes reprochfully.

This is the fruit of after-games, or prostituting an Art to the Candor of
them that know it not: but it must be so no more. To prevent therefore, both
discontent on the one side, and dishonestie on the other, I resolve (as others
use to do, and as they have hitherto falsely reported of me) to afford my
Labors to none but such as trust me with their money before I trust them with
my Art, which I shall afford at 10li. to any that are reputed worth 1000li. and
in lesser proportion to such as shall bring with them the testimony of their
Minister, and Neighbors of their meaner condition: and if the Certificat rank
them amongst the Poor I shall as freely as ever give them assistance. But if
any (except Kindred, Friends, Patients, or Ministers) address themselves unto
me without the former conditions, let them not think it strange if I turn my
former affabilities into future denyals, and that I lay my self less open to
affronts in that kind than formerly.

The Draper is not bound to find Cloth for all the naked, because he has
enough in his shop, nor yet to afford it at the Buyers price. The Lawyer is not
obliged to spend his voice and spirits for all the Injured in Forma Pauperis,
because he pleads well, and shall be heard. Acts of Charity are more due from
Kindred than from Strangers. When a Husband of sufficient means shall not think
his Wife nor Child's life worth 10li. I am not bound to bestow that on them
which is of more value. I could instance many such kind Husbands, and of late,
one who valued his word at above 500li. but the danger of his Wife not above
5li. and that in question of cavelling, if need had required it. In sum, I am
wholly tired out with the injuries, vexations, and losses of the business.

I have served the Commonwealth now twenty seven years, toyling both early and
late, not without the frequent hazard of my Life. I have spent my Youth and
Industrey for Food and Raiment, never receiving any Public Encouragement, or
Gratuity, but to be valued beyond my Condition or Demerit in Taxes. I have
served these many years the King and Queen by special Commands, and in some
especial services, receiving only one Reward and a Diamant-Ring from her
Majesty, but not any stipend at all from Either. And if the same Diligence and
Industry had been employed with the same Stock either in Trade, Merchandise,
or the Laws: or in Negotiations for the Court or State, I cannot think so
meanly of Gods endowments and blessings, as not to have culminated with the
best of my Equals. But enough of boasting, if yet the Commonwealth may receive
the benefit intended: for which I thus argue.

First, If my Ways and Titles, are justifiable* why may not the State as well
resent a Proposition of Public Good from me as from another? And if from me,
then this is one Proposition I do yet recommend; That some Order may be settled
by the State for the Instruction and Civil Government of Midwives.

Secondly, Though my Ways and Dealings were not justifiable, yet why may not
so much good as I am able to do herein be accepted, and the evil that is found
in me be restrained or punished?

Thirdly, Though I were the worst of men, so as not worthy to be named, yet why
are not some more worthy Persons employed in this Proposition, or it examined
whether it tend to good or no, and so much as is good be retained, the rest
waved and condemned?

Does the Argument sound well, that because I am said to be evil, therefore the
Commonwealth must want a Benefit of no relation at all to that evil? because I
am pretended to be Ignorant, or Covetous, or both, therefore some ignorant
Women, whom either extreme Poverty has necessitated, or Hard-heartednesse
presumed, or the Game of Venus intruded into the calling of Midwifry (to have
the issues of Life and Death of two or three at one time in their hands, beside
the consequence of Health and Strength of the whole Nation) should neither be
sufficiently instructed in doing Good, nor restrained from doing Evil?

Shall want of President be here objected? May such, as will, nor be Wise, nor
religious but by President, ever want President to be either? Yet this has
President in some Foreign examples.

The Objection infers thus much, Because there was never any Order for
instructing, and governing of Midwives, therefore there never must be. Because
multitudes have perished, therefore they still must perish. Because our
Forefathers have provided no remedy, nor knew any, therefore we must provide
none, though we know it. If all our Forefathers had subscribed to this
Argument, there had never been beginning of those many conveniences we now
enjoy, and we had been left to the Worlds first ignorance and nakedness. And
it follows also, That because our Forefathers adored Idols and Devils,
therefore we must do the like.

It may be when Bishops are restored again, their Ordinaries will come in to
plead their care.

Of what? Truly that none shall do good without their leave.

That none shall have leave, but such as will take their Oath and pay Money.

That taking this Oath and paying their Money with the testimony of two or
three Gossips, any may have leave to be as ignorant, if not as cruel as
themselves, and that none shall have the Privilege to be so certainly forsworn
as these who swear impossibilities: but of Instruction or Order amongst the
Midwives, not one word.

O that Christians and well-minded People would lay these premises to heart.
If this Voice in Rhama, If this Cry of Women and Children, be so: loud and
lamentable, how ought every one to play the good Samaritane? how ought every
man to play the wise Man to consider his own interest, lest his own health be
at stake in it? And though it were a figment, yet ought it not still cry
without a hearing.

I call not particularly upon Magistrates and Ministers, they commonly are wise,
and know best what use to make of such intimations, and how far they are
engaged in Conscience to promote it, and by what ways. And for my self, I
suppose I need not appear any further in it. I and my Family are out of
Gunne-shot, of the forementioned dangers. I have formerly cast pearls before
Swine, and found the issue.

I now have unfolded my Talent from the Napkin. I have washed my hands, I have
delivered my soul.

The Mighty God of Compassions bless this Public Information to his Glory.
Amen.
FINIS.

