Certain uncertain Proposals from Freeborn Subjects of England, to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; as they were presented, Aug. 9. 1647. at Croyden
in Surrey.
WE earnestly desire the Kings most Excellent Majesty may immediately be
brought to London with honor, there at pleasure to recide with safety and
freedom according to promise, and our just expectation.

WE likewise desire, that a firm and lasting Peace may be speedily settled in
this Kingdom, which cannot be if the King be spoiled of his indisputable
Rights, and not restored to his wished greatness.

We desire that such members of Par. as have vented any speeches seditious and
Treasonous, may besuspended from sitting, in the House and tried according to
the known Laws of the Kingdom; For we have no cause to believe the subject
shall be Righted in their freedom, if there be not high regards had to the
Kings Person and Honor.

It Is for the Honor of our Nation, to bear our King high; To make him glorious,
is to render him formidable to other Princes. It Is much for the honor of Sir
Thomas Fairfax, in whose power it is alone to raise him to such splendour and
height, that his clouded and discountenanced Subjects receiving a gracious
influence from the sprightly beams of his Sacred Majesty; may be revived and
cherished; And we acknowledge Sir Thomas Fairfax as the beginner, so the
perfecter and finisher of our Peace and Happiness.

These are our Desires, our Fears follow.
WE justly fear, that while his Excellency contended to bring his Majesty to
London, whether the Parliament and City would or no; and they Declaring and
Voting him to come, whether his Excellency would or no: The King in the
Agreement will be left unconsidered, and we forfeit our hopes and Expectation.

We likewise fear, (as we have too sad occasion) that a new war will be
settled in stead of an old Peace; And our lost dispirited Island imbarque in a
second adventure on a Sea of Blood, till we suffer shipwreck and utter Ruin.

We sadly fear the bad design of these that so boldly assume to themselves

We sadly fear the bad Design of these that so boldly assume to themselves a
liberty to traduce his Sacred Majesty, and the worse Effects it may take on
some desperate villains, while such remain unpunished, unquestioned.

We fear the danger the delay may bring, that a Peace so coldly followed, may
give advantage to a diligent and over-active party to imbroil in a second more
fierce and terrible war.

We fear the worst, that our Peace is not nigh, that we are not rightly
qualified to entertain her, nor yet brought low enough to receive so high a
blessing.

We fear, that if the King be not settled so well as the Kingdom, there is no
good intention to either.

We fear God, we Honor and Obey the King.

Certain Hopes to sustain Comfort, and confirm a timorous and fearful mind.
WE Hope the worst is past.

We hope Sir Thomas Fairfax will according to his promise bring the King to
London with Honor, safety, and Freedom; we hope to see it suddenly, without
which we can hope for no good.

We hope it is not the intent of this alconquering Army, to diminish, much
less to extinguish the Glorious Lamp of Majesty, being so well assured, if the
King burn dimne, his People will go out like the snuff of a candle: If Majesty
be defaced in the Royal stamp, his Subjects will not pass for current Coin.

We hope to see the King in his full Greatness and Splendot, and that his
Excellency will add to his Glory, not Substract, nor clip the wings of Majesty.

We hope his Excellency will make good all his promises in his Declaration and
much more: We hope to see it performed speedily without delay; And were it not
for these hopes, our hearts would break.

Certain Pertinent and Necessary Queries.
Q. Whether the Freeborn People of England will ever tolerate any
Tolleration of Covernment in this kind: Or they will not be impatient of any
thought to destroy Monarchy, whose yoke is easy, and burden light?

Q. Whether Monarchy can be destroyed in the Person of the King; Whose
numerous issue gives Assurance we cannot be happy in any other Government?

Q. Whether the whole world would not rise to revenge any violence done to his
Majesty's Sacred Person, as has been often threatened? And whether every good
subject hating the impious thoughts of so horrid an Act, ought not to endeavor
the bringing of such to Condign punishment?

Q. Whether it be not the best way to settle the Kingdom in a firm Peace,
first to seat and establish the King in his Royal Throne? without which our
preposterous Peace cannot be lasting.

Q. Whether the Peoples Peace and Happiness depends not altogether on the
safety and Honor of the King?

Q. Whether there be not a necessity of his Majesty's speedy coming to London?
And whether there can be any composure of the present distraction, and
satisfaction to the People without this?

FINIS.

