AN APOLOGY FOR THE Ministers of the County of Wilts, in their Actings at the
election of Members for the approaching PARLIAMENT.

In Answer to a Letter sent out of the said County, Pretending to lay open the
dangerous Designs of the Clergy, in reference to the approaching Parliament.

Wherein is showed, The notorious falsehood of the said Letter: How injurious it
is to the Gentlemen elected: and the dangerous design of it against the
Ministry.

By some of the Defamed Ministers of the Gospel in the same County.

Humphrey Chambers, D.D. John Strickland. Adoniram Bifield. Peter Ince.
Neh. 6.8. Then I sent unto him saying, There are no such things done as thou
say, but thou feignest them out of thy own heart. 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the
hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God. London, Printed for Ralph
Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

An Apology for the Ministers of the County of Wilts in their actings at the
Election of Members for the Approaching Parliament.
ALthough Christians in general, especially the Ministers of the Gospel, must
look and prepare for reproaches in this life, and may wear them as a crown of
Glory, when they are unjustly cast upon them; yet the Apostle Paul's often
endeavors to quit himself from sleightings and slanders, that his Ministry
might not be blamed or blemished through him, seems to us a sufficient warrant
for any, Christians or Ministers, to seek to remove such slanderous
imputations, as being openly and falsely raised against them, tend to the
dishonor of Christianity, or Ministry, or both; especially when the Actors in
this injury are high pretenders to an extraordinary pitch of holiness,
religion and piety; whose words may therefore plead for credit where they come.
This is an Apology for appearing in print at this time, in Answer to a Letter
lately printed and published, sent out of Wiltshire to a Gentleman in London,
pretending to lay open the dangerous designs of the Clergy in reference to the
approaching Parliament. This Letter pretended to be written to a friend in
London, was intended and calculated as we see by the hasty printing and
publishing of it, generally for all England, publicly to calumniate the
Clergy and Gentlemen chosen to serve in the next Parliament for the County of
Wilts, and to prepare contempt and scorn for them in the hearts of all men, so
far as the credit or cunning of the Compiler of this Letter could possibly
prevail for that end; yet it is said to be written by a true friend to the
public interest and all peaceable men: to which we have not much to say,
though the spirit of this Letter seem not to subscribe the testimony which the
writer thereof bears to himself. But our main business is with the Letter it
self, the dangerous design whereof is manifest, viz. to render the Clergy (as
he calls them) despicable in the eyes of the people, which will more fully
appear in the Answer to the Letter it self. In which the Author pretends to
answer the expectation of the Gentleman to whom he writes, in giving a true
account of passages relating to the choosing of Members to sit in Parliament
for the County of Wilts; but how much he has disappointed the expectation of
his friend, will appear to the impartial Reader, when we shall have discovered
the falsness both of his Narrative and Invective. It seems this man was very
angry, and therefore quarrels with all that stand in his way, and some are apt
to think it was because himself was not chosen, at least because his friends
were passed by: and if this be true, the ingenuity of the Noble Theban that
went home rejoicing that there were so many men fitter then himself to serve
the public, would have saved him all this labor.

We will not so far prejudice that Noble Gentleman whom the Author of this
Letter has sufficiently described, and unworthily traduced, and whom by way of
honor we shall name, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, as to make any Answer to what
is in this Letter charged upon him; he needs no Advocate in what he did, acting
as we are confidently assured with a public spirit, and desirous to do his
Country real service. Nor will we so far lessen the esteem of those Gentlemen
chosen in our Country to serve in the next Parliament, as to undertake their
defense, against that reproach which is boldly and generally cast upon them in
this Letter; aetatem habent. We are much assured, having particular knowledge
of the Religious integrity and eminent faithfulness of many of them, that they
have no way deserved that black calumny he seeks to fasten upon them, as
unworthy time-serving men, and such as never did the State any service. Si
accusasse sufficiat, quis erit Innocens. Neither do we know why this single
accuser should think so highly of htmself, as to expect that he should bear
down with the weight and warrant of his own Letter, the reputation of those
Gentlemen, whom their Country has honored, and in assurance of their
fidelity entrusted with whatsoever is dear unto them in this world. But since
the Penman of this Letter, (whether upon his own account, or with advice of
others, we know not) is pleased to vent the heat of his indignation against the
Clergy, as he is pleased to style them, and to set some of us by name as
ringleaders of the faction in the front of those Ministers of the Gospel in
this Country whom in his Rhetoric he calls a Scottish faction, Politic state
Parsons, a time-serving generation, self-seeking Parsons, the corrupt Clergy,
Rigid foolish men, a corrupt self-seeking generation of men, and to bend all
his forces against us and them, as carrying on some dangerous design in our
activity about this election of Members to the Parliament, concerning which he
makes such a horrible outcry: We conceive our selves bound in duty toward God,
and for the upholding of the credit of our Ministry, so much reproached by
him, to examine the Bil of high complaints laid in against us. The accusation
in which we with the rest of the brethren of the Association are charged in
this Letter, is either by way of Narrative, or Invective; and we shall answer
unto both. By way of Narrative it is affirmed for truth, first, That the
Ringleaders of this faction were, Dr. Chambers, Mr. Byfield, Strickland; these,
with the rest of the brethren of their Association gathered together a great
number of people, and taught them their lesson beforehand. To which we answer:

First, see how this man stumbles at the threshold; the truth is, the first of
those mentioned in the Catalogue, his acting in the business, except upon the
day of election, was next to doing nothing in it: which we mention not because
any of us know any cause why we or any other should be either sorry or ashamed,
of being more active therein; but the truth is, upon a pressing occasion he was
out of this Country for above a fortnight together, and came not to his own
house till the night before the election: and not to Wilton, till a great part
of the company were gone unto the Hill on the day, and at the time of the
Election: and so it fell out by providence that he had not opportunity to
gather together a great number of people, much less to teach them their
lessons before hand: By this the Reader may see how little truth is to be
expected in the rest, when there is so gross an untruth in the beginning. And
we see evidently, that the writer of this Letter watches for our halting, and
bears us so much good will as to take us up before we be down.

Secondly, suppose it had been true of all the three Ringleaders mentioned,
with the rest of their brethren, as it is more particularly charged upon one of
them (who has learned, though he be by name reviled with the title of Scribe
and Pharisee, yet not to revile again, but to commit himself to him who
judges righteously,) that they were active, and exceedingly bestirred
themselves in that election, busly intermedling with more then ordinary
diligence and activity. What is their crime? how can they be truly charged as
offenders, and over busy intermedlers in that which concerns them not, who are
members of the same Commonwealth with others, and therefore are as much
concerned in the welfare thereof as any others: In the peace thereof we shall
have peace.

But it may be the crime is our more then ordinary diligence and activity: To
which we answer, what we have now done? is there not a cause? Surely more then
ordinary diligence and activity is very justifiable when the case is more then
ordinary. Can we expect to see another Parliament, in which the Interest of all
that is or should be dear unto us in this world, as Christians, and as
Englishmen, can be more concerned then in this present Parliament? Nay, are
there not a generation of men amongst us, who are acted by such principles as
do manifestly tend to the subverting of Law, destruction of Propriety, and the
utter extinguishing of the Ministry of the Gospel, and shall we sit still?

Another Charge is, That we with the rest of our brethren of the Association
taught the people gathered together by us, their lesson beforehand, to cry up
only those ten men named in our List.

To this we answer: That there was a List given out of ten names, we shall not
deny; neither do we know any just exception to be made against it; we are
confident the compiler of this Letter would have found no hurt at all in it, if
that List which he abetted, and which many were brought violently to abet, had
been owned by us, and followed by the Country in their election; so as that
the fault was this, that we did not teach them to cry up their List; but we
demand any shadow or proof of this, that we taught the people to cry up only
those ten men mentioned in that List, which he calls ours, which yet it was no
more ours then those Gentlemen of the Country, who were also concerned in it
with our selves. Nay, we do with much confidence affirm, that it was often
expressed to several men, that men were left to their free liberty, if they
were not satisfied in any of the ten to put in any other fit person or persons
in their room, and accordingly some did take that liberty. Neither did we ever
persuade any person to adhere to any of the ten, further then upon the general
account of their fitness to do their Country faithful service, and that was
in truth the depth of our design, that such men, and such only might be chosen.

Another charge is, That we did teach the people to brand others, as namely
Lieut. Genesis Ludlow, Col. Eyres, etc. (who were nominated by approved faithful
men in the Country) with the names of Anabaptists, Levellers, to render them
odious to the generality of the judicious people, by these false and malicious
imputations.

Ans. We do again demand proof of this charge, that any of us did ever teach
any one to brand Lieut, Genesis Ludlow, Col. Eyres, etc. with the names of
Anabaptists, Levellers; we do with confidence affirm, that as we did not our
selves, so neither did we hear any other to put them into this dress, till we
found them so clothed in the Letter. But suppose that some did use those
expressions, will it follow that they were taught by us so to do? we think
the leaders of their party would not take it well if we should charge upon them
all those reproachful, scornful, and reviling speeches, uttered by very many of
their followers upon the place, against such who might have expected better
language from them. We expected upon the mention of two in their List, the
Author would have given us the names of all the rest in my List, and not have
left us to spell out the meaning of an etc. and to defend our selves from
branding with reproachful names, we know not who. It were no difficult work we
think to find out the rest of the names in that List; but since the Author of
that Letter is pleased to conceal them, we will not further provoke him by the
mention of them.

It is true that List was commonly called by the company upon the place, the
Anabaptists List; because the number in that List did either consist of such,
or some of the most notedst sticklers for it went under that denomination; and
so it will not be strange, that there should be frequent mention of the name
Anabaptist: yet we do again deny that we did brand any of them with those
names, Anabaptists, Levellers, or taught others so to do: And thus the
groundwork fails him; surely then those other words, to render them odious to
the generality of the judicious people by those false and malicious
imputations, must needs be left to stand alone, and signify nothing; only
because the words may be of good use if they be rightly applied, we shall borrow
them, and retort them with much more clearness of truth.

The Author in this Letter has branded the faithful Ministers of the Gospel,
not only in this Country, but throughout the Nation with the titles of a
corrupt Clergy, a corrupt self-seeking generation of men; and diverse such like
reproachful terms to render them odious to the generality of the judicious
people by those false and malicious imputations.

Another charge, at least insinuated against us, is, That some hundreds gave
their voices who were either Cavaliers, or else of inconsiderable estates, not
worth 100 li. and therefore incapable of choosing by the modle of the
established government.

Although the words may be as well applied to those that voted for his List, and
with as much truth, as to the other side; yet because there is in this Letter
nothing but what is intended either directly or by insinuation to cast an odium
upon us: We shall therefore say that we do not know of any one person that came
thither upon any of our requests or desires, that is liable to either of those
exceptions. And we do again put the Author to this fair issue, either to
make proof but of one so qualified as is mentioned, that was brought thither
to give his vote, by us: or else to say, that he has wronged us in this
insinuation.

The next charge is more express, it was agreed upon at length that the
several lists should be called one by one, and so put to the yea's or no's,
without naming any other in competition with the former: but this order was
violated by the Clergies party, by which means, through the instigation of the
Scottish faction Lieut: Genesis Ludlow was put by.

A. Whereas he says, it was agreed upon at length that the several Lists
should be called one by one: the truth is, it was agreed upon at first, upon
the first coming upon the place: But it is apparently false, that this order
was purposely violated by the Clergy party; for the truth was, though it was
agreed on by the Sheriff and those Gentlemen that were about him, and near
unto him, yet we are confident the agreement was not known unto the tenth man,
when the question was put. And upon this mistake the generality did look upon
the question, as if there were a compatition, and so did cry up him whom they
did most affect and desire; and it was some time before this mistake could be
rectified, which yet was as much endeavored by those whom he calls the Scottish
faction, as by any of their party that appeared on the other side: so that the
violation of this Order was only by a mistake. And it is apparently false that
by means of the violation of this Order, through the instigation of the
Scottish faction, Lieut. Genesis Ludlow was put by; for the truth is, he was put
by for want of voices. That that Noble Gentleman has been serviceable to the
public, we shall not deny, or go about to diminish his worth; yet we see no
reason to subscribe to that odious comparison, as if he had been more
serviceable to the true interest of the State, then all the men that are
chosen, put them together. And we doubt not but the modesty and ingenuity of
that Gentleman is such, that he will give them little thanks for putting him in
the balance alone against the ten, many of whom have been eminently
serviceable in their places, and to whom the Lieut. G. Ludlow will think it no
disparagement to give them the right hand of fellowship. Whether it were the
desire of that Gentleman to be mentioned for the place, is much questioned by
some who pretend to know something; it is strongly suspected that his name was
made use of without his consent, to make way for others; and if this be true,
surely he will give them but little thanks for there labor, in making use of his
name to such an end; however we are confident, so great an assertor of the
liberties of the people cannot take it well, to have his name made use of, to
impose upon the people so as it shall be accounted a crime for any not to
appear for him.

The next charge is, These Politic State Parsons neglected the preaching of
their Lecture at Sarum, that they might bawle with open mouth no Ludlow, no
Ludlow, till they were even hoarse again; they chose rather to spend their
breath in decrying honest men, then in preaching the Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

Ans. The truth is, the Lecture at Sarum (which he not without some scorn calls
their Lecture) upon the day, and at the time of the election, was for that time
omitted, but not as he says neglected; there may be sufficient justifiable
reasons for the omitting of the Lecture for a turn, which yet will not amount to
a neglect of it: and we suppose this was a justifiable ground for that
omission; The greatest part of the Auditors were called to another special
service, in which they were very much concerned, which could not be done at any
other time. It is neglected by those, who when they have time and opportunity,
do not frequent it: and then it will be easy to judge, who they be who do
neglect the Lecture at Sarum. This is evident, the Ministers who are called to
preach that Lecture, are far more ready to bestow their pains in preaching of
it, then some of those who are so forward to turn this single omission to our
reproach, are to attend upon it; there is only this difference, the Ministers
did once omit it, and those men never come unto it.

For that other part of the charge, That we did baule and cry with open mouth
no Ludlow, no Ludlow, till we were even hoarse again, choosing rather to spend
our breath in decrying honest men, then in preaching the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus: We answer there was a necessity of decrying some, as will appear by what
is confessed to be agreed upon, viz. That every one should be put to their yeas
and noes, without naming any other in competition with him: for we demand how
it was possible for us to give our votes according to that agreement, when
there were so many in nomination, without decrying some. It is confidently
affirmed that this course was agreed on by their own motion and desire; and if
that be true, let the world see how they deal with us; put us on a necessity
of crying, and then beat us for crying: But he says, we did decry honest men.
An. That which was to be decryed at that time, was not who were honest men, but
amongst many honest men, who were most fit to serve in Parliament; surely the
choosing of one does not at all necessarily question the honesty of him that is
refused. Whereas he says we chose rather to spend our breath in decrying
honest men, then in preaching the Gospel of the Lord Jesus; we answer, this
work we were then called to, was not to preach the Gospel, but to choose
members for the approaching Parliament; that was the work of the day.

Besides these partculars in the Letter by way of Narrative, relating to our
selves, there are two passages in the letter relating to others, though charged
obliquely upon our account, which are not to be omitted.

The first in these words, What shall I say of the impudency of these men? One
Stone a Factor for them, and a vassal to them, went up and down at the election
like a mad man, crying out, Now friends appear for the Church of God or never;
poor man! can he put no difference between appearing for the lusts of men, and
the Church of Christ? between the Classical usurpations of ehe self-seeking
Parsons, and the truth of Christ?

An. By that person whom he reproachfully calls one Stone, is meant Mr.
William Stone of Sarum, a man of known sufferings for, and fidelity to the
public, and whose integrity in point of Religion (for ought we know, or have
heard of) is unblemished. He desired us to let the world know that neither the
words ascribed to him by the inditer of this letter, nor any to the same
purpose, were spoken by him; howbeit he sees no cause to extract, or blush at
them, if he had spoken them; though he abhors the spiteful commentary which is
made upon them; he knows very well how to distinguish betwixt Christ's Church
and men's lusts, and wishes that distinction were better studied, and held on
all sides; but as to the speech fully ascribed to him, he looks upon it as a
mere figment, invented to bring him in within the scrape, that he might have a
share in the reproach the writer of this letter was resolved with his best skill
to cast upon the Clergy, and all that were friends unto them.

The other personal charge is in these words: Sir, I had a sight of a letter
writ by one Burges, a person of the confederacy, sent to one of his brethren in
this County: his words are as follows: Sir, I hope you will be active to
engage all that ever you can to appear with us for such men as will be valiant
for the truth; and be ready to meet Dr. Chambers, Mr. Byfield, Strickland,
Ince, etc. and that we may not be divided, there shall be a Last of the ten to
be chosen given to every one that appears for the best interest; let us not
be accessory to our own ruin, and give occasion to the succeeding generation
to curse us, by not putting forth our interest to the utmost for choosing right
men. If we remember the last men that met at Westminster, what they were voting
by and withal, how the monster of their malice was even brought to the birth,
it will make us active for a better choice. Besides what this Parson writ in
his letter, he told the party, before one Mr. Dyer, that there was a commission
coming out for ejecting Ministers, and that he would be in danger of being
outed his living, that should not appear with the Ministers at the election.
To this we answer.

By that person whom he reproachfully calls one Burges a parson of the
confederacy, he means Mr. Daniel Burgess, whom we look upon as a godly and
able Minister of Jesus Christ, but no Parson of the confederacy; for we own no
such thing in his sense: we are indeed in an association with many others of
our godly brethren, in a way of Christian communion, but not of a subtle
combination. That the Author had a sight of that Letter written by Mr. Burges,
we will not deny; but we are assured that he has not truly recited the said
Letter, as appears by a copy of it, which we have under Mr. Burges his hand:
his words in the close of the letter are not as they are above recited, but as
follows: I pray you let us not be accessory to own ruin, and give the
coming generation cause to curse us, by not exerting our selves to the utmost
for the choosing of sound and faithful men: if we remember the last men that
met at Westminster, and what they were voting to ruin, have not we cause to
adore that hand of providence that dashed their design (the monster of their
malice) when it was even come unto the birth, and now points us our to a better
choice? the same Lord give us wisdom timely to improve it. The ingenious
Reader cannot but observe a considerable difference, and so Mr. Burges is not
obliged to own that letter as his, which his accuser has so mangled; yet
because he does own it for the substance, we say that we see nothing in it,
that would have turned to his reproach, if it had fallen into the hands of one
that had been willing to give it a candid Interpretation. For these words so
confidently affirmed to be spoken by Mr. Burges to the party before one Mr.
Dyer, That there was a commission coming out touching Ministers, and that he
would be in danger of being outed of his living, that should not appear with
the Ministers at the Election; Some of us have spoken with Mr. Burges and Mr.
Dyer, and they confidently affirm the charge to be falls throughout, and deny
the words, so that we may well apply the following words unto the Author, The
world may see how he makes lies his refuge, and has recourse to carnal
weapons.

Besides this Narrative, by way of Invective he charge us,

1. With being of the Scottish faction, and promoting of the Scottish interest.
To this we answer:

1. In general, that we can the better bear their bitter revilings, because
the most eminent servants of God in their generations, after whom we are not
worthy to be named, Luther, Calvin, and others met with the self-same usage,
not only from Popish Adversaries, but even many who pretended to higher
seize in religion, scorned, derided, and loaded them with reproach:
Doubtless the Gospel would have less Reproach, and the Professors thereof
more love amongst them, if at the length these Scripture rules might obtain
place and practice in good earnest, amongst those that name the name of Christ:
Let us not judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. And again, Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put
away from you with all malice. But to come more particularly to the sharp
Invective against us.

These words, Faction, Interest, and Scottish joined with them, are words of
late much come into use amongst us, but of that ambiguity, when they are used
by way of Invective, that few can tell the meaning of them, it lying in the
breast of him that does impose them upon others, to express in what sense he
means them; and therefore till the Author speaks out what he intends by this
charge, we shall only say at present: that when there has been so much blood
unhappily shed betwixt the Professors of the Gospel in England and Scotland, it
savoureth not much of a Christian spirit, now that there is a hope of a Union
betwixt the Nations, to foment a perpetual enmity betwixt them, by making
Scottish still a proverbial expression of what is evil. What we can probably
imagine to be his meaning in this Invective, will be fully answered in the
examination of some of these Invectives that follow.

2. He does charge us, that we make the oppression of Tithes and fat Benefices
our great Diana, which makes us in business so active to uphold them. To this
we answer.

First, Whether we do make Tithes, and worldly gain, and fat Benefices our
great Diana, the accuser we are sure cannot tell; possibly we may be of another
frame of spirit before the Lords eyes, then we are before his; certainly it
would savor more of a Christian spirit to leave secret things to the Lord our
God.

Secondly, What crime is it to desire to uphold and enjoy the established way
of maintenance by Tithes, which for so many hundreds of years has been
settled upon the Ministry, both by Custom and Law? We are very sensible that
there are many men justly chargeable with the sin of covetousness, in
reference unto Tithes. But then the compiler of this Letter should do well to
consider whether it be not more likely to be those who covet to take them to
themselves when they have no right unto them, then those who desire but to
enjoy their own by the same propriety that any man has in his estate.

Thirdly, For that maintenance settled by the Law of the Land upon the
Ministers of the Gospel, we own it, and take it, in all Christian freedom of
spirit, blessing the Lord, who has dealt with us in outward things beyond our
deserts or expectations; and we would ask the writer of the Letter a question
in his care; whether if he could get one of those fat benefices he speaks of,
settled by Act of State upon himself and his posterity, for his good service
in decrying the Ministry, would he then take it for Idolatry or superstition to
enjoy what he calls the oppression of Tithes: this we are sure is very evident
in the practice of many that are the lowdest cryers against this intolerable
oppression, that they are content to liquor their fingers in it, and it is
their greater grief and burden that they may not keep that to themselves, to
which they can pretend no more right then a Tenant to detain his Rent from his
Landlord: And because we are now upon the business of Tithes, we shall examine
another passage in the close of the Letter relating thereunto. In those words,
This corrupt self-seeking generation of men will not cease from busy
intermedling in State matters and raising factions, till the maintenance of the
Ministry be brought into one Treasury, and equally divided. In Holland (you
know) where the Magistrate takes a strict account, the Ministers dare not busy
themselves thus in State-affaires. To this we say.

First, This is indeed a grand project, which some men please themselves so
much with, as that it is very probable they have already laid out what place
they shall get in this new office.

Secondly, In this passage there is more then a hint of the grand intention of
this design of the common Treasury for the Ministers maintenance, viz. to make
the Ministers to be less active and busy, especially in crossing the wills of
those upon whom they are made to be so dependant; and if that be the intention
of those men, whom with are charged to be so active in crying down, we shall not
need to say much to justify our activity, especially to all judicious men, who
are sensible of the great mischief that must needs come unto Religion, by such
a course, especially when this dispensation of the Gospel shall fall into the
hands of such who serve the Lord that they may serve their Bellies, and in
order thereunto must serve the times, and therein the various lusts, humors,
and interests of their masters upon whom they do depend. Nevertheless we
doubt not but that if God have any pleasure in us, and delight still to dwell
amongst us, he will reserve a number that have obtained mercy to be faithful,
who will not be turned out of their way by such byasses of humane dependances,
and if ever they should be lead into that temptation, God will deliver them
from the snare and the evil of it.

Thirdly, How inconsistent is this project with the complaint before of the
oppression of Tithes? will that be lessened by taking them into a common
treasury? we doubt the Country man will not find it so, when Tithes shall be
required by more severe exactors then ever Ministers were; So as that the world
may see the ease of the people is not intended, no not by those who make the
lowdest cry of the oppression of Tithes.

Thirdly, He does by way of charge against us, rank us with that sort of men
who have caused the late broils in this Nation and Scotland, and who will not
cease plotting and combining till we imbroyle the Nation again in blood, if the
Lord in mercy prevent not.

Answ. We answer, we abhor the mention, either of abetting the former broils,
or of plotting and combining to imbroyle the Nations again in blood; and we
demand of the accuser, to make good his charge as to any of us, or to lay aside
such cursed provoking insinuations against those who desire to be peaceable in
the Land.

Fourthly, We are charged to carry on a design to bring the Nation again into
Egyptian bondage, and to set up our selves, and our Classical Diana by civil
sanction, and to that end to endeavor to procure a considerable number of
Members that may vote in the next Parliament an Assembly or Convention of
Ministers to make Canons for the inthralling the consciences of men, and to
impose upon, and domineer over our brethren.

Answ. Whether his friend to whom he writes, be as he says, so considerate
(that we say not so inconsiderate) as to observe such a design carried on by
us with the rest of the Clergy of this Nation, we cannot tell; but this is
evident, himself is so suspicious, as that he can create Imaginary Plots and
designs, and so uncharitable as to put the grossest mis-construction upon an
innocent action; and for our Innocence, we can appeal to God, and do testify
in the presence of the all-seeing God, that we desire no such power, nor affect
no such dominion over the consciences of men; we tremble at and abhor the
thought of it, knowing that it is best with the Church of God when men have
least to do in making Laws in it, and when they intend mainly the
establishing and observing of the Laws of Christ the King of Saints; and if to
be subject to his laws, be with this man to be brought again into Egyptian
Bondage, surely though he rank himself amongst the Saints, yet Jesus Christ
(we doubt) will rank him amongst those who say we will not have this man to
reign over us: If there be a desire in any to promote such a settlement in
matters of Religion as may be agreeable to the mind of Christ, and consistent
with the due liberty of tender consciences, we know not how that should be
accounted making Cannons to inthral the consciences of men.

Fifthly, We are charged that we will rather join with the vilest of men, then
with such as cross our carnal interests, and dissent from us, though never so
godly; and this he says he plainly sees.

Answ. For that of our joining with the vilest of men, we suppose he speaks
this in reference to the Election, and to our activity at it; and if so, we
say, it is a most false and unchristian accusation, and such as could not have
been fastened upon us, by any discerning eye. But there is no sense against the
calumnies of men, forestalled with prejudice, and blinded with malice. It may
be the penman of this Letter reckons all those amongst the vilest of men that
are not registered in his Catalogue of Saints, and so would have dominion
founded in grace and Saintship to be the only qualification for government. We
deny not but it were much to be wished that governors might always be endewed
with grace and the knowledge of God in Christ, added to their other
qualifications; but we cannot subscribe to that principle which is truly called
a State-heresie by the Author of the true estate of the case of the
Commonwealth in reference to the late established government, viz. That godly
persons though of small understanding and little ability of mind in public
affairs, are more fit for government, then men of great knowledge and wisdom,
if endewed only with natural parts and moral virtues: But if our Author be not
infected with that heresy, we further answer, when he shall be pleased to tell
us whom he does mean by the vilest of men, and in what act of ours he did
plainly see our joining with such, we shall be able to give a better account by
way of answer to him; and in the mean time if he have not too much work upon
him already to make good his other charges against us, we shall put him to that
farther trouble, to name but any one of the ten that were chosen, whom we cried
up and voted for, that can in the least give an occasion to such a charge; and
in this he has a double task to make good; one that the party is of the vilest
of men, and the other that we voted for him; and we are well assured, he cannot
make good either the one or the other. We list not to recriminate, and desire
to avoid all personal reflections; otherwise possibly there might be some just
ground found to retort the charge, but we forbear. Only we desire him
seriously to consider with whom he joins in his slandring of the Ministers of
the Gospel; surely this is the practice of the vilest of men.

For that other branch of the charge, our not joining with those who cross our
carnal interests and dissent from us, though never so godly.

A. We answer, We do so far honor, and prize, the power of godliness, as
that we should be heartily glad to close with such in whom we find it, in all
ways of love and peace; it has been our prayer, and shall be our endeavor,
that all who accord in fundamentals of Gospel Truth and holiness, may be
brought to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; we hope (through
mercy) we have learnt not to value our carnal interest before the Churches
peace and unity; and to think and speak of divisions, emulations, and breaking
into parties and factions, amongst those that are truly godly, as we do think
and speak of theft, whordome, murder, and the like fruits of the flesh. But yet
we say,

First, we dare not under the specious pretense of joining with the godly
party, close with any who are, or seem to be such, in actings of that nature,
as are destructive, not so much to our carnal interest, as to the true
interest of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God: (for so we do conceive the
upholding of the Ministry and its maintenance is more the interest of the
Gospel then our own) lest whilst we seek to knit with men, we disjoyne our
selves from God; and whilst we would make up strife with others, we make a
greater breach between God and our own souls.

Secondly, we see but little hope that ever there should be a happy closure
with those who do so factiously engross all the honor of Saintship, yea
honesty and faithfulness, to themselves and their own party; for so the Author
seems to carry it throughout the Letter. Himself and his party he mentions as
the poor despised Saints, as the approved faithful men in the County, honest
public spirited men, men that are most faithful to the public interest,
such as have been valiant in the field, and ventured their lives in the high
places for the liberties of the people; such as have all along in the greatest
revolutions and dangers appeared in their purses and persons for the true
interest of the Nation, such as have poured out floods of tears and prayers for
the cause of Christ; But the rest who do oppose them, or not join with them,
are called a Time-serving generation, a company of time-serving Cavaliers, and
corrupt persons, such who in the greatest Revolutions and Dangers durst not
show their faces, unless it were at Oxon, where some of them sat and acted; a
company of unworthy time-serving men, such as never did the State any faithful
service, such as do unworthily and vain-gloriously in their own persons hunt
after worldy honor, and popular applause, and do even hate and abhor the
poor despised Saints.

An. We would be loath to be justly ranked amongst those who do hate and abhor
the poor despised Saints; we desire to love and honor them all, as the
excellent ones in whom is our delight; yet we do hate and abhor that cursed
dividing principle, whereby Godliness and Saintship is made a faction with
many; whilst they enclose and monopolize it unto themselves and their own
party, so as that none shall be counted Godly and Saints, owned, loved, and
esteemed as such, but those of their own way: we do not doubt but that God
has many whom he will own as Saints, who yet are branded as carnal, nay as
antichristian; And we could heartily wish, that even amongst those who are most
forward to ascribe and appropriate this title to themselves, that there were
more of Saintship to be found in them. The true Saints of God are indeed often
despised and reproached by the men of the world; but it is certainly no
evidence of Saintship to be despisers and reproachers of their fellow brethren,
and of any of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel: If the tree must be known
by its fruits, how little Saintship shall we find amongst many of those who
yet do ingrosse all unto themselves?

We shall not go about to make our selves guilty of that which we have already
condemned in the Author of this Letter, viz. making odious comparisons and
descriptions of all that are not of our party; yet we are not assured of this,
either that all who did appear for that List, for opposing whereof we are so
much reviled, were Approved faithful men, publique-spirited men, etc. nor that
they only of that party were the only honest, approved, faithful,
publique-spirited men in the County; being very confident, that there are very
many in our County, who though of a different persuasion in matters of
Religion, from the Author and his party he so much commends, yet are approved
faithful men, faithful to the public interest, for which so much blood has
been spilt, and treasure spent, such as have been valiant in the field, and
ventured their lives in the high places for the liberties of the people, such
as have all along in the greatest Revolutions and Dangers, appeared in their
purses and persons, for the true interest of the Nation: such as have poured
forth floods of prayers and tears, for the cause of Christ; and who cannot be
justly accused for sitting and voting at Oxon.

Upon the whole, this we demand, as the poor servants and despised Ministers of
Jesus Christ, that upon the receipt of this our Reply, he do either make good
the truth of his public Narrative, and Invective, as to our selves, whom he
has particularly named, and reproached, which we are confident he shall never
do: or else that he do us right, by making some acknowledgement that he has
done us wrong. If he will do neither, let him know, who ever he be, that his
Letter will dog him to his deathbed, and if he obtain not pardon for it in the
blood of Christ, (which from our hearts we wish him) it will stand up sadly
against him at that day when without shall be -- Whosoever loves and makes a
lie.

Besides this Narrative and Invective against us, the heat of his indignation
vents it self farther against our Association. The Author of this Letter
having failed thus as we trust, in finding occasion or fault against us
concerning the Kingdom: he endeavors further, to find it against us,
concerning the Law of our God, attempting to turn it at least to our reproach,
that we as fellow brethren, yea as yokefellows, laborers together in the work
of the Gospel, do maintain a communion and fellowship together, for mutual
assistance in our common work. This we cannot but say something to, lest any
should be canslesly biased, by great and empty words, to judge harshly and
falsely of some poor unworthy servants of Jesus Christ, who desire to be
faithful. His words are these.

Sir, by this days work you may judge of the issue and fruit of the Ministers
association in this County, which may rather be called a subtle Combination,
then a Christian spiritual Communion, as they manage it: you will hear of
the like proceedings in other Counties, especially where this Association is
carried on, the same being divised as a shelter upon a Politic account
against an approaching storm.

For the Author to wrest the fault, if there were any, of the late election of
members for Parliament upon the Association of Ministers, is so groundless an
attempt, as that it proves only that the Author of this Letter being
resolved to take the first occasion, loudly to reproach the Association, caught
hold of this in his anger, before ever he considered whether it were of weight
or no for his purpose. The truth is, so little influence had our Association
upon this Election, as that in all the meetings of the Brethren, where we were
present, never was any the least consultation about it; we professedly decline
in our meetings all intermedlings in matters of civil concernment, so as that
days work was no more the issue and fruit of our Association, then Tenterden
steeple was the cause of Goodwins sands.

But he says our Association may rather be called a subtle combination, then
a Christian spiritual Communion, as we manage it. He should have done well to
have told the world how we do manage it more like a subtle combination then a
Christian spiritual communion; and if he could have done it, he would not have
spared us: but we see he has learnt that principle, Boldly to calumniate, and
then something will stick. And because he wants whereof in particular to accuse
our actings in this Association, therefore he does quarrel with out Intentions,
and tells the world that this Association was devised as a shelter upon a
Politic account against an approaching storm.

They rise above their measure doubtless, who take upon them to judge of heart
designs and intentions, and thereby to condemn actions apparently good, if
well meant. But to satisfy the world, and to justify our innocence, we are not
afraid nor ashamed to lay open the bottom of our design in this Association,
and how it has been managed all along. The Brethren are united in Christian
love, for mutual assistance and advice one with another, in that common work of
the Ministry to which we are called, and those meetings which have been
hitherto in this Association, have been managed to the Christian comfort and
edification of one another, and of the beholders, blessed be God for it; and we
trust in Jesus Christ they shall be so ever.

Though our Adversary be pleased to call it a subtle combination, yet we can
appeal to him whom we desire to serve in the Gospel of his Son, that we
intend nothing but a Spiritual, holy, Christian union improved (so far as our
frailty will permit) in the exercise of those uniting graces of love, humility,
self-denial, meekness, and brotherly kindness, for mutual edification in
faith and love which is in Jesus Christ. And if thus to unite be a grief of
heart unto any, yet we are sure it is a rejoicing of heart unto many, who
behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren thus to dwell even together
in unity.

The ends that we propounded to our selves, before expressed, are such as we
are sure no tongue but such as is set on fire of Hell, can speak against; and
the blessed fruits and issue of such an Association, through the good hand of
God upon it, will be such as none but such as are too much possessed with the
spirit of envy can envy us the happiness thereof. We have long groaned under
the evil and the mischief of our divisions, and we find that most of our
jealousies and jarrings are occasioned by our strangenesle and distance; and
upon this account our brethren at the last general meeting, testified
unanimously, and very affectionately, their desire to have such brethren, who
differ in matters of Church constitution and order to join in with them, that
as far forth as we are come we may walk together in love and cheerfulness by
the same rule; and if this might be obtained, we believe it would be acceptable
to the Lord, and a ready way to make a grave wherein to bury for ever much of
those unlively jealousies, enmity, and unbrotherly bitterness which sadly
appears amongst some whom we cannot otherwise judge of but that they are
brethren.

The Author seems to be possessed with the spirit of jealousy, and of evil
surmisings; since he can get nothing against us, he will surmise that there is
something; and if he cannot charge our actions, he will judge our hearts and
intentions, and from thinking there may be, concludes surely there is something
very blameworthy in us; as the Jews of Asia, seeing Trophimus the Ephesian with
Paul in the City supposed that Paul had brought him into the Temple, and cried
out, Men of Israel help, this is the man that brought Greeks into the Temple,
and has polluted this holy place. How much this is against the law of love, he
may do well to consider, for love thinks no evil. It is storied of Cambyses,
he did but dream his (...) should (...) King of Persia, and for this he put him
to death: so this man does but dream of plots and designs of a subtle
combination, and a politic device, and he presently concludes, so it is: and
what he would do unto us if he had power in his hand it is easy to judge; even
that which (to use his own words) would make our cares to tingle, and our
hearts to ache: which leads us from his Invective to his threatenings.

He tells us of an approaching storm; and again, as it was with the Prelates in
entering their Protestation in the former Parliament, they prepared a Rod to
whip themselves with, and dug a pit wherein they themselves did fall: so
will these men do, that which they have designed for upholding their corrupt
interest, will be the Ruin thereof: and again those rigid and foolish men will
not see the hand of God which is gone out against them, but go on in their
vain ways of opposition, notwithstanding they have been so often disappinted:
yea the work of the Lord shall prosper, and God will ere long separate his
faithful Ministers and servants from this corrupt self-seeking generation of
men. And again, though good men should be silent and sit still, yet the Lord
himself will shortly avenge the cause of his people, and bring deliverance in
a way which we think not of, which will make the ears of some to tingle, and
their hearts ache.

In all these passages he does threaten the Ministers shrewdly, with what is
coming upon them, and no marvil, Quicquid speramus facile Credimus; he hopes
to see the downfall of the Ministry, and so easily believes it, and it may be
thinks it will never be well till it be so. It is no new thing to meet with
peremptory predictions of the ruin and downfall of the Ministry, which yet
through the goodness of our God have fallen to the ground without expected
accomplishment; and it is no small mercy that God has beaten out the Teeth of
our Maligners; that they only can bark and not bite, that their tongues only
and not their hands can reach us: yet the world may see they do what they can,
and therefore the Author here does not so much Prophecy of, as Project our
ruin, by rendering us odious both to the People, by ranking us with the
Prelates, and also to his Highness and his Army, by provoking them against us,
as being of that sort of men who have caused the late broiles, and will yet
again imbroile the Nation in blood if God in mercy prevents not: In which he
deals with us and the rest of the Clergy of this Nation, (as he styles them)
as the Persecuters did in the Primitive times with the Christians, they put the
bodies of Christians into the skins of wild beasts, and then set wild beasts
upon them for to tear them, so he puts us into the shapes of his own conceits,
of his own apprehensions, and his own slanders of purpose to make us ugly, and
to render us vile and contemptible, that so the more easy way may be made for
our ruin: But our trust is in our God who knows our hearts, that he will in
due time clear our Innocence against those malicious suggestions, and make it
appear to his Highness and his Army, and to the whole Nation, that as poor
weak servants of Jesus Christ, we desire jointly to promote the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and the prosperity of the Commonwealth in which we live.

But he tells us we will not see the hand of God which is gone out against us,
but go on in our vain ways of opposition notwithstanding we have been so
often disappointed. To this we answer.

We fear we have been all of us too unobservant of the Lords hand, both of
chastisement and mercy too when it is lifted up over us, but surely it is our
blindness, or else the Lords hand has not been altogether stretched out
against the contemned Ministry of this Nation in Judgment, of latter times: we
think there was a time not long since, when many sadly feared, and others
strongly hoped that the despised, disowned Ministers of England should quite
have shaken hands with their maintenance and Ministry together, and had done
so, had not the Lord then appeared in the Mount wonderously, and unexpectedly,
for the rescuing his poor servants. We have often thought it our duty to
acknowledge this work of God, and to walk humbly, carefully, and thankfully
before the Lord in regard hereof. Our comfort and hope at the worst was, that
our Lord Christ has his Stars of all magnitudes in his right hand, and that
unless he remove the Candlestick he will continue his Stars amongst us, how
much soever they be clouded by the reproaches of many adversaries; and our hope
and comfort still is, that we have the same Lord who has delivered us, upon
whom to trust that he will yet deliver us; And we heartily bless God for the
instruments under him of our deliverance, and we hope that they shall never
have cause to repent, they nor their posterity, that they have rescued a poor
despised Ministry from rapine and ruin.

The Author seems to be desirous the world should think that he is no enemy to
the Ministry, but only to such as are corrupt, self-seekers, busybodies, and
therefore,

1. He makes an honorable mention of some whom he calls faithful Ministers,
and says, God will e're long separate his faithful Ministers and servants from
this corrupt self-seeking generation of men; But if this corrupt self-seeking
generation of men be the whole Clergy of the Nation, as he seems all along to
carry it, then they stand all without the reach of his charity, and cannot any
of them obtain so much from him, as to hope that they are in the number of
Gods faithful Ministers and servants, yet we doubt not but that even amongst
those whom he calls, this corrupt self-seeking generation, God has many
precious ones even amongst those whom he accounts as the filth and ^he
off-scowring of all things; Many faithful ones whose Ministerial abilities,
admirable success in winning souls to God, diligent and powerful Preaching,
sound and wholesome doctrine, peaceable demeanor, and holy and exemplary
conversation does distinguish them and separate them from a corrupt
self-seekin^ generation: and this separation we doubt not but God has already
made in the hearts of those who are truly sensible of the many gracious works
the Lord has wrought by them, and who for their works sake do account them
worthy of double honor.

2. He prays that God would forgive these men, for they cause the Ministry of
Christ to be evil spoken of, and to stink in the nostrils of people who do
but deride them as a company of vain busybodies.

Who would have expected after all this dirt cast upon us by the Author, to
have found in him so deep a sense of the reproaches cast upon the Ministry of
Christ? but alas, a few good words in the close will not be sufficient to wash
off the guilt of all his former reproachings and revilings: how much himself
does stand in need of the benefit of this prayer, will appear to the judicious
reader, if we do make a very little alteration in it; God forgive this man for
causing (as much as in him is) the Ministry of Christ to be evil spoken of, and
to stink in the nostrils of the people by his deriding of them as a company of
vain busybodies, for their doing of that which no law of God or man does
forbid unto them. And we would desire the Author of this Letter to examine his
own conscience in secret, upon this Interrogatory, how tender soever he seems
to be of the reputation of the Ministry that he would not have it to stink in
the nostrils of the people, whether that which troubles him at the very heart
be not because he sees us, and other poor servants of Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding all open and secret counter workings, still to retain a high
place both as to our persons and Ministry in the love and esteem of multitudes
who truly fear the Lord; however it will sound in his cares, we shall take the
boldness in all humility and thankefulness to our good God for his abundant
kindness toward his unworthy servants, to assure him that the despised
Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, even at this day do finds
(blessed b^ the Lord) much love in the hearts of very many who walk humbly and
closely with the Lord their God; nor do these servants of God discover any
more eminent effect of the hard speeches which are in word and Print uttered
against them by bitter men of several spirits and interests, then the blowing
up of the affections of many of Gods people to a stronger flame of love toward
them and their Ministry; which therefore we hope the Lord will teach and
strengthen his weak servants with greater faithfulness to fulfill to his own
glory, the stopping of the mouths of their enraged adversaries, and the good
of the poor of his flock who wait on him.

We are glad to hear that the Author of this Letter bethinks himself at last of
the Christian weapons of Faith Hope, Patience, Prayers, and Tears; it was our
hard lot to fall into his h^nds whilst he was making use of other more sharp
weapons; Psalm. 57. v. 4. yet if he and those of his party, of whom he speaks,
be in good earnest to stand to those spiritual weapons only, for the time to
come we shall desire to make use of no other; and if we fight on both sides
with these Arms, there may at last be hope that we may be brought together
into the bond of truth and Christian love, to serve our God with one consent
according to his blessed word.

All the revenge we will take of our accuser for his injurious dealing with us,
shall be to join him with our selves in our prayers to the Lord (though
possibly he may scorn the motion, as not thinking that we have any
acquaintance with God) that he would deliver both him and us from every evil
work, and keep us to his heavenly Kingdom to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Books newly printed by Ralph Smith, viz.
Mr. Dicksons Exposition on the whole Book of the Psalms in three Books.

The Christian Charter, showing the privilege of Believers in this life, and
in the life to come: by Mr. Watson Minister of Stephen Walbroke; the third
Edition, much enlarged.

Also, Mr. Watsons Art of Divine contentment; the second Edition.

Mr. Hutchinsons Exposition on the six small Prophets, viz. Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah.

Mr. Hutchinsons Exposition on the three last Prophets, viz. Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi.

An Exposition on the whole book of Ecclesiastes, by that late learned and
pious Divine, Mr. John Cotton Pastor of Bostock in New England.

A Sermon of Mr. Simon Ash at the funeral of Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker. Together
with a Narrative of his pious life. The second Edition, many other Poems and
Elegies added.


