THE Troublesome and Hard ADVENTURES IN LOVE.

Lively setting forth, The Fevers, the Dangers, and the Jealousies of Lovers;
and the Labyrinths and Wildernesses of Fears and Hopes through which they daily
pass.

ILLVSTRATED By many admirable Patterns of Heroical Resolutions in some persons
of Chivalry and Honor; and by the Examples of incomparable Perfections in some
LADIES.

A Work very Delightful and Acceptable to All.

Written in Spanish, by that Excellent and Famous Gentleman, Michael Cervantes;
And exactly Translated into English, By R. C. Gent.

London; Printed by B. Alsop, dwelling in Grubstreet near the upper Pump. 1652.

To the Munificent Lover of all Ingenious Spirits, The Right Honorable, and
most Noble, JAMES Earl of Northampton, etc.
My LORD.
I Have read that great Princes have stooped so low from the height of their
power, that they have vouchsafed their Princely favor to the most abject of
their people, and gratefully received a few drops of fair water from the palm
of a poor man's hand; which act of royal acceptance and respect, has more
enobled their names unto posterity, then all their deeds of victorious Chivalry
and Magnificence. The Consideration of this has imboldned me to prefer these
papers to your Honors acceptance and protection. The subject is but light, for
it treats of love; but so interwoven with stories of heroical resolution, and
examples of high perfection that you can read nothing in this nature more
profitable or delightful. The Author was by birth a Spaniard, the same
Gentleman that composed Guzman de Alfarache, and the second part of Don Quixot,
who in all his writings has made it as much his study as his mirth, to
represent and deride the vanity of those bold inventors, whose wild glory it
has been, not only to impose upon, but to torment the imaginations of their
readers; and instead of possibilities to fill their fables and the world, with
Giants and with Monsters.

The Spaniard (I know not by what fate) is more happy in his prose then in his
verse, whether his Cuentaes cannot so well be taught to run in numbers, or
whether the Genius of that Nation is more promptly inclined to express it self
in Prose then in Verse. Howsoever though he differs in the manner, yet he
agrees in the substance, for as the incomparable Sir Philip Sidney truly
observes, it is not the rhyme but the invention that crowns the Poet, and verse
does no more make a Poet, then a gown does a Lawyer. The piece in the Original
is dedicated to one of the Grandees in Spain, and of the Privy Council to the
King, which has more encouraged me, to present it to your Lordship in the
translation. And though there is no man a more absolute master of his passion
then your Lordship, and therefore cannot properly be said, to be subject unto
love, yet it shall be no dishonor to you to be a lover of the Muses, and to
accept these their flowers into your protection; flowers they are, but so
sweetly violent, that as their beauties may arrest all eyes, so I doubt not but
their perfume through many ages will continue to testify unto the world the
influence of your protection, and the most grateful resentments of him who is

(My Lord) Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant. R. C.

The Printer to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, this work coming to my hands by chance I published, hoping
that some might be delighted with the reading thereof. How worthy or unworthy
it is to be joynt-heir with the fine-born children of this our Age, I leave to
your censures, keeping mine own judgment within the compass of my breast. Yet
thus much the condition and quality of the Author emboldeneth me to say, That
he being as much a Merchant, as a Scholar, and a Traveller, as a Courtier, it
seems that the Subject of his writings is as pleasant as the Form; and the
Matter as delightful as the Manner. And knowing that some men conceive more
pleasure in the substance of Histories, either Politic or Amorous, then in the
flourish of words, I was the more encouraged to blaze this work to the light,
wherein many Histories are recorded; among which, though some are inserted that
have been written by others before, yet were never seen in English till now.
See them and use them at pleasure.

Farewell, B.A.

The Troublesome and Hard ADVENTURES IN LOVE.
CHAP. I. How the Emperor Nero sent to demand the daughters of Camillo for his
Concubines, and what happened thereupon.
IN the famous City of Mantua, at that time that Nero (whose cruelty has made
the world to admire his manners) was Emperor of Rome, dwelt an old Knight named
Camillo, no less adorned with virtue then favored of fortune: who being about
threescore and ten years old, was forced to lead a single life, his wife
Paulina paying nature her due. This Camillo being thus dispossessed of his most
wel-beloved Lady, with no less grief bewailed her death, then with pleasure he
enjoyed her presence whilst she yet lived. But time the medicine of all sorrow
diminished his grief, the sooner by means of the unspeakable pleasure which he
took in viewing the perfections of his son Perierio, and his two daughters
Euphilia and Perina; which Gentlewomen for their singular virtues and extreme
beauty, were of the Citizens of Mantua worthily termed the sepulchers and tombs
of their mother Paulinas graces and perfections, all Mantua judging that all
the gifts both of fortune, nature, and the mind, wherewith Paulina was endued
in her life time, were buried and intombed in her two daughters: neither was
Perierio less famous in respect of virtuous conditions then his sisters, he
being adorned with most excellent qualities, and inferior to no man both in
perfection of body and subtilty of wit.

Thus Camillo rejoicing that he was the father of such children, therein
thinking himself to be most happy, lived with as great contentment as any man
might do. But Fortune (whose favors are but seldom continual) grudging at his
felicity, intended to try whether he could as patiently suffer adversity in his
latter years, as he being younger had virtuously behaved himself in prosperity.

For Nero the Emperor, being informed of his wicked companions, in whose
flattery he took pleasure, that Camillo had two daughters in beauty surpassing
natures cunning, and in perfection of body resembling the Goddess Venus,
incontinently sent a Letter unto old Camillo, by two of his Noblemen, being
written after this manner.

Nero Governor of the world, to Camillo.
FRiend Camillo, (for so much I account thee to be, in that thou art my
subject.) These are to give you notice, how that the rare beauty of thy two
daughters Euphilia and Perina, being bewrayed unto the world by the report of
fame, and made known unto me by the relation of my noblemen, I judged them too
worthy to be joined in marriage to any man of lower estate then a King. And
therefore I command thee to send both thy daughters to the Court, where neither
the one nor the other shall be Empress, but both of them the Paramours and
Concubines of an Emperor.

Farewell.

This letter was with all speed by the said said Noblemen delivered unto
Camillo, who unclosing the same, and breaking us the seal, soon read that which
was sufficient to break his heart in pieces, and work his death, had not his
destinies reserved him to defend his daughters honesty, and free themfrom the
tyrants outrageous lust, through his sage counsel, and politic deliberation.
So that having read the Letters, after he had something meditated upon the
contents thereof, he gave the Noblemen answer, that for as much as he being a
widower could not live being separated from his two daughters and his son
Perierio, he would with his son accompany them to the Court, there doing his
Majesty such service as it might please him to command, expecting the day of
his departure out of this world, leaving not his daughters only but his son
also at his Majesty's pleasure. But to the end that he might take order for the
preparation of his journey, and provide such necessaries as were expedient for
him, his son and his daughters, he desired them to obtain of his Majesty but
the space of one month, which expired, he would without all doubt be at the
Court with his children. The Noblemen finding old Camillo so ready to pleasure
Nero the Emperor, promised him to do what they might, and so departed. But
Camillo calling his son Perierio, with his daughters Euphilia and Perina to him
sending a world of tears from his eyes, which distilling along his pale cheeks
streamed on his silver hairs, and fetching a long sigh from the innermost part
his heart said unto them.

Ah Perierio, ah Euphilia, ah Perina, ah my loving children, in whose
prosperity consists all my hope, yea in whose felicity my life is harbored,
insomuch, that through the increase of your honorable virtues, I have enlarged
the term of my life; and now seeing that Fate or Fortune does threaten your
dishonor, I doubt not but that I shall be overcome by grief to end my aged
days, and with a tragical and mournful death shut up all those happy and
blessed hours which the Gods have hitherto granted me. Ye have heard the
Tyrants will, ye know his lust, and likewise ye are not ignorant, what shame,
what infamy, what dishonor that would be, not only to you two, Euphilia and
Perina, but also unto me, unto your Brother, yea unto all the line and stock of
our race and kindred. What answer I have made the Noblemen, is not unknown to
any of you. But as I do not mean to be found as good as my word in the least
point of all that which I have promised them; so I am of opinion that ye cannot
believe otherwise, but that my tongue spoke further then it had command from my
heart, and that my lips pronounced that which was not in my breast concluded.
But loving children, where Lust is a Lord, and Riot rules, equity and justice
is expelled: and where a Tyrant governs, all is Law that he does like.
Wherefore fearing lest contradiction and denial might be cause of our disgrace,
I stuffed the Tyrants Messengers with such a pleasing and soothing answer. But
to be short, know, loving children, that I had rather that we should all agree
to die one death, then to condescend unto the Tyrants outrageous and lividinous
desire.

Perierio having heard his Fathers noble resolution wondering that such courage
harbored in his breast, he being a man of such an aged life, considering that
old men are commonly deprived of natural heat, and so become cold, fearful,
and void of all heroical virtues; amazed therefore at his fathers virtue, and
rejoicing that he was the son of such a father, answered him in this mander.
Father, the extreme sorrow which I conceived by reason of Nero his heinous
intent to disgrace us with the spot of infamy, in demanding my sisters to
deflower them, and make a prey of their chastities, no doubt had smothered my
heart and stopped my senses, not suffering me to utter one word, had not the
joy which your noble virtue and valiant courage works in me, gotten the
superiority, and freed me from the excessive injury of sorrow. Therefore if it
would please the Gods to be so gracious unto us, that we might escape the
imminent ruin and fall of our honor, I for my part am ready to resign not
only my liberty, but also my life, and with ransom of the cruellest death
that man may excogitate, redeem the honor of our lineage and progeny.

Perierio had no sooner declared his readiness in agreeing to his fathers
resolved will, but Euphilia (though by grief commanded to keep silence) uttered
forth these words.

Father, the Tyrant can rule the body, but not the mind, he may threaten us
shame, dishonor, and disgrace, but shall not be able to accomplish or execute
the least of his menaces Cowards fear the threatenings of those that would fly,
were they threatened: but where courage displayeth his Ensigns no menaces may
approach. And therefore let the Tyrant do what he can; for his power is not
sufficient to dishonor our kindred by threatening us disgrace, for that we
neither fear him, nor all his torments. For death, which the Gods have
appointed, a fearful token to most men to warn them to leave their worldly
pleasures, and to resign their vital breath is unto us a most sweet and
pleasant object, and yields us comfort, being the only mean by which we may
escape infamy and shame. Death therefore shall free us from the Tyrants
intended villainy, and redeem our kindred from disgrace.

Perina, glad that her sister concluded so well to her liking, said.

Father, seeing then that (as my sister has well declared) death must be our
redeemer, I beseech you not to torment your old age with anxietie and grief for
us; and you brother, though we die, may pass your youth in pleasing rest. And
therefore let my sister and me care for this matter, which touches us only,
and fear not that by means of our cowardice ye shall reap any dishonor. And
seeing that of two evils the least must be chosen, and the greatest avoided,
let me persuade you to look to your selves, and avoid the Tyrants anger, which
ye are sure to incur, if you resist his will, and obey not his command,
accomplishing your promise made unto his Messengers. Wherefore Father send us,
and wring your self from Fortunes wrong: consider your age, which requires
rest: take your delight, comfort your self with the presence of my brother
Perierio, in viewing whose virtues and perfections you may easily forget us,
though we were Goodesses and not mortal maids. So shall both yo^ and my brother
escape danger, and my sister and I g^in honor and renown. For we fear not the
Tyrant; he may tyr^nize where he can, for our hearts (which will never yield to
vice) are of too noble a disposition to be conquered by him that i^ overcome by
his own lusts and lividinous affections. To be short know that neither the
Tyrant nor all his menaces shall be able to conquer us, seeing that we have
death tied at our gi^dles, which shall in spite of all the Tyrants of the
world ransom us from dishonor.

Old Camillo seeing that his son and both his daughters were endued with such
an haughty and valiant mind, as a man that had forgotten all occasion of
sorrow, with a pleasant countenance replied.

Most haughty Euphilia, and couyagious Perina, I have followed your counsels,
and as you see put off all sorrow: Now therefore attentively hear my counsel,
and prepare your selves to put it in execution. My intent is such, that if ye
die, your brother and I will not live till morn; let us therefore disguise our
selves, and to morrow morning depart from Mantua before day. The Gods will
favor us, and deliver us from Nero his hands seeing that we (as our
consciences witness) to free their sacred constitutions from violence, have
left our possessions, lands, castle and substance, committing our selves to
fortunes mercy, which is mere cruelty. But if our flight be so unhappie that we
be overtaken by the Tyrant, then, as we hoped all to live can we all but die:
and seeing we cannot live the one without the other, let us all live together,
or all die together. These hoarie hairs of mine, are messengers of death, and
warn me to prepare my self for the grave: but your golden locks, and the glory
of your youth forbids death to approach, and shall then ye be ready to die,
and I that stand with one foot in my grave fly from him whom I cannot
overrun? No no, loving children. I seek not to live but to have you live, and
therefore yield to my request, and live with me, if ye will not have me die
with you,

CHAP. II. How Camillo, with his Son Perierio, and his two daughters, Euphilia
and Perina, fled out of Mantua into Spain, to escape the fury of the Tyrant
Nero, where they became shepherds: Also how Perierio became enamoured on a
strange Lady,
EUphilia and Perina, hearing that their Father was so desirous to aba^don all
his livings for their cause, fell down on their knees before his feet, and
prayed him to command them to do whatsoever he pleased, and they would be most
ready to execute his pleasure. Camillo therefore taking them up by the hand,
willed them to prepare themselves to depart from Mantua with him and Perierio
the next morning, taking their best Jewels with them, and all their ready
Gold. Camillo clothed himself like a Shepherd, and Perierio (lest his father
should be known) played the Barber, and shaved his beard clean off to the chin:
and apparelled himself like a Butchers boy, Euphilia and Perina, (whose beauty
and favor was such as could not but be known) scarce able all night to imagine
how they might disguise themselves in such manner that they might pass
unknown, at last concluded to cloth themselves like Market-women, and seeing
the wind blew something strongly, they thereby took occasion to muffle their
faces with their handkerchiffs, as if they had the toothach. Thus the old
shepherd, young butcher, and muffled Market-women, were so cunningly disguised
that no man thought so much as to dream, that they should be Sir Camillo, with
his son and his daughters. So that they passed not only through the City but
the Country also, unknown to any man. Neither did they rest until they were so
far from Mantua that they thought themselves to be out of danger. Yet they
durst not stay in any place of Italy, for fear least search being made after
them, they might fall into the tyrants hands: and therefore traveled on daily
till they came into Spain, and there in a solitary place where no kind of
people but shepherds did resort they built a pretty house, and bought a flock
of sheep, determining to live shepherds until such time as the Gods and their
fortune would suffer them to return to their country.

These shepherds had not dwelt in their new built house the space of six
months or thereabout, but they had perfectly learned to understand and speak
the Castilian tongue, insomuch that the same language was as easy unto them as
their own. For there being but little difference betwixt the Italian and
Spanish tongues (which are of near affinity,) and these noble shepherds being
wonderful witty and ingenious, it could not be but that they should in short
space apply their Italian tongue to the pronunciation of the Spanish words. For all the shepherds that in those quarters dwelled, as they did marvel at the
supernatural beauty of these strange shepherds, so did they think it a
miracle that they had in so short a time learned to talk with the Spanish
shepherds, and that so eloquently and with such a grace, that many took
pleasure to talk with them, and few departed from them without bearing away
that which was sufficient to instruct them in their own language. In so much
that diverse of them being more curious then others, when they went to talk with
the new shepherds, carried paper books with them to note up such phrases as
Perierio and his sisters used in their talk. Besides the Castilian tongue, they
had also learned to play upon all such rural and pastoral instruments as were
by the shepherds of that quarter used. On which instruments Perierio played
with such dexterity, that the inhabitants thereabouts thought that Orpheus had
been raised from hell to fill the air with the agreeing noise of his
instrument, and to delight the shepherds of that Country with his pleasant
notes. Euphilia and Perina, not much inferior unto Perierio in that quality,
yet far his superiors in singing a part in music, by reason that their voices
were clearer then his, when they sung unto their brothers instrument, moved the
other shepherds to wonder at their celestial melody, and become so
heretical, that they thought Perierio to be some God, and his sisters two
Goddesses, supposing it a thing impossible that mortal creatures should be
endued with such heavenly and immortal conditions. But whatsoever they were
thought to be, they were so beloved of all the Spanish shepherds, that no man
thought himself happy yt had not perfect friendship and alliance with them. Yea
if the least injury in the world had been offered to Perierio, his aged father,
or his beautiful sisters, they were all ready to revenge it, not as a private
quarrel, but as some common and public wrong done to the whole Country, and
all the inhabitants thereof.

Old Camil^o, therefore seeing that he and his children were so beloved of all
the Country, and taking great delight in the sweetness of the air of that
climat, began to build farms and to purchase land, so that fortune favoring
him, he became in short time wealthy and rich, and of great credit. Perierio
his son, took great delight in hunting and fowling, often committing his flock
to his sisters care, who kept both his sheep and their own with such diligence,
that all men marked that they were not careless, but painful and industrious
Yea they won such favor and commendation in every man's eye, as their beauty
was not only praised in the Country, but also spoken of in Cities far from
them. And yet was their submisse modesty such, that although their praise daily
increased, yet they nothing puffed up with pride, humbled themselves, and
scorned not to keep company with the basest swain in all the Country. Every day
they went forth with their flocks to the field, defending their faces from the
heat of the Sun, with no other scarf or vale then a garland made of sundry
kinds of flowers, that attire becoming them so bravely, that they seemed to be
daughters unto the Goddess Flora for their exquisite beauty, marching with
their sheep through the pleasant Downs and green fields, more like to some
heavenly Nymphs then mortal women. If it chanced there were a meeting of all
the Farmers daughters, then were they (I mean Euphilia and Perina) bid thither
as the mistresses and chiefest of the feast: Perierio their brother, likewise
missed no feast nor game, being invited by the richest and chiefest farmers
sons; whereof many became suitors unto his sisters, and many of their sisters
enamoured of his beautiful and comely disposition, wished themselves married
unto him. But he delighting more in tuning his pastoral Harp, rejoiced his
companions with a round or twain, whilst that others courted their mistresses,
not so much because he would not debase himself to love a shepherdess, as
for that he shunned so Lordly a Master as Cupid, esteeming his liberty and
freedom from fancy, the only cause of all his joy and pleasure. But fortune
who thitherto had favored both Perierio and his sisters, began to withdraw her
lovely looks from them, and in lieu of a smiling countenance, intended to show
them a lowering face and frowning forehead For not long after, it chanced upon a
pleasant morning betimes before Phoebus golden lines had greeted the Southern
plains, that Perierio haunting his accustomed hunt in a passing pleasant wood,
not far from the place where his sisters fed their flocks, (having left his
sheep unto their keeping as he was wont to do) espied a brave damsel, her
beauty being comparable to the color that Venus face is dyed withal; sitting
on a hillock, and resting her head on her hand. At the sight whereof, Perierio
greatly amazed, retired behind a bush, where he not seen, might perfectly both
see her, and hear what she said: for he marked by her countenance that she was
in a melancholy mood, and vexed with extraordinary grief. Her words were these
being expressed with a lamentable voice, moving the very trees and bushes to
yield tears.

Ah Fortune, as often as Phoebus appears in the woods, as often as he rises
in his Eastern glory, and as often as his penetrating rays warn me to leave my
restless rest, and harness my self to my endless toil, and never ceasing
labor; so often thou do renew my grief and multiply my sorrows. What,
Fortune, have thou made all other women so happy through my mishap, that to
make me an instance of the miserablest wight that lives, thou have delivered
all others from their miseries, to throw them all on me? O most injust doom! O
most cruel Goddess! Though by reason of the exceeding injustice, thou
deservest to be crossed out of the catalogue of divine powers. And therewith
she rose from the hillock, and looking round about which way she might take,
she espied Perierio behind the bush coming toward her, which she marking,
stayed unill he came near her and saluting him with a most gracious
countenance, said. Shepherd (for so much thy apparel betokens, though thy
beauty be such, as makes me to mistrust if, and think that thou art but a
counterfeit shepherd) pardon me if I be too bold in demanding thy name and
country; which if it may please thee to tell me, thou shall bind me to owe thee
a good turn. Perierio (whose heart was pierced with Cupids shaft, and on
sudden made captive to that Lord whose service he so shunned) so gazed on this
Lady (for she was no less, as you shall hereafter learn) in whose beauty all
his desire rested that he could scarce speak one word; at last, plucking up his
spirits, answered. Madam (for your exquisite perfections and stately
countenance deserves no less) where no offense is committed, pardon is craved
but in vain; I am an Italian born; called Perierio, the happiest man that ever
was named, if occasion were presented wherein I might do any service acceptable
unto you Madam, I thank thee Perierio (replied the young Lady) for this thy
undeserved courtesy; and seeing I am not able at this time to make thee any
recompense. I can but pray the Gods to grant thee thy hearts desire. And with
that shooting into the midst of the woods she was out of Perierios sight,
before he thought she was departed. For when she heard by his name and Country,
that he was not the man she doubted of, and gathering by his countenance, that
he was suddenly struck in love of her, least he should become troublesome and
importunate unto her, hasted thence, supposing that she being out of sight
should also be out of the shepherds mind; and that by ^eason of her absence he
should recover his liberty and freedom which her presence had caused him to
loose. But alas, where she thought by her departure to ease his grief
contrarily she increased his passions. For he seeing that the sum of his
conceived pleasures were fled, and she missing, in whose golden locks his soul
was entangled, began to cry out with a loud and pittyfull voice. My soul, my
soul, whither art thou fled? Why have thou left my body, seeing that thou being
separated from me, I may not live? Ah poor Perierio wretched Perierio! Die: die
miserable Perierio. Ah cruel Gods, that have allotted me a life worse than
death and a body without soul. Ah discurteous Lady, and is this the
gratefulness you wished to show me, as a due recompense for my readiness in
doing you pleasure? Is this the thankfulness you talked of Is this the good
turn you should owe me? To steal away my heart, and carry my soul with thee,
imprisoned in the snares of thy alluring looks; leaving my body breathless,
and so giving me sufficient occasion to accuse them both of theft and murder,
considering that thou have robbed me of my soul, and thereby deprived me of
life. For now have I no life of mine own but live only in thee Ah unhappy man
that live, and know not where I live, for I live in that body which is in place
as far unknown unto me, as that body ^t self. So that I live in a body I know
not what, which unknown body is in a place, I know not where. Forgive me Cupid
divine power and mighty God, I confess to have offended in contemning and
neglecting thy puissance: Which my contempt, thou have punished with a pain the
like never heard of before. The dart penetrated into the very inmost part of my
heart and forced me to yield to love. Seeing then I love and am inroled in the
scrowl of those that follow thy bands, as a true and valerous Captain lead me
to the knowledge of that which I love. For I doubt nut but that thou which have
had the puissance to make me love, and that so strangely; art likewise able to
make me know whom I love. Thus Perierio after that he had with many sighs and
tears bewailed the loss of his former freedom, began at length to consider,
that the accustomed hour of his returning to dinner was past, and therefore
least his father should marvel at his long absence, and by reason thereof fall
into suspicion, least some mischance had befallen him (for old men are always
careful of their children, and as often as they be out of sight, so often do
they deem them to be lost) he more like a shadow then a man crossed the nearest
way homewards. Where he found his aged father sleeping, for the heaviness he
was in by reason of Perierios absence, rocked him a sleep: but as soon as he
heard Perierio, he awaked, and then they fell closely to their cheer, though
Perierios mind ran more on his unknown mistress then his present meat.

Whilst that these two were at dinner, Euphilia and Perina, to shun the
extreme heat of Phoebus, mounted in his Meridian pride, went with their sheep
toward the Wood side, to take the advantage of the high trees which yielded a
most pleasant shadow: Where they sitting together began to take their Oaten
Pipes and sing. Euphilia began in this manner.

Whilst Thaetons sage fire
his scorching beams
On the earth does cast and move
the sacred crew,
Of Nymphs most chaste to seek
the silver streams;
Therein to bath their hands
of Crystal hue:
My Pipe shall move the air
with her sound
To send down drops and wet
the scorched ground.
Perina. Whilst bright Apollo in his highest seat,
With fiery lines does burn the tender grass:
My notes shall pierce the skies and Jove entreat,
To bid the winds repress their furious blasts.
That sweetly breathing on us in the field,
The glittering leaves a pleasant noise may yield.

Euphilia. The chirping birds now do moiest the air,
And to the clouds complain of summers heat:
The hunter cease to pursue the hare,
And fowls do leave their prey for fainting sweat.
Now therefore shall my voice the skies ascend,
To move the Gods this harmfull heat to mend.

Perina. Now do the simple sheep to shadow fly,
The Traveller by Cinthia's light is lead:
To shun the rays which sparkling down the sky,
Proceed from fiery Phoebus golden head.
My Pipe shall therefore to the clouds complain,
Resolving them in showers of wished rain.

What an excellent matter is it (said Euphilia) sister Perina, that we here
leading this Country life, and being separated from the noise and tempestuous
uproars and broyls which commonly are raised in the proud Courts of Princes,
should enjoy such extreme pleasure as we do in these pleasant groves, sometimes
being in the shadow, sometimes sitting on the banks of the delectable River,
and sometimes walking in the dark groves, where we both fence our faces from
Phoebus injury, and delight our ears with the natural Music of the singing
birds. I promise you truly (quoth Perina) I am of opinion that the noise which
the wind makes among the trees, does delight and recreate the hearts of men,
more then ye fond noise of some people when there is a great assembly. For
there the greatest pleasure, is mere grief: proud Majesty and highness,
nothing else but vanity; feasts and games nothing but troubles and tempests;
honor and renown, nothing but blind errors; and most commonly we find, that
among them that delight in that kind of life, words and thoughts are different,
the tongue pronouncing otherwise then the heart means. But here (said
Euphilia) ambition lays not her bait, neither has avarice or covetousness
any place here. The people does not here aspire to honors nor sue for
dignities: but men live free from passions and perturbations in all virtue and
simplicity. Here reigns little or no malice, but all things are ruled by
justice. Neither does the simple shepherd (quoth Perina) seek out new parts of
the world nor adventure into strange Countries, committing himself neither to
the cruel furious winds, nor unmercifull waves, to enlarge his treasure, or
augment his riches. And yet he lives as contentedly with that little which he
has, as he that does abound in rich possessions and great revenues.

CHAP. III. How Marcelio came to the house of Camillo, and of the strange
advenutres that befell him in his love to Alcida.
AS Euphilia and her sister were thus discoursing, they seemed to hear the
voice of some distressed person, and Euphilia arising, espied a shepherd
resting his back against the trunk of a tree; but she hoping to gather the sum
of his grief by the sense of his complaint, steeped immediately applying her
ear to the shepherds words, which were not unlike to these.

Ah love, thou can not invent any worse torment then I feel nor thou fortune
can be more variable and inconstant, then thou art unto me. And it is
impossible to find a heart so bereft of all hope, and yet so content in
suffering pain, as mine whereof love is the only cause; which upholdeth my
languishing breath, to the end that I may endure the grief which continually
vexes me, But when shall my tears and life take end? when shall my torment
cease? when shall my sighs bring forth my heart with them.

And therewith he took his way straight toward the place where Euphilia and
Perina sat. Whither he arrived so sorrowful, so weary, and so grieved, that
it seemed that fortune pitying his case, had purposely sent him to that place
to comfort him and assuage his dolours, not only up means of the clear water
which did spring out of the foun^ in whither the shepherds accustomed to lead
their sheep to drink: but also by reason of the pleasantness of the place the
shadow of the trees, and exceeding beauty of these two noble shepherds. In so
much that all these things caused him to think that he had received some
solace, though the importance of that which he sought, and the desire he had to
find the same, gave him no leisure to rest in that place. Yet was he, being a
stranger so curtuously entertained by the two sisters, that he deemed himself
not a little happy to have lighted on such company, Wherefore he being
entreated by them to go with them to their lodging, to eat something, and to
refresh himself with such dainties as their country manner afforded, could not
but grant their request, and so followed them unto their fathers house. Where
he was received of aged Camillo and his son, not as a stranger, but as one that
had been of their near kindred and affinity. For they marking his singular
beauty and perfection of body his excellent grace in speaking, his sharp wit;
and his comely, behavior, thought him worthy of all the courtesy they could
imagine to show him. Supper being done, old Camillo took his leave of the
strange shepherd, and went to his rest. But Perierio and his sisters keeping
the shepherd company, led him into the Orchard to take the evening air, after
that Phoebus had shut up his light in the Western parts. And Euphilia desirous
to know what sinister chance had brought the shepherd into such a Chaos of
cares and world of sorrows, began thus to be inquisitive of his fortune.

Gentle shepherd, seeing that the night is no time to travel and you are so
tired that you are like to fall in great danger of some sore disease, unless
you look to your self and rest your weary limbs, I heartily pray you to stay
with us this night, and you shall have no worse bed then where my brother lies
on, nor worse bedfellow then himself. And for as much as the pleasantness of
this cool air is such, that it inticeth and provokes us to recreate our selves
therein: if that you will whilst we expect the coming of the dark night,
unfold the cause of this your wandering journey unto us, and make us pertakers
of your evil and adverse fortune, we shall think us to be greatly beholding
unto you. The shepherd would not be long entreated by such excellent persons,
but walking with them in a pleasant arbor of Eglentine, began to discourse
after this manner.

Gentle shepherds, the manifold benefits which it has pleased you to heap on
me being a mere stranger, unworthy by my deserts of the least courtesy in the
world, bind me to yield to whatsoever you can demand of me, as far as my simple
power stretches, And therefore although my evil be of such nature that it
cannot be communicated unto all kinds of persons, yet the opinion which I
conceive of your deserts, and the valor which your beauty bewrays,
constrains me to make an open rehearsal of all my forepast life, if I may
term that life which I would willingly counterpoise and change with death. Know
therefore gentle shepherds that I am called Marcelio, and that my vocation and
estate is far contrary to that which my co^t ^heweth. I was born at Soldine,
the principal and chief Cit^ of the Province of Vandalia, and my parents were
of great authority abounding in wealth and riches; I have been brought up even
from my childhood in the Court of the Lusitan King, where I was much made of,
and dearly beloved, not of the principal Peers only, but also of the King
himself. Insomuch that he would not suffer me to part from his Court, until
that time that he had committed his Garrisons in the borders of Afric unto my
charge. Where I remained a long time chief and general Governor of all the
Cities and For tresses which the King there has; keeping my residence in the
City of Cente, where my misfortune and adversity took beginning. There was in
the same City a certain Knight named Eugerio, who was by the King honored with
the charge and government of the City. This Knight had a son called Polydor,
most valiant and courageous in all extremities; and two daughters called Alcida
and Clenarde, exceeding all the Gentlewomen of their Country in beauty.
Clenarde was endued with singular dexterity in handling her bow, but Alcida,
who was the eldest surpassed her in beauty. Who has so enamoured my heart,
that she has been the cause of this hopeless and desperate life which you see
me lead, and of the cruel death which I call and wi^h for every hour. Her
father was so careful and dainty of her, that he would scarce allow her at any
time to absent her self from his presence, which hindered me that I could not
let her know the affection which I bore her. But nevertheless as often as I
saw her I signified and bewraied my pain unto her by means of my passionate
looks, and the sighs which proceeded from my heart without the consent of my
will. At length I found occasion to write unto her and therefore unwilling to
neglect such wished opportunity, I sent her a letter the contents whereof were
such.

Ma^celio unto Alcida.
MAdam, your honesty and grave countenance, your modesty and wisdom, your
wit, and great judgment, and thousand other virtues with which you are most
happily endued besides the incomparable beauty which increases your renown in
all parts of the world, have so entangled my thoughts in the consider^ion
thereof that I have been forced to collocate, and place the sum of my felicity
in meditating the rare gifts both of body and mind, by which it has pleased
the Gods to make your Ladyship famous. But when I consider mine own
unworthiness, and perpend the great difference, which is between such
excellency and my self, such is the despair which possesses my heart, that I
suffer incredible torment. Yet the force of your beauty constrains me to
judge my self happy, in that I suffer pain for so worthy a Lady as your self.
So that I feel singular joy and gladness in my evil, and receive an extreme
glory in enduring grief. Pain unto me is a pastime; to weep, a pleasure; to
sigh, a solace; grief, health; which does raise the fury of torment in me,
though therein I enjoy a blessed content. All this do I suffer for you Madam;
it is your beauty and virtue which causes me to be tormented with such
contrary passions. And therefore pity an unfortunate lover, who offers you
his own ^^fe, and who desires not that his evil may be redressed, but only
wishes that it may be known.


This was the Letter which I wrote unto my Lady, which if it had been so well
^eaned as it was fortunate. I would be loath to change my ^bility with the
eloquent style of Tully. The Letter being secretly conveyed into the hands of
Alcida, at the first caused her to be offended with my boldness, but at last
marking the sincerity of my love, and the constancy wherewith I not only
remained steadfast, but also patiently endured he^ s^^rnfull answers and
disdainful looks, her heart was altered, and she moved to reward my love with
a pleasant countenance. So that when my luck was to see her, I easily e^pted
the ^lteration of her former frowardness. For her very eyes did warn me to be
of good cheer, and I might plainly see grace ^e^ted in her forehead. After
which time I b^gan openly to show my self to be her superior, oftentime
justing, turneying, and writing verses poems, and many such other things for
her service, remaining in this pain the space of certain years. Which being
expired, Eugerio thought me worthy to be his son in law, and by means of some
of the chiefest personages of the City he offered me his daughter Alcida in
marriage. And it was amongst us agreed, that our wedding should be kept in the
City of Lisbone, to the end the King of Portugal might be present at the same.
Whereupon we dispatched a Post in all haste to advertise the King of this
marriage, and to entreat his Majesty that we commending our charge unto
faithful and trusty persons, might come thither to celebrate our marriage the.
The rumor of which marriage was incontinently sperad through all the City and
the neighbor places thereof and caused such a general joy and applause in all
men, as so beautiful a Lady as Alcida, and so faithful a lover as my self
deserved. Until that time it seems that I was very happy. But fortune that
favored me so highly, afterward cast me down headlong into the depth of these
miseries, in which I find my self presently, Know therefore that after my
unfortunate marriage was concluded on, and the Kings license granted, Eugerio
being a widower, his son Polidor, his daughters Alcida and Clenarde, and
unhappy Marcelio, who unfoldeth his mishap unto you, having committed our
charge to loyal persons, we embarked at the Haven of Centa, to sail to the
noble City of Lisbone, there to celebrate our marriage, as I have before said.
The content and pleasure which we conceived of our wished desires, in such
manner blinded us, that regarding neither the unmercifull waves nor the
boisterous winds, and commending our vessel to fortune, the patroness of
inconstancy, we went to sea in the worst and dangerousest time of the year, not
considering or perpending the inconveniences that at such times are ordinary.
But very shortly thereafter, fortune chastised our temerity and fond rashne:
for before night had covered Neptunes face with the curtain of darkness, the
Master of the ship discovered certain tokens of tempests to come. Soon after
began the thick and obscure clouds to cover the skies, the angry waves began to
murmur, the winds blow variably. Whereupon the master of the ship with a
fearful and troubled countenance uttered these words. Ah sorrowful and
fearful tokens! Ah unfortunate bark! What ill luck and miserable adventure is
prepared for thee, if the Gods here show not their deity!

He had no sooner ended these words, but a certain boistreus and furious blast
so launced on the mainsail, and in such manner whirled into the body of the
whole ship, that at that instant she was in such danger, that he who held the
stern was forced to abandon the government thereof, and so the ship following
the mighty fury wherewith she was led, and went whither the wind and waves did
drive her. The tempest increased more and more and became greater and greater;
the furious waves covered with white foam began to augment their anger and to
rage more then before. There might we see a massy rain falling from the
element, intermingled with lightening and fearful thunder. There might we also
hear a terrible noise and shaking of the sail yard, the mast, the lines, cords,
cables, and tackling of the ship. There might we also hear the lamentable voice
both of the passengers and Mariners, which caused us to fear exceedingly. The
winds beset the ship on all sides, and the waves battered it in such manner,
that the very strongest and best nailed parts thereof burst in pieces. The
proud sea sometimes lifted us up to the firmament, and suddenly she carried us
down even unto the bottom; yea and (that which was wonderful) the waves in
such manner parted asunder, that we might plainly see the sand and gravel in ye
bottom of the sea. The men and women that were in the ship lamenting and
bewailing their unfortunate end, some fetched heavy and grievous sighs from the
bottom of their hearts; some offered pitiful vows, others yielded fountains
of tears out of their eyes. The master of the ship not knowing what to do
against such raging fortune, his cunning being overcome by the fierceness and
perseverance of the tempest, could no longer conduire le timon.

He knew not the nature nor offspring of the winds, and in one instant
commanded and ordained a thousand different matters. The Mariners troubled and
vexed by reason of the agony and perplexity of their present death, could not
execute their charge and by reason of the noise and cries of the passengers,
could not understand what the master prescribed them, calling as loud as he
could for his life. Some of them turned the sail yard; others hales the sale
cord; others striked the top-sail; others came to mend the sprit sail; others
to save the misen sail; others did take of the bonnet and enlargement of the
main-sail; others were occupied with knitting the broken lives together; others
looked to the hinder deck tail and castle of the ship; others to the fore deck;
others to the hatches; others voided the sea into the sea, casting the water
out of the ship. To be short every man did what in him lay to defend and save
the miserable vessel from inevitable shipwreck. But all their diligence served
to no end, their vows and tears helped not to appease angry and fierce Neptune;
but the night approached more and more, and the wind and tempest increased
marvellously. When the dark night was fallen, the tempest being nothing
assuaged, Bugerio hoping for no remedy, with a terrible countenance,
representing the very picture of fate and despair, his eyes being cast on his
son, his daughters, and me his son in law, gave us sufficiently to understand
by the heaviness of his looks, what grief he ^uffered for the death which was
prepared for us. Insomuch that his care and grief did as much hurt, as our own
misfortune. T^^ p^or old m^n environed with sorrow, spoke in this order with a
lamentable voice the tears running down his f^ce

Ah changeable Fortune, enemy of humane welfare have thou reserved such a
woeful disaster for my old days? Oh how happy are they that die in bloody
battles amidst their enemies in their youth, to the end that never attaining to
their l^tter age, they f^ll not into d^nger to bewail the pitiful adventurse
and death of their loving children! oh wonderful mishap! oh sorrowful success!
who ever ended his life with such grief as my self? For whereas I thought to
comfort my self at the time of my death in leaving children in the world, to
conserve and keep the memory and remembrance of my lineage and kindred, now I am
constrained necessarily to die with those that ought to celebrate my funerals.
O loving and dear children who would have thought that my life and yours,
should have finished at one self same time and instant? Who would have thought
that our lives should have taken their and through one and the self-same
misfortune? I would willingly comfort you my dear children; but what solace can
a sorrowful father give, whose heart is pestered with so much grief, und who
himself is void of all consolation.

Comfort your selves my children, arm your hearts with patience, leave all
grief and sorrow unto me, to the end that I dying may suffer as many deaths as
ye all must endure.

This, old Eugerio uttered with so many sighs and sobs that he could scarce
with much ado speak, embracing us all one after another to take his leave and
bid us farewell, before the hour of eminent shipwreck was come. It would be a
great enterprise, and difficult matter for me presently to recount what tears
Aloda wept, and what grief I suffered for her sake, and therefore I will only
tell you one thing that nothing so much grieved me as that my life (which I had
offered for her service) could not take end without her death. In the mean time
our forlorn ship driven with the force of the angry waves and furious winds
(which blew so mavelous strongly) flying all night though the straight of
Gilbatan, more swiftly then we wished or served our turn the next day went
astray, I know not how many leagues into the large Mediterrean sea.

Where after that we had long wandered hither and thither, the force of the wind
and waves driving us up and down for the space of that dry and night, the next
morning the tempest seemed to be something assuaged, and the rufull waves
abating their courage, Neptune spread a pleasant calm over the sea; wherewith
we were not a little cheared.

But fortune not contented to have heaped such a world of calamities upon us,
would also take her pleasure in mocking us in the midst of miseries. For on the
sudden the wished calm was turned into a worse and greater extreme tempest
then before: which brought us into such extremity, that we hoped not for one
hour of life. At last one side of the ship being strooken with a great raging
whirlwind, the other side lay flat upon the water, and was in danger to sink
presently.

When I saw the manifest danger, I began to ungird my sword, to the end it
might not hinder me, and embracing Alcida, I leaped with her into the ship
boat. Clenarde being a light and nimble Gentlewoman, following us did the same,
not leaving behind her bow and arrows, for that she esteemed more of that than
of some great and precious treasure. Polidor thrusting his father forwards,
thought to have done as much, and to have leaped into the boat as we had done;
but the ship-Master, with another Mariner, leaped in before them: And as
Polidor with his aged father thought to have followed, the boat was separated
from the ship by reason of a mighty wave which was driven by the wind betwixt
the ship and the boat, so that they were forced to remain in the ship: the
sight whereof in short time we lost, and never since heard any news of her. But
I am of opinion, that (all doubt removed) she was swallowed up by Neptunes
greedy waves, or that crossing overthwart the Sea, she perished miserably on
the coast of Spain.

How Bartophamus the Pylot, by Treason, left Alcida in the Isle Formentaria,
and Marcelio in the Isle Juique, and carried away Clenarde, and what ensued.
PErierio and his sisters listening to Marcelio's discourse, he proceeded in
this manner. Alcida, Clenarde, and I, being in the boat conducted by the
industry and diligent painfulnesse of the Mariners, we went astray up and down
the seas for the space of one whole day and night, attending for Death from
hour to hour, without hope of any remedy, not knowing where, or in what part of
the world we were. This notwithstanding the morning next following, we
perceived that we were very near to land, endeavoring to row as near it as we
could possibly, At the length, the two Mariners being very cunning in
swimming, did not only leap into the water to swim to the shore, but also drew
us all to that so long desired land. After we were so happily delivered from
the danger which furious Neptune threatened us. the Mariners fastened their
ship-boat to the shore side, and knowing the place where we landed, told us we
were in the Isle of Formentera: and wonderfully marvelled that we had run so
many miles in so little time. But they had such experience of the wonders that
fierce tempests are accustomed to do. that they were not too much amazed at the
course of our navigation. Yet howsoever the tempest had driven us, we were then
assured and out of danger of the menaces wherewith fortune feared us amidst the
inexorable waves. But we were so greeved for the loss of Eugerio and Polydor,
so troubled with weariness, and so famished with hunger, that we had none or
little cause to rejoice of the life which we had recovered. Neither will I now
rehearse what tears Alcida and Clenarde shed because they had lost their father
and brother, to the end that I may tell you the sorrowful and unhappy success,
which I had in that desert and solitary Isle. For after that, by reason we were
arrived in the same, I was delivered from the fury of the sea, love became such
an adversary and enemy unto me, that he seemed to be grieved that my life was
saved from the pecil of the tempest, and that he would torment me with a new
and more grievous pain, when I thought my self to be in safety. For malicious
Cupid wounded the heart of the Pylot (who was called Bartophamus) and rendered
him so far in love of the beauty of Clenarde, the sister to Alcida, that to
attain to the point of his intended desires, he forgot the law of friendship
and fidelity, and imagined a strange and wicked treason which he did put in
execution. Which was such.

As the two sisters wept, and grievously lamented their fathers and brothers
miserable death, it happened that Alcida overcome with heaviness and
weariness, she lay down on the sand and fell a sleep. Whereupon I began to say
to the Pylot: friend Bartophamus if we take not some order to provide for
victuals, and if our ill luck be such that we can find none, we may make
account we have not saved our lives, but rather that we have changed the manner
and kind of our death: and therefore would I that you and your companion should
go to some village or borough of this Isle, which you may find, to fetch meat
for us to eat. Sir Marcelio (answered Bartophamus) fortune has done us
pleasure enough in bringing us hither, and helping us to arrive at this Isle,
though it be desert and barren. And you must not think that we shall here find
any meat to assuage our hunger, and remedy our necessity; for the country is
not inhabited. But I will tell you how we may find means to suffer no hunger:
do you see yonder little Isle that lies right over against us, in that Isle
there is great quantity of Dear, Conies, Hares, and many other beasts. There is
also a Hermitage, where the Hermit has good store of bread and meal.
Therefore I am of this advice, that it were good that Clenarde (whose dexterity
and cunning in shooting is not unknown unto you) should pass over to that Isle
and carry her bow and arrows, which she has here with her, and kill some Heart
or Do. I and my companion will row her thither, and you sir Marcelio may stay
with Alcida. For it may so come to pass, that before she awaketh, we shall
return hither with abundance of fresh and savoury provision. This counsel of
the Pylot was well liked of me, and Clenarde, we not thinking of his pretended
treason. Nevertheless Clenarde, would not in any case pass over to the said
Isle, unless I went with her; for she durst not trust the Mariners. And
although I excused my self not to go with her, saying that it was not
convenient for me to leave Alcida alone, and that sleeping in a place so
solitary; she answered, that the distance between that place and the little
Isle, was not very great, that she was sure that we should bring good provision
with us, for that there was much venison in the Isle, and that the sea was calm
and still, (for after that we were set on shore the surging waves were
appeased) by reason whereof she concluded, that we might pass over to the
Isle, and return again before Alcida awaked, especially because she was tired
with weariness and had many nights been deprived of her rest. Finally, she
alleged so many reasons, that forgetting what was most convenient for me to
do, I resolved to accompany her to the Isle. Whereof Battophamus was not a
little grieved, for that he sought not to have any but Clenarde only to go, to
the end that he might the better execute his villainous treason, yet wanted not
the villain means to bring his wicked will to pass: for we leaving Alcida a
sleep alone and being all settled in the boat to pass to the Isle, I thinking
of no hurt and being unarmed (for I left all my weapons in the ship when I
leaped into the boat with Alcida to savo our lives) the two mariners fell upon
me, took me and bound me,

Clenarde seeing their manifest treason, would for grief cast her self
overboard into the sea, but the Pylot held her, and taking her aside, secretly
said unto her in this manner. Lady, trouble not your self for this fact, and be
not grieved at that which you see us do; we do it in your behalf you shall
understand, that this Marcelio as soon as we were arrived in yonder desert Isle,
spoke secretly unto me, and desired me to counsel you to pass over to the
Isle hard by, and after that we were on the sea, that I should sail Eastward,
declaring that he was in love with you, and that he would leave your sister in
the Isle, to the end that he might have you at his pleasure, without any let or
hinderance. And whereas he made such difficulty, and seemed so unwilling to
accompany you, he did but dissemble to cloak his malice, But I beholding the
worthiness of your passing beauty, not to prejudice your deserts, at the very
hour that I should have executed the treason, I resolved to remain loyal and
faithful unto you, and thereupon have served Marcelio as you see, with full
deliberation to leave him at the end of an Isle not far hence, on the shore
side, and thence to return with you incontinently to the place where we left
your sister sleeping. Now you know how the matter stands, and therefore see
what you will do.

Clenarde hearing this in good sooth believed that it was all true, and was
mortally angry with me, being very well content that Bartophamus should carry
me to that place where he had appointed to leave me. Besides, she beheld me
with a disdainful countenance, that I could not enough marvel at the
strangeness of her alteration. And she was so enraged that she could not
speak, but she rejoiced in her heart, that she should be so revenged of me;
without perceiving the knavery which the Pylot went about. So that I well
marked, that Clenarde was nothing grieved at my evil intreatment, whereas
notwithstanding at the first, she took it so heavily: and therefore I said unto
her, How now my sister, what mean you by this? Do you think both my misfortune
and yours, and the danger wherein the Gods have placed us both at this instant,
to be so small and of so little weight, that you ought so soon to cease from
weeping? Or do you hope to see us soon delivered out of their traitorous hands,
that we may be revenged of their villainy. Whereupon she inflamed with fury,
like a fierce Lioness, told me, that I was so dealt withal, because I would
have left her sister Alcida in the solitary isle to lead her away, and many
other such brave invented lies, which the Pylot had made her to believe.

When I understood that, I felt such an extreme pain, and was so greeved, that
I well perceived, that never the like had befallen me before; and although I
could not stir nor touch those Peasants, yet I miscalled them, and railed at
them wonderfully.

And as touching Clenarde, I alleged her such quick and forcible reasons, that
at length she knew that all this proceeded out of the love which the Pylot
Bartophamus bore her. So that she began so pitifully to lament our case, that
it was sufficient to mollify stones, but not the hard hearts of those
traitorous mariners. Now consider, that our boat had in short time with
mavelous swiftness overrun a great part of the sea, when as unfortunate
Alcida awaked, and found her self alone, who seeing that she was to abandoned
and forsaken, turned her eyes toward the sea side, to see if the could espy the
boat and perceiving that it was not there, she went along the shore to seek us,
but she found no body. Ye may well think beautiful shepherds) what grief
Alcida suffered at that instant, and imagine what abundance of tears she sent
from her Crystal eyes. Consider I pray you, in what extremity the miserable
young Lady found her self, when as she was left all alone in that solitary and
desert Isle: perpend in like manner how often she meant violently to cast her
self down headlong into the sea, molesting the air with her lamenting voice,
and how often she called me, and forced echo to repeat my name in the element.
But we were by this time so far separated from her, that we could not
understand her cries, but we might well perceive that she with a white
handkerchiff (which she lifted in the air) made sign that we should return, but
the traitor Bartophamus could not be entreated. But sailing mavelous swiftly
with wind and tide, we arrived at the Isle Iuique, where he landed and with
his companion carried me on the shore, tying me to an ancker that stuck in the
ground. Incontinently certain Mariners came thither being of Bartophamus
acquaintance and of like disposition. And notwithstanding that Clenarde
recommended her honor unto them, and prayed them to deliver her from
Bartophamus his wicked enterprise, yet she obtained nothing the more of them
peasants, who took no regard of her just complaint, but gave the traitor
sufficient provision to live, wherewith he entered his boat again, taking
Clenarde with him sorely against her will. After which time I have not seen
her, nor heard any news of her. I remained there a long time famished and bound
hand and foot. But the chiefest part of my grief consisted in the calamity and
miserable case which poor Alcida was in, being left alone in the Isle of
Formentera. For as concerning the necessity wherein I was, that was soon
redressed. For certain mariners that were more pittyfull and honester men then
the other villains, hearing me call unto them, came near me, and freed me from
my wonderful kind of prison unlosing the lines wherewith I was tied to the
anchor. And after that they had given me meat to assuage the fury of hunger
(which well near had overcome me and caused me to resign my life) I was so
earnest wtth them, and so importunately requested them to carry me to the Isle
of Formenters, that they being moved with pity presently rigged a briggantine,
and making provision of victuals and weapons, ^ailed with me to the Isle of
Formentera, where I had left Alcida. But what search I made I could not find
her. Suppose gentle shepherds that she had chosen the sea to be the sepulcher
wherein she buried her grieved body, or that the wild and savage beasts had
made a prey of her tender limbs. But I searching along the shore, plains,
rocks, valleys, caves dens, and most secret corners, and buroughs, of all the
Isle, at length found a piece of a rock wherein certain letters were ingraved
with the point of a knife, which contained this protestation; which I as deeply
ingraved in my heart with the edge of my memory, as it was cut in the hard rock
with the point of a knife.

Thou sandy meadow, desert all and dry,
Thou sable, like the plumes of snow-white swans,
Thou sea that shrowdest Neptune in his court,
And art acquainted with my flowing tears,
Thou furious wind and variable air,
Molested with my grievous sad complaints;
Where painted and engraven does remain,
The exceeding torment of my helpless grief;
All ye make true report of my intent,
For seeing that mine own Marcelio
Is with Clenarde fled I left alone,
And since his faith and all my hope withal,
Is with his sails commirted to the wind;
Bear witness that Alcida thus forsaken,
Henceforth will never fancy person more;
For fear to enter in such dangerous seas
And eke to fall from freedom to like foil,
From pleasing rest to such disquiet toil.
I will not here make mention of the wound which I felt in my heart, when I
read this memorial, that I knew that by fortunes cursed spite, I was hated of
my Lady and mistress, whom I love dearer then mine own life. Wherefore being
environed with so many calamities and troubles, I as weary to live any longer,
would have pierced my distressed heart, intending to run on the point of my
sword had not those good Mariners that were with me, not only by persuasions
and words, but in effect and deeds also hindered my intent. They forced me half
dead to return to the Brigantine, and by my importunate entreaties they sailed
toward the coasts of Italy, and landed at the Haven of Cayetta in the Kingdom
of Naples: wherein I enquired for Alcida, asking news of all those that I
found; and at length meeting with certain shepherds, after I had told them
certain tokens of her, they knowing whom I meant, informed me that she
certainly landed at the same Haven in a Spanish ship, which passing by the Isle
of Formentera, and them rivers, finding her there all alone, fetched her
aboard. And that because I should not find her, she had changed her apparel and
clothed her self like a shepherd. Whereupon I also became a shepherd to the
eye, in outward colors, hoping the sooner to find her; and in this habit ran
over the whole Country: without meeting with any man that might tell me news of
her. At length I found a certain shepherd that gave me intelligence, that she
knowing that I was informed of her being there, took ship and sailed into
Spain. So that with all speed I took ship also, minding to follow her, and I
arrived here in Spain which I have almost coursed over, and as yet I cannot
hear any tidings of this cruel Lady, which I seek with such labor and
exceeding pain.

And this (gentle shepherds) is the Tragedy of my life, this the cause of my
death, and this the success of my mishap. If perchance I have troubled you
with the tediousness and perplexity of this pitiful history, the fault is in
you selves, who have so earnestly desired me to do the same. In the mean while,
I beeech you not to take your pleasure in going about to remedy my evil, nor
to comfort my distressed soul. But let me spout out of my infortun^te eyes so
many tears, as so just an occasion requires. Wherewith Marcelio having ended
the discourse of all his misfortune, he began to sigh and weep so bitterly,
that it was pitiful to behold; in such manner that no man that saw him could
not but be moved with extreme pity,

CHAP. V. How Marcelio taking his leave of Perierio and his sisters, departed
in search of Alcida.
EUphilia having heard this pittyfull and lamentable discourse of Marcelio, was
^orely grieved for his cause, and gave him this comfortable answer. Sir
Marcelio, the strangeness of your mishap is sufficient to abash any man
whatsoever, and to give him sufficient cause to be grieved though it concern
not himself; but seeing there is no harm so great but may be helped in tract of
time, and as fortune is inconstant in her favors, so is she likewise not
constant in her frowns, and she hoiseth men as well from adversity to
prosperity, as she cast^th them from their wicked pleasures to an intolerable
grief Insomuch that her only essence is inconstancy, and all her being is
being variable, as well in withdrawing her favors, as in bestowing them. And
therefore (valiant Knight) be of good cheer, draw up your spirits, and
courageously take hold on the shield of hope. For I doubt not but that you
shall in short space attain to your wished desires, and find your Lady whom you
say to be in these parts of Spain. For if it be so (as I certainly believe it
is) all doubt removed, I shall hear of her by reason that all the shepherds of
the Country resort hither; so that it cannot be but we shall hear of them such
news as they know, and it may so fall out, that Alcida her self may have
occasion to pass this way. But howsever know this that she cannot be long in
the country but we shall hear of her. And besides, we will give order that she
shall be sought for in the most secret places of the wh^le country. But in such
manner, that your arrival into these parts be kept secret, least she fly into
some other country further off. M^rcelio thanked her greatly for her exceeding
and undeserved courtesy, and desired her to remember to do as she so freely and
of her own voluntary goodness had promised. Whereupon taking his leave of her,
Perina, and Perierio, notwithstanding that they were loath to let hi^ depart ere
morning, yet he so earnestly desired them to take his most just excuse in good
part, and to suffer him to do according to his own intent, that they could not
but let him accomplish his pleasure. So that Marcelio thanking them all in most
courteous manner, for their rare hospitality and singular benevolence toward
him, departed late in the night from those famous shepherds, and took his
wonted course in running up and down the woods, rocks, plains, caves and all
such solitary and desert places where he thought he might meat with the cause
of his grief, and yet the sole mistress of his heart and only object of his
content and delight. The noble shepherds were marvellously sorrowful for his
departure: but especially Perierio, who (as you have heard) was in love with
the Lady that fled from him in the wood. For he had purpose to ask Marcelio
certain tokens of his Alcida, because he doubted whether that Lady which he had
seen had been Alcida; but for that Marcelio had declared, that his Lady was
apparelled in the habit of a shepherd, he gathered that it was not Alcida,
because the Lady which he saw was most sumptuously and gorgiously attir^d, more
like some Princess then a counterfeit shepherd. Whereof he was glad for two
respects; the one because Marcelio had rehearsed Alcida her protestation
ingra^en in the rock. Whereby he signified that she would never love any man
living more. The other, because Marcelio was Alcidas husband in troth and
promise, and therefore thought he should have but hard luck to become
competitor and corrivall to so worthy a Knight and faithful lover as Marcelio.
Euphilia and Perina went to their rest, but Perierios mind was so entangled in
the conceit which he had of his strange love, that he could not rest, but
tumbling and tossing up and down in his bed, by that time the day appeared, he
went from b^d as he came unto it, for he had not so much as shut his eyes all
the time that he lay. As Soon as he had put on his clothes, he went into the
Orchard to drive away his melancholy passions; but the more he strived against
love the less he prevailed, and the means wherewith he sought to quench the
fire which Cupid had inflamed in his breast, did kindle the same. For hearing
the birds sing their natural notes, and ^ill the air with their chirping
noise, he began in this manner to renew his passions.

Ah pleasant birds, that bewray your wished content by your shril voice, which
sounds so sweetly in the air would I were so happy that I might have cause to
sing with you. Ah cruel fortune that did send me into the wood to meet with
my enemy. Ah unmercifull Cupid that go about to stay me, by her for whose
service I would willingly offer my life? Why have thou made me love her that
hates me? And why prolongest thou my life to increase my torment? If I may not
enjoy her in whom my felicity consists, I must die. And therefore if I must
be deprived of my wished desires, sweet death mend thy pace, and deliver me out
of this intolerable grief. Make have ye fatal dames, and cut the line of my
life, that with the loss of the same, I may gain a pleasing rest and
quietness. But why do I request, where I may command? Have not I this dagger
which at my pleasure may cause the breadfull Destinies to throw my miserable
body (the very habitation of grief) breathless on this ground? True, but what
if with one stroke I make four wounds in four several bodies. For if I die,
aged Camillo cannot live, nor yet either Euphilia or Perina. Therefore rather
then my father or my sisters should end my Tragedy, I will endure the
extremest torment that love or fortune can invent.

Why then come woe,
and be my daily weed;
Come, come, and wend
with me in every place,
Come be the drink,
and meat whereon I feed:
And paint thy colors
in my youthful face.
Let fortune frown,
let wanton Venus hate:
Let Cupid fret,
woe is my trusty mat^.
And therewith Perierio flung out of the Orchard, and went with his sheep to
the field. And after Euphilia and Perina being warned by Phoebus silver lines,
that Aurora had cleared the air, and expelled the darkness of the night,
followed with their flocks also. But Perierio lest they should perceive his
inward grief by his outward looks led his sheep something far out of the way
where he thought he might be out of sight until he had powered forth the tears
which as yet sat in his eyes. Dinner time being come, he washed the tears from
his face, and looked as cheerfully as he could, least his father or his sisters
should mark any alteration in him. He lived thus for the space of two months,
weeping and lamenting the absence of the Lady which he loved, oftentimes
ranging through woods, to see if he might be so fortunate as to meet with her
again.

CHAP. VI. How Euphilia and Perina came to the knowledge of Perierio's love,
and what conference passed between them.
HOw runningly soever Perierio cloaked his grief under a pleasant countenance,
yet because he so delighted to be alone, haunting solitary places Euphilia and
Perina began to suspect that their brother had something or other that troubled
him.

And they could not enough marvel why he so often separated himself from their
company whereas notwithstanding he was wont so pleasantly to recreate them,
either rehearsing some history, or sounding his instrument, or discoursing of
the disposition of the water, inclinations of the Planets, and of the celestial
orbs. And therefore they could not imagine what might be the cause that he was
of a merry, become melancholy, and to delight in solitariness, where he so
coveted company. And to the end that they might know what moved him to alter
and change his natural complexion, upon a certain morning, when the air was
something darkened with a gross mist, they followed him secretly into the
woods: and although he almost tired them with trotting up and down all the
paths and cross ways of the wood, yet they marvelling at the strangeness of
his walk, rested not until the bright beams of the sun had chased away the
duskish mist: for then they were compelled to stay behind Perierio a pretty
way, lest they should be seen by him.

At length he being overcome with weariness, the sooner because he labored in
vain: grief and travel together forced him to rest. He therefore espying a tall
Pine, which did cast a large and enticing shadow, threw himself down on the
hard ground under the same. and taking his country Cytheren sung so sweetly
unto it, that the heavenly harmony of his music amazed all the Deer and birds
in the wood.

Euphilia and Perina had no sooner marked that their brother had taken the
advantage of the Pine, to shroud his weary body from the injury of Apollos
heat, but they entering in the midst of the thicket, to draw as near him as they
might hear the sound of his instrument rebound against the bushes, whereof they
were passing glad, hoping that he would bewray his thoughts to the dumb trees
and senseless bushes. They therefore listening, heard him sing in this manner.

Floribusnt plenum ver, sic mea vita periclis,
Piscibus ut que fretum, sic ego mill malis:
Adversis cumn^or, cumulat; ut hortus arenis;
Gaudia me fugiunt, sort petitque dolor.
My mind is void of mirth, no joy
my humor does possess;
No pastime does avail, nor sport
my grief for to redress.
No muse may move, no song delight,
no, no, nor pleasure please;
No tune can touch, no fancy like,
no toy can work my case.
No game, no play, no dance, no show,
no company at all;
No exercise, no use of bow,
nor yet of boul or ball.
Ne Bacchus cups, ne Ceres cheer,
ne Venus looks unsure:
From woe to wantonness, can now.
my pensive thoughts allure,
Care, care, does waste my years though young
and vex my youthful age;
And therefore since no worldly thing
my dolor can assuage.
I am content because compeld,
where others laugh to weep:
At night a thousand thoughts resolve,
where others take their sleep.
After he had ended this Sonnet, Perina his youngest sister, seeing that he
arose to depart thence, whistled and so stayed him. For he marvelled who it
should be; but at length espied both his sisters coming toward him, which
wonderfully astonished him, because they had never done the like before; and
courteously greeting them, asked what the cause was of their coming thither?
Euphilia answered, your self brother Perierio. For though we have great regard
of our own welfare (quoth Perina) yet we do not regard our selves only, but
are as careful of your fortune as of our own. And therefore we (quoth
Euphilia) marking and perceiving by your solitary walks, that you were troubled
with some grief or other, and that some misfortune had happened unto you, we
were as sorry as if it had been our own case. This brother Perierio, is the
cause of our coming, to see if we might come in knowledge of the evil which
tormenteth your youth, that it being known unto us, might by our diligence and
industry, be remedied and amended. Therefore brother conceal it not from us
whatsoever it be, and you shall find in us more then sister-like readiness, if
more may be. Ah loving sisters (quoth Perierio) I cannot enough thank you both,
for the love you bear me; and in truth the only cause that I have smothered my
pain with silence, not detecting it unto any of you, has been, for that I was
loath that you should be grieved for my sake, and I wished nothing so much: as
that all the discontent and anguish of my evil should redound to no bodies grief
but mine own. And therefore (sweet sisters) if you love your selves and me also
wish not to be acquainted with my sore, least you suffer part of the pain. But
content your selves, and look to the tranquillity of your own hearts, not
tormenting your selves in my behalf. But you be deceived herein brother
Perierio (quoth Euphilia.) For in thinking to free us from grief by concealing
your evil you do amiss. Know you not that they which are careful of any man's
welfare, and so tenderly love him, that they think themselves hurt if any ill
light on him, are continually compassed with fear if he be grieved, thinking
the cause thereof oftentimes to be far greater or worse then it is?

Quando ego non in tui graviora pericula veris? And therefore brother you
afflict our hearts with diverse torments in concealing your evil from us,
whereas we can but feel one pain if we knew it. For now the torment of
suspicion in suspecting diverse things, does assail us of one side, fearing
sometimes one mischief sometimes another; every one whereof wounds our hearts
with passing sorrow. And fear makes the assault of the other side; causing us
to imagine that the matter is far worse then it is. Lastly, hope troubles us
as much as suspicion or fear. For though it be a motion of the mind of future
luck or good to come, and not of evil; yet is it but a perturbation of the
mind troubling and vexing it continually; and he that hops enjoys not his
hearts ease nor quietness of mind. Why then sister (quoth Perierio) to rid you
of all suspicion, fear and hope, know that I love, and suspect no worse, nor
hope any better; and ask we no more, for I should not be able to answer you if
you should be too inquisitive. The reason is because I know not whom I love;
nor where she is whom I love. And is it love (quoth Perina) that troubles you?
Why then left you not this verse out of the Sonnet, which you sung to the
Cytharen but even now.

Ne Bacchus cups, ne Ceres cheer,
ne Venus looks unsure:
From woe to wantonness, can now,
my pensive thoughts allure.
Well remembered sister Perina, (quoth Euphilia) for if he be in love, he must
needs offer sacrifice to Venus, and what but the unsure looks of Venus has
caused him to give over all pasture and mirth, and live in passionate grief.
And yet he says.

That Venus looks unsure.
could no way him allure.
How then can you love Perierio, if you be not allured by be ^^ty? Very well
sister (quoth Perierio) For though Venus be accounted the Goddess of love in
being mother to Cupid, yet does she command no further then beauty stretches:
which is not the only object that moves men to love. What think you not that
virtue, nobility, excellency, or wealth, may move us to love? Then you must
confess that I may love, and yet not allured by Venus colors. Nevertheless
know, that beauty is the only cause and motive of my love, and yet do I not
think that the verse which my sister Perina so well remembered, was unfitly
inserted among the other verses of my Sonnet. For seeing that I loved, and yet
was bereft of all hope, ever to enjoy her whom I loved (because I neither knew
what she was, nor where she was, as I have already told you) by reason whereof,
I wished no greater pleasure then grief, nor better companion then woe, and
therefore might very well say, that the unsure looks of Venus should not
provoke my pensive thoughts from we to wantonness; meaning not by Venus looks
sincere and true love, but wanton and voluptuous love.

CHAP. VII. How Maffeo arrived at the place where Perierio and his sisters
were: how he was enamoured on the Lady Eleonora, and departed with her into
Spain.
AS Perina thought to reply, she was interpelled by a certain Knight that came
galloping toward the place where she, Perierio, and Euphilia sat, being
sorely wounded in diverse places of his body, his sword being drawn, and holding
a scarf of silk almost in pieces in his left hand. This Knight seeing Perierio
and his sisters could not enough marvel that he had found shepherds so far
surpassing in beauty. And drawing near them, he was so courteously saluted by
them, that he was amazed to have such an unlooked for Salve. And requiting them
with like courtesy, asked them whether they had not seen any men riding that
morning through the same wood. Perierio answered no. And as the knight thought
to take his leave of them, Euphilia desiring to know what he was, found
occasion to stay him, and therefore spoke unto him in this manner: Sir Knight,
it seems that you are sorely wounded, by the abundance of blood which has
issued out of sundry parts of your body, and therefore I think it were not
amiss, if you should alight from your horse, and tie up your wounds, ere you
travel on any further.

And for as much as we are far from any town or village, if it will please you
to take in good part such homely fare as my fathers country cottage can afford,
you shall find us ready to lead you thither, and to welcome you to such cheer,
as may content nature, though it be not comparable to courtly dainties. The
Knight being very weary, and fearing least he might incur extreme danger, if it
should happen to be long are he might reach to some town, though he was
ashamed, necessity forcing him thereto, accepted of Euphilias offer; thinking
that God had sent him in that wood to meet with those courteous shepherds, who
beyond all expectation proffered him such friendship and succor, he being a
mere stranger unto them. Therefore thanking them for their exceeding courtesy,
he did bear them company to their fathers house. Where the old man, rejoicing
to see so comely a person by his son Perierio and his two daughters feasted the
Knight in such manner, that he easily might perceive that he was welcome. After
they had ended dinner, Euphilia asked the Knight how he had gotten all those
wounds, and what ill fortune had brought him into such danger. Whereupon the
Knight began to make this discourse of his tragedy. Gentle shepherds, to the
end that you may know that you have the miserablest man in the world before
your eyes, here present with you, I will as briefly declare you the history of
all my life as I may, so I be not troublesome unto you, to hear the tragical
events happened unto me since my cradle, I am loath to give you any cause of
grief. But seeing that it pleases you, to know the cause of this my mishap. I
hold my self bounden to pleasure you, and do according to your desire. And to
be as little tedious as I possible may, I will use as much brevity as the
greatness of the matter will permit me. Know therefore (gentle shepherds)
that fortune threatening me bad luck, began to lower on me before I came into
the world; for she conspired my death before I was born. You must note how that
my father before I was born had no children, but his brothers son was his
adopted heir, and should have inherited all his lands, had he died without
issue So that this adopted heir having intelligence that my mother was big with
child, very careful^y w^ited for the time that she should fall in travel,
which hour being approached, he corrupted the midwife with a great sum of money
to smother me at my first entry into this world, and to spoil me of my life
before I perfectly lived. But no; fortune would reserve me to worser events,
and I was not so happy to be dealt withal as my unkind cousin had appointed.
For the midwife being pricked with remorse of conscience, and overcome with
pity, could not find in her heart to stifle me in her hands, when as I was
committed to her to be tenderly handled and looked to, with all the care and
diligence that might be; but she invented another manner to content Silvestro,
(for so was my cousin named) which was secretly to steal me from my parents,
and to convey me into the house of a poor laboring man (whose wife was wont to
serve for nurse unto such poor men's wives as for weakness or sickness could
not bring up their own children) about twenty miles from the place where my
parents dwelled, which was the renowned City of Constantinople my father at
that time being general governor over the same City. The Midwife made the
same poor laboring man and his wife believe, that I was son unto one of her
cousins, that she had in the abovenamed City being called Bradasso, and
therefore willed them to take all the care and diligence that might be, in
fostring me as a child ought to be, and that she would accordingly reward them;
as ste did; for she paid them duly week by week, as long as she lived.
Thinking her fault more excusable, seeing she caused me to be brought up with
part of the money which she took of my cousin to spoil me of my life. I omit
for brevities sake, what grief my parents suffered for the love of their long
desired son, especially because they kn^w not what was become of me; but they
thought nothing so ^u^e as that I was dead and that the midwife would not let
them know of it, least they should have been too suddenly oppressed with such
sorrowful news.

When I was three years old or thereabout the midwife died such a sudden kind
of death that she could not take order with my nurse for me. The nurse
therefore having intelligence of her death, fearing least she should keep me
for nothing (which she was not able to do being a very poor woman) borrowed her
neighbors horse, and rode with me to the City of Constantinople; where at the
midwifes she inquired for the same Bradasso, whose child she thought it was:
this Bradasso, being a young man of some four or five and twenty years of age,
and unmarried, swore by all that he might, that he never had to do with woman
in his life time, so far as to g^t her with child. Whereof the woman
wonderfully amazed wist not what she should do with me. And so poor Maffeo (for
that is my unfortunate name) was become a bastard that had neither rath^r or
mother that would know him or receive him as their child, and yet had both
father and mother, who would have thought themselves to be the happiest parents
that lived under the v^^l of he^^en, if they had found their own beloved
infant, whom they thought to be dead long since. But my cousin being informed
by the rumor spread through the City that a child nourished three or four years
by the industry of such a midwife, could find neither father nor mother, after
the same midwife was dead, began to calculate the time of my birth, and finding
it to be full just at the time that the nurse avouched that I was brought unto
her, remembered that the midwife had told him, that she had dispatched the
child, and taken such order that he should never be heard of. And therefore he
never thought any otherwise but that I was dead. But after he had heard this
rumor spread through the City of me, he began to think how women are pittyfull,
and therefore doubted whether the midwife had caused me to be fostred or no in
that place, because he should not hear of me; he considered also, that my
parents had told him diverse times, that I was not dead but lost, or rather
stolen: though in truth they thought I was dead, and imagined that the midwife
had but made them to understand that I was lost, or stolen to diminish their
grief with hope. He considered also, that the midwife was no woman to be the
mother of the child her self-seeing that she had been widow a long time, and
was above 70 years old when she died, which age was not convenient for
wantonness, to be short, he concluded that it was I, and fearing lest if the
nurse should make too diligent search to find out my parents, it might at
length come to my fathers ear, and himself thereby deprived of his heredity, he
caused the nurse to come unto him and told her, that seeing no man would father
me he would have me brought up to be his page, seeing that I was a pretty fair
complexioned boy. And agreeing with her for my board, charged her to let me
want nothing, and to use me well. After that time he came oftentimes to the
place where the nurse dwelt, to see whether I was well handled, and sent me
apparel by his men, and money to discharge my expenses for my board. When I was
about ten or eleven years of age, he took me from that place and made me his
page, but in truth he used me as if I had been his brother rather then his boy:
by reason whereof my father, (though I then did not yet know that he was my
father) made the more of me: for my cousin dwelled with my father, and was as
his son. In the mean time I thought my self most happy, seeing that I had no
father to have hit upon so good a master, Whom I served as faithfully as he
dearly loved me. After I had served him the space of three or four years, his
father by adoption and my father by right, though fortune had beguiled nature,
died, and my mother within three months after his burial. So that my master
being in possession of all my fathers goods, lands, and lordships, began to
Court all the chiefest gentlewomen of the city, thinking himself worthy to be
matched with the chiefest. Among all others unto whom he made love, he chiefly
offered his service to the daughter of a Spanish Knight that lived in
Constantinople, called Don Francesco de guerdona, a man of great valor,
wealth, and policy. So that my master to obtein the love of fair Eleonora (for
so was the gentlewoman called) sued sought, watched, warded, prayed, protested,
and did what service a man might be said to do in the behalf of his mistress;
sometimes he played late in the night before her window, on his Lute, Cytharen,
and Bandora; sometimes he turneyed and justed in her presence, to move her to
love him for his manhood: and sometimes he sent her lettters, songs, and
sonnets, therein bewraying his passions; hoping she would receive him to her
servant, being overcome with pity. But all served not: for she could no way be
moved to bear him affection; whereat I marvelled greatly, nor could not imagine
at the cause thereof. For he was a brave valiant young Gent. of great authority
and estimation, favored by fortune, as wealthy, rich, and abundant, exorned by
nature, being beautiful and fair of complexion, tall and well proportioned,
and of a courageous and resolute mind, wise politic, and witty. All which
considered, no man could but condemn the Gentlewoman of cruelty, seeing that no
man so faithfully served her as sir Sylvestro (for so was my master called.)
But at length I had sufficient occ^si^n offered me, not to marvel any longer at
her frowardness toward my master. For Eleonoras mind was more settled on the
Page that was wont to bring her letters and papers, wherein was his masters
message, then on him that sent them. Which she at last showed, and bewrayed so
openly, that I began to perceive what affection she bore me, and how she both
despighted and despised my master. For I being sent unto her upon a certain
morning with a pair of silken garters from my master, all edged with gold, and
environed with pearls, most sumptuously and artificially wrought, she taking
the garters out of my hand, gave me a Portugal Crusado, (being worth sir
English Angels) for my pains. Whereof I was very gl^d, partly because I was so
well rewarded, and partly because I thought she began to make more account of my
master in accepting the present, so bountifully rewarding the messenger. But as
I was departing out of the house to let my master know of the good news,
(hoping thereby to have augmented my Crusado with my masters liberallity) she
called me again and leading me into her bedchamber alone, burst out into these
words. Ah M^^teo, thou do serve thy master too trustily, to do me pleasure:
and thou art an instrument against thine own welfare. How so Madam (quoth I?) I
will soon show thee how (quoth she,) but first you must tell me, whether you
think not that he hinders himself that sueth to obtein that thing for
another, which is wished unto himself? Yea Madam quoth I.) Then (replied she)
do you harm your self in endeavoring by your careful painful, industrious
and diligent service, to satisfy your masters desire, in that he wishes her
to be his wife, unto whom thy self may be a wedded husband. And so if thou
grant that thou would be glad of such a wife as Eleonora, I conclude that
thou strivest against thine own commodity, and that thou art an instrument
against thine own self.

When I heard her conclusion, it so well liked me, that I considered not
whether the consequence followed according to the premises or no. Yet howsoever
it was so contrived, that it set me at a non plus, insomuch that I stood am^ed,
and knew not what betided me. I had never yet followed the Court of Cupid,
though I had served one of his soldiers: and therefore I was to seek of mine
answer, and wist not what to say. Notwithstanding that I felt an amourous
passion creeping in my heart, contrary to any motion that I had felt before.
For I know not how, my thoughts were surprised with love, after Eleonora had
argued in such order with me, and I feared that she had been but in some merry
vein to jest, taking her pastimes in mocking with me. And therefore I made this
answer, Madam you are very merry this morning, whatsoever the matter is; God
grant it be toward your good luck. And you are the bolder with me, because you
may. But least my master long for my coming I beseech you to tell me whether it
will please you to command me any service, for I must have homeward. None other
(quoth she) but that thou thank him for his present, and give him this from me,
which is no less worth then his and so I do owe him nothing. Wherewith she
reached me a Hat that was sent her father from a Spanish Duke, being a most
costly Jewel. I therefore taking my leave, she bid me farewell, adding this
clause to shut up her Vale, Molest me no more for thy master; do for thy self
what thou will Maffeo. To be short. I returned unto my master with such answer
as Eleonora commanded me. But I began to be so lovesick, that I knew not how
it was possible that a man might be so greatly altered, and so wonderfully
changed in so short a time. Within a few days after, my master had prepared a
letter to be sent to Elconora, which I put in my pocket, and walked up and down
the streets not far from the place where she dwelled, and when I thought good,
I returned home with such answer as my brains could invent and so I served my
master, obeying the command of Eleonora. Who was so fixed in my heart, that I
could not be separated from the thought of her beauty and excellency one minute
of an hour. And though I sought by all means possible to extinguish the fire
that consumed me, least at length it might grow to an unquenchable flame; al
helped not, I strove against the stream, and to go about to root out the
sparkles of love, was as hard a matter for me, as it were to any man to pluck
the stars out of the christaline orb wherein they be sixed. Therefore at
length, not able to endure any longer. I wrote Eleonora a Letter to this effect.

Maffeo to Elonora.
LAdy, the extreme pain which my overburthened heart does fuffer, causes me to
let you understand the greatness thereof. I was in liberty, but you have
brought me into bondage, I mean of the mind. I was free from those butchers,
the affections which torture the hearts of men; but now by you am delivered
into the hands of those cruel vexations which so poster my passionate heart,
that I am forced to fly unto your mercy. Pity therefore your poor Maffeo,
least he die: who if he has been too bold in bewraying his grief and torment
unto you, hops himself to be excused, in that your self are the cause thereof.

Farewell Lady, and think on poor Maffeo.

She had no sooner received my Letter, but she sent me this bitter answer which
she did but to try my constancy as afterward it very well appeared. The
contents were such.

Eleonora to base Maffeo.
I Perceive Maffeo, that baseness and fondness strive in thy heart for
superiority; of which foolish strife I mean not to be an arbitress. Could you
find no fitter person then my self, to part the fray? Poor ^wad, could thy
tongue pronounce in my presence, which thy heart cannot perceive in mine
absencee? and cannot you with deep study having had all this time, attain to
the knowledge of my humor, whereas notwithstanding extempore, you gave so
right a censure of my vein, When Eleonora mocketh, thou must not imagine that
she means: and when she jesteth, thou must not think that she is in earnest.
As for the loss of thy liberty, not I, but thy base ignorance and dull wit is
the cause thereof. But grant I were, do always they that imprison set at
liberty? No, many are taken by one, and delivered by another. Leave thy
fondness Maffeo, least I have cause to hate thee, for I may not love thee. I
bid the farewell, for I wish thee no evil. And therefore take heed thou offer
me no occasion thereto.


Ye may suppose (gentle shepherds) how coldly that letter comforted distressed
Maffeo, when he expected the sentence of life or death. But then I perceived
that she had but mocked with me, when she used her merry prittle prattle unto
me in her chamber at her own house, yet ceased not to burn and fry in the
furious flames of my burning passions; and so remained as long as I could,
striving against love like a valiant champion; and passed over two months in
continual skirmishes against Cupid: but alas, who was compelled to yield at
length, but I that fought against a God of such force and puissance? insomuch
that I chose rather to die, then to live without the love of Eleonora, and in
all have dispatched another letter, which I secretly conveyed unto her, the
meaning where of was much to this purpose.

Maffeo to Eleonora.
LAdy I am loath to molest you, and yet cannot choose but trouble you. Love has
so conquered the bulwark of my heart, that I have determined to offer my life
for your service I know that Eleonora did mock, and does now disdain, but I am
forced to suffer, and am ready to die, because both mocked and disdained by her
in whom my life consists. And therefore though by fortune I am base (as you
urged) yet by nature I find the contrary, in that noble Eleonora is the subject
of my restless thoughts. You willed me to take heed lest I should give you
occasion to hate me: if I do, though it grieve me, yet I cannot help it.
Nevertheless, so you give me leave to love you, I shall be content, though you
hate me.

Farewell.

Unto this Letter, she sent me no answer, but it happened within two or three
days after that she had read it, that I had occasion to pass through the
street where she dwelled, she seeing me, and sitting in the door alone, called
me unto her, and brake forth into these bitter words.

Why Maffeo, think thou not that thou do me displeasure enough to trouble
me with thy odious letters, but must you also fret me with the sight of thy
ignominious person? I have wished these two days that I might see thee, to cast
out all the anger and spite unto which thou have moved me, upon thee. But
seeing thou have vowed thy life to my service, I mean to try thy faithfulness
and obedience; and yet desire not to have thy life. I command thee therefore to
carry this letter unto thy master Sylvestro: but I will allow thee to read it
before I seal it.

With that she felt in her pocket, and with her hand in color like to Juno
when she braved the Queen of love for the golden apple before the Troyan
youth,) drew forth the letter and bid me read it. The meaning I remember to be
such.

Eleonora to Sylvestro.
THe knavery of your Maffeo, has given me occasion to use your service
Sylvestro. Therefore if I may be so bold with you, I would entreat you to
punish his knavish sawciness: for because he sees I make little account of his
masters feigned love, he offers me letters wherein he painteth his own
passions. I have admonished and warned him to leave his peevishness; but
seeing he despises my warning, let him fear your threatening.

Farewell.

When I had read this letter, I was in worse case then before: it would be too
long for me to make rehearsal in what a passionate state I was, both while I
heard her rail at me like a raging Lioness and when I saw by the reading of
the Letter how she sought to be revenged of me, that I was ready to resign up
my life, and to fall down dead in her presence for love grief, and fear: and
contrarily, gladness and hope made such a combat at one instant in the midst
of my heart, that I knew no more of my self, then he that was never born. At
length gathering my senses together, I came to my self; and answered her: that
whereas she sometime said, that I was an instrument against my self, she should
now have most just occasion to say the same, and most fit matter whereout to
gather premises producing the conclusion of her saying. And though if be my
death (quoth I) to do your command, yet I will and must obey With that she
having sealed the Letter, I t^ok it and went away; bidding her adieu with all
the humility that I could for my life. And posting to my master, I delivered
him the Letter which was so spightfully written against poor Maffeo,
notwithstanding that I was not ignorant of the contents thereof, though my
master knew not so much. But as soon as he read the letter, supposing that I had
been the only cause of his bad success in his amors, drew forth his dagger
and threw it at me; and seeing that though the dagger stuck in my leg, yet it
had not given me my fatal stroke, ran at me with his naked sword, intending
fully to glut himself with the blood of his innocent page, and cousin germain
(though I as yet then knew not that I was so.) But I stepped aside, and got out
of the house as soon as I could, flying unto one of our neighbors who seemed to
make much of me, and in whom I had most confidence. Unto him I declared how my
master was fallen out with me, and showed him the wound which he had given me,
meaning to slay me. This man being a poor honest man, and a Baker by his
occupation, by name Pharicles, was likewise cunning in surgery, and so
willingly and so carefully dressed my wound that I thought him worthy of
greater reward then I could give him. But the smart of the wound, the sorrow of
my grief, and the torment of love, cast me into such a dangerous disease, that
I was in great peril of death, and out of all hope ever to recover my life
again. After that I had lain in that case six or seven days, late in the night
came Eleonora unto me, in the habit of a gentleman page, because she would not
be known, and told the baker Pharicles that she was my cousin, and that she had
brought something to make a confection for me. Whereupon the good Baker arose,
and opening his door let her in, and sent her up to my chamber. Where she
seeing that I was alone fell down on her knees before my bed, and weeping most
pitifully, pronounced these words. Pardon me sweet Maffeo, pardon me, and
could not for grief speak one word more, but shed out whole streams of tears,
which running down her cheeks, fell on my bed, and in such sort wetted it as if
it had been cast into some river. I amazed at that sudden chance, could not
tell whether I dreamt, or whether I was awake; for me thought by the voice it
should be Eleonora, but when I looked on her vesture. I suspected it had been
my master that had repented in such manner, for that he so hardly used me. But
to rid my self from doubt, I reached the candle that stood by my beds-head, and
looking her in the face, I soon knew my Eleonora, who was in the like taking
that I was when I read that unfortunate letter before her. Incontinently I
lifted her from off her knees, embraced her, and kissed her on her tender lips,
saying: What Eleonora my Lady and mistress, do you humble your self after this
order unto you servant? Pluck up your heart and be of good cheer; and ask no
pardon at my hands, for you have not committed any fault against your servant.
Ah Maffeo (quoth. she) my fault is great, and so much the greater, because against
Maffeo. After we had passed on great part of the night in such talk, she in
accusing her self, and I in reiterating my unworthiness, at last we promised
each other troth; and agreed to leave Constantinople and fly into Spain. For
because she knew that her father would never agree unto our marriage, she
concluded to provide a good sum of money, and many rich jewels, for the easier
carriage, and so to transport her self and me into Spain, there to lead a
contented life, until such time as we might be reconciled to here father, or
fortune allowed us to return. This devise liked me so well, that all the
medicines in the world, could not have cured my disease so well as the presence
of her, for whom I was so willing to die. To be short, she appointed me the
hour and place where I should meet her, when all things were prepared for our
voyage. Where I finding her in the same habit that she was when she visited me,
we took ship, and sailed unto Saint Lucar in Spain, where we lived contentedly
and merrily for the space of five or six years. In he mean time you must note,
how that Eleonoras parents marvelling what was become of her, were exceeding
sorrowful.

CHAP. VIII. How Maffeo and Eleonora sailing toward Constantinople were
severed by a tempest, and Sylvestro drowned: also how he met with her again.
MY cousin Sylvestro, having heard of her secret and sudden departure and mine
also, began to suspect that we were together, and that Eleonora sent him that
letter but to give the matter a contrary color. Wherefore considering that the
Gods so favored me first in that my life was saved by means of the pitiful
midwife, and afterward that I was loved by so noble a gentlewoman where he was
rejected, his conscience began to prick, and urged him so far, that on a
morning he went to the house of Eleonoras father, and declared to him the whole
matter. Whereat he wondering would have besought the Magistrate to burn
Sylvestro at a stake; but that Sylvestro promised him that he would go to the
end of the world but he would find us, and in like manner discover the whole
case unto us, and bring us home to Constantinople. In so much that six years
being expired, I espied my cousin Sylvestro walking in the Market place, and
least he should see me, I went homewards to carry the news unto Eleonora. But
he espied me and followed me to the place where I dwelt, and entering into the
hall, where I sat with Eleonora, fell down on his knees, and informed us of
all the matter: showing us his testimonial letters and passeport, from the
city of Constantinople, wherein was mentioned that he was purposely sent to
seek us. Besides he brought letters written with Eleonoras father, Don
Francesco de Guerdonaes own hand. Whereof we were so glad, especially Eleonora,
that we could not but pardon my master, who now became our servant. You may
well think that we made as speedy preparation as we could to return to
Constantinople. For within eight days we found a ship rigged and thoroughly
furnished, with provision of victuals, and all things necessary, which was
bound to Constantinople. In which ship we conveyed our selves with all that we
had, and haysing fail, committed the vessel to Neptunes mercy. But variable
fortune (that cannot be reduced into any order, sometimes being lighter then
the wind, and flying more swiftly then an arrow being shot out of the bow, and
sometimes heavy and marching slowly, and resembling the Tortyse; Variable
fortune I say) being loath that we should rejoice of our felicity without any
proof of sinister hap, raised such a tempest on the sea, that the ship being
battered with the swelling waves, clove asunder and burst into pieces. So that
every man c^tching hold some on a piece of mast, some on a piece of a board,
some on the ship hatches. Eleonora having a young child by her, (for God had
enriched us with a young Spaniard called Alonso, though the poor babe was as
soon hated of fortune as it was born, therein not unlike his unfortunate father
(for it was but three months old when we came to sea) she emptied one of our
greatest chests, and therein clapped her self and her young Alonso: stirring ye
boat up and down with a piece of an Oar which she had spied in a ship. My cousin
Sylvestro reaching to two or three oars thinking to lay the^ under him tumbled
into ye sea. I for my part had gotten a great piece of cork, which such as it
was, by ye help of ye Gods saved my life. But nothing so galled me, as that I
saw my only Eleonora and Alonso, floating on the terrible sea within the
chest, and yet I could not come near her, and the traitorous waves would not
drive my cork the same way that the chest was carried. For the winds blew so
crabbedly that the chest floated one way, and I with my cursed cork was driven
quite contrary. So that in short space I lost the sight of the chest, and
therewith of all my joy. Imagine gentle shepherds in what plight poor Maffeo
was at that instant. For as long as I could see my Eleonora and her Alonso, I
perceived not the perilous case I was in, but after I had lost that blessed
sight, I marked in what danger I was to be swallowed up by the greedy waves at
every moment. Yet the grief that I suffered for that I knew not how Eleonora
fared, permitted me not to care for my self, who almost an hundred times had
purposed to leave my cork and cast my self into the depth of the roaring sea,
and very Court where Neptune sat to rail at him for his fierce government. But
yet I know not how my dreadful destinies inveigling my heart with vain hope,
reserved me to worse mishaps. After that I had rolled up and down the seas a
whole night, in the morning betimes I espied a great ship of war on the sea, so
that I being something comforted at the sight thereof, began to call unto them
that were aboard of her, as loud as my voice could reach. But the Mariners
though they heard not my voice, by reason of the noise of the waves which did
beat against the belly of that great ship; yet seeing me, considered in what
necessity I was, and steering the ship as near as the steer man could, they
threw out a cable rope which I catched by the end, and so got into the ship.
Thus God had redressed my necessity, howsoever it fared with poor Eleonora and
Alonso. My life was saved, but my sorrow nothing ceased, yea increased rather.
For thinking on Eleonora and Alonso, I was so beset with grief, that my life
was in greater danger, then when I lay rolling up and down the rising waves on
the Cork. I had not been in the ship above the space of three days, but the
wind blew so slowly, that we were not the better for our sales, but were
compelled to use all the oars that were in the ship. As we had thus rowed one
day and a night, we espied a chest floating on the sea which by reason of the
lightness was carried away more swifter then our great ship. At length it
approached so near us, that I might well perceive it to be the same chest
wherein my Eleonora was. And when I saw that no body was in the chest, suppose
(gentle shepherds) whether I had not sufficient occasion to think that fortune
had made Eleonora, and my unfortunate boy Alonso, a prey unto the hngry.
Whereupon I fell into such a trance, that having by the diligence of the
Mariners recovered my senses again, I heard them say, that they had never seen
the like ecstasy. O spiteful fortune! when she begins to frown on men, she
never cease until she makes them most miserable, and brings them into
despair. And when they are in such distress, that they think it impossible to
be worse handled, then she to show her power, augmenting their evil, causes
them to acknowledge their heresy. As I for example, who could be in worse case
then I was, when sprawling on the cork amidst the raging waves, I was in danger
every moment to be devoured of Neptune? Yet I farto worse when I iost the sight
of my dearest Eleonora. And a thousand times greater was my misery, when I saw
the empty chest. At which time, cursing the winds as helping causes to my
mishap; the sea as greedily desiring the prey, the ship as the instrument that
brought me into that Charibdis of calamity, the celestial Planets as hard
hearted, seeing me injured, and not revenging my wrong, the stars as witnesses
of my misery, and fortune as the efficient cause, yea primum mobile, and only
author of what mischief soever had betided me; I would have cast my self
overboard: but my intent being hindered by the Mariners, I was forced to
comfort my self as much as the greatness of my hap could permit, and to arm my
self with that old poesy, Dum Spiro, Spero. Though my greatest hope was
despair, and my life worse then death.

Within a few days after, the Mariners taking occasion by a gale of wind, which
blew something strongly, hoysed up their sails and arrived at Constantinople
within two days after. Where incontinently I went to my father in laws Don
Francesco de Guerdonas house, and declared the whole history of our navigation
unto him, how we suffered shipwreck, how I saw Sylvestro my cousin fall into
the sea, how I had lost Eleonora and my child, and how I was saved in the other
ship. But least I should kill the old Knights heart, I suppressed the sight of
the empty chest. Don Francesco and his Lady, glad to hear their son in law
speak, but sorry to understand the sum of his woeful relation, fell both into an
ecstasy. At length the old man coming to himself said. Ah my dear son Maffeo,
whose presence I have wished for so long time. What a disastrous chance is
this? what spiteful mishap? what an horrible event? it seems that fortune
(that monstrous Goddess) has endeavored to exercise what mischief she can
upon thee and thine. Ah Maffeo, thou see these silver hairs which cover my
face, are tokens how near I approach to my grave; and yet this heart, which is
enclosed in this weak and feeble body, is such, that I might with shield and
spear, encounter with fickle fortune, I doubt not but I should become
victorious. But alas, force, manhood, courage, or valor cannot prevail in this
case; and therefore only rests that we put on the armor of hope. It is not
impossible, (seeing my daughter and her son were so well placed in a chest)
that we should hear of her, and perhaps before we are aware, may see her.
Wherefore seeing the Gods have saved you, and amidst such a multitude of
misfortunes brought you home to your Country, I think it not amiss that you
should acquaint your self with the estate of your goods, and take possession of
such lands and houses which, your honorable father dying, your traitorous
cousin Sylvestro inherited. Whereunto I answered, that well I might do it, but
never should enjoy any pleasure though all the goods, riches, and kingdoms of
the world were mine, unless I had my Eleonora and her child present with me:
and therefore I meant not to stay at Constantinople. Which done, I took my
leave of my kind father, and mother in law (who so wept at my departure, that
it might have moved any man to commiseration) and so leaving them, I betook me
to my fortune, meaning to try whether she would some time turn her wheel, and
become more favorable then she was accustomed to be. After I had traveled by
sea and land, so far that I marched through most parts of Europe, through a
great part of Asia, and Afric, at last I shipped from the West Indies,
toward Spain, where I had been three times before. For I know not how, my mind
gave me that if she lived, I should hear of her there, thinking that she could
land no where but in Spain, seeing that our ship was drowned near the coast
thereof. But all helped not in all those three years (for so long I had
traveled since my last departure from Constantinople) no living creature
could tell me any news of Eleonora or the child And therefore I would not
return to my country, but thought to run over all Spain, and thoroughly search
the whole Country, for I hoped not to find her in any place, if I found her not
in Spain; though my hope was little or none to find her at all, considering
that I had seen, the unhappy chest spoiled of her carriage. When I had ranged
up and down the dry fields and sandy meadows of the country nine days, at
length I came into a most pleasant green, through which there can as delectable
a river as man's eye might behold, the banks whereof were beset with Orange and
Lemon trees; which by reason of their fruit cast forth such a fragrant and
odoriferous smell, that the very odor thereof did perfume the air in such
manner, that it did spread the same smell over all the neighbor greens and
meadows of that quarter. So that the coldness of the river, the shadow of the
trees, and the odoriferous scent of the fruit, enticed me to rest my weary
limbs on the river side; where the pleasing noise of the murmuring stream did
bring me into the sweetest sleep I could have wished. You must note, that the
b^nk on the other side of the river was something high by reason whereof, my
dear Eleonora (whom I so painfully sought) lay in the grass against the bank
on the other side the river, not being seen. Who whilst I was a sleep, chanced
to rise up, and seeing me lie with my face upward knew me. How glad she was
(gentle shepherds) I leave unto your discretion to judge of. But she willing
to try what remembrance I had of her plucked off a lemon in color like to the
Indian gold, and in it ingraved this distichon.

Hesperio sub sole virum requiescere gaudet:
(Cum prole complaudens) Eleonora ^uum.
And casting the carved lemon on my breast, she lurked behind the bank lest I
should see her. But I slept so soundly, that although I felt the lemon fall
just upon my breast, yet I started not; for in that paradise I feared nothing:
but imagining that the lemon was shaken off by the wind, I was loath to give
over my sleep so soon, and therefore I turned my self to fall into sleep again.
But as I held the lemon that was cast at me in my hand, I felt that it was
something rough: willing therefore to see what kind of lemon it was, I read the
poesse, and no sooner espied the name of Eleonora, but my heart seemed to leap
out of my body for joy. Yet because I saw not her, nor any man in the world
near me, I could not tell what to imagine of that lemon; but concluded at last,
that the Gods had sent me that eminent token in sign that I should hear of
Eleonora and the child. At length she called on the other side of the bank,
Maffeo, Maffeo, why do thou not speak to thy Eleonora? Wherewith I as a man
raging mad, looked up to the skies, sometimes down into the river, and
sometimes over the meadow, and seeing no mortal wight, I brake out into this
open exclamation.

O miserable wretch that I am! I ran over the world to seek my beloved
Eleonora, and now I have found her, I cannot see her. Where art thou Eleonora,
where art thou? Or does an echo rebound the sound of thy voice from the other
part of the world unto mine ears? Or do I dream? Or do I imagine to hear that
which I do not? Or is it the ghost of Eleonora that calls unto her Maffeo?
And if that be, why am not I a ghost also? Or have the Gods hearing her bewail
her miseries pitied her complaints, and changed her into one of these
delectable lemon trees? Or have the sacred nimphs being ravished with the love
of Eleonoraes beauty, led her with them into ye secret bowels of this pleasant
river? surely I believe it is so. And therefore Maffeo make have to follow her.
Cast thy self into the silver streams Maffeo, and they will bring thee to thy
wished and long sought for Eleonora.

Thus I being ready to leap into the water, Eleonora rose up, and came on the
top of the bank, right over against me, saying. Stay Maffeo, stay, Eleonora is
here; and here may thou behold thy son Alonso. At the fight whereof I was so
amazed, that I knew not whether I did but dream, or whether it was so indeed.
At last knitting my wits together, I perceived that I was not deceived or
enchanted, but that with my natural eyes I beheld my wife and my son, being a
pretty tall wag about four years old. But to see the churlish nature of fortune
who though she seem to favor men, yet she does in such manner with wrinkled
frowns intermingle her favors, that they have no cause fully to rejoice of her
benefits. And so it fared with us, for what greater chance in the world might
have glutted our hearts more with joy then this that I seeking Eleonora found
her, and Eleonora seeking Maffeo found him likewise, each of them saluting the
other, and speaking the one to the other? And yet contrarily, what greater
grief then this that we had found each other, saw each other, and spoke one to
another, and yet could not come one to the other; being separated by that,
being something large and very deep. I could not swim, Eleonora less: and so we
were in the pittyfullest taking that might be in the world.

Eleonora told me that she had traveled one day and a half along the bank-side
of the river, and had seen no bridge from the place where she was, unto the
side where I was, Insomuch that we could not imagine how we might do to travel
both together; for we were ^oath (seeing we had so happily met with each other)
to part again, fearing least we should hazard our selves into danger of our
former mischance. What remedy I wanted my sword to cut down trees to serve me
for a bridge, and loose wood there was none. Nothing rested but this, that we
should travel along the river by the banks side, she of the one side of it,
and I on the other side of it, until such time as we had found means to get
together.

After we had marched in that sort four or five hours, (in which space she had
declared me how she was saved from the present danger of drowning, by the means
of a Spanish galley; how that the chief ruler of the staves that rowed in the
galley kept her in a close prison, because she would not consent to his wicked
and filthy desires; and how that by means of one of the galley slaves after she
had been in that miserable and loathsome captivity two years and a half, set on
shore, and brought to a country village not passing forty miles from the place
where I found her) we met with a shepherd and his wife, who told us that we
should within a small mile find a bridge to pass over the river, whereof we
were passing glad. And in short space reaching to the bridge, I passed over to
the other side, and embraced my beloved Eleonora, and my young Olphonsus, who
began prettily well to prattle in the Spanish language, for his mother used
continually to speak Spanish unto him. But mark (gentle shepherds) how fortune
still sought to bar us from perfect felicity. For as we were thus embracing one
the other, and rejoicing of our good success after so much ill suck and so
many dangerous chances; came three tall lubberly Moors, each having a good
cudgel in his fist who approaching near us, and being enamoured with the
beauty of Eleonora, presently fell upon me, and hinding me hand and foot,
rolled me to the bank-side where they left me; But Eleonora and the boy they
carried with them, whither I knew not, until the next morning, that she having
escaped from the Villains (who were so busy in robbing a Farmers house, that
they took but little regard of her) told me her self, being returned to the
same place where they left me b^und. You must note, that the thee us had set
Eleonora with her child upon this horse which they had stolen, with all the
furniture belonging unto it, from some Farmer by the way, and had laden it
with swords and other weapons, with all which, she ran away, and rested not
till she approached the bridge, near which I lay bound. I very glad to see her
and my son incontinently cast of all the weapons and other trash, saving this
sword which I kept for my defense. And thinking it scarce safe to stay long in
that place we rode on a good pace, till we reached to a small village, where we
lighted.

As Soon as we perceived the darkness of the night to fly from the beautiful
glimps of Lady Aurora, to horse we hied, and rode on still toward the next
haven. But Phoebus darting his beams on the plains, so enflamed the air with
the heat thereof, that we were compelled about midday to alight, and to shroud
our selves from the Sun, under a Tree that stood in the midst of the
highway. The passing heat made me slumber, and from that slumbring I fell so
fast asleep, that awaking, I missed Eleonora, and what was become of her, I
knew not, but that the child which was by me cried and told me as well as it
could, that the naughty man had run away with his mother. Whereby I suspected
that some villain or other was by Fortune suborned again to cross me with her
currish envy. In what grief and perplexity I was at that present time, you may
think (gentle shepherds) by your selves how perplexed you would be if you were
in the like case: yet seeing it was not the first time I had been in like
taking, I stuck to patience, and cleaved to hope. For my heart was so hardened
in unfortunate events, and unhappy chances, that contemning Fortune and all her
power, I could better behave my self in adversity then I was accustomed. And
therefore speedily leaping on horseback, I took up my Alonso with me, and rode
till I came to the next village, where leaving the child with an honest
shepherd (unto whom I declared ye case wherein I was, promising to reward him
thoroughly for the boys maintenance til I fetched him thence, which I hoped
would not have been long) and desiring him to use it well, I posted thence to
seek sweet Eleonora, that poor Eleonora whose life was so miserable, because so
dear to me. As I coursed with my steed up and down the wildest and solitariest
places of the country at length this morning (being the sixth day after I lost
Eleonora) I fell into ye hands of the same villains that took away Eleonora the
first time, when they tied me by the unfortunate Bridge. These on every side
assailed me, some behind, some before, and some of them on each side of me: for
they had increased their company by four men, so that there were seven of them.
Yet by the help of the Gods and my sword, I so acquitted my self, that with no
worse wounds then these, I got from them, and recovered this Scarff, which
Eleonora for have had forgotten and left behind her, when she ran away with
this horse.

Thus (gentle shepherds) have you heard the whole history of my life, and I
hope you are satisfied as concerning your question. Now I am to request you, to
give me leave to follow on my journey; for until I find Eleonora, I cannot
rest. And so Maffeo, thanking them for their courteous entertainment, took his
leave and departed. Now therefore leaving him to seek Eleonora, we will proceed
in rehearsing the success of Perierio his strange love.

CHAP. IX. How Perierio resolved to travel in search of the Lady on whom he was
enamoured, and how he obtained leave of his father under pretense of becoming
a Scholar.
PErierio being entreated by his sisters to tell them whom he loved, though he
could not name her, for that he knew her not; yet he let them know as much as
he could tell, and declared the whole matter unto them; how he met with that
Lady by chance, how that she asked him his name and country: and how therewith
she conveyed her self out of sight on the sudden. Euphilia and Perina were very
sorry, that their brothers love was of such a kind, that it might not be
remedied, but by giving over love. For it was altogether casual and
accidentary, neither might they hope that ever he might enjoy his love, for
that there was nothing less like, yea it seemed rather impossible.

For they considered, first, that he had never seen the Lady before that time
nor after; by reason whereof, though he chanced to see her, perchance should
not know her. Secondly, they marked that he knew not her name, her parents, or
Country, to enquire after her: so that the nearest place he knew where he might
find her, was the world, and the properest individium to denominate her, was a
certain woman.

And lastly, they perpended that she sought for some other Knight, who had her
heart in hold; and therefore a very hard matter, though Perierio should find
her, to obtain her love. All this considered and weighed, they sought to root
love out of Perierio his breast, which Cupid had so pierced with his dart, that
all the persuasions of the world could not serve to extinguish the fire which
was kindled in his heart, and increased more and more daily. In so much that
the fire being enflamed, and beginning to torment him with insupportable pain,
he determined to commit himself and his case to Fortune, hoping, that as the
cause of his grief was accidentary, so the effect might by chance be redressed
and remedied.

Perierio thus resolved, asked, and obtained leave (though with much add) of
his aged father, to travel into far countries, to see and learn such things as
a young Gentleman ought to know, alleging that there was nothing more
peremptory to youth, then to pass over those years which are apt to comprehend
and learn, in foul obscurity of ignorance. In so much that a young man that
will live in credit and reputation, ought to travel into strange countries, to
be acquainted with foreign manners and governments, to learn tongues, to haunt
Universities, and insinuate himself into the company of learned men. All this
Father (quoth Perierio) is necessary for them that will have their lives
famous, and death honorable.

Old Camillo replied with Horace: Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mane
currunt. Men change not their manners, but the air, that run from country to
country, Perierio. And therefore I am not of their opinion that believe that
men by far traveling from home, can attain to wisdom and humane prudence. For
I think, that that is not gotten by running into far Countries, or by living in
exile far from home, but rather by communication and conversation of wise
men. Yet Perierio seeing that here in this multitude of shepherds, little
wisdom is to be learned, or little profit to experience and prudence to be
reaped. I and content that thou go to the University of Salamanca, which is
within this kingdom, and there to repeat such rudiments as thou have begun at
Rome, that thou may afterward be apt to greater studies, and to exorn and
beautify thy mind with the brightness of the liberal Sciences which are the
lights of humane understanding: Lastly, also to fense thy mind with wise and
sage precepts of Philosophy, that after thou have attained to the knowledge of
natural things, thou may use moral Philosophy to moderate thy affections, and
to follow that which thou know to be honorable and profitable, shunning the
contrary. Then art thou fully armed to pass forward, and to travel into other
countries to be acquainted with strange customs, or to learn diverse tongues;
otherwise what profits it to have coursed through sundry and strange regions,
and to have seen many kingdoms, and manners of diverse Nations, if he that
travelleth wants the ripeness of wit and judgment to reap profit by his
being abroad: Therefore Perierio, think not that I disallow of traveling, but
would have them that take that course, not to have their stomachs empty, but
first guard themselves with the knowledge of Philosophy and humanity, and
furnish themselves with provision necessary to such journeying. For I remember
that Homer and Virgil to describe and form an heroical man adorned with all
virtues, fained that Ulysses and Aeneas, had traveled through all the world;
and not thinking this sufficient, they fained that they descended into hell,
and went into the Elizian Fields, and knew those that were in them.

Perierio hearing his father allege such points as made for his purpose, was
exceeding glad, at length obtained his Fathers good will to leave the country
and rustic company of Shepherds, to haunt the comely and seemly conversation
of Scholars though his mind was more moved to his Lady then to the University,
whither old Camilla determined to send him. And although Euphilia and Perina
knew the color wherewith he painted the occasion of his traveling, yet they
reserved the whole sorrow to themselves, without declaring it to their father,
fearing lest he should be discouraged and discomforted thereby, that he might
hinder his health, and for grief fall into sickness, considering that old age
is so subject to diseases, that the least cause in the world of discontent is
sufficient to subvert the estate of health in an aged person.

CHAP. X. How Perierio in his journey met with the fair Shepherdess Ismenia
with whom he departed toward the Temple of Diana.
PErierio lifted up with the wings of hope, in a manner doubted not but his
fortune would be more favorable then she had been, taking his leave of his
father and his sisters, he betook himself to his journey, intending to go to the
University of Salamanea, as his father wished but in such order yt he would
take ye nearest way about to see if Fortune would once again favor him with
that sight which made such an impression in his heart, that neither continuance
of time, nor contrariety of thought, was able to raze out the print thereof.

Thus Perierio having traveled six days through Woods, dales, bushes, greens,
medows, hills, valies, and other solitary place, and yet had not met with that
which he sought, nor seen any likelihood thereof, began to be wonderfully
discomforted, and thought his pain vainly bestowed, seeing that Fortune was
blind and made no discretion of persons, but ever wrought by chance, bestowing
her favors not where she would, but where they fell. Perierio thus
discomforted, climing on the top of a hill, heard a most sweet and melodious
voice sounding to a harp within a little wood where the high O^kes made a
pleasant shadow. And drawing near to the wood, he marked that it was the voice
of a shepherd, who after she had ended her song, began thus to complain of
her misfortune. No doubt but all the stars that from the skies send light on
the earth, have agreed and consented to my mishap and ill fortune; neither is
there any thing on earth, that may yield me any comfort or consolation; but
love which is subject to fear, turns and converteth my sorrowful soul into
pure ice. Ah Fortune, how can thou be so cruel? How can thou forbear to
succor a heart so distressed as mine, seeing that I am falsely suspected of
disloyalty? And therefore I must accuse thee Lexander, thou art the man whom I
must burden with the cause of all my grief; unto thee do I discover and unfold
my plaints, hard-hearted and cruel Lexander, in whom no pity takes place:
For if thou wer'st of my side, I would not care though Heaven Earth Love and
Fortune were against me, and enemies unto me. After that she had ended her
complaint, she fetched a heavy sigh from her heart, and therewith wept so
bitterly, that Perierio might easily perceive that she was in that pitiful and
lamentable taking, by reason that her husband falsely suspected her to be
disloyal and unfaithful; so that he entered into the wood and found her sitting
upon the grass in the shade, near to a delectable Fountain, which issuing
from the top of the hill, ran along a great part of the wood in diverse places.
But when she saw Perierio coming near her, though she was something
discontented that she was interpelled amidst her passions; yet beholding that
he seemed by his behavior to be some Shepherd of great account, being most
courteously by him greeted, saluted him likewise with such modesty, that he
began to misdoubt whether she were Alcida the promised spouse of Marcelio. (For
he called to mind how that Marcelio had told him and his sisters, that Alcida
had clothed her self in the habit of a Shepherd, because she might be the
harder to be found by him) and therefore spoke thus unto her, Beautiful
Shepherd (for so your coat bewrays, though your singular grace make me
suspect that your calling is contrary to your colors,) I shall desire you not
to be discomforted, though I have troubled you at this time, intruding my self
into your company, for as I have discourteously offended, so shall you find me
most ready to make amends for my boldness. Gentle shepherd (answered she) I am
so forsaken of al comfort and solace, that good company cannot offend me, and
therefore where no fault is committed there is nothing to be misconstred of.
And to put you out of suspicion, know that I am a shepherd as well in vocation
as in habit, called I^menia, and born near to the Temple of Minerva, in the
kingdom of Portugal: But I pray you what chance has brought you hither into
these Countries, or do you by hap dwell hereabout? In truth Ismenia, (quoth
Periorio) my ill fortune has brought me hither, for I neither dwell here, nor
ever was in this place before; I was born in Italy, but with my father and
sisters transported to the fields annexed to the river Epla, about four or five
days journey hence. I know the place very well, quoth Ismenia, it is not far
from the pasture where fair Euphilia, so renowned in all that quarter, does
feed her sheep. I hear you name my sister (quoth Perierio) and am glad to have
met with one that is not wholly unacquainted with our Family. What say you
(quoth Ismenia?) In truth unto a woman so distressed as I am being desolate and
forsaken of my loving husband, nothing could have happened more wished for, then
to have met with such honest and virtuous company as it has pleased the Gods
to comfort me withal, in directing your self toward these woods. And
forasmuch as I am in mind to go to the Temple of Diana, if your journey ly that
way, I shall think my self among so many mishaps, to have received no small
favor of Fortune. As for me (quoth Perierio) where I am I know not, nor
whether I may go, and therefore am induced to think that Fortune begins to
repent her self of her shrewdness, in that she has favored me with so worthy
a guide as your self, to lead me forth of my straying errors to some place
where I may enquire for directions in my journey. And I am most passing glad,
that you go toward the Temple of Diana; of the sumptuousness whereof, I have
heard such famous relation among the Shepherds, in the Village near my fathers
Farm, that I have a long time been moved with great desire to see the same.
And therefore fair Shepherd, take which way you will, and Perierio will follow
you. Ismenia glad that this Shepherd was in her company, began to march,
hoping before Phoebus should attain to his Western home, that they should reach
to a Farm where she thought that they might be lodged that night: But to shun
tediousness in their wearisome journey, Perierio desired her to recount and
declare the cause of her grief unto him. Ismenia answered, that although the
memory thereof could not but pierce her heart with the prick of exceeding
sorrow, yet notwithstanding because he desired whom she could not say nay, she
was content to make a pastime of her misery. And thus in this ensuing Chapter
began the History of her Tragedy.

CHAP. XI. How Lexander was enamoured on Ismenia, and how he was crossed in his
love by his father Filene.
IN our Village dwelled a certain Farmer that had a comely youth to his son, in
beauty passing all the Shepherds thereabout, being called Alanio, who feeding
his sheep in a pasture ground, not far from ours used sometimes to come to me
and keep me company sitting in the shadow by me, and telling of tales, or
passing over the time with some other kind of honest recreation; whereby at
last grew such a familiar acquaintance betwixt us, that love joining our hearts
together, we were not well while we were separated the one from the others
company. To be short, he loved me, and was loved of me. There was in the same
Village a fair beautiful Shepherdess called Selvagia, who for her beauty
might be compared with Venus in the valley before Paris, when she won the
golden Apple. Of which Shepherd my Alanio became enamoured; whereupon I to be
revenged on him fained to favor Lexander his deadly enemy. Which fained love
of mine, at length by reason of the acquaintance that grew between us, changed
into such pure and true love, that by reason thereof I am fallen into the
misery, in which I now find my self at this present.

Now, continuing the history of my life, you shall know that Lexanders father
called Filene, sometimes frequented my fathers house, by reason of certain
business that my father and he had between them concerning Oxen and Kyne, and
seeing me although he was something old, yet he fell in love with me and that
so greatly, that he became foolish, mad, and frantic: He became so importunate
unto me, and troubling me above a thousand times, daily declared me his
passions and grief, but all could not help: For I would never give ear to his
prattle, nor mark what he said, and though he had been much younger or less
aged, and by many parts more perfect then he was, yet for him could I not have
forgotten his son Lexander, who had so won my heart, that I had wholly given
him the possession thereof. The old man knew not what friendship was between
his son and me, for Lexander was so obeysant and dutiful, that he behaved
himself secretly in wooing me, least his father knowing thereof should have
rebuked him, and have occasion to be angry with him. And in like manner, was
Lexander altogether ignorant of his fathers folly, who because he should not
give his son example of lightness, took all the regard he might to his love
from him. Nevertheless the foolish cocks-comb, ceased not to molest me with
importunate requests to take him to my husband. He made me wonderful large
proffers, he promised to give me many clothes and jewels, and he sent me many
Letters, hoping thereby to change my mind. In his time he had been a Shepherd
most excellently qualified, eloquent in speech, and witty, which you may easily
gather by a Letter which he wrote me, as I yet remember.

Filene to Ismenia.
FAir Shepherd, love is cause of all such fault as I can commit in writing
unto, hoping that I have not committed any in loving you. And if perhaps my
Letter be troublesome unto you, believe certainly, that I already fear the
answer you will make. I have a thousand times signified and declared unto you,
what affection I bear you, and in recompense thereof, you take pleasure in
mocking me. You openly laugh at me to see me like to dye for love of you; but
as for me I am glad to see you laugh, though it be to my ruin and destruction;
For when I remember and think of my evil, and see that you take pleasure
therein, rejoicing at my misery, I perceive that you will not remedy my grief,
insomuch that it were an exceeding folly for me to regard your mocking, seeing
that my life and death consists in you, to dispose of me as you please. If
you ask why I should love you? I answer, because I am forced, and cannot but
love you, insomuch that though I might live and not love you, yet I had rather
to dye, then so to live; for when I remember your graces and perfections, I
cannot but judge them happier that die for love of you, then those that can
behold you without admiring your exceeding virtues; for I cannot be persuaded
that a man may die more happily, then he who loses his life by reason of such
heavenly beauty as yours, which has so pierced my breast, that I am not mine
own, but yours: for as soon as I saw you, I began to love, and to pine for
grief. And if you say that I am to be blamed because I am amourous and yet old;
in that respect I sue for remedy unto you, seeing that I have not so greatly
offended in loving you, as in knowing you so late; For I acknowledge that I am
old, and I am not a little grieved that this my pain is not as ancient as the
course of my age; and I am sorry that I might not have loved you from the first
day that I was born as well as since the first hour that I saw you, certifying
you that this love shall dure and continue till death. Marvel not sweet, to see
me gray and wrinkled; and though you surpass me in valor, yet I think it but
small reason that a man should lose his pay and salary under this color, that
he is an old Soldier. The new built houses are not comparable to the ancient
buildings of Rome; and commonly all men always say, that among all things, the
old is the best. Love would not until this present time make me feel the
pinching pain of amorous passions, because he well knew that affection was more
firm, and fancy less fickle in an old man as I am, then in tender age, where
every look is love, and every face a new fancy. I am firm and constant to love
you for ever; and old, never to be loved as long as I live. Young men that say
they love, are double and subtle; they fain, but not fancy; their forehead is
marked with Venus badge, but their heart never felt Cupids shaft. And when they
plead for mercy, alleging that they dye for love, then are they less subject
to passion and most free from fancy. Their changeable affection, is assured
liberty; their passion, pastime; their love, a custom and not a pain. Think
not sweet, that I am like the amourous youth, who having received a favor of
his mistress, vaunteth and boasts thereof to all the world; for though I had
received ten thousand, I should be as constant and firm in keeping them
secret: But as I see you disposed and bent to work my death, I fear that I
shall endure much torment, and have occasion to say little, and brag less; yet
the chiefest favor whereof I may boast, is to die for the love of Ismenia.
With what great reason may I find fault with the time, considering that I who
love you most, am least esteemed. But alas, I loved you too late, and seeing I
was not born at the same time that you were, it is reason that I should dye for
love of you. Ah fair Shepheardess, had my Fortune been such, that I might have
been of your time, I had had that which had been sufficient to win your love,
and to deserve favor of you; for though it becomes no man to blaze his own
praises, yet affection forces me to say, that among all the young men of our
time, none might compare with me, at dancing, leaping, football, hand-ball,
bowl, bow, cithren, pipe, flute, and all such kinds of exercise, wherewith our
Country youths recreate themselves and win the hearts of their mistresses. But
(ah cruel chance!) what serves either that which is, or that which has been,
unto him poor wretch, that is buried in the bowels of forgetfulness, because he
is near unto his death? In the mean time, may it please you to consider by that
which I have said, that the glory of your perfection which at this present
makes you famous to all the country, shall finally fade, as the pride of the
sweet violet decaieth with the fall of the Summer. Now you are hard as a rock,
and cruel, but when you shall be overtaken with age, then shall you want the
liberty and force wherewith now you disdain me. For this is the revenge which
love takes of you, that he then brings you into deadly pain and torments,
when hope begins to fail you.


Filene sent me this Letter and many more, with other Songs and Sonnets,
wherewith if I had bin as greatly moved as contented and delighted, he had
Judged himself happy, and had been ill wedded; but it was impossible to find
any where means whereby the picture and image of my beloved Lexander, might be
rased out of my heart; For he so pleased me, and was so constant and perfect in
love, that his will and mine was but one will, his word and mine one word, and
his heart and mine one heart. Never did he perform less in deed, then in word
he promised. His doings were always correspondent to his sayings. And as for
me, what Lexander liked, I could not mislike; and whatsoever displeased him,
was horrible to Ismenia. In this pleasant life and sweet concord having passed
certain years, we purposed to confirm and establish our content, and to sign
our wished desire with the seal of honest and chaste marriage. And although
Lexander before he would take me to his wife, intended to speak unto his father
first, and to ask his consent as it beseemed an obedient son to do, yet when I
had advertised him how that his father would not be willing to agree unto that
match, by reason of the foolish desire he had himself to take me in marriage he
esteeming more of his own content and the estate of his own life, then of his
due obeisance toward his father, concealed the matter. So that this
unfortunate marriage, was made with the consent and good will of my father, at
whose house the wedding was kept, where there was such feasts, games, sports
and pastimes held, in respect of our marriage that it was spoken of in all the
Boroughs and Villages thereabout. When the amorous old man knew that his own
son had deprived him of his love, he became so furious against Lexander and me,
that he hated us both, and abhorred us worse then death it self, in such manner
that he would never after see us, or come near us.

On the other side, a certain shepheardess of the same vilage, called
Felisarde, who so fancied Lexander, that she almost fell mad for love of him
(who made no account of her by reason that he loved me so well, and because she
was an elderly Maid and nothing well complexioned,) seeing that he whom she so
dearly loved had wedded me, almost fell into despair. In so much that our
marriage bred us two deadly enemies. The angry old man to have occasion to
disinherit his son, determined to marry some fair young woman, by whom he might
have children; but though he was exceeding rich, yet all the shepherds of our
country disdained to be married unto him. except Felisarde only, who to have
opportunity to allure my husband to her unlawful and dishonest lust, (for she
had not as yet forgotten the love of Lexander) willingly took old Filene to her
husband. She had not long time been married, but she began to practice means
to gain the love of my husband, and for that intent she sent a Maid that served
her, called Sylveria, unto Lexander, to tell him that if he would grant her her
will, she would obtain pardon for him from his father; and besides, she would
do him much pleasure, and show him great favor; but she could never corrupt
him with all her large proffers and fair promises to consent to her wicked will;
wherefore she considering that she was so despised and so little regarded of
Lexander, began mortally to hate him, and endeavored continually to move her
husband more and more to indignation against his son. Neither was she content
with that but determined also to practice a strange and villainous treason
against us both; for she had in such a manner won the heart of Sylveria her
maid, by reason of her flattering promises and other favors which she had done
her, that she was ready to do whatsoever she would have her, although it had
been against Lexander, whom she respected for the time that she had served in
his fathers house. So that they secretly consulted among themselves, how they
might be revenged of me, and at the hour appointed for the execution thereof,
Sylveria went forth of the Village, and coming to a certain Green near the
River, where Lexander used to feed his sheep, she stepped unto him, and with a
troubled countenance as if she had some matter of great importance to tell him,
spoke unto him in this manner. Ah Lexander, how well and prudently have you done
in eschuing the love of your wicked mother in law, unto which although I
sometimes encited you, yet know that I did so by reason of her importunate
requests; but now I know how the matter stands, she shall not be able any
more to make me the messenger of her dishonesties, I am acquainted with some of
her secrets that concern her nearly, and are such, that if you knew them,
although your father be so cruel unto you, yet would you not leave to hazard
your life for his honor. I will not say any more, because I know you to be so
wise, and endued with such discretion, that it shall not be necessary for me to
use many words and reasons in your behalf. Lexander being astonished to hear
her talk in this order, misdoubted some dishonesty of his stepmother. But to
know the truth, and to be thoroughly informed, he desired Sylveria openly to
show him all the matter, and to let him hear what it was that she knew of
Fehsarde her mistress. At first she would be prayed, seeming to be unwilling
to disclose a matter so secret; but at length she declaring that unto Lexander,
which he demanded of her, and which she so greatly desired to tell him, stuffed
him with a lie most notably well forged and contrived. Saying, and considering
that it is a matter of great weight both unto your self and your father Filene
in like manner, to know that which I know: I will most plainly declare it unto
you, assuring my self that you will not let any man know how that I have
discovered this secret unto you. You shall understand, that your mother in law
Felisarde has purposed to defile your fathers bed with a certain shepherd,
whose name I will not tell you, seeing it lies in you to know him if you
please; for if you will come this evening and enter into that place where I
will lead you, you shall find the Traitress with the Adulterer in your fathers
house, for they have so appointed it, because that Filene your father does this
night lie abroad, and does not return till to morrow about midday, by reason
of certain affairs moving him thereto. Therefore prepare your self (if you
will follow my counsel) and about eleven of the clock at night come unto me
to our house, where I will bring you to the place, where you may easily do that
which you shall think convenient for the honor and credit of your father; and
by means whereof, you may also be reconciled unto him. Sylveria said all this,
dissembling so cunningly, that Lexander resolved to put himself in danger to be
revenged of him that thought so foully to dishonor his father: And thus the
traitress Sylveria, glad that she had deceived my husband by the counsel of
Felisarde, returned home, to let Felisarde know the effect of her talk with
Lexander, and what he appointed to do.

CHAP. IX. How Lexander, through the treachery of Felisarde and Sylveria, would
have slain his father, and what ensued thereon.
THe obscure night had not so soon vayled the air with the curtain of
darkness, but Lexander coming to the Village, and taking a dagger which he had
gotten by the decease of his Uncle Palemon, went just at eleven of the clock at
night to his fathers house, where Sylveria expected him, according as they had
ordained. Where was ever such treason seen? Or where such malice thought? She
took him by the innocent hand, and ascending the stairs as softly as they
might, she led him to the chamber door where Filene his father lay with
Felisarde asleep; when she had brought him there, she said, Lo Lexander now are
you in place where you ought to have your heart and hand required in such a
case. Enter into this chamber, and ther^ you shall find your stepmother in bed
with the adulterer. With that she got away, and retired as swift as she could.
Lexander being deceived by that dissembling traitress gave faith to her words,
and encouraging himself, drew his Punyard, and having thrust open the door
with his foot, entered into the Chamber like a furious man, and being enraged,
with a loud voice uttered these words: Traitor, I will presently make thee dye,
the loves of Felisarde shall but little avail thee; nay they shall be the
cause of thy death and ruin. And so saying, altogether enraged, and not
knowing who was in bed with Felisarde his stepmother, lifted up his hand to
clap his weapon into his fathers breast; but as Fortune would have it, old
Filene knew his son by reason of the light which was in the chamber, and
thinking that Lexander purposely came to kill him, because he had so ill used
him both in word and deed, sat upright in his bed, and crossing his arms spoke
thus unto Lexander. Ah my son, what cruelty moves thee to become the butcher
of thy natural father? Call your judgment, and enter into your wits again, and
seek not to shed my blood, or term my life with so tragical an end. For if I
have been something rigorous unto you, and unnaturally dealt with you being my
son, I crave pardon, intending to become most favorable unto you ever
hereafter. When Lexander perceived the treason of Sylveria, which had almost
been cause that he had slain his own father, he fell into such an ecstasy, that
his force failed him, and his dagger fell out of his hand without his
knowledge; for he was so amazed of the treason which he had committed against
his father (had not God provided the contrary) that he could not feel his
weapon drop out of his hand, but altogether troubled and confounded like a man
that was bereft of all his senses, went presently out of the chamber, and out
of his house. Felisarde knowing what should chance that night, watched for the
coming of Lexander, who was no sooner entered in the chamber, but she leaping
out of her bed fled into a more inward and back room, where barring up the
door, she freed and exempted her self from the fury and anger of Lexander. But
when she saw that he was departed, and by reason thereof she out of danger,
returning to her bed where Filene lay, trembling at the peril which he had so
wonderfully escaped, she began to stir up her husband against Lexander his son,
exclaiming in this manner.

O Filene, now may you see what a son you have, and know that to be most true
which I so often have admonished you, concerning his evil nature and
inclination.

O cruel Lexander! O traitor Lexander! how comes it to pass that Heaven does
not confound thee? why does not the earth open and swallow thee up into her
bowels? why do not the brute beasts tear thee to pieces? and why do not all men
persecute thee, and punish thee according to thy heinous actions. Accursed be
thy marriage, accursed be thy disobeisance, accursed be thy loves, and accursed
be thy Ismenia, seeing that she has enticed thee to execute such a cruel act
and abominable deed. Ah Traitor, thou have not chastised the shepherd Alanio,
who unto thy great dishonor and shame, has dishonestly haunted and
entertained thy wife Ismenia, whom she loves better then thy self, and yet
thou would kill and massacre thy own father, who always has made great
account of thy life, honor and credit. Ah unhappy father! Ah unfortunate old
man! what fault have thou committed so great, as to be slain and murdered by
thy son? by him whom thou have engendered? whom thou have brought up and
nourished? And for whom thou have suffered a thousand troubles? Now therefore
take heart, cease henceforth to bear him any more love or affection; commit him
to the rigor of the law, that he may be punished as he has deserved; for if he
that has committed so execrable an offense escape due punishment, every
disobedient child will be emboldened and unfearful, and thine at length will in
good earnest lay hands on thee to shorten the course of thy odious life.

Sorrowful and troubled Filene, altogether amazed and fearful, hearing his
wives voice, and weighing the horrible treason which his son had thought to
commit upon his person became so angry, that taking up the dagger which
Lexander (as I told you) had let fall out of his hand, went forth as soon as
the day appeared, to assemble the Justices of peace and chiefest of the Village
together in the criminal Court, where he with abundance of tears flowing out
of his eyes, spoke unto them in this manner.

I call God to witness (most excellent shepherds) that I am so grieved with
that which I am to declare unto you that I greatly fear, lest my spirit and
breath fail me before I have opened the matter unto you. Especially seeing it
is such that I may be esteemed most cruel, in that I publicly complain of my
son, expounding his misdeeds and wickedness unto you, which being so strange,
that I know not how it may be accordingly punished and chastised, I beseech you
to see what is convenient to be done in this case, to prescribe him such and so
just a punishment, that other children may thereby take a manifest example how
to behave themselves toward their parents. Ye know very well, that I have
nourished him carefully, and maintained him as a father ought to do, brought
him up painfuly, taught him and instructed him, and what trouble, pains, and
labor I have had with him, what counsel I continually have given him, and how
mildly I have rebuked and chastised him in his youth. Now is he sorely against
my will married to the Shepheardess Ismenia, and because I have rebuked him,
therefore instead of revenging himielf on the shepherd Alanio, who shamefully
entertaineth (as all the Village knows) the said Ismenia his wife, he has
turned his rage against me, intending to murder me: He found means the last
night to enter into my house, yea into my bedchamber where I lay and slept
with my wife Felisarde, and there with this poniard would have slain me: and
verily had dispatched me, if God of his grace had not taken his force from him,
in such sort, that he could not hold the dagger in his hand, but was
constrained to let it fall, and so confounded and bereft of his senses,
departed without executing his damnable enterprise. And this is it that I had
to say, thus is the matter verily passed, as my beloved spouse can better
inform you. But for as much as I certainly know that my son Lexander had not
taken upon him to commit such an horrible treason against me his father,
unless he had been counseled and provoked thereto by the inticements and
allurements of his wife Ismenia, I beseech you to perpend and weigh what ought
herein to be done, to the end that my son may be punished for his offense, and
false Ismenia also, as well for the counsel which she has given unto her
husband, as for her lightness and dishonest love toward Alanio.

Filene had scarce ended his tale, but the people began to murmr and make
such a noise, that it seemed that the whole Village should have presently sunck
in the ground; in so much that the hearts of all the Shepherds were troubled,
and all conceived generally mortal hatred against Lexander. Some said, that it
was pity he should live till Phoebus had reached to his Meridian seat; others
said, that he ought to be cast into the River; others, that it was pity if he
were not burned quick; and others, that he ought to be committed to the mercy
of the cruel and savage beasts: finally, there was no one person that was not
stirred up against him. Besides, they did likewise all marvel of that which
Filene falsely alleged concerning my life; but they were nevertheless all of
them so amazed at the fact Lexander, that they did not greatly hearken to the
accusation and impeachment which Filene most falsely (by reason of Felisarde his
wives deceitful speech) had made against me.

When Lexander had heard what his father had deposed against him, in the Court
of criminal cause, in the presence of the Justices and audience of all the
people, he was wonderfully grieved; and besides, when he understood what his
father had said against me, he conceived such exceeding sorrow, that it passes
my ability to express the same. And thence comes all my grief, thence took my
evil it offspring, that was the cause and beginning of all my labors, travel,
pain, and sorrows. For my dear husband Lexander, remembering that in times past
I did love, and was loved of Alanio, and that love forgotten and dead,
oftentimes may be renewed and revived again, because he saw that the Shepherd
Alanio (whom I could not abide to see, and whom I abhorred for Lexanders sake)
was yet amourous of me, daily showing me such courtesies and importunate
cherishments, he thought verily, and persuaded himself that all was most
certain and true which his father had spoken of me in the face of the world. In
such manner, that he dispairing as well for the treason committed unto him by
Traitress Sylveria, as for the suspicion which he conceived of me, departed
incontinently from the village: since which time he was never seen there, nor
any news brought what is become of him. And as I knew that he was departed, and
the cause wherefore, by report of certain shepherds his friends, (unto whom he
had rehearsed the whole matter,) I likewise left the village to seek him and
intend not to rest any where, until I find my sweat spouse, to the end that I
may excuse and clear my self unto him of that fault which is falsely imputed to
me, and which he suspecteth to be most true. It is long since I have wandered up
and down through the world to seek my husband and although I have sought him
and inquired for him in most places, and especially all the chiefest and
principal farms, houses, villages, and boroughs of the country, yet can I not
hear any thing of him. The best adventure that I have had in this my endless
voyage, was, that two days after I departed from our village, in a certain
valley, I met the traitresse Sylveria, who having heard of the voluntary exile
and banishment of my husband Lexander, went after him to discover her treason
unto him, repenting that she had so highly offended him. But she had not as yet
found him: and as soon as she saw me, she approached near me, and falling fi^t
on her face, cried me mercy, and at my will, rising she opened the whole matter
unto me Whereof I was not a little glad, thereby understanding how that
abominable treason was practiced against us. And although I was but a weak
woman yet I could have unlaced the traitresse members, and teared her to
piecemeal with mine own hands, yet I withheld my self because she only could
remedy my harm, by reporting her own mischief. I willed her diligently to seek
my beloved Lexander, and to give him notice how all the matter was passed: and
therewith on the sudden, I left her going one way, and I came anut her, to the
end that either of us might find him.

Thus gentle shepherd, have you heard the plain and true rehearsal of all my
miseries and calamities. And for as much as Phoebus is not yet drowsy or
sleepy, nor like to reach to his Western bed so soon: if in like manner you (as
I have done) will take pleasure in reporting the cause and offspring of your
wandering errors, I doubt not but we shall reach to the place (where I hope we
shall rest this night) by that time that you have added the canclusion to your
narration. Alas (quoth Perierio) the conclusion must needs follow quickly,
where the narration is sooner ended then begun. For all the speciallity that I
can use in declaring the cause of my misery, is this general rule, that I know
that I am most miserable. For I love, but whom I know not: and that is all I
can say concerning my self.

Perierio hod scarce ended his words, but Ismenia made sign that he should
hearken to a certain voice which she thought to Have heard in the woods; for
there was a Gentlewoman in the habit of a shepherd not far from the place
where they were, which thus complained of her mishap.

Ah Fortune, have I thus long had thee in estimation and yielded thee such
honor; and do thou reward me with continual and never ceasing travel? Ah
unthankful and ungrateful Goddess! If a Goddess. For Gods are just,
constant, merciful; thou inconstant, cruel and most unjust: by the rule of
contraries, therefore art thou no Goddess. Ah foolish wench be wise at last
being taught by experience, and instead of worshipping fortune, curse her,
detest her, and defy her; and persuade thy self that the Gods which are
jealous, and therefore wrathful, and incensed with anger against those that
deprive them of the honor due unto them, and give unto others have thrown thee
into this Charybdis of miseries, to punish and chastise thy heinous offense
committed against them in worshipping that Idol fortune. Wherefore O heavenly
powers, Brisilla bends her knees and foldeth her hands, asking pardon of
heaven for her error. She repents her of her ignorance, she bewaileth her
folly. Pardon merciful Gods, pardon me, and cease to work your vengeance upon
a poor distressed virgin, that is desolate and bereft of all hope and
consolation, pleads for mercy from heaven. And with that she wept so
bitterly, that Ismenia and Perierio coming unto her could not see her face, it
was so veiled with tears. Likewise she pulled her golden hair, by whole locks
off her head with her hands, which were so white and so delicately fashioned
that it was a marvel to see such tender hands so cruelly prey upon so brave a
head. Ismenia therefore not able to behold such an unmerciful spectacle, stepped
unto her and held her hands, which so furiously teared her glistering hair,
saying, Ah distressed shepheardess, seek not your own ruin, wrong not your
self, and fight not against your own person; for the torment and grief which
you suffer by reason of your misfortune, is augmented and enlarged, not
diminished or slacked by these means.

Therefore (fair shepheardess) hold your hands, and cease from vexing your self.
You live not alone in adversity, for we are not so happy but that we may
worthily complain of Fortunes sicklenesse. Company in misery is no small solace
comfort your self therefore, and with us hope, that the Gods will at last be
moved to mercy, and appoint the end of our miseries. Ah gentle Shepherd
(answered Brisilla, for that was her name) where despair rules there hope is
banished Nay, quoth Perierio, embrace hope, and despair dares not approach.
The extremity of my case (replied Brisilla) forbids me to take hold of hope.
Yea, but through magnanimity and courage (quoth Perierio) may you overcome and
vanquish your extremity. And therefore (sweet shepherd) let not your heart
faint, nor your courage slacken, but with an invincible heart suffer not any
extremity though never so supreme, to brave your mind; and though you be
conquered of all your enemies, yet yield not the liberty of thy mind to the
proudest Champion that either Fortune or fate can arm against you.

Brisilla marking that both Perierio and Ismenia were persons of estimation,
thought the^ to be some of the chiefest shepherds therabout, and therefore
as soon as she could contain from weeping, thanked the^ for their comfortable
persuasions; for she received great consolation in that she had met with them
taking great delight in beholding their beauty: and asking them whether they
traveled, Ismenia told her, that she with Perierio were bound toward the
temple of Diana, hoping that the Lady president of the same temple would remedy
their harm, and give them such instruction, that they should have cause to hope
for the end of their troubles in short time. Brisilla hearing that, was passing
glad, and began to clear her eyes from the water which continually ran down her
face. And having chased away such impedime^ts as hindered her speech, by reason
of her sorrow, she spoke to Perierio and Ismenia with such an excellent grace,
that her words seemed to flow from her mouth, as running water issues out of
the fountain. Insomuch that they did not doubt, but that she was some courtly
Princess, though she covered her body with the vesture of a country less.

CHAP. XIII. How P^riander Prince of Albion, and Brisilla daughter to the Duke
Florindos, became enamoured of each other, and what ensued.
AFter they had had some talk of each others fortunes and troubles, Brisilla at
the request of Perierio and Ismenia, began to unfold the cause of her travel,
making a copious and large narration of the course of all her life. Permitting
this Exordium.

Loving shepherds, though I fear that I shall not be able to accomplish that
accordingly, which I have undertaken to do, mistrusting that I shall both lack
time to end the history of my life, when I have begun it, and also discretion
to contrive the same into some order and method my memory being weak by reason
whereof, I may chance to forget, and slip over many things; yet hoping that you
will accept of my good will and readiness in pleasuring you, I will endeavor
as near as I can, and as truly as my memory will permit, to report and lay
down the whole circumstance of my case unto you.

I was borne in the famous Isle of Albion, where my father was general
Commander over all the Kings Forces abroad when the King was at home. And if
his Majesty chanced to follow the Camp in his proper person then was my father
Viceroy and supreme Governor at home I had not lived six years, but my father
venturing himself in the midst of his enemies, and pressing into the very
bowels of their Camp, slew the King of Gaul with his own hand, and therewith
gave the enemy a terrible overthrow, and his King a great victory, but it cost
him his life. For after he had slain the King, there were so many Knights that
besought him to revenge the death of their King that he was not able to escape
the hour which his destinies had appointed him.

When the King was informed how that my father had obtained him such a
wonderful victory with the price of his life, knew not whether he had greater
cause to rejoice for the overthrow of his enemy, or to weep for the loss of
such a valiant Soldier, and faithful subject. Wherefore he in proper person
came to my fathers Palace, and himself brought my Mother the news of my
Fathers honorable death, comforting us all with such friendly speeches, that
we could not have been grieved for his death, if Nature had not forced us to
lament his loss. Yet howsoever we were grieved, the King caused my Father to
be buried most honorably, and erected such a magnificent Tomb at his own
cost, that he gave a sufficient Token to all his Country, how greatly he
esteemed of Duke Florindo, (for so was he called.) Within four years after,
my Mother the Duchess, being an aged woman dyed, and was buried under the same
Tomb with my Father. And the King considering that I was young (about ten
years of age) and that I was only heir to the Dukedom, to the end that I
might be carefully brought up and well looked unto, he caused me to be brought
to the Court, where I waighted on the Queen, who made as great account of me as
if I had been her daughter. And to the end that I might perceive the love and
affection she and her husband the King did bear me, I was honored with the
title of a Duchess, and disposer of all my fathers signiores, and Lordships,
yea and of the Dukedom also, at mine own pleasure: neither did the King
withhold from me any part of the revenues thereof; so that I lived in as great
joy as any mortal maid might; for I wanted nothing that I was able to think of.
I was loved and favored both of the King and Qu^en, and therefore honored of
all the country. But alack, this my felicity was too great to be perpetual;
and I was seated too high to escape the stormy blasts of adversity. The tall
Oaks are shaken with the winds, and the climing steeples rent with the thunder
clap, where the low brambles feel not the fury of the wind, nor the base
cottage the force of the storm. The tops of high mountains are chopped through
Apollos heat, where the low plains and green medows are beautified with
flowers, and being cherished with Phoebus rays, produce sw^et herbs, and yield
food to the shepherds flocks. And so poor Brisilla lifted up to high estate,
triumphing in Court, and glorying in her happiness; is brought in this most
miserable torment, whereas many simple maids and country wenches enjoy sweet
content, and pass their lives in supreme pleasure. You shall therefore
understand (loving shepherds) that I being 15 years of age or thereabout, the
young prince was sent for by the King from the University; for the Qeen had
purposed to marry me unto him Who being about eight or ten months younger then
my self, was thought too young to be married so soon; but the Queen fearing
least some one or other (for there was many noble men's sons of great houses and
high descent in the Court) should win my heart and love, used the matter so,
that few or none could have my company but her son, whom she wished to be
matched with none but my self. And in truth by reason of our daily conversation
at length grew such familiarity and acquaintance between Periander and me, that
love creeping into our hearts united us together, and of two bodies made but
one heart, one will, one desire, one pleasure, and one mind. Insomuch that the
Queen, yea and all the Court, began to perceive the affection that we did bear
one to another. Suppose (shepherds) what a pleasure it was both to the King,
his wife, and most of all the noblemen of the realm, yea generally to all men
in the country, to see such likelihood of a marriage, which they so earnestly
wished and greedily desired. And die that time that Periander had reached to the
age of eighteen years, the King fearing least delay might breed danger, and my
affection to change or his sons mind alter, called us both into his chamber and
in presence of the Queen his wife spoke unto us after this manner, intending to
try our constancy.

Marvel not my son Periander, nor you young Duches, that I have sent for you
hither, for I will not keep close the cause thereof. Know therefore that my
pleasure is, that you Periander love not Lady Brisil any longer; have I sent
for you from the University to court your mothers maids? Did I call you to the
Court to learn how to play Mars in the field, and do you take upon you so
young, to serve Venus in the chamber, you are but a boy yet Periander, and
therefore unfit for love. And you Lady Brisill, have we showed you such
friendly entertainment in the Court, and honored you with such an high estate,
to allure our son to fancy you, where I purposed to marry him to the King of
Portugals eldest daughter, and heir apparent to the crown of Portugal? thy
father the deceased Duke, was a man of great desert, but his daughter not so
worthy as to become a Queen. Be contented with the title of a Duchess Lady
Brisil, and reach not so high a bough as a crown; for thou may both miss of
thy purpose, and incur danger to lose their favor, in whom consists your
welfare. Therefore I exhort you both to leave these familiar meetings, these
lovely Salves, which you give one to another in the morning, and courteous good
nights you bid one another in the evening; also those pleasant smiles,
passionate looks and continual winks wherewith you favor one an other, will I
have you not to use any longer. And to be short, I forbid you to use company
one with the other any more. Periander hearing his father concluded so
peremptory against his bliss, answered. Then father, my Lord and Sovereign if
it please your Majesty to separate me from the conversation of Duches Brisil, I
beseech you to give me leave to separate my self from the company of all men;
and with that he drew his dagger, and would have wounded his loving heart with
the sharp point thereof, had not his Mother the Queen hindered his intent,
holding his arm. As for me, I was so perplexed both at the Kings words and his
rashness, that I fell on the ground in such manner, that the king himself
thinking that I had been dead, ran from his chair of estate, and lifted me from
the ground, calling Lady Brisil, speak, speak Lady Brisil, young Queen of
Albion, speak but one word. But I lay in that ecstasy a good hour. All which
time the King, the Queen, and all that were present, (but especially Periander)
were so grieved that none of them could abstain from weeping. The King called,
the Queen hallowed in mine ears, with a lamentable voice, and Periander almost
breathless, being choked with exceeding sorrow which he conceived, could
neither call, nor cry. At length with much ado, I came to my self, and stood
upright, to the joy of all those that had heard of my mischance. Whereupon the
King told us that he had used his formor words, but to learn whether our love
was firm, intending if I liked of Periander, and Periander of me, as of man and
wife, to marry us together. To be short, before we departed from the King, he
sent for some of the chiefest Noblemen, and in their presence, Periander made
promise never to marry other woman then my self, and in like manner affirmed
that I was content to have him to my husband, and would die rather then be
married to any other. So that our marriage was presently concluded, and the
wedding to be a month after.

CHAP. XIV. How Massicourt betrayed the Prince Periander, and sold him to the
Moors for a Gally-slave, and the sorrow that was made for his absence.
IMagine, loving Shepherds, what joy there was through the country, when it
was reported that the young Prince and the young Duches were promised, and
should be married within the space of one month? Consider also, how happy and
blessed that Periander and I thought our selves to be, when we had obtaind that
with the King and Queens consent and good will, which we feared that they would
never have granted? but envy the sorest enemy that wageth war against
content, soon made a breach of our felicity, into a woeful and pitiful mishap.

For there was a young Knight in the Court called sir Massicourt, being son to
the Earl Doraster, who was so in love with me (though he had not as yet
declared it to me) that for me he had willingly made exchange of all that he
had. This Sir Massicourt having of the contract between us, took it so heavily,
that he almost dispaired. But considering that grief or sorrow could not
prevail to remedy his harm, took courage, and hoped to find means by subtilty
and craft to hinder the marriage, which he practiced with all speed. The Earl
his father was Admiral of the sea, by means whereof, this young Knight had
great acquaintance with diverse Captains of the ships of war, and other Pilots
and shipmasters: among whom he had one especially bound unto him named
Barsalis, whose service he durst employ in the weightiest matter of the world,
and unto whom he might have communicated the chiefest secrets he had.

To be short, he sent for this Barsalis and told him, that if ever he would
requite the courtesies and friendship which he had received of him, that now
the time was come, and occasion offered, wherein he might show the thankfulness
and gratefulness of his mind. The Captain Pilot answered, that he wished not
for any better hour then that in which he might be employed in his service,
protesting, that whatsoever he would have him do, he should find him most ready
to execute his pleasure were it right or not, so it consisted in his power,
being ready to hazard his life to do him service; whereupon Sir Massicourt
desired him to cause a ship to be well rigged and furnished with provision, and
to lay Anchor at the haven of Dover, where he should expect his coming, and
then he should further understand his pleasure. Which Barsalis promised to do,
though he wist not why, nor to what end. For Sir Massicourt being something
politic, and considering that men's minds are fickle, and subject to
alteration, would not as yet disclose his intent unto the Pilot, fearing least
he might have been moved to bewray him before the time that he purposed to
execute his treason. But after he had charged the Pilot to expect his coming
to the Haven of Dover, he sought occasion to talk with the young Prince as soon
as he might. And the next morning having heard that Periander intended to ride
a hunting, prepared himself, to meet the Prince as he rode toward the Park.
Periander glad of his company (for there was great familiarity between them)
and sir Massicourt was wonderfully well beloved of him, began to be merry with
him, and to talk with him according to his accustomed manner. At length sir
Massicourt taking occasion to speak of the Sea, I remember (quoth he) that your
Grace oftentimes has been earnest with me to go to Sea, and to see what rule
Neptune keeps in his kingdom. The weather is now most pleasant for that
purpose, insomuch that if it will please your Grace now to recreate your self
in beholding such pleasure as the calm Sea can yield, I am ready to accompany
your Grace to Dover, where I have a most gallant Pinnace, as excellent and fit
for our turn as any Vessel in all the Realm. Periander thanked him, and
appointed to ride with him the next morrow toward the haven. As soon as he
came to the Court, he told us that he had purposed to go to Sea, and asked me
whether I would give him leave to be away five or six days. And although I was
very sorry and unwilling that he should go, fearing lest any mischance might
happen unto him, yet seeing he so desired to go, I seemed to be more willing
then I was, left he should be grieved, and leave his pleasure for fear of
displeasing me.

The next morning sir Massicourt being come, their fast broken, and their horse
ready, they rode merrily from the Court; but alas, I was not without cause
discomforted, neither did I forecast such danger as happened in vain; for the
traitor Massicourt, as soon as the Prince was aboard the Pinnace, called the
Pilot Barsalis aside, and gave him certain chains of gold and other sumptuous
jewels, mounting to the value of ten thousand crowns, promising him a far
better reward. And this is it I request at your hands (quoth he) that when we
be on the sea (seeing the wind serves for Spain) you should fail into the
Spanish sea, and being there, on the sudden lay hold on the Prince, and my self
also, as if you were enraged against us, and sought to bereave us both of our
lives. That done, you shall hide me into some odd corner of the Ship, where
the Prince shall not be able to see me, and make him believe that you have cast
me into the Sea and then arriving at some Spanish haven, sell him to the Moors
that have the government of the Galleys, to be a Gally-slave, but first put off
his clothes, and apparel him as if he were one of the Shipboyes; then shall we
be rid of him, and he never like to escape out of their hands. Barsalis
promised to do all this, and performed no less indeed. For Periander was sold
unto the Galley slaves, sir Massicourt traveled into Spain and Italy, and
Barsalis upon a certain night, set his Pinace on fire, and burned all his
Mariners, saving himself in a Ship boat, and in a Merchants he returned to
Albion. Whither being arrived, he came presently to the Court and brought us
news of those that we so long had wished to hear of. For they had bin away ten
months, and though the King had sent out diverse Ships, and the Admiral himself
also coursed through the seas, yet could we hear nothing either of the Kings or
Admirals son. Whereby we supposed that they were dead, though we hoped the
contrary. But Barsalis that traitrous Pilot told us, that as soon as they had
entered the mouth of the Sea, the wind rose, and such a tempest was spread over
all the Sea, that the Pinnace being beaten with the waves on every side, rent
in pieces and sunck presently. All that he could say of Periander and
Massicourt, was, that he saw them both together leap out of the Pinnace, and
that the Knight with a small mast in his hands swome up and down whither the
stream drove him, and that the Prince casting himself upon one of the hatches,
tossed up and down the waves. All the rest that were in the Ship, he said that
they sunck with the Pinace, and himself escaped alone in the Ship-boat. This
traitor Barsalis received no small gift of the King and of me, (although his
news was so evil) because he told us that he saw the Prince fleeting up and
down the waves upon one of the ship-hatches, hoping that he was somewhere cast
on land, though perhaps so far that he could not so soon return home to Albion.

I will not hear make mention what a living death or dying life I poor wretch
led, all the while that Periander was absent, sometimes persuading my self that
he was dead, and sometimes hoping to see him and enjoy his presence; but this I
will leave to your discretion (loving shepherds,) and pass on forwards in the
declaration of this lamentable history. You shall therefore know, that after
Barsalis had been six months at home, the Admirals son returned to his fathers
house attired like a ship slave, and told us such a tale of his wonderful
adventure, how he was cast on the shore side with his mast-piece, and how he
fared on the land, that not the Court only, but all the Country also admired
at his hard fortune. But concerning the Prince, he could tell no more then the
other traitor had done, yet to give a color of likelihood, he agreed to the
same report which the Villain Barsalis had made. And though my hope was small,
yet I took the greater courage, because sir Massicour^ that Arch-traitor had
escaped such dangers and troubles as he made us believe. And howsoever my young
heart strived against sorrow and grief, yet the Queen being old and weak of
nature, consumed for very grief, and dyed. Who being buried and intombed, what
mourning, what grief, and what sorrow was made, not in the Court only, but
generally over all the Country, I am not able to express. And as for my
self, though I was very sorry for her death, yet was the grief and pain which
I suffered for the absence of Periander, so great and exceeding, that I could
scarce think up-any other thing, and therefore the sooner forgate the death of
the Queen.

CHAP. XV. How the traitor Massicourt slew himself, because he could not obtain
the love of fair Brisilla: also how the King was enamoured on her.
BY this time began the traitor Massicourt to make love unto me, and to cast
such passionate looks upon me, at all times that he passed by me, or came into
the place where I was, that I could not choose but perceive that he was become
darling to Venus, by the forcing dart of her Son Cupid, and that he suffered
great pain for my sake.

I was sorry for his case, because he was a most gallant Gentleman, exceeding
both in perfection of body and readiness of wit, but yet my heart was so fixed on
Periander, that although I had certainly known that he was dead, yet could I
not have forgotten him to love any other. Yet howsoever I was affected,
Massicourt found means to enter into the Orchard. I being there alone, and
emboldned himself so far, that he came unto me, greeted me, and with all
humility, by word of mouth declared what torment he suffered for love of me,
desiring me to be merciful unto him. Whereunto I answered, that I could show
him mercy in pitying his case, and exhorting him to change his mind, but other
mercy I could not show him, and so I flung into the Palace and left him among
the trees, which might have been witnesses of the tears he shead. Yet he gave
not over the field for all he had had but ill success at the first assault,
and purposed to send me a Letter, hoping that ink and paper would do more then
his bare words had done. Especially because he being passionate, was not able
in my presence to express his mind, neither would I hearken unto his speech.
Insomuch that he thinking that I could not do less then read all whatsoever he
wrote, though I could not give ear to his sayings; dispatched a Letter and
conveyed it into my hands as secretly as he could: which letter was written to
such an end.

Massicourt to the Duchess Brisil.
PArdon me gracious Lady, if I am troublesome unto your grace, for I am forced
by that Lord whom I must obey. The sum of my desire is to please your grace,
and my chiefest felicity consists in your content, therefore think not Lady
that I would willingly molest you. My humble Petition is that it may please
your grace to weigh the torment, grief and pain, which I suffer, which if your
gracious mercy do not slacken, is like to seal my love with death, and to give
the world cause to accuse your grace of cruelty. Mercy Madam is an ornament to
Ladies of high estate. I wish not that you should forget the Prince Periander,
but to admit me as copartner and pertaker of your grief. Neither do I crave
that your grace should not love Periander (whether he be dead or yet live) but
give me leave to love you, and to accept of my love, as a comfort to assuage
the sorrow you suffer for Periander.

Farewell.

When I had read this Letter I could not but be angry: for it grieved me that
he went about to withdraw me from the love of Periander, though he seemed to
wish the contrary. For how could I have loved him, and not forget Periander?
how could I have been merry with him, and mourn for Periander? and how could I
laugh with him, and weep for Periander: wherefore incontinently, I wrote him
this answer.

Brisilla to Sir Massicourt.
YOur conscience urged you (Sir Massicourt) to crave pardon in the beginning of
your letter, foreknowing your offense. But your excuse is, for that you are
constrained by him whom you must obey. Cupid you mean, I am suit: but how
shameful it is that a Knight should so bewray his pusilanimity and faintness
of courage, I leave to your own consideration. And to let you understand
furthermore, that if your desire be to please me, and therefore far from
undertaking any thing that may trouble me, you shall obtein your wish and enjoy
true felicity (which you affirm to consist in my content) if you molest me with
neither letter nor speech, to love you. For in so doing you shall bind me to
acknowledge that you have done me a singular pleasure. You know that I have
already told you that I am sorry for your torment and passion; though I may not
be your Physician. Neither do I think the world so mad, as to judge me cruel,
if your folly cause you to die. (Though it be a common and usual custom unto
all your sex, to talk of the mate before you have the check.) You can teach me
that mercy beseems maids, but you forget in the mean time, that Knights ought
not to be unmerciful as to seek the overthrow of our honesty, and to spoil us
of our honor. Have not I given faith to love Periander, and shall I not incur
foul shame and dishonor, if contrary to my promise. I love you? but would you
have me use your love as a pastime to forget the dolor which otherwise I should
suffer for the absence of Periander. How far do you run beyond reason; for I
will have you know that such love as you talk of; yea the very memory thereof
only, should be a whetstone to sharpen my grief, seeing there is nothing more
painful or odious unto me, than that which draws my mind from thinking on
Periander, and encumbereth my thoughts with matters taking away the remembrance
of Periander, thinking no time il spent but that wherein I shed not tears for
Periander. Therefore cease to molest me, seeing the sum of your delight
consists in pleasing me.


After Massicourt had received this Letter, he durst not so often molest me.
Northelesse, of purpose he came diverse times to the Court, preasing near the
privy chamber to have occasion to speak with me; but I could watch him as well
to shun him, as he could watch me to talk with me. In so much, that since I
wr^te him that Letter, I spoke with him but once, at which time I so sharply
rebuked his importunity (seeing that no mild or courteous speeches could serve)
that a long time he absented himself from the Court. At length (when I thought
surely that I had been altogether rid of such a troublesome suitor) on the
sudden he greeted me upon a certain morning, being but newly risen. And
although I was alone, yet I was so angry, that I turned my face from him, and
would not speak unto him. This happened (to my remembrance) twice or thrice,
after which time I saw him no more. But about three weeks after, a little
casket covered with a cloth of gold was brought me, whereon there was written
this inscription in golden letters.

My Supreme will and pleasure is, that this be given to Duchess Brisil.

I marvelling what that meant, asked the messenger, who sent it? or to what
end? To which he answered, that he that sent it, is not now, but living was
called Sir Massicourt. Who being in his chamber (quoth the messenger) this
morning, willed me to go into the next room till he called me, and that I
should presently carry the casket which I should find upon the table to
Du^hesse Brisil: when I had stayed there three or four hours, I marvelled what
my master did there so long alone, and peeping through the crease of the
chamber door, I saw him lie breathless on the ground, and so amazed, I stepped
in and found this casket, what is in it I know not, and so the messenger being
Sir Massicourts chamberlain, departed. I opening the casket, found a dagger all
bloody, on the blade whereof, was this message engraven in such small letters
that I could scarce read it.

Go tell the Queen that in my heart enthroned,
Does sway the scepter of my haughty mind,
That thou have pierct the seat whereon she sat,
And overcome the Kingdom which she ruled;
That thou have massacred that Massicourt,
Whereover she so proudly tyrannized:
That thou have drowned all his thoughts in blood,
Who loved her as never wight was loved:
That thou have rid him from her cruel face,
Who praised her beauty to the sovereign skies;
That thou have sent him to the groves of hell,
That deemed his heaven consisted in her grace:
That thou have ended his exceeding pain,
Whose grief her mercy would not mittigate:
And that thou have his torment finished,
Whom she (for cruel) caused to despair.
This do, and let the color of thy coat,
Give to the butcher of my death a note.
In what case I was (loving shepherds) after I had read that message and been
informed of that rufull tragedy, I will not now declare.

For the sorrow which I conceived for the end of Massicourt, was incredible.
Besides what a sudden rumor was spread through the Court of his death you may
consider, insomuch that I need not to stand upon that point. But I will pass
on to the rest of my misery. For within three or four months after the decease
of sir Massicourt, I got a stronger enemy to my content then Massicourt; for
the King himself (though he was above fifty years of age) solicited me to give
over all remembrance of his son, and yield to his request, which was to become
his wife, and be crowned with the diadem of Albion. Yet could not that precious
object alter ye mind of Brisil, or any whit in her diminish the memory of
Periander. But the King knowing that he might command, when he perceived that I
could not be induced by prayers, fair words, lofty promises, and other
allurements to grant his suit, soon used the tyranous sentence of all those
that may do what they will.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. And thought to try whether he
could by threatenings and menaces obtain that, which by fair means I would not
consent unto: but all could not help, for except death only nothing could take
from me that faith and promise which I made to Periander. And whilst the King
and I thus strove, he in loving, and I in hating a letter was brought to the
Court from the King of Spain, wherein he informed the King that his son
Periander was with him intending to be in Albion with his father and loving
Brisil very shortly. But that he had sent a messenger before his coming, that
they should be informed of his health and fortune, could scarce believe it; but
that they saw it was manifest, seeing the Prince Periander had written that
Massicourt was by the Pylot Barsalis cast overboard, and yet notwithstanding
he complained not of Barsalis, but agreed with him in the report of the tempest
which was none. Besides that love which he bore me was sufficient proof of his
treason. For he sent us the whole declaration of the treason practiced by
Barsalis against him. He also informed us how he had heard of the Queen his
mothers death, whereof he was very sorry. The King having received these
Letters, at the first was glad that his son was living, and caused Barsalis to
be apprehended, who with a little racking confessed the whole matter, and
appeached the Admirals son that was dead, as the Author and cause of all that
he had executed. Whereat the whole world so marvelled, that they could scarce
believe it. And whereas many had pitied the Knights lamentable and tragical
end, now they judged him rewarded according to his deserts. And I for my part,
was so enraged against him, that if he had yet lived. I believe I had with my
own hands wrung his head from his shoulders; for he was the cause of all my
calamities. The King caused Barsalis to be hanged and quartered, and in the
place where Massicourt that politic traitor was buried, did he command a
gibbet to be set up reaching over his Tomb, and this written on the top of it
in great letters, Here lies entombed a Knight of ancient fame,
An Earls son, Sir Massicourt by name.
This Knight, for love, an heinous treason tried;
Yet could not help, he pierced his heart and di'd.
He was no traitor known till clad in clay,
This Gibbet here was set it to bewray.


For the King was terribly enraged, when he had heard this strange kind of
treason: which was the cause that now he loved her whom he had wedded to his
son; and hated him whom he was by Nature bound to love.

For lest Periander should return into Albion, and marry with me, whom he would
have to be his wife, the King forgetting both the law of Nature and Honesty
wrote unto the King of Spain, that his Son Periander was guilty of treason
against his own person, being his Father: and therefore desired him upon all
friendship, and the alliance that had a long time been between the Kingdoms of
Spain and Albion, to keep his son close prisoner, and to let him be used as
hardly as any of all the other Captives which were in his Kingdom or Domions.

When I had heard what answer the King had returned by the Ambassadors of
Spain, my heart was ready to burst. And I was minded diverse times to dispatch
my self with one of my garters, thinking that by my death I should deliver
Periander from imprisonment, and move the Kings mind to use his son as he ought
to do. But I know not how, I was always so falsely allured with hope, that I
continually abstained from shortening my life, and thereby prolonged my misery.
You shall therefore understand, that I got one of the Ambassadors Pages to
carry a Letter from me unto Periander, and to deliver it secretly into his own
hands; which the youth promised that he would accomplish, though it should cost
him his life: and to reward his readiness, and to make him the willinger and
carefuller to discharge his duty, I gave him twenty crowns to drink. The
Letter was written to this effect.

Brisilla to the Prince Periander.
SWeet Periander, the joy which poor Brisil conceived when she heard of her
Periander, was too great to be of long continuance, and even as the herb that
grows and fades in one hour, so the mirth that possessed my soul, was in a
moment expelled and banished. You accused the Pylot Barsalis, but you might
rather have cursed the traitor Massicourt as the chief cause and first
beginning of all our sorrows: for the furious love, hypocriticaf friendship,
and malicious policy of that unhappie Knight, has wrought first his own
ruin, and therewith our adversity. How miserable and unhappy art thou
Periander, that thy own natural father hates thee? How unfortunate, that thy
parent conspireth against thee? And how unluckie, that he who ought to be thy
chief friend is become thy enemy? Nay rather, how wretched is distressed
Brisil, that unhappie Periander must be thus miserable, unfortunate and
unluckie for her sake? Ah Periander, could my captivity set thee at liberty,
how pleasantly, and how willingly should the world see me run to the Prison,
and yield my leg to the Stocks or Iron Gyves? Nay, might the dearest blood that
succoureth my faithful heart, purchase thy ransom from imprisonment, and
obtain thee thy souls desire, how soon should my breast offer it self to my
knife to be set a broach, and to have a passage made into the inmost part
thereof? But no, the Gods and fortune envy at me too greatly, to suffer me to
enjoy so great happiness. If no man can or dare tell you the cause of your
fathers sudden wrath against you, know that I have found means to rid you of
that doubt, and to let you understand that accursed Brisil is the occasion
thereof, though she had rather die then live to see thee wronged. The King thy
father will be married to Brisil, and therefore must Periander be banished,
(which is more) imprisoned among strangers far from home. But assure thy self
Periander that I will rather die, then undo that which is knitted with my
faith, and bound with my honor. If you can patiently endure your imprisonment,
persuade your self that I will courageously abide my martyrdom. Which for that
as it cannot but be the crown of mine honor, so also is like to be the cause
of my releasement: I wish that it may happen with all speed. That Brisil being
lifeless and forgotten, Periander may be reconciled to his father, return to
his country and enjoy his pleasure until the decease of the King, then to be
crowned with the glorious title of King of Albion. And thus faithful Brisil
bids thee farewell, lamenting nothing so much as that she was not in the
galley by you to row for you, and bear all the travel that you by reason of her
were constrained to suffer, among them unnatural Moors and galley slaves.
Adieu.

Thine, and therefore thy self miserable. Brisilla.


This Letter I had no sooner delivered to the Page, but Ambassadors departed
from the Court having taken their leave of the King, and embarked themselves
the next day after to return into Spain. When they were gone the King sent for
me, and asked me whether I was not yet resolved to love him seeing he hated his
own son for love of me. Whereunto I answered that if his Majesty loved me
indeed, he would likewise love his son, seeing that I loved none but his son,
nor could not love any other as long as I lived. But (to be short, and as
little tedious loving shepherds, as I possibly may) after we had reasoned and
argued together the space of a full hour, he in protesting how entirely he
loved me, and that he could not live, unless he enjoyed Brisil as his Queen;
and I in defending, that I might not love him, nor live, if I break my promise
made to his son in his presence and by his consent; at length he burst out into
these raging words. Proud Brisil, and ungrateful Duches, thou despisest the
high offers of a King, and contemnest the love of a Monarch, that governs a
whole Kingdom. And think thou not that I cannot command thee, seeing an
huge people is ruled by me? I promise thee, that I will teach thee not to say
nay, when I demand; and to be ready to grant when I request. Therefore know,
that thou shall be married unto me, will thou, or will thou not, and the
Marriage day shall be the ninth day after to morrow. See then that thou prepare
thy self against that day, to condescend to my pleasure, lest thou will rue thy
stubborn hardneckedness. And with that he turned from me into the next chamber,
and left me poor distressed wight ready to yield up the ghost, at the sound of
his conclusion. But snatching hope by the subject, I thought either the Kings
mind might before the appointed day be altered, or fit opportunity offered me
to escape his tyranny by flight. But neither I could in time get away, nor the
King had forgotten his intent. But the day which he had appointed for the
Wedding being come, and all things in a readiness, sent for me. I, although I
did not well know what to do yet r^sting upon this point, rather to die, then
to forsake Periander; and considering that fury was not to be repressed by
force, where Majesty commanded, and that fair speeches prevail most, where the
party is weakest, I went presently unto him, and falling on my knees, beseeched
his Majesty to pardon me for my former folly, promising, that whereas I had
offended his Majesty with stubbornness, I meant to make him amends with
obedience and loyalty. And for that I could not but as yet mourn for my
forepassed frenzy, I besought his Majesty to protract the day of the wedding
one month farther, to the end that I might prepare and exorn my self in such
manner, that the whole world may bear witness that Brisil does offer her self a
worthy spouse to so mighty a Bridegroom. The King was herewith so pleased, that
giving the farewell to all anger, willingly granted me my request; whereof I was
not a little rejoiced, hoping before the space of one month to be so far from
his reach that he should not force me to be married to any but to Periander.

CHAP. XVI. How Brisilla to avoid the intended Marriage of the King with her,
departed secretly into Spain, where she found means to speak with the Prince
Periander, and how he escaped out of prison with her.
TO compass the conclusions of my intent, lest I should seem pensive or
sorrowful, I wept all night, to the end mine eyes might spare from shedding
tears in the day. Besides I seemed to be very busy in beautifying my person
with sumptuous clothes, costly jewels, precious pearls, and other ornaments
which I had laid aside sithence the loss of Periander. At last, about a week
before the prefixed time of our marriage, I espied an occasion to get out of
the Court, which though it was not so fit as I could wish, yet fearing lest if
I did let that slip, I should not have the like offered the day being so near
at hand, I took hold of it, which was this. There was a ship that six weeks
before, had brought sugar, figs, raisons, dates, oranges and lemons, to Albion,
the Merchants whereof, having bought other wares to return into Spain, had made
their provision to go to Sea. Which when I heard, (for I was in nothing so
attentive as to learn of some Back that was bound toward Castile) I changed my
sex in outward sight, and in the form of a Shipboy, I went to the Spanish
Merchants, and beseeched them to take me into their service, for I was a poor
fatherless child that had for the space of two years led a Mariners life;
which misliked me so, (for that I was weak of constitution, and my limbs tender
by nature) that I have taken leave of the Master of the Ship, wherein I have
served to see if I could happen into some other kind of good service. The
Merchants no doubting my tale to be other then truth, because I spoke Spanish
unto them, supposing that I had learned their speech by traveling into their
Country, liked me so well, that they went to Mumbchance which of them should be
my Master. Whereof I was so glad, that seeing the Mariners hoyse up the sails,
and hale in the Anchor cable, I cared not for the chance of the Die, or whose
servant I should be, hoping that if the Gods would favor us with a gale of wind
that I should shortly arrive to the place where the stay of my life, and hold
of my hope remained. But mark the taunting check which Fortune gave me. For we
had scarce entered the mouth of the Sea, but we were overtaken by two swift
Pinnaces, so well furnished with all warlike provision, that they had been able
to master four such Barks as the Merchants ship wherein we were. To be short,
that they calling to our Pilot that he should strike, durst not but obey; and I
misdoubting that they were Albion ships, sent to look after me, kept my self
under the ship hatches, where I so bepitched and betarred my face, that the
judgment of the eye could not prevail to discern who I was, if I might have
escaped speaking. But the Pilot who could not understand the Albion speech,
called me to interpret what the Albion Pilot dem^anded of him. But I made as if
I had been so afraid that I could not speak, and while I heard them wrangling
each in his own language, one nothing understanding the other, I tried to
counterfeit my voice as well as I ceuld, fearing lest I should have been
compelled at length to become their interpriter, which in truth so happened.
For the Merchant my Master considering the course of our Navigation, was
greatly hindered by their importunity, and fearing lest they were Pirates and
thought to pilfer and rob the Bark, and spoil him and the other Merchants of
their goods and lives, forced me to come to the uper part of the ship, and to
speak to my Countrymen. Thus I constrained whether I would or no, not only to
present my self unto them that sought me (for I had heard what they demanded,
though none could understand them but my self, and therefore I was the better
instructed what to say unto them, and how I should interpret their sayings unto
the Spaniard) but also to bewray my voice unto them, and to be the expounder
that should declare and explicate what they demanded, and what the Spaniards
answered. Wherefore being come into their presence, I began to speak British,
but that in such order that they had much add to understand me, and took more
pleasure to laugh at me, then to enquire after Brisil, whom the fools spoke
with, and thought that she had been some Moor or Turk. For the Admiral who was
there in his own proper person, hearing how crabbedly I cracked his British
language on the pate; what the devil (quoth he) have the Gods sent us hither,
to mock us with our language after this sort. No doubt but our pains are well
bestowed to come thus far into the Sea, to talk with such an eloquent fellow. I
believe certainly, that he has been an Orator to the Devil three or four
years. Whereupon he asked me what Country man I was, a Turk or a Jew? I
answered him that I was which he would, for I knew not my self where I was
born. At length he asked me where I had learned to speak such good British,
whereunto I made as if I had not marked that he mocked and gybed with me, said,
that when I was two or three years old I was in Albion with my mother, for the
space of two or three years or thereabout, in which time I learned so much of
their language, that God be thanked it serves my turn. Whereat they all burst
forth, and laughed very heartily, and at length, remembering Brisil, they asked
me whether our Bark was bound? and I answered to Barbary; then they asked
whether we had not any women passengers aboard, I answered, that we had no more
then they saw, either men or women. They said they were not so content, but
would search the Ship, and bade me to tell the Pilot that he should not resist
their pleasure, for they would do it and were forced to do it by the straight
command of their King. Whereupon I told our Pilot this tale, that they were the
King of Albions searchers, that scoured up and down the Seas, to see if they
could meet with any Ship that carried such wares out of the country as were
not granted or licenced by the king; and that because they suspected that the
Merchants that were in that Ship had unpriviledged wares, they would for that
purpose make search for them, and if they found none, they would not any longer
hinder them of their undertaken voyage. The Pilot willingly let them come
aboard the Bark, though the Merchants thought verily that they had been
Pirates, and used that color to obtain their prey the easier. But they found
themselves deceived, for after the Albion Lords had thoroughly searched the
Ship, they returned into their Pinace again, without offering the least injury
in the world to the Spaniards, whereof they were glad, and I gladder, having
escaped the danger which Fortune seemed to threaten me. And in few days after,
being speedily arrived at the wished Haven, my Master took post horse for
himself and me, and we rode to Sivil, in which City my Periander lay
imprisoned. And now I began to wish my self released from the subjection of my
Master, for he employed me in so many matters that I could not perform my duty
toward him accordingly, and withal have time and occasion to obtain my desire
concerning Periander; wherefore I sought all means possible to be rid of my
Master, who was loath to part from me. At length I feined my self to be sick,
that I could neither eat nor drink, nor stand on my feet, but kept my bed, and
being asked by him what I ailed, or what sickness I had, I made as if I durst
not tell him, at length seeing he was so importunate to know, I told him it was
the plague, whereof he was so afraid, that he would put me into an Hospital
among the diseased; but I entreated him that he would rather leave me to mine
own shift, then to place me among the diseased, promising that if I escaped
death, I would return into his service before any other. And though he was
loath to let me go where I should want looking unto, yet seeing that I had
rather have died then be carried to an Hospital, he gave me three or four
pieces of gold and sent me packing, wishing that I might fare well. I thanked
him for his kindness, and the Gods for my liberty. And now I began marvellously
to long for the sight of my only comfort Periander, who little knew that I was
so near him. But I could scarce imagine how I might come to him, and avoid all
suspicion. For I feared lest the King should have misdoubted of my intent, and
therefore have written unto the King of Spain to make search whether I were in
his countr^y, but especially to watch whether any came unto Periander, knowing
that if I were in Spain it was to come to him. The consideration whereof, made
me so careful and so wary that I looked before I leaped, and did nothing but
being forethought; So that I passed by the prison where Periander lay every day
once or twice, and sometimes more often, to see what likelihood there was that
I might come near him. I espied the manner of the prison, the condition of the
Gaolor the estate of those that frequented his company. At length I became so
impatient, that I could not abide any longer delay and therefore began to
invent some deceit or other to beguile the keepers, and come to the speech of
Periander. First I purposed to apparel my self like some Italian Gentleman, and
so to have asked the Gaolor leave to speak unto the Albion Prince, but that
seemed not the safest way. Afterward, I thought to go like a British beggar;
thinking that they would have brought me to talk with the British Prince, to
take pleasure at our strange parley. And this liked me worse, for so I might
have easily been entrapped. At last I found no better means then to
counterfeit my self to be an Egyptian Prophet and Fortune Tellers. So that I
went into the street where the prison stood and a good way off (as I had not
thought to come near the prison) I began to sing an Egyptian enchantment, and I
did so counterfeit the ^une thereof (though knew not my self what sense my
Sonnet inferred) that the Spaniards thought me an upright Egyptian; and having
ended my Song, a number of Youths, Maids, women and men, also came flocking
about me, holding up their hands to know their fortune. I, as cunningly as I
could, held the devil a candle, and told them many good morrowes, and evil
evenings, as I often have heard yt the Egyptian figure Castres used to do, to
deceive the world; yet nevertheles I used the matter so that they were content
of their fortune, and liked me the better. But I was so haled and pulled from
one place to another, that I knew not how I might content them all. At length I
was fetched by the Maids that dwelt with the Gaolor and his daughters to come
thither, whither I went willingly, for that was my cause of my practiced
sorcery, and there was the man whose fortune made me become a fortune tellers.
To be short, the Maids of the house led me into a yard where they might
secretly talk with me, and ask me questions concerning their fortunes. But it
chanced that my good hap was such, that I espied Periander out of a window
reaching unto the yard where we were; but alack I spied that renowned mirror
of beauty, fair Florina, the daughter of the King of Spain, standing by him,
who entangled in the snare of fancy, and fettered in the pleasant contemplation
of Perianders beauty so loved him that she corrupted the Gaolor with sums of
money to use her Love, not as a strange prisoner, but rather as a worthy guest
whom she also in proper person sometimes visited to assuage his sorrow; which
sight so amazed me that I could not tell what I said to the Maids desirous to
know their fortune. I felt a kind of soothing pleasure creep into the veins of
my heart, for the presence of my friend, and on the other side, a fearful kind
of grief possessed my soul, for that I was acquainted with his company,
mistrusting whether poor Brisil was committed to the winds, and raised out of
the heart of Periander, by the matchless courtesies which he received of fair
Florina; but not suspend you with my long and endless discourse (loving
shepherds) know that fair Florina espying what dealings I had with the Iaylors
daughter, as new sick as the rest, willed the Iaylor to bring me into the
chamber where she was with Periander, to learn what cunning I had. Therefore I
being led by the Iaylor before her, saluted her and her company with all the
humility I could, but yet in such order that my besmouged cheeks were died with
a vermilion red at the sight of Periander. But Florina imputing the change of
my hue to shamefastness, and thinking I being a simple swad, was abashed to
see my self in their presence bid me come near her boldly, saying she meant to
be my patient, and to see whether I knew by the lineaments of her h^nd, what
Fortune she had; and was like to have. Imagine (gentle shepherds) what mind I
had either to tell her fortune, or to give her an answer being in that case;
yet taking all the courage that in such extremity could cleave to my heart. I
said, My skill is too small to conjecture of so high constellations; for I hold
opinion that the destinies of those that are of such noble descent as your
self, are more intricate then the constellation of base persons; and therefore
if my divinations prove false or little agreeing to the truth, I leave your
Grace to be burdened with the blame, seeing it is your pleasure that I should
conjecture of your luck, and not my own presumption: And therefore thus much I
will say of your fortune, I will not touch your Parentage, wealth, honor, and
likelihood of great renown, for that is known to all the world, but I will tell
you of that which is most doubtful, and more delightful unto you, as my simple
knowledge teaches me; for (unless I am deceived) you love (Lady) and that most
loyally, but I see one doubt which is like to redound to your sorrow, that you
shall have a shrewd enemy to your desire, and a terrible foe to your wished
love. And to yield you reason of my divination, mark the line of affection in
your hand, it is straight, a token of pure love, and faithful affection
accompanied with loyalty, and these two short wrinkles which you see of each
side of the forsaid line, are token of the cross you are like to endure in
obtaining you hearts ease. Neither would I have your grace to think that the
clause of this ill success depends only on the person who has your heart in
hold; for there be many events and chances that we cannot foreknow or
forethink, which may breed your sorrow. But hoping that your Grace is minded as
the Astrologian that said, Inclinationes non sunt edicta praetorum, that
inclinations be not ordinances and decrees of Majors; shall be able to command
the stars and rule over them, according to that old saying, Sapiens hominabiter
astris, I am glad thou take me to be so wise Egyptian, replied Florina. But I
pray thee can thou not tell me more particularly of some adventure to come?
No truly Madam (quoth I) may it please your Grace to bear with my rudeness and
ignorance, which is not able to content your pleasure, and satisfy your mind
concerning this point. Why then, quoth she, let me know what you can say to
this Gentleman, for I hope as I admitted him to hear my luck so he will not be
angry if I hear his fortune. But Periander, (as I well perceived) knew me; for
I saw his face receive such diverse colors, and his countenance altered so
suddenly, that Florina marvelled what had befallen unto him, that he stood so
perplexed; for he conceived infinite pleasure in seeking his only joy so near
him and contrarily he was grieved that I found him with Florina, fearing lest I
should suspect him less constant, and so my self less faithful. Florina
beholding Periander, wist not what to say, and although I was sorry to see him
in that taking, yet because I knew the occasion and reason thereof, I was the
better contented, hoping that it was no more then I thought it to be, and that
he was led in a trance by my unexpected presence. Yet I was commanded by
Florina to depart, she thinking it now no time to tell any more fortunes. And
so I was forced to leave poor Periander, before he was come to himself,
although I feared that as my presence had stricken him, so my departure would
kill him. Nevertheless, seeing there was no remedy, I took it as patiently as
I could, and away I went, though I was not permitted to go far; for the Maids
of the house so flung about me, and kept such ado with me to know the sequel
of their fortunes, and to have me fully resolve them in all points which they
desired to know, (seeing I was so hastily called from them by Florina, that I
had not half satisfied them before) that I could scarce get from them. And my
luck was such, that while I was busy with answering to their questions, the
Gaolor had heard that Florina was missed in the Court, and looked for, to come
to the Queen her mother, which when he had signified unto her, she stayed not,
but incontinently hied to the Court. Periander therefore by this time being
restored to his wits, and seeing both time and place serve to talk with me in
secret, to the end that I should not be discried, willed the Gaolor to bid me
to come unto him, for that he earnestly desired to confer with me about the
nature of certain herbs that grow in Egypt and other peculiar matters. To be
short, the Gaolor sent me in to Periander, and there left me with him alone,
where he came and embraced me, his eyes distilling and gushing forth whole
streams of tears, saying, Brisil, Brisil, pardon me, that you were not by
me welcomed and entertained at your arrival, according to your deserts, and
my duty. For where necessity nippeth, all must obey. And doubt not that Leander
had been more welcome to loving Ero, if the swelling waves had not hindered his
journey by glutting themselves with his carcass, and so stayed him from the
wished Tower, unto which he was swimming, then thou most worthy Brisil to thy
faithful Periander. It were too long for me (worthy Shepherds) to declare
what other cherishments and loving congratulations that he made. To be short,
we talked of many matters (as you may well think,) of Sir Massicourts
Conspiration and treason especially, which was the first step to all our
troubles; of the Queens death; of the Kings unnatural tyranny, of my secret
flight of our Fortune on the Sea, of my Master: to be short, there was nothing
raked up in silence, that concerned our fortune. At length, the chiefest matter
and hardest point of all our conference was offered, when as we having informed
each other of all our adventures since that time that we were by the policy of
traitorous Massicourt separated entered into consultation what we might do to
shun the eminent danger which was like to fall upon us, by reason of the Kings
wrathfulnesse. And after we had long deliberated, now intending to use this
means, now that at length, we concluded to take the vantage of the time, seeing
that by means of Florina. Periander was not kept so straightly, but that he
might go secretly out of the prison, and walk whither he would to take the air.
Therefore least if his father the King of Albion should upon my flight send new
Ambassadors to the King of Spain, to have his son put to death (for he diverse
times swore unto me that Periander should die if he any way hindered his
marriage with me,) or brought Albion to be dealt withal not according to
fatherly affection, but his merciless rage, we thought best not to expect the
worst, but to play safe as long as time and occasion was offered us. To make
few words Periander the next morning by break of day got out of the prison
(telling the Iaylor that he went to a place where Florina had appointed him to
meet her) and coming to the house where I waited for him, she presently departed
from Sivil, intending to trabel toward some solitary place, where we might
live until we heard of the death of the King of Albion. And because we should
not be known, if search were made after us, we clothed our selves both alike
in the habit of country maids, as if we had been two sisters.

CHAP. XVII. How the Prince Periander and Brisilla became shepherds, and how
by the means of Malorena and Bergama, the Prince departed from Brisill.
AT length traveling thus together, we arrived to a certain village which is
called Ezla, where we purposed to keep our residence. And although we had
sufficient wherewithto maintain our selves, yet the better to avoid suspicion,
and to have wherein to employ our leisure and to take our delight, and
pastimes, we bought a flock of sheep, and learned to play the shepherds as well
as we could; none of all the inhabitants knowing but that we were two sisters.
For Periander was yet but young and had no beard, and besides he was so fair of
complexion, that it had been impossible for one to suspect that he was no woman.

After we had passed over one month in that haven of content and passing
pleasant kind of life, I enjoying the presence of my Periander, and he of his
Brisil in spite of the world, fortun^ began to envy at our felicity, and to
evert the happy estate wherein we lived. For it chanced that we being both at
the feast which was celebrated in honor of the Goddess Ceres, there was a
young shepherd being son unto one of the richest farmers in our village, who
casting his eyes on Sybilla, (for so I named Periander, who was thought to be my
sister) was fetttered in the snare of his beauty that we were so troubled with
importunate requests and suits of this youth, that we wist not how to dehort
him from folly, or how to quench the burning flames which consumed the poor
shepherds hear^ For the crueller Sybilla my supposed sister seemed to be, the
more he was provoked to hope for mercy; the colder she showed her self to be,
the hotter he was, the more she disdained, the more earnest he sued; the more
she crossed him for his fondnes, the more he hoped for kindness.

Insomuch that poor Petulca (for so was that wretched shepherd called) so
miserably loved, that all the Country knew by his color, what Captain he
honored and served. His joy and welfare which was wont to recreate the whole
company of the Inhabitants, was changed into Melancholy.

His young face which was a fashion of Modesty, Grace, Mirth, Beauty and
Comeliness, waxed wrinkled, his limbs weakened, and all his body decayed: So
that as he was generally pitied of all men, so were we most woefully grieved at
his hard Fortune, though we could not help or remedy the same.

Nevertheless, seeing that Petulca ceased not from his suit, but so hotly
followed his cause, pleading for mercy to save his life, I counseled Periander
to fain as if he loved him, hoping that we might by that devise and mean
escape the ill will and anger which we were like to gain of all our Neighbors
if the youth had died. For his passion was such that nothing but death only
could move him to leave his love. Thus Petulca loving a young Prince in the
habit of a lovely shepherd, and perceiving that he had won the Fort which he
had so fiercly assaulted, revived again, and in short time became as pert and
as trim as ever he had been. He came twice or thrice in the week unto us, and
so pleasantly discoursed of diverse matters as occasion offered, that we could
not have changed the recreation which he had by his honest company and merry
conversation, for the richest jewel of India. As he had lived in this
contented and pleasant manner one month, it happened that the daughter of a
shepherd called Petrueco, dwelling in the next Farm to our cotage, was fo
intricated in the net of affection, and so entangled in the beauty of Petulca,
that she allured him by continual favors, loving glaunces, courteous
greetings, pleasant speeches, and all means she could invent to gain his good
will, and to move him to love her; but all the world was not able to alter his
mind, though we wished that he might have been enticed by her deserts, to
repent of his first bargain. At length when Malorena (so was this unhappy
shepherd named) espied yt Petulca was so ungrateful that he would not any way
requite her courtesies with favor, she began most deadly to hate my sister (I
mean Periander) supposing her to be the cause of all her woe: For as she knew
Petulca was in love of my said sister, so she thought that he was as well liked
of her; which induced her to be persuaded that we of purpose entertaind him the
more kindly to hinder her matter: whereas contrarily when we knew that she so
dearly affectioned him we made less account of him, hoping that he wearied with
our coyness, might have lent his ear to his new Mistress that honored him
so highly. Yet howsoever we wished her well, and longed that she might enjoy her
hearts desire, she nevertheless being of contrary opinion, became our mortal
foe. If she chanced to pass by us, she did cast such a lowering look upon us,
as if she would have eaten us: if she had lighted at unawares in the company
where we were, she thought her self the worse; if she spoke of us to others,
she belyed us, and invented tales to defame and discredit us. Yet all this
served not; but intending fully to revenge her self of the injury which she
dreamed that we offered her, she excogitated this stratagem There was in the
same Village a beautiful young M^id, Niece to this Malorena, who by reason that
she kept her sheep in the next pasture to ours, kept great company with us, and
became very familiar and friendly unto us. Which her Niece Malorena espying
thought to use her as the instrument of her supposed practices. Therefore on a
certain morning she sent for her and made such a sugared speech unto her,
declaring the occasion why she sent for her, the estate of her love toward
Petulca, the love of Petulca toward Sybilla, alias Periander, and briefly all
that concerned this matter, desiring her not to deny her friendly aid and holy
herein. So that to be short, Bergama (for that was this other Shepherds name)
promised her niece that what she could do, she would be ready to perform.
Whereupon she told her what she would have her to do, instructing her in all
points concerning the same. Which tended to no other end then to work our woe,
and by expelling us by their treachery out of those quarters, to enjoy the love
of Petulca. Insomuch that these two Neeces having agreed and concluded upon the
premises, thus began Bergama to play her part. But you must note, that when
Petulca the amorons shepherd used to come to our field, his way lay hy the
place where Bergama kept her sheep. So that she espying him, on a certain
morning betimes marching over her ground to come to pass the time with us in
merry chat according to his manner, she stepped unto him, and knowing with what
kind of talk she might stay his journey, she cunningly held him prattle until
such time as she espied that I was alone. For commonly my sister Sybil alias
Periander, toward noone used to go to our lodging, not so well able to suffer
the heat of midday, as I. Bergama therefore espying me alone, called me unto
her, and asked me where my sister was (as if she had not known it) when I had
answered that she was gone home; why then (quoth she) seeing thou art alone, I
pray keep company with me a little and this shepherd, who although he had
rather be in company with Sybil, yet for that maugre his will, he must this
noone be my guest, will not be displeased with your presence since he loves y^u
the better for your sisters sake. With that she did lead us both into a
delectable Arbor, whence I might see my sheep as well as if I had been in mine
own field, and therefore was the sooner entreated to stay with her. In the
midst of this Arbor was a table of Marble stone, on which she laid a fair
napkin, and set before us such cheer as was most wished for in the Country at
that time of the year, praying us to sit down and take such fare as she had in
good part, since she envited us not for the excellency of her delicates, but for
good will and pleasure of our company. So she placed the shepherd Petulca and
me together on one side of the Table, and she her self sat on the other. While
we were thus merrily banqueting and talking together, thinking or dreaming of
no harm, Malorena by whose counsel and instinct all this was practiced
having notice of our being together, by means of a little wench sent under by
Bergama her niece in post-haste went to our Cottage and entering into the house
spoke unto Periander in this manner.

Fair Sybil, I doubt not but you have heard of the love and affection which I
have borne toward the shepherd Petulca, and that therefore I seemed to be
displeased with you because he so dearly loved you, and for your sake despised
and disdained me. But now, seeing I know the contrary, and being informed of
one of his special friends, how the matter stands, I perceive that I have
greater occasion to be angry with your sister then with you; and therefore I
thought good to come unto you, and to crave pardon of you, for that I was
offended with you without c^use. In respect whereof for acquittance, I will now
show you as great friendship, as before I wished you evil. You shall therefore
understand that your sister Brisilla does most unnaturally deal with you in
loving Petulca, whereas she seems not to esteem of him, and Petulca himself
does most shamefully abuse your courtesy, in that you give such trust and
credit to his feined speeches and dissembling persuasions. For he therewith
brings you in a fools paradise, causing you to believe that you are the
saint whom he honors, whereas he like a treacherous caitiffe loves your
sister Brisil so affectionately, that he never espieth her out of your company,
but he hieth unto his Lady, passing the time with passionate speeches, swearing
each other love and loyalty, and therewith conspiring together how they may
best deceive you and feed you with this false opinion that Petulca loves you,
because you should not perceive that he and your sister could play concord in
your absence, though they were always at discord in your presence. And for
because you shall find my words to be true, and acknowledge me to be your
perfect friend, whom you suspected to be your foe (as in truth for a time I
could not well digest you, I will lead you in a place where you shall see your
unnatural sister and dissembling suitor banqueting together. You know my niece
Bergama very well, I doubt not, which is as shrewd a wench as any in the world,
if you knew her qualities. And I think also that you perceive what great
acquaintance there is between her and your sister. This Bergama my cunning
Niece has granted them her house for their secret meeting place, where Petulca
after he has been with you, and sometimes without coming unto you, stays
till he come home, and then is sure to enjoy the company of his loving Brisil.
For as soon as you are gone from her, thither she trippeth. And if you will
follow my counsel and go with me, you shall see how lovingly she at this
present sits on Petulca's side, and makes good cheer with him in Bergama's
Arbor. I would have you to go with me, because if we go to your field, we are
like to miss of our purpose, the reason is, for that my shrewd Niece Bergamas
stands on her hold, and watches for your coming, and as soon as she can
espy you, the convert breaks up, the Shepherd marches on forward, and your
sister returns to her sheep. But where I will lead you, we shall not be seen,
and yet see all. And then take Malorena to be your friend, when your own eyes
shall force you to confess the same.

Periander giving faith to this Sirens sweet Song, went with her, and according
to her saying, saw us together, though we poor souls most innocent, and thought
of no such supposed villainy. Yet Fortune to mar our matter the more, and to
give the greater color to Malorena's tale, would have it so, that while
Periander stood with that traitress and looked upon us, the shepherd Petulca
being of custom merry and pleasant, smacked his lips on my cheek as I sat by
him, which I knowing his humor, that he did it of wantonness, and not of love,
made not strange of it, and seemed not to take it in ill part, since the
shepherd meant no evil by it: But alas! (loving shepherds) Periander took it
so heavily, and so ingraved both that which he had heard of Malorena, and seen
with his own eyes, in the ground of his tender heart; that now I am compelled
to detest that traitres Malorena to hate that deceitful Pergama and to curse
Fortune yet at this hour. For when Periander had seen us in the Arbor, he
returned home presently, and thanking Malorena, that she had so faithfully
bewrayed our treachery unto him, desired her to return home with him, where he
wrote a Letter unto me, and sealing it up gave it to Malorena, and not doubting
of her fidelity, prayed her to deliver it unto me; which he promised to do, and
departed from Periander, who incontinently went his way I know not whither; for
since that time that he went home and I was called by Bergama, I never saw him,
nor heard of him, nor could know what is become of him. The traitress seeing
how cunningly she had deluded her neighbor, unripped the seals of the Letter,
thinking she might be her secretary seeing she had done her so good a turn; but
by chance looking on the subscription before she had read the contents, and
seeing Periander written instead of Sybilla, was stricken in a maze on the
sudden, not knowing what it meant, but to be the better informed, she read the
Letter which was thus penned.

To Brisil, health and pleasure.
BRisil, to the end that thou may enjoy thy Petulca at thy will and pleasure
without any hindrance, I have left thee, and my self means to live solitary in
some wilderness, seeing the society wherein I only delighted, is taken from
me. Love Petulca, and love him so, that thou hate me if thou will; for I cannot
but love love thee, and so love thee, that for fear lest I be troublesome unto
thee, I have separated my self from thee, wishing thee all the pleasure and
delight thou can desire, and praying the Gods to save Petulca from all
mischance for thy sake.

Farewell. Ever thine, though thou weary to be his, PERIANDER.


When Malorena had read that Letter, she could not but marvel at the
strangeness of the case; for she perceived thereby what kind of sisters we
were; and though she was sorree that she had offered such true Lovers that
injury, yet glad for that she hoped to enjoy the love of Petulca, she stayed
till he came home, and then she showed him Perianders Letter, telling him from
point to point how she had served us: For she thought, when Petulca should know
how he was by us deceived, in that he loved a man for a woman, a youth for a
maid, yea Periander for Sybilla, that then he would be sorry that he so
unwisely had disdained her self, and set so little by her love. But yet she was
deceived; for Petulca having attentively listened to her tale, and well
perpended the Letter, was so angry at her and enraged that she had committed
such villainy against us, that he swore he would himself revenge the injury by
her offered to us. And therewith flung from her, and presently declared all the
matter unto me with tears trickling down his eyes, and showed me the Letter
which Periander had written unto me: whereat I was both so ashamed and amazed,
that I fell in a swound. But being by the industry of Petulca come to my self
again, I conceived that grief for the departure of Periander, and the false
opinion which he holds of me, which now so tormenteth and vexes me, that I
wish I had fared as wicked Malorena did, who understanding that Petulca had
opened all her treachery and divelish practices unto me, falling into
desparation, for that she had attempted so much villainy in vain, cast her self
into the River, and so was dr^wned. By means whereof the whole village, yea and
the neighbor towns, were filled with the rumor of this tragedy; and I the
next morning making no man of my counsel, depar^ed from thence, to seek my
sorrowful Periander.

Thus (loving shepherds) have you heard the discourse of my miserable life,
which now is so much the more miserable, by how much the more pleasure and joy
I have had therein: For the grief which I suffer because Periander (the thought
of whom, and remembrance of whose love is the only thing whereby I live)
departed from me with such an opinion, is so extreme, that the greatest
pleasure which ever I enjoyed in all my life, is no way equivalent or comparable
unto it. Judge then your selves (worthy shepherds) whether I have not cause to
curse Fortune, and blame even the Gods of cruelty.

Wherewith Brisilla having ended her history, began newly to weep and lament
most pitifully. But Ismenio and Perierio, who had so attentively given ear to
her discourse, that they had not interrupted any part thereof, comforted her as
much as they might. And seeing that by this they were come to the place where
I^menia had appointed to rest that night, they made provision for supper, as
merrily as their passions would suffer them, falling to their meat, refreshed
their weary bodies, and afterward took their rest.

As soon as Apollo had lighted on his fiery steeds to run his wonted course,
Perierio, Ismenia, and Brisil, rising from their bed, be took them to their
journey toward the Temple of Diana, every one of them hoping that they should
have their grief if not remedied, yet at least something mitigated; for the
wisdom and divine power of the Lady president of that Temple, was so blazed by
the Trump of Fame through all the Countries about her that no man in her time
which had heard of her celestial knowledge, doubted but that his evil might
by that Lady be redressed, though it were nere so marvelous, so it passed not
the bounds of possibility. This Lady was called Felicia, of whose wisdom,
knowledge, beauty, excellency courtesy, gracious favor toward all true
Lovers, and virtuous piety toward all distressed persons Monte Mayor largely
describes in his Diana; and forasmuch as the same Monte Mayor copiously
sets forth the sumptuousness and magnificence of the Palace wherein this
Lady Felicia kept her Court, in the fourth Book of the first part of his said
Diana; I think it superfluous for me to retain the Readers ear with
unnecessary relations of those things that by others have so exactly been
performed.

Wherefore turning the gentle Reader desirous to know the curiosity of the
sumptuous building both of the Temple and Palace before mentioned, with the
situation of the place to the fourth book of Monte Mayors Diana, I will
prosecute the matter of my history.

CHAP. XV. How Perierio, Ismenia, and Brisil, in their travel found Marcelio
and Maffeo asleep, who departed with them toward the Temple of Diana.
PErierio with his company had not gone above the space of an hour or
thereabout, they came into a fair green, where they saw a shepherd and a
Knight lying on the tender grass asleep both together. Ismenia and the Lady
Brisil marvelling at that sight, seeing two persons of such different calling,
so fellow likely sleeping one by the other wist not what it meant; for they saw
neither flock of sheep by them, nor yet any other company. But Perierio told
them that he knew both the shepherd and the Knight also; for he had both seen
them at his fathers house, and heard them declare their sorrows to his sisters.
So while they lay and slept, Petierio declared unto Ismenia and the Lady, who
they were, (for it was Marcelio, and Maffeo) and as briefly as he could
rehearsed the sum of both their discourses which they made in his presence to
his sister Euphilia, concerning the cause of their travel and trouble, when
she so courteously with her sister Perino, entertained them at her fathers
lodging. And when as he had told them as much as he knew of Marcelio and
Maffeo, (which greatly delighted both Ismenia and the Lady Brisil, for they
conceived infinite pleasure in hearing the strange history of their lives) he
awaked them, both desirous to know what success they had in their travel, and
how they had so happily hit of one another company. Maffeo not sleeping so
soundly as Marcelio, awaked at the first call, and marvelling to see such
beautiful shepherds about him, thought that it was some ominous token of good
hap; and as he beheld them more narrowly espying Perierio, he leaped up
suddenly, and embraced him so courteously, yielding him a thousand Bezolas manus
and thanks for his gentle entertainment at his fathers country house, that not
Perierio himself only, but I^menia also, and the Lady Brisil could not but
praise the Knight for his gratuity and thankfulness? and being asked of
Perierio whether he had found his Eleonora, and where he had met with Marcelio,
he answered, that after he parted from him and his sisters, he found Marcelio
within two days after, exclaiming on fortune for her accursed inconstancy, and
most bitterly lamenting the miserable estate he was in for his Alcida, who
continually fl^d from him when she could hear of his arrival to the place where
she was. Insomuch (quoth Maffeo) that when I heard Marcelio (whom I til that
time never had seen) so pitifully breath forth his plaints to the merciless
skies, I thought my self favored of the Gods, that I was not only tormented
with the sting of adversity, seeing there were more that bewailed their
adventures then my self. And in truth I so pitied Marcelio his case, that I
assuaged mine own grief by comforting him; when I found him so desolate, and
void of all consolation and hope. So that he glad of my company and I of his,
after we had declared our troubles each to other, we purposed to travel
together, and so have kept one the other company these five days. In which time
we have coursed over most part of all the villages aout the river Ezla, where
old Camillo your father dwells. And as we were one evening something late in
a pleasant grove, some 40 leagues from this place, we (overcome by the
wearisomnesse of our journey, and heaviness of our sorrows) fell asleep. Where
being awaked by three most beautiful nymphs, of them received a letter
subscribed unto us both: whereof we greatly marvelled, seeing that no man in
the world knew of our amity and friendship, which was out of two or three days
continuance. Nevertheless we hoped more then we feared. For we thought that
such divine things could not happen but for our better luck and content.
Wherefore unknitting the letter we read it, and found these to be the contents,

Felicia servant to the Goddess Diana, to the valourous Knights Marcelio and
Maffeo.
Marvel not (most worthy Knights) that my Nymphs amidst the solitary groves,
bring you a message from me: being unknown unto you. For seeing that I take
pleasure in nothing so much as in succouring those that profess chastity and
true love, when as by the uncrtain doom of the unchangeable. Goddess Fortune,
they be led into the irksome path of adversity, and pestred with sorrows for
the unhappy and overthwart success of their honest and worthy desires; when I
was informed at the altar of Diana, of your deserts, and understood how
worthily you have merited not only to enjoy your wished love, but also to be
crowned with a glorious laurel in token of your loyalty, how could I do less
then send my Nymphs unto you, straying as forlorn, and to set you in the path
that shall bring you to the accomplishment of all your heroical desires; take
the way that my messengers appoint you, and you shall have occasion to hope
Marcelio for his Alcida, and Maffeo for his faithful Eleonora.

Farewell.

When we had read this letter, not knowing whether we dreamed or were deceived
with some fantasy or vain vision, we looked on the Nymphs, gazing on their
beauty; but knew not what answer to make. But they so graciously spoke unto us
with such a settled and grave countenance, beautified with pleasantness and
courtesy, saying. Be not abashed at our presence worthy Knights; for we are
sent hither not to harm you, but help you, to give you comfort, and encourage
your minds now distressed. Marcelio taking heart gave them this answer, Worthy
Nymphs since we be not able to make you any part of amends for this your high
desert, I beseech the sacred powers of heaven to recompense your favor toward
us. In the mean time if occasion were offered that our service might requite
your courtesy, till death we acknowledge our selves bound both unto you and
the sovereign Lady Felicia, who has sent you hither to direct our straying
paces, and address us in some stayed path, by following of which we may obtain
the end of our hapless journey.

Courteous knight (replied one of the Nymphs) recompense we neither deserve nor
desire, our message we bring and thus deliver it. Seeing you have read the
Letter, it may please you to stay here till you see us no longer but so, that
you mark well what way we take, and then follow us at your pleasure, and you
shall not miss of the way which our Lady does write of. And therewith the
Nymphs most courteously taking their leaves departed from us, though we were
sorry to see them go, and leave us behind them. Yet we encouraged by their
words, followed, being led by the guide of hope, not so much knowing whether we
go right, as hoping that we are in in the way which the Lady promised that
we should take.

Thus (Perierio,) you have heard what success we have had since I was with you.

When Perierio, Ismenia, and the Lady Brisil, had heard the words of Maffeo,
marvelled at the strangeness thereof, and told him, that unless they were
deceived, they were in their direct way to the Temple of Diana, whither they
also traveled to the same Felicia, to crave her aid and counsel for the
abridgement of their sorrows. Maffeo passing glad of that, waked Marcelio, who
in like manner as his fellow had done, knew and saluted Perierio. And after
they had very courteously greeted one another, and each discharged him of his
duty according to the rules of civility, they marchd on pursuing their journey.
And for as much as Ismenia and the Lady Brisil had partly by Maffeo, while
Marcelio in his shepheads weed yet sleeped, been informed of their Fortunes,
they requested Perierio, Ismenia, and the Lady Brisil, each of them to tell the
cause of their travel. Which to beguile the wearisome journey, and to pleasure
the Knights, they did all three perform.

When they had ended each his discourse, they came near to a most pleasant
Grove, beautified with sundry ranks of tall trees, which yielded such a
pleasant shadow, that they could not pass by that place without entering into
it, and enjoying such pleasure as the amerity thereof did offer them. This
Grove was so perfectly made by Natures skill, and hedged with such pleasant
bushes, that the manner thereof far exceeded the artificial Gardening
invented by the subtilty of mortal men.

As these Lovers walked up and down the Grove, when they came near the hedge,
they sat down, and listening, they heard certain shepherds singing to the
sound of their Oaten Pipes. Which shepherds belonged to the Lady Felicia, and
were called Custophilus and Eromaus, Their singing tended to this sense.

Custophilus. APollo seated on his golden Steed,
No sooner gins to climb the mounting sky,
But Coridon, his tender Lambs to feed,
To pleasant field with them does careful hie.
He lets them nibble on the savoury grass,
And wily sounds his Pipe to praise his Less.

Eromaus. NO sooner Phillis, shaking off her sleep,
Does spy the glory of Aurora's face;
But to their wonted pastures drives her Sheep,
And treads the green-grasse with a nipping pace.
She hears her Coridon does sound her name,
She steppeth near, of him to do the same.

Custophilus. Fair is my Love (quoth Coridon the Swain)
For in her face sits Venus Queen of Love;
Who likes Phillis, likes not in vain,
For how could Nature frame a braver Dove?
Ye Heavens the wrathful Gods to anger move,
If Coridon to her unfaithful prove.

Eromaus, Fair is my Friend (quoth Phillis in reply)
For in his forehead Cupid takes his place;
And prints his Trophies in his lovely eye,
Wherein should I then but Coridon embrace?
Revenging Nemesis, with shame repay
My fault, if ever my true love decay.

Custophilus. HEr lips (says Coridon) are like the hue
That Cherries bear by natures secret skill:
Her breath as does the Violet so blew,
The glowing air with fragrant scent does fill.
And therefore Coridon accursed be,
When from his sweet saint Phillis he does glie.

Eromans. IN beauty like Alexis he is famed,
(Quoth Phillis) like to Paris for his pace:
When he in Ida beauties judge was named,
And for the fairest deemed Venus face.
But did not he poor Oenone forsake,
That fault my Coridon will never make.

Custophilus. THE Antarctick pole join to the Arctick may,
(Quoth Coridon) and stars fall out the sky:
Yea and the silent dame of night by day,
May run her race, and take her course awry.
But never shall that hapless day be seen,
Wherein shall Coridon forsake his Queen.

Eromaus. THe flames of Aetna flashing on the main,
(Quoth Phillis) may in tract of time be turned;
In pouring showers of never ceasing rain,
And the Ocean into ashes may be burned.
But never shall the lucklesse hour come,
That Phillis shall disdain her Coridon.

Custophilus. Erst cold December, down shall way the trees,
With summers fruit, and cloth the earth with flowers:
Erst July shall let running rivers freez,
And deck with snow the tops of climing towers.
Yea death shall close my life with dreadful doom,
To Phillis ere disloyal I become.

Eromatus. THe Husbandman with Plough shall ear the sky,
And Fishers wrap the Seas in snaring net:
The Birds shall swim, and watery fishes fly,
Ere Phillis shall her Coridon forget.
And when the fatal Dames have stopped my breath,
My shadow shall him follow after death.

Custophilus. THus Coridon and Phillis past the time,
With vowing each to other loyalty:
He could not blow his Pipe, or roll in Rhyme,
But she for verse her cunning needs must try.
And if he ceased to sing, and began to speak,
Most wittily she wistt her mind to break.

Eromaus. BY this Apollo does decline and fall,
He lights from off his steed to take his rest:
And from the Fields these Lovers gins to call,
Who ere they part, a kiss or twain must wrest.
Therewith content, till morning leave they take,
And with their sheep, each haste does homeward make.

CHAP. XIX. How Marcelio met with Polydor and Clenarde, who declared to them
what had happened to his father Eugerio and himself, after they were separated by
the tempest.
WHen these Shepherds had ended their Sonnet, Marcelio, Maffeo, Perierio,
Ismenia, and the Lady Brisil, intending to rise and pass on in their journey,
they heard a certain Knight and a Lady thank the Shepherds for their Music.
And because they could not see what this Knight or Lady was, by reason of the
thickness of the hedge, they hearkened to their talk. For the Knight turning
himself toward the Lady, spoke unto her in this manner. But I pray you sister,
have you ever heard in the Court, or in any populous City, any Music that so
delighted the senses, and contented the mind, as this Pastoral fit, which
these Shepherds here have bestowed upon us? Certainly brother (quoth she)
these Country songs, being accompanied with a certain kind of simplicity and
goodness, please me far better then those melodious tunes which are used in
the Courts or Palaces of Kings and Noblemen, being most curiously composed and
artificially enterlaced with diverse new inventions. And now we talk of this
matter, I cannot forget that good time in which Marcelio making love to our
sister Alcida, did use some evening to play on his Lute, and sung so sweetly,
that if Orpheus his Music was agreeable unto his, I marvel not though he moved
stones and trees to follow him, and fetched Euridice from the duskish Groves of
Tartarus. Ah Marcelio, Marcelio! Where art thou now? Nay where art thou Alcida?
Ah most unfortunate wretch that I am! Continually does Fortune offer me
occasion to remember something or other which may increase my grief, at such
time as I intend to recreate my self with some simple pastimes.

Marcelio who was with the other Lovers on the otherside of the hedge, hearing
very attentively what talk the Knight and the Lady had, was so astonished to
hear them name him that he scarce believed that he was the man they named; but
began to imagine that it was some other Marcelio and Alcida they spoke of. But
to be resolved, he climbed on a tree, and looking over the hedge, espied that
it was Polydorus and Clenarde, brother and sister to his Alcida; whereof he was
so glad, that he ran unto them and embraced them both with tears expressing his
exceeding joy, seeing he could not utter one word in a long while he was so
suddenly surprised with gladness. Polydor and Clenarde marvelled greatly what
this might mean; for because Marcelio was apparelled like a Shepherd, they
knew him not, till such time that his sobs and tears permitted him to utter
these speeches. Ah brother of my heart, now do I not care for my misfortune,
seeing that I am so happy as to see thee. But what, is not Alcida by thee? Or
does she perhaps hide her self in some secret place of the Grove? I beseech
thee to let me know some news of her, if thou know any, and deliver me from
ye torment which I suffer. Herewith Polydor and his sister knew Marcelio, and
embracing him said.

O most blessed day! O most happy hour! Ah brother to our soul, what cruel
disaster has been cause that thou art deprived of the company of Alcida, and
us of her presence? Why do thou march thus disguised? Why do thou wear such
counterfeit apparel? Ah cruel Fortune! It is most certain that there is no
perfect content in any thing whatsoever.

On the other side Maffeo, with the other Lovers, seeing that Marcelio had so
luckily met with Polydor and Clenarde, were very glad, and so they marched
altogether toward the Temple of Diana. And by that time that they had gone two
leagues, the Sun being at the highest, forced them to take the shadow of
certain trees that grew about a pleasant Fountain. Where they all sat down, and
washing their hands in the Christaline water that issued out of the Fountain,
each one setting out such provision as they had brought with them, they
refreshed themselves, and having satified their hunger, after that Marcelio had
told Polydor and Clenarde what fortune he had after his departure from them, he
desired Polydor to let him know what adventures he had had, since that time
that he left him with old Eugerio in the Ship, when he with Alcida and Clenarde
leaped in the ship-boat, and so were separated from their sight by the
tempestuous waves; thinking sure that they had miserably perished with that
unfortunate ship. Whereupon Polydor began thus to rehearse how he and his
father escaped the danger of the Sea, using as much brevity as he possibly
could, because he thought it would be troublesome to the rest of the company,
to hear matters that were full of sorrow recited.

After that I was hindered by the Pilot and the Mariner (quoth Polydor) when I
had prepared my self to leap into the ship-boat with my father, so that we were
compelled to remain in that unfortunate and dangerous ship; our aged father was
so distressed, as we may suppose that a loving father may be, who in the latter
end of his old age, sees both his own life and his dear childrens also, in
such present danger. He did not greatly complain of the waves that battered the
flanks of the ship, neither did he regard the boisterous winds that beset our
Vessel of all sides; but when he beheld the boat in which you were with Alcida
and Clenarde, (which seemed at every moment to be overwhelmed and drowned in
the rising waves which seemed to flee over the boat) he thought that his heart
was pulled out of his belly; and when you were separated from us that we could
not see you any more, he was so grieved, that I feared lest he should have
presently died.

The ship being led by Fortunes will went astray up and down the sea for the
space of five days, after we had lost the sight of the boat, at the end of
which space, Phoebus being near his Western home, we found our selves to be in
sight of land. Whereof the Mariners rejoiced marvellously, as much for that
they had recovered the hope which they had altogether lost and given over, as
for that they knew in what coast they were arrived; for the land which they saw
was the pleasantest Country and the most delectablest place that the Sun
penetrated with his beams, abounding with all kind of delight and pleasure.
Insomuch that one of the Mariners began thus to cry out, O blessed and happy
land of Valentia, receive those, which the Sea being irrited and provoked to
ice, does vex and afflict. Happy are they that being out of danger to be
swallowed up by the greedy waves, enjoy thy fertility, and the meekness of they
air! With far more labor does the Ship ear the Sea, then the labourer does
thy fields. O favorable land, before the sea become more enraged against us,
receive us into thy pleasant bosom, seeing we are almost spoiled and forlorn,
and thou shall do as much for us as he that saves another life. Receive us I
say, O beautiful Country of Valentia, that we having once set foot on land,
never return to sea again.

By these words of the Mariner, we gathered that we were near Valentia, which
country is famous through all the world. But while the Mariner thus called to
the merciless land, the Ship bring driven with a furious wind, arrived so near
the land, that if we had not wanted the boat, we might have reached unto it.
Nevertheless, certain fishermen fishing not far from us, and seeing our Mast
rent our Anchor lost, our sails torn, and our ship pitifully buttered,
perceived in what extremity we were. Therefore with all speed they came to
succor us, and with much trouble they fetched us out of the Ship and led us to
Land. The joy which we conceived thereof, was such as every man may and ought
to imagine. Eugerio and I, we thanked the Fishers for their help, in that our
great necessity, according to our duty. But they as men of a good and simple
heart, by nature pitttifull, regarded not our thanks, nor would take any reward
at our hands for their pains, one of them making us this answer. Sirs, thank
us not for this deed, for you shall know that we are bound to succor and help
all men that are in like necessity, and therefore take our readiness and good
will in good part which forces us to do good unto all men, whose extremities
want our aid. And persuade your selves, that as often as such occasion shall
be offered as this, we will do the like, although we should thereby hazard our
lives, and intrude our selves into danger. For this morning happened such a
chance, that if we had not remedied the same as we now have done this, we had
been grieved therewith all the days of our life. The chance was this. At the
point of the day, we went out of our lodges with our nets, and our other
ordinary preparations to fish withal; and before we came to the sea side, we
saw that the air was overcast with a dark mist, and heard that the sea raged
by reason of the boisterous winds which blew very ruthly, in so much that we
were twice of opinion to return home again, fearing to commit our selves to the
dangerous streams, in such a malicious and perilous time. But some of us
thought good that we should go to the shore, side to see whether the tempest
would slacken, and the weather change. For it happens sometimes, that after a
great tempest the weather changes on the sudden, and spreads a calm over the
whole sea. But as we came to the sea side, we espied a great boat so shaken
with the wind, and bruised with the waves, without mast, sails, oars, and all
other seafaring instruments, that unless this had been near the shore, they
could not have escaped present death: to be short, they were in the very same
case that you even now were. We moved to compassion, without regarding the
peril unto which we submitted our selves, presently leaped all into one of our
Ships, and with all speed rowed toward those forlorn persons. When we were so
near them, that we might see them that were in the boat, we espied a young
Lady, whose face was covered with tears, and her cheeks so blubbered with the
water that issued out of her eyes that it would have moved a Tiger to pity.
Which Lady, as soon as she perceived us rowing toward her, expected our
romming, with her arms stretched, and said unto us. Ah brothers, I heseech you
to deliver mo from this imminent danger with which Fortune menaceth us
presently, and more earnestly do I beseech you to deliver me from the power of
this Traitor which is by me, who against all reason and equitty keeps me
prisoner, and most villanously offers to force and violate my chastity. When
we had understood that, with all speed and diligence that we could (and that
not without great danger) we pulled them out of their boat, and setting them
aboard on our ship, we brought them to the shore, where she told unto us all the
vilany of the traitrous Mariner that was with her; how he had abused her and
her sister, with a certain Gentleman allied unto her, which would be long to
rehearse. But we have exempted her from the villains and led her to our
lodging, where she is yet with our wives and daughters out of all danger to
fall in the hands of those malicious and dishonest caitiffs that were in the
boat with her, whom we have cast into prison not far hence, where we will cause
them shortly to be punished and chastised according to their deserts; seeing
then that such and event happened, (as in like manner more may happen) who is
there of us all that would not, nay that ought not willingly to hazard their
lives in like danger, to recover the welfare of those that are lost, and to do
good unto those that are abused and afflicted? When Eugerio my father heard the
fisher say so, he thought that the same young Lady might have been one of his
daughters, and although the fisher could not tell us her name, we hoped
nevertheless shortly to be resolved of our doubt, by reason that the Lady was
not far off, and that the Fisher did lead us unto the house where she was, that
we might there take our rest. As we came near the house we heard the women sing
that were within; and we so longed to see the Lady, that we could scarce reach
to the house in time enough to know what she was; but entering into the lodging,
the Fishers wife with her daughters and her maids, marvelling to see what new
guests came thither, they all held their peace, and left their song; and among
them did we see the damosel whereof the Fisher had spoken, whom we
incontinently knew, and were of her known, for it was my sister Clede, who is
here present at this time, and may tell you how she fared after that she was
separated from you, by means of the Traitor Bartophamus, and how she came so
luckily unto that self-same place where both she and we were saved, by the help
of those pitiful and courteous Fishers; but when we had heard of the treason of
the same Villain Bartophamus, of the necessity of Alcida, and of your
captivity, I leave it to your discretion to consider how grieved we were, as
Clenarde my sister well perceived, and may witness; for the joy of our arrival
to land, and delivery out of that present danger, was turned into mourning, all
our pleasure into grief, and all our comfort into despair. Insomuch that the
fisher seeing how pitifully we were grieved and afflicted, for the mishap of
Alcida and your self, he comforted us as much as lay in him, and told us of a
certain Lady called Felicia, bearing rule over the temple of Diana, saying that
she had such infinite knowledge and wisdom, that she could remedy our evil by
telling us what was become either of Alcida or your self, whereof we were very
glad; for that was the chiefest thing that we desired to know. Wherefore we
resting there that night, as soon as Phoebus had saluted the Fishers cottage we
rose, and thanking the fisher and his wife for their inestimable goodness and
friendship toward us, and rewarding them according to our power, we departed
betimes in the morning, leaving the Mariners there. To be short we marched,
Eugerio, Clenarde, and I, till we reached unto the temple of Diana, where we
saw the Palace where the wise Lady Felicia holds her residence. We beheld the
magnificent building both of the place and of the temple, we saw the most
pleasant Gardens, the sumptuous towers, the most wise and discreet Lady, and
many other things that have so suspended our minds with admiration and marvel,
that I am not able to make rehearsal according thereof. We saw in like manner
the most excelent and beautiful Nymphs that attend on the Lady Felicia, and
many other shepherds both men and maids and diverse Knights, Gentlemen, Ladies,
and Gentlewomen, that were come thither to have their harms remedied by the
sage Felicia, who had given them great comfort in their love and necessity, But
as concerning us, the aid and help which she has done us until this present,
is, that she has kept our father Eugerio by her, willing us to go unto these
quarters, and not return until we had occasion to be better contented. And
forasmuch as we have received no small contentment and joy of your life and
presence, we think we have sufficient occasion offered us to return to the sage
Felicia, especially seeing we have in her company left our aged father all
alone, and desolate, among strangers, I know that it imports greatly for his
comfort, that we should find out our sister Alcida; But seeing that fortune in
so long time has barred us from understanding where she is, or hearing any
thing of her, I think it convenient that we deprive not our father any longer
of our company and presence.

After Polidor had ended his discourse, all the company marvelling at the
strangeness of his and Clenardes adventures, comforted Marcelio, who wept
bitterly for Alcidaes sake: and as soon as his tears would permit him, he
recounted unto Polidor and clenarde, what had happened unto him since he saw them
last. But Ismenia with the Lady Brisil, Perierio and Maffeo, having heard the
report that Polidor made of the sage Lady Felicia, were pricked with a greedy
desire to arrive to the Temple of Diana; pa^tly because they wished to see that
famous Lady, and partly for that they gathered by the praise which Polidor gave
her, for her discretion and wisdom, that they should have occasion to hope for
the redress and remedy of their harms For they were in great hope that some of
them whom they so diligently and painfully sought for either were already among
those gentlemen, damsels, and shepherds which Polydor said that he had seen
with the Lady Felicia, or should be ere long by means of the said Ladies
singular wisdom and experience.

The Sun by this time began to fall in the Western plains, and thereby was not
so hot but that Polydor thought good to march forward, that they might in good
time reach to the palace of the Lady Felicia. Which liking all the company,
they rose all and went on their journey. They had not gone passing a league and
a half, but they met a certain nymph, whom the Lady Felicia, foreknowing the
coming of this worthy company, had sent to let them know of certain things
which she would have them acquainted with before they came unto her, to the end
yt all things might succeed according as she through her incredible wisdom
thought convenient. Marcelio therefore with the rest of his company coming to
the place where the nymph was, saluted her very courteously as she likewise did
him and all the other that were by him, and asked them whither they were going:
whereunto they answered, that they went toward the temple of Diana. She hearing
that said; for as much as I can gather by the valor and worthiness of your
persons, I believe ye Lady Felicia, of whose nimphs I am one, will be very glad
of your company. And seeing that Phoebus does now begin to prepare for his
evening lodging, and the day draws to an end, I will return home with you* for
I am assured ye shall be received with great triumph. They thanked her greatly,
that she would keep them company and went on with her toward the temple. For
they conceived mavelous hope by her words, and although Polydor and Clenarde
had been in the Palace before, yet they remembered not that they had seen her
among the other nymphs, by reason of ye multitude of the nymphs of the Lady
Felicia, who all of them obeying the commandment of their sage Lady, are
employed in sundry charges and diverse places. So that Polydor asked this nymph
how she was called, whereupon she answered her name was Arethea. Clenarde
demanded what news was in the Ladies Palace? she answered, that the chiefest
news she knew was ye two hours before her departure from thence, there arrived
a young Lady in the habit of a shepherdess, who being espied by an aged
Knight that was at that present with the Lady Felicia, was known to be his
daughter: and that because she had a long time gone astray through most parts
of the world, the aged Knight her father was so joyful of her arrival, that
the rumor of that young Ladies fortune, was spread through all the villages
about the temple of Diana. Marcelio listening attentively to these words,
greedily desiring to know whether the Lady she spoke of were Alcida, could not
but interrupt the nymph as she went to go forward in the relation of her news,
and so he asked her how the aged Knight was called. Unless my memory fail me,
answered the nymph, he is called Eugerio, and his daughter Alcida. Wherewith
Marcelio surprised with exceeding joy, after he had a long time stood as if he
had been in a trance, at length burst out into these words. Ah most blessed
troubles that take end by so prosperous an adventure! ah fortune and as he
meant to have gone forward, he could not utter one word more, but fell down on
the ground wholly astonished. The Lady Brisil, Ismenia, and Clenarde, flocked
about him to encourage him, and did so much prevail, that he came to himself
again. In the mean time, Polydor and Clenarde, were mavelous joyful at that
news, seeing that all their misfortunes should take end by the coming of their
sister Alcida, Maffeo, Perierio, and the Lady Brisil with Ismenia, were
likewise glad for Marcelio's sake, and hoped likewise that as the Lady Felicia
had wrought his bliss, so she would likewise being moved with compassion of
their miseries, redress their grief. Ismenia desirous to hear something of her
husband Lexander, said to Arethee, fair Nymgh, I was marvellously well
contented, and received great joy to hear of the general gladness that is in
the Ladies Palace, by reason of the arrival of the Lady Alcida: but yet I
should conceive more perfect pleasure, if it would please you to tell me what
shepherd of account there is at this present in the Palace. Arethee answered,
you shall find diverse shepherds of account whose names I remember not, yet two
or three I know above the rest. There is one shepherd called Petulca of whom
the Lady Felicia makes great account of, for his wit and chastity. Besides
there is a shepherd called Philorenus, whose presence pleases the Lady
Felicia as much. The Lady Brisil hearing Petulca named, marvelled to know how
he came thither, and to what end; and therefore asked the nymph, whether she
knew ^he cause of his commig thither. The nymph answered, that as she
remembered, he came to hear of a certain young shepherd whom he sometime had
loved instead of a young maid, under the name of Sybilla he being apparelled in
the habit of a shepherdess and dwelling with his wife, made all the world
believe they were two sisters. And many other things, which I cannot (quoth
Arethee) now rehearse, shall you understand of him when you come to the
Palace, concerning those two sisters, which I promise you are wonderful
strange. Strange they are indeed (quoth Brisil) if you knew all fair nymph.
Verily I believe (quoth Arethee) that you are either the shepherd Periander or
his supposed sister. Either of them indeed (quoth Brisil) but my name is not
Periander. I promise you (quoth Arethee) that my Lady will be singularly glad
when she sees you: for I have heard her talk much of you and your spouse
Periander.

Ismenia although she heard not that her beloved Lexander was among the other
shepherds which Arethee had named yet for that she heard that the Lady Brisil
had heard something concerning her matters, she took the more heart in her own
cause, and was glad for the poor distressed Duchess sake, hoping that she
should receive comfort of the Lady Felicia.

Maffeo and Perierio who had heard nothing of their Ladies, were nevertheless
of as good cheer as the rest, hoping that when they were come to the Temple of
Diana, they should receive as much comfort as any: because the Lady Felicia had
written to him and Marcelio, as you have heard before.

CHAP. XX. How Perierio and his company came to the Temple of Diana, how they
were entertained by the Sage Lady Felicia, and the great joy that was there
made.
THis worthy company being convoyed by Arethee the Nymph, came into a fair
large place which was before the gate of the Palace, weere they saw a most
gallant Dame come out of the house, being apparelled in a black Velvet Gown,
with a large Veil of precious Lawne over her head, accompanied with three
beautiful Nymphs, resembling the stately Goddess Juno, when she went to
entreat Aeolus to disturb the Seas, when Aeneas sailed toward Latium.

Arethee espying her, advertised all the company that it was the Lady Felicia,
and the three Nymphs, Doride, Cynthia and Polidora. And approaching near unto
her, fell down at her feet and saluted her, as in like manner Marcelio with the
rest of his company, did in all submisse and humble manner. Felicia seemed to
be wonderfully pleasant for their arrival, and spoke unto them with a most
cheerful countenance, saying, Worthy Knights, Ladies, and notable shepherds,
howbeit that the pleasure which I take in this your presence is great, yet that
content which you shall reap by mine shall be no less. But forasmuch as you are
overtravelled by reason of your wearisome journey, go now take your rest, and
forget your sorrows; seeing the one cannot be wanting unto you in my house, and
I am to take care for the other by means of my skill. They thanked her most
humbly, and finally took their leave of her, but she caused Polydor and
Clenarde to stay with her, saying she had something to say unto them: but the
others were led by Arethee to a side place of the Palace, where they were
feasted that night, and provided of all things necessary for their cherishment
and rest. This house was so sumptuous and magnificent, garnished with such rich
movables, and beautified with such delightful gardens orch^rds, rivers and
fountains, that there is nothing comparable to the excellency thereof,

Marcelio, Maffeo, Perierio, with Ismenia, and the Lady Brisil, were lodged in
that part of the palace, which abutted upon the garden, in sundry chambers
being hanged with cloth of of gold, and most precious tapistry wrought with
admirable cunning. Supper was prepared for them most magnificently, and it was
served up unto them in vessels of Gold and Crystal. And when the night was
approached, and bed time at hand, they were laid on such good and easy beds,
that howbeit their bodies were wearied by travel, yet the softness of the
delicate down, with the hope which Felicia had given them, provoked them to a
most pleasant and sweet sleep.

On the other side, the Lady Felicia, with Polydor and Clenarde, (whom she
willed to make no mention of the arrival of Marcelio and the rest of his
company) went into one of her most pleasant gardens, where Eugerio walked
alone, his daughter Alcida only being by him who although she yet had on the
same shepheardlike apparel that she did wear at her first coming there,
nevertheless was incontinently known of her brother and sister Polydor and
Clenarde.

It were impossible for me to express the joy which old Eugerio made for the
happy meeting of al his children, whom he so dearly loved, embracing them one
after another and welcomming Polydor and Clenarde with fl^uds of tears flowing
out of his aged eyes. Alcida greatly welcomed Polydor her brother, and Clenarde
her sister, but far more affectionately cherished him then Clenarde,
imagining that she had purposely gone away with Marcelio, and left her alone
and distressed in the desert and solitary Isle of Formentera, as you have heard
before,

But the Lady Felicia intending to unfold these errors, and make the cause
thereof known unto Alcida, desiring to end their wonderful misfortunes, and
restore them to the blessed estate wherein they were before they committed
themselves to cruel N^ptune, to sail toward the haven of Lisbone, there to
celebrate the concluded Marriage in the presence of the Lusit^n King their
Sovereign, she spoke unto Alcida in this manner.

Most noble and beautiful Alcica, notwithstanding that Fortune has been so
great an enemy unto you in afflicting you with so many troubles and vexations,
yet cannot you deny, but that by reason of the great content which you now
enjoy, you are fully revenged of the injury which she has hitherto done you.
And for as much as the error which you have lived in, until this present day,
without cause abhorring your Marcelio is sufficient (if you yet hold the same
opinion) to alter your heart, and to breed his exceeding misery; it is
necessary that I should declare unto you, how that you are terriblie deceived
if you be of that opinion. For the presumption which you have of Marcelio, is
quite contrary and otherwise then you mean; for when you were left alone in the
Isle, that came not by his fault, but by the villainy of a certain traitor
subborned by Fortune to aggravate your mishap, who to recompense the wrong
which she has offered you, has directed your steps hither toward me, in
whose mouth you shall not find any other then truth. Your sister Clenarde shall
largely tell you all that concerns this matter, and how it wholly stands,
mark well what she shall say unto you and give credit to her words; for as for
me, I swear unto you, that whatsoever she shall rehearse concerning this, shall
be most certain and veritable.

Whereupon presently Clenarde began to inform Alcida how all things had
chanced, excusing Marcelio and her self, and largely declared the treason of
Bartophamus, and all that which already has been said touching the same.
Alcida having very attentively given ear to her sisters speech, was wonderfully
well contented to know the verity and truth of the case; and as she did drive
away and exclude her former rancor and false opinion from her heart, so did she
in like manner manner expel all such anger and hate, which she had
underservedly conceived against Marcelio. Wherefore she now knowing the error,
and perceiving that she wrongfully had given over the love which in times past
she had born to Marcelio, the sparkles of love that had so long been raked up
in the ashes of oblivion, began to show their force in her, and the affection
which had slept thus long, began now to waken: insomuch that she said unto
Felicia, Madam, I acknowledge my fault, and the singular pleasure which you
have done me in bringing me into the knowledge thereof, But being at this
present time delivered from that false opinion, and as well affectioned toward
Marcelio as ever I was; who for that he is now absent, if I may not enjoy his
company, I shall not obtain the perfect joy which I hoped to receive by your
means, nay rather shall I conceive another grief so excessive and intolerable,
that I shall be compelled to sue for new favors at your graces hands, to
remedy the same.

It is a manifest token of love (answered the Lady Felicia) to fear the
absence, but as for that you shall have no cause to care. The Sun has now
drawn in his beams, it is time for you to retire, and to go to your chambers
to take your rest with your father and your sister; to morrow morning will we
talk of the rest. Therewith she went forth of the garden, and so did Eugerio
with his daughters, and went to the place which Felicia had appointed for them:
which was separated from that part where Marcelio with his company was lodged.

As soon as Phoebus had harnessed his Steeds to run his wonted course, Eugerio,
Polidor, Alcida, Clenarde, and other Gentlemen and shepherds that were in the
Palace at that time, met together in the garden, where sitting by a fountain
before the chambers where the Lady Brisil was lodged with Ismenia, Perierio,
Marcelio, and Maffeo, began one to play on the Lute, another on the Citharen,
another on the Bandora, others on their Flutes, and some sung prick songs;
insomuch that with their music they awaked the Lady Brisil, who called
Ismenia, and she knocked up Perierio, and the other Knights that lay in the
chambers above her. Who all of them leaning in their windows, although they
might not see all those that sat at the Fountain, by reason of certain Laurel
trees that grew about it, yet because it was so near to their chambers, they
could hear what they said. They therefore listened very attentively each of
them, Maffeo whether he might hear the voice of Eleonora, (for he hoped greatly
that as the Lady Felicia had written unto him as well as unto Marcelio, that
therefore in like manner, Eleonora should have been arrived at the Palace as
well as Alcida; notwithstanding that the Nymph Arethee had not made any mention
of her) and Marcelio, whether he might hear his Alcida. As for Perierio he
could not hope to see the Lady whom he loved, and therefore was more sad then
the rest, and looked out at the window more to fortget the fantasies by the
pleasant Music of those that were in the Garden, and to pass the time in
beholding the beauty of diverse Ladies and shepherds which were there. The Lady
Brisil harkned whether Petulca the shepherd sung, to know whether he had heard
any thing of Periander. But Ismenia being sorely discomforted because Arethee
the Nymph had not named Lexander, when she asked what Shepherds were in the
Pal^ce, thought sure that he was not among them that were by the Fountain; but
she had better luck then she wist of; for inconttnently she heard a shepherd,
who sitting alone, after he had sounded his Corne-muse, began thus to complain
to himself.

Sonnet.
AVrora's looks expel the duskish night,
And after darkness does the day ensue:
When Nymphs to field make haste for their delight,
And Birds do scale the air of sable hue.
But to endure a never ending night,
Since no day may my grieved heart delight.
For neither can Aurora's joyful face,
Nor tune of Birds that sing for man's relief:
Out of my heart the night of sorrow race,
Or drive away the darkness of my grief.
Yet nothing can my soul from sighs release,
Nor yet my voice from doleful accents cease.
Ah mirthless Flowers, since she is lost and gone,
Whose beauty your Aurora does surpass:
Abate your pride and wither in the Sun,
Whose harmful beams do scorch the fainting grass;
For since that beauty which I here declare,
Is your Aurora but a night of care.
Ismenia hearing him sing out of her chamber window, knew that it was Lexanders
voice, whereof she was glad, though sorrow to hear him so grievously complain,
thinking that he so bewailed the absence of some other, and not for love of her
self. But she was soon delivered from that suspicion, for after he had ended
his Sonnet, he burst out into these words with a most pitiful sigh.

Ah poor soul! what an high offense have thou committed, to believe such
false accusations against thy sweet Ismenia who honors thee above all wights
in the world, whereas thou least do deserve it at her hands? And therefore
do thou worthily suffer the torment which thy lightness and credulity has
procured thee. Ah my dear Ismenia, how much better had it been that thou had
not taken the pains to course the world like a forlorn wight to seek after thy
unworthy Lexander, that he now acknowledging his fault, might return home to
his house, and there find thee. Ah traitress Sylveria, and was this the best
reward thou could afford me for the great pleasure and service I have done
thee sithence thy childhood? Yet I could account it a benefit that thou have
informed me of thy horrible treason, if thou had come in time, for seeing
thou have stayed so long, thy advertisement has served to no end but to
increase my grief, and multiply my sorrows.

When Ismenia had heard that, she thought it time to thank the Gods for her
fortune, and to give over all care and grief, Marcelio, Maffeo, Perierio, and
Duches Brisil, were glad for her sake, and seeing that so by little and little,
their company was comforted, they were so encouraged, that they doubted not but
that they should all obtain their wished desires in time, judging that the Lady
Felicia was the only Patroness that could redress the sorrows of all such
true amourts as were afflicted by reason of their sincere love.

In the mean time, Ismenia was so tickled with desire to enjoy the wished
company of her Lexander, that she had almost thrown her self out of the
window, and so fallen down headlong into the Garden where he was: but seeing
that her company hindered her from that unhappy meeting, she would have
presently gone to the Garden, had not Marcelio and the Duches Brisil exhorted
her to stay till she knew the Lady Felicia's pleasure, who seeing the day
appeared, and the Sun began to glance through her windows, sent Arethee the
Nymph unto Marcelio and the rest of his company: Therefore as Ismenia was
talking with Marcelio, of the great desire she had to be with Lexander, Arethee
entering into the chamber where they were, and with a most courteous countenance
said unto them: Noble Gentlemen and fair Shepherds, I beseech God to send you
so good hap and fortune as you deserve. The sage Lady Felicia has sent me
hither, to know of you whether you have rested better this night then the
nights before, and whether ye have received more content then of custom you
are wont to do. Besides also has she commanded me to lead you into the Garden,
whither she will presently come to speak with you. But you Marcelio, must put
on this suit, which the Lady has sent you, and put off your Shepherds
apparel, to the end that you may be clothed according to your estate.

Ismenia would not stay till Marcelio spoke, but her self returned this answer
unto the Nymph, for joy of the good news which she brought. O blessed Nymph,
what a good morning have you given us? How are we beholding unto you? God will
recompense the pleasure which you have done us, seeing that our ability
suffices not. As for the content which we have received this night it is
greater then I can declare, seeing that this morning we have been so happy as
that I have recovered my life, and these other Gentlemen hope to obtain the
same; wherefore to obey so worthy a Lady as sage Felicia, we are ready to go
into the Garden with you to know her pleasure.

Then Arethee took from another Nymph that came with her, the costly and rich
apparel which the Lady Felicia had sent Marcelio to put on, and helped him to
cloth himself in that suit which was wrought in pure gold and precious pearls,
most sumptuous and bravely placed. As soon as he was apparelled, they went
forth of the chamber and followed Arethee into the Garden, where she led them
into an Arbor, whence they could not see those that sat at the Fountain, and
taking the Lady Brisil and Perierio by the hand, left Marcelio, Maffeo, and
Ismenia in the Arbor leading Perierio and the Duches to the Palace where she
left Perierio in a fair chamber under the bedchamber of the Felicia, willing
him there is expect the Ladies coming, and so mounting the Marble stairs, led
the Duches up to Felicias chamber, where the Lady her self running to the door,
welcomed her in this sort:

Most gracious Princess, pardon me, for that I honored you not yesterday
according to your merit and estate, for that I as yet knew not the worthiness
and excellency of your person; but this morning as I consulted in the Temple of
sacred Diana our Sovereign Goddess, concerning your case and of your company, I
was informed of the Nobility of your stock, of the antiquity of your house, of
the perfections of your beauty and virtues of your mind and of your loyalty in
the sacred Laws of sincere Love and Chasti^y. Know therefore most excellent
Princess, that the Gods being moved with your incomparable virtue, have sent
you hither not only to enjoy the love of the beautiful and valorous young
Prince Periander, but also to be hoysed to the top of perpetual bliss and to
live not thy self only, but all the Progeny that shall issue from thy fruitful
worthy body, in such honor as no time, no misfortune, or nothing whatsoever
shall be able to abate or diminish. In the mean time till the gods send us
further knowledge concerning this affair encourage your self noble Princess,
and give over all care and grief; let me take thought in your behalf, and I
promise you that I will not sleep upon the matter. But till occasion be offered
that it may be put in practice I shall desire you to take patience to lodge in
this my simple and solitary house, which though it be not comparable to the
princely place of your bringing up, I mean the famous Court of Albion, yet I
doubt not but for the recreation, pleasure and content which you shall have in
my company, you will think well of it, howsoever you find it far inferior to
kingly Palaces, for the baseness of the building. Most heavenly Lady, (answered
the Duches) what thanks I may yield you for your high deserts, I know not and
therefore persuade your self that I wish you as much recompense as a mortal
heart may conceive. As concerning my abode with you, I am ready to stay with
you as long as you please, neither shall I think ill of the place seeing that
in magnificent building it surpasses the stateliest Palace that I think may be
in the world. But grant it were (as you say) inferior to the mean Court of
Albion, yet considering the excellency of your person, it may be judged the
most pleasant and delectable place under the vale of heaven. If you like so
well of my company already (replied the Lady Felicia) I hope you will increase
your liking when you have made trial of my readiness to pleasure you. But in
the mean time, because I must go unto the rest of your company that is in your
Garden, if it please you, put off your shepherds attire and apparel your self
with these Robes, which though they be as precious and costly as ever was any
that entered in my wardrobe, yet are they not so sumptuous as your virtues
deserve. And for that you have so chastely behaved your self, and as yet kept
your virginity inviolated contrary to the opinion of all men whereas you have
notwithstanding so long kept secret company with your loving Periander,
reserving your Virginity, and consecrating the same to Diana, until such time
as your Marriage Rights being celebrated, you may by the laws of Hymaeneus,
give an honorable adieu to virginity, and enjoy the fruits of your chaste love;
I give you this bunch of Roses which shall not wither in winter or fade in the
summer, but in token of your chastity reserve their natural vigor and fresh
color as long as you live. As Felicio had so said, whilst her Nymphs
apparelled the Duches, she called Perierio by Arethee, and saluting him very
courteously told him that she had not been less mindful of him then of the other
of his company that night. Therefore, quoth she, put on the clothes that I will
send thee, and stay for my coming; as for all the rest, disburthen your self of
all care, and let me alone; and so she departed from Perierio, who went to the
chamber where Arethee had led him, and incontinently espied Arethee coming with
a fair suit of black velvet as he was wont to wear before his father was exiled
from Venice. Arethee having helped him to put on his clothes, returned to the
Lady Felicia, who seeing that Duches Brisil was ready, set a most precious
Coronet on her head, on the top whereof she put the bunch of Roses, and taking
her by the hand, seeing Perierio apparelled, bid him follow her into the
Garden; so she went toward the Fountain where aged Eugerio sat with his
daughters, Alcida and Clenarde, and his son Polydor, with other Knights and
Shepherds, among whom was the shepherd Petulca, and Lexander also. And you
must note, that the Lady Felicia had also caused Alcida that morning to leave
off her shepherds coat, and apparel her self in rich attire according to her
estate, that when she should meet with Marcelio (who now was in like manner most
sumptuously appareled) she should not be disfigured with base clothes, though
Alcida her self as yet knew nothing of Marcelios being there. As then Eugerio
and the rest of those that sat at the Fountain, saw the Lady Felicia coming,
being accompanied with so beautiful a Princess, marvelled greatly who the same
young Lady should be, and every one doing his obeisance to the Lady Felicia,
and her company saluted her most humbly, as she likewise with Brisil, and
Perierio did them. The Duches seeing Alcida, wondered at her beauty, as likewise
Alcida did at her; for by reason that she was so sumptuosly and richly
apparelled, her beauty which surpassed all Gentlewomen of her time, seemed
rather to be heavenly then mortal. And though Polydor and Clenarde had seen her
the day before, yea and gone two or three leagues in her company, yet the
change of her attire so altered her, that they as yet knew not that she was the
Lady Brisil, whose beauty was injured by that base shepheardlike attire. But
Felicia calling Alcida and the shepherd Lexander unto her, went toward the
place where Marcelio and Ismenia with Maffeo, stayed for her coming. They
seeing her come, as they marvelled at the supernatural beauty of the Duches,
which had thus long been shadowed under a rustic habit, so were they exceeding
merry to see her so well accompanied to their joy and comfort; for Marcelio saw
his Alcida of one side of her, and Ismenia saw her Lexander on the other side.
You may also imagine what a sudden joy Alcida conceived to see her beloved
Marcelio, and Lexander to see his dear Ismenia, whose absence he but one hour
before so pitifully lamented.

After that Marcelio, Ismenia, and Maffeo, had humbly saluted Felicia, and
embraced, Marcelio his Alcida, and Ismenia her Lexander, the Lady Felicia left
the Duches and Perierio there with them, and calling Maffeo unto her said, Most
valiant Knight though the gods have not as yet gladded you with the sight of
her whom you seek, in such manner as the rest of your company; yet let me
entreat you to be of as good cheer as these, seeing the joy which they have
had, or is yet present is to come and future unto you. You shall have no worse
entertainment then you have had hitherto, therefore if that like you I pray you
stay with me till you hear more tidings of your beloved spouse, and let me care
for the rest.

Gracious Lady (quoth Maffeo) seeing I cannot give you acquittance for your
great deserts, I can do no less then rest your servant for ever, ready to do
your Ladyship pleasure at all times though with hazard of my life. As
concerning my wife Eleonora, I doubt not of her presence before long, seeing
your Ladyship wills me to leave that c^re unto your self. And therefore what
you think good, I cannot but allow, and what you please to have me to do, I will
put in practice; being ready to go or stay, to depart or to remain, or any
thing else whatsoever it may please you to prescribe. Herewith Felicia taking
her leave, entered into her Palace again leaving Maffeo, Perierio, and the
Duches by Marcelio with his Alcida, and Ismenia, with her shepherd Lexander.
And although Lexander and Ismenia were but of base birth, yet were they en^ued
with such excellent conditions and qualities, that they might have worthily
complained of Fortune and Nature, that they had not allotted them Nobility of
race. Yet howsoever they were of low parents, they nevertheless behaved
themselves so in the company of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, that they were
beloved of all men, and none knew them but coveted to keep company with them,
were they of never so high estate. They then being in company with these
excellent and famous personages, brought over the time with pleasant parley
until noon, at which time the bell rung to dinner. The table being covered in
the midst of the Garden under a pleasant bower, the Lady Felicia came thither
with Eugerio, with his son, Polydor, and his daughter Clenarde, the shepherd
Petulca, and Philorenus, where, after Marcelio had embraced his father in law
Eugerio, who was exceeding glad to see his son in law Marcelio; the Lady
Felicia taking Princess Brisil by the hand sat down, and willed all the rest
of the company to place themselves at the table. I will not here declare what
Lordly cheer was made them, nor how magnificently they were served by those
beautiful Nymphs, nor yet with what precious and sumptuous vessels their meat
was brought to the board: but this will I only say that the beauty of the
guests, the countenance of the Lady President, the sight of the Nymphs, the
sweetness of the Music, the delicateness of the fare, the pleasantness of the
Bower, the gainness of the Garden, and in a word, the incomparable excellency
of things there present, was sufficient with the penetrating force thereof to
revive the senses even of dead men, and quickening their spirits to make them
live again.

There might you have seen the Lady welcome her guests with such pleasant
countenance, that they took more pleasure in beholding the same, then in
tasting their meat; and the guests so courteously returned her thanks,
generally over the whole board, that she had rather have missed her cates then
her company; for she took no small delight to see so many distressed persons by
her means merrily drink one to the other* as if they had never known of any
sorrow or grief; for the nature of that place is of such force and efficacy,
that whosoever entered into it, was combred with no care.

Now neither did aged Eugerio remember the cruelty wherewith Fortune danted him
and his children on the Sea nor Alcida think of the Isle of Formentera where
she was left alone, and in the Rock engraved her protestation, that she would
never after fancy man again, nor Clenarde mention the treasons of Bartophanus
against her and Marcelio. Now did Maffeo not dream that his Eleonora was taken
from him while he sleeped, nor that his cousin Sylvestro deceived him of his
heredity. Now did not Perierio sigh for the sight of the Lady that wounded his
heart with the stroke of love in the wood; Now did not Lexander and Ismenia
trouble their brain with the malicious subtilty of their mother-in-law
Felisarde, and the Traitresse Sylveria. To be short, now did not the Duches
Brisil call to memory the Traitor Mafficourt, the Fortune-telling in Spain, nor
the cunning deceit of Bergama, suborned by Malorena. Neither did Petulca now
muse on his Love Sybil, whom he so earnestly wooed, she being but Sybil in
counterfeit dissembling, alias called Periander, a man as fit to play the
wooer, as Petulca himself. Neither did now Philorenus (the other shepherd
that was there, and was named by the Nymph Arethee, unto Ismenia, being asked
what Shepherds of account there were in the Palace, of which Philorenus, we
shall have occasion to say more hereafter) complain of his ill hap; nor any of
all the other Gentlemen or Shepherds that were there, did bewail or lament
their misfortunes. For the heavenly harmony of the Music which diverse of the
Nymphs made them dinner was served, some playing on the Bandora, some on the
Virginal, some sounding their Cornets, others their Corne-muses, others their
Harps, others the Cithren, others the Lute, others the Gittren, others blowing
their Flutes, others the Recorder, and diverse other instruments that would be
too long to name, so ravished their senses, that they thinking themselves to be
in some earthly Paradise, could not but be delighted, and barred even from all
thought and imagination of discontent.

The Music ended, the three chiefest Nymphs, Doride, Cynthia, and Polydora,
sung this Sonnet, to recreate their Ladies guests that sat at the table.

Doride. Fly cutting care to hollow Caves,
fly from this sacred place:
Fly grief to uncouth Groves, and let
us pleasing joy embrace.
No tears may torture now, no sobs
may grieve, nor sighs may vex:
No woe may wound, no thought may threat,
nor sorrow make us yex.
Our pain is past, our dolor done,
we sail with prosperous wind:
No passion now, nor trouble may,
disturbour quiet mind.

Cynthia. The Sea does flow as well as ebb,
and waves both mount and fall:
As stormy Tempests do disturb,
So calmes do quiet all.
The Summers Sun produces Flowers,
which fragrant scents do yield:
Though winter air in snowie robes,
does wrap the barren field.
The sight of Phoebus Lordly face,
does drive away the rain:
And Titanes as often is full,
as she is in the waine.

Polydora. Let Furies fret, let Charon curse,
let brawling Cerberus bawle:
Let Radamanthus rage, let Pluto
chafe, and Minos brawle.
Let all the Fiends of Acheron,
even spet out all their spite.
They shall not mar the mirth we make,
by high Diana's might:
Which all those that do sojourn in
this sacred place, exempts
From hellish harm, from wracking woe,
and Fortunes shrewd attempts.

The three Nymphs having ended the Sonnet, dinner was ended, the cloth taken
up, and the Lady Felicia rising with all her Guests walked out of the Bower
into the other part of the Garden, where she called Maffeo under her, and spoke
unto him in this manner, Worthy Knight, for that I know your chiefest bliss
consists in the finding of your wife Eleonora, I mean by the help of the
gods, and the especial favor of Diana, to help you unto your hearts desire
with all the speed that I may. And therefore seeing the same is brought to
pass, the more happy you shall deem your self, I will put my skill in practice
out of hand. Wherefore incontinently may it please you to depart from me, and
go to the place where you left your child, and taking it thence return to me
again with it, and let me care for your rest. Maffeo yielding the venerable
Dame singular thanks for all her favors, humbly took his leave of her and all
the company, and presently departed from the Palace, taking his way toward the
Village where he left his young Alonso, after he lost Eleonora in the highway
while he sleeped, where we will leave him pacing in his journey, and talk of
those that remained in the Palace with the Lady Felicia.

CHAP. XXI. How Perierio drunk the two Potions of Oblivion and Understanding,
and likewise the Discourse that was between the Lady Brisil and Petulca.
MAffeo being gone the Lady Felicia taking Perierio apart, led him into the
Palace, and brought him into her study which was so exorned and beautified with
sundry volumes, that it seemed rather to be the Library of some grave
Philosopher, then the Counting House of a Lady; for there was no Book, no
Author, no Writer, that was in estimation at those times, but the Lady Felicia
had him in her Bibliothick. Now having Perierio there alone, she thought it
time to execute that which his destinies had appointed, and therefore said unto
him, Courageous Gentleman, although you have not as yet told me one word
touching the cause of your coming hither, yet I know it as well as you can
tell me. Is it not to enjoy the love of a Lady which you never saw but once? I
expect no answer for I know it is. And I pray you tell me whether you are of
that opinion yet or no? and whether you are constant in your love, ready to
undertake any labor to obtain the same? But ere you give me an answer quaffe
out this goblet, in token of your good will toward me that wish your hearts
content.

Perierio taking the Goblet, drank out the Liquor that was in it cheerfully,
which had such virtue that it took away the memory of Love, how deep soever it
was rooted in the hearts of mortal creatures. He therefore having taken his
draft, answered thus, Most prudent Lady, I am ashamed that I am come hither
unto you having, yea knowing no cause why I should trouble your Ladyship, and
unless I had received such exceeding pleasure in viewing your Ladyships most
sumptuous Palace, I should be sorry that ever I left my aged father and loving
sisters, sorrowful and mourning at home for my absence. Well (quoth the Lady
Felicia) I am glad that my Medicine has taken so good effect. But I pray you
take one drauth more at my request, which shall not be of the same liquor as
the other, but more fruitful; and though it be something more bitter in the
taste, it shall nevertheles be far more sweeter in operation then the other.
Perierio taking the cup drank the potion, though with some difficulty, by
reason of the sternnesse thereof which was nothing so gentle as the former
potion of oblivion. But Felicia seeing that he had courageously forced himself
to leave nothing in the cup, well done (quoth she) for though the root of
science knowledge and learning be bitter, yet are the Flowers which it
produces, most sweet and pleasant. And as he thus spoke, she perceived that
her second potion had done no less good then the ^^rst. For it had not only
sharpened his wit and grinded his understanding, being more apt to receive the
impression of learning, but ravished him with such desire to attain to the
knowledge of Philosophy (whereunder I comprehend all kind of learning) that his
mind was quite changed from Venus to Minerva, and from Cupids Court to the
Mount Parnassus. In so much that he began to unclose the clapses of Felicias
Volumes, and untye the strings of her Books, being spurred thereto with a
fervent zeal to know the contents thereof; where we will leave him talking
with the Lady about the liverall Sciences, and such other matters concerning
scholasticall parley, and speak of those whom we left in the Garden, where
Marcelio and Alcida walked together in one Alley, Ismenia with Lexander in
another; Eugerio with his son Polydor and his daughter Clenarde, walked by the
River which closed up one end of the Garden. The shepherds Petulca and
Philorenus, with the rest of the company, sat on a bed of cammomile, and
Duches Brisil walked alone in an Arbor of Roses, where the dye that beautified
her vermilion cheeks, strove with the Roses for superiority in perfection of
color.

Thus walking alone, she espied the shepherd Petulca sitting among other
shepherds, and desiring to know of him whether he came thither about
Periander, as she had understood of the Nymph Arethee, she stepped by them, and
saluting them, said.

Gentle shepherds, I hope you will not be displeased, though I press into
your company being not sent for, the rather because Petulca is one of my old
acquaintance, and therefore I could do no less then greet him, as I would have
done ere this, if occasion had been altered. Petulca (weo though he had made
earnest enquiry what this Princess was, had not yet learned that it was
Brisil, sister to his dear Sybil) marvelling at the Ladies words, seeing he
knew her not, or never had seen her to his knowledge, was so amazed, that he
wist not what to say, which Philorenus marking, gave her this answer: The
displeasure Madam that we conceive by your coming is such, that we think our
selves honored with your presence, and therefore acknowledge our selves
beholding unto you, in that you disdain not of the unworthy company of such
simple shepherds as we be. As for the acquaintance which you say you have had
with our friend Petulca, as we are altogether ignorant of, so do we not envy
at his luck in that so gracious a Princess as your self bears a remembrance
of him.

As Petulca thought to ask pardon for his unmindfulnes, and to excuse the
weakness of his memory in that he could not remember that he had in all his
life time seen any Lady comparable to her for her beauty or estate, much less
to have seen her, the Duches stayed him saying, Well Petulca thy company
thinks thee happy that I bear memory of thee; but I pray you unhappy may I
be thought to be, seeing that thou disdainest to know her, whom I thought you
would not have forgotten so soon. Is this the memory you have of me, and my
sister Sybil, whom you so dearly loved? Is this the remembrance you bear of
cursed Malorena and dissembling Bergama, who for thy sake sought our ruin?
Petulca amazed to hear her say this, and knowing her by her voice to be the
same Brisil that sojourned among the shepherds of his Country, at length
burst out into these words, Ah gracious Princess, the Gods know that I have
not forgotten neither you nor Periander, who under the name of Sybil, in the
habit of a shepherd, bearing title to be your sister, has caused my grief,
and forced me to undertake this troublesome journey, intending never to return
home till I have found him, and letting him know the Treason and malicious
dealing of Malorena and Bergama, to exhort him to race out the false surmise
and suspicion which he has grounded in the bottom of his heart of your
disloyalty. For seeing that for my sake he has been so horribly abused and
brought into that error; I will hazard my life to restore him unto his former
estate again, to the end that he may enjoy you, and your self to him. And
marvel nor Lady, that I knew not your person, though I will remember you^
acquaintance; for as the Sun is in respect of the least star of the sky, the
rose in respect of the nettle, the juniper tree in respect of the thorn bush,
and the Lordly Crystal in respect of the base glass, so is your Ladyship now
in respect of the time that we were feasted by the dissembling Traitress
Bergama in her Arbor. And therefore seeing that I had not as yet understood
(having enquired of the Lady Felicias Nymphs of your calling) any other thing
of you but that you were a certain Princess of Albion, and that we should
shortly hear of the cause of your coming, and more largely know the course of
your fortune; I hope your Grace will not think the worse of me, who have vowed
my body and life to do service unto your loving Periander, what state or
calling soever he be of. Thanks kind Petulca (quoth the Duches) and persuade
thy self that I think no otherwise of thee then I did at any time. And to the
end that thou may understand the truth and verity of all my troubles, and
know what Periander is, and also what caused him to fain himself to be my
sister, being attired in shepherds attire, I will briefly and truly rehearse
unto thee in this good company of shepherds (so I be not troublesome unto
them) the whole state of my fortune. But first I must entreat you to tell me
how long you have been here, when you departed from the village, and what
success you have had in your journey.

Then may it please you to understand (quoth Petulca) that after the malicious
traitresse Malorena had cast her self into the river to take penance for her
heinous offense, by her own appointment, the whole Village was made acquainted
with her villainy detesting her for her malice, and marvelling at Periander and
your self for your perfect love, in mavelous manner mourning for his
departure and your mishap. Insomuch that the chiefest of the village sent for
me to understand the truth of the whole matter; which when I had declared, they
took order with me that I should speak with you, and comfort you, letting you
know what they had appointed to do in your behalf; for they intended to make
enquiry through all the country after Periander, to the end that he might be
informed of all that had happened in the Village concerning malicious Malorena,
and so be induced to return again unto you, knowing the sayings of Malorena to
be false, and invented by her pestiferous brain. Whereupon I, most ready to do
any thing that might redownd to your content, betimes the next morning went to
your lodging, but there I found you not, nor could learn of any one of your
Neighbors what was become of you; whereof how sorry I was, I leave to the Gods
to witness, and not I only but the whole Village, most grievously lamented
your sudden departure. At length I resolved not to rest in any place till I had
found Periander, and let him know how he had been abused by Malorena, and how
you were injured by him, in that he giving credit to such a malicious maid,
lest you to pass your life in such discontent and grief for his cause. To the
end that if Fortune had been so froward as to deprive him of your company for
ever, by some sinister hap yet he should know how faithfully you loved him,
seeing that your loyalty was known unto the whole Country. Whereupon I having
first caused dissembling Bergama as an instrument and helping cause of this
mischief, to be banished, until such time as Periander and you were together
and consented to have her released from exile, I betook my self to my journey,
and having traveled two days and two nights, at last I arrived in a Country
house, where I was very courteously used by a certain shepherd, who took
pleasure to talk with me concerning the cause of my coming, for that he had
himself not passing eight year since, almost coursed over the world to seek his
wife, which was carried away upon a certain time by a Duke that riding that
way, caused his men to take her with them, he being abroad in the field. And
that after he had taken so much pains, it was his luck at length to come to
the Temple of Diana, where the Lady Felicia dwells, who helped him to his
wife again. Therefore the shepherd having entertained and feasted me very
courteously and bountifully, set me into a way which directly brought me to
this place assuring me that I should of this Lady be informed of all matters
concerning those that I sought for; as in truth I have found his words not
disagreeing unto verity; For being arrived here two days since, the Lady
welcomed me not as a simple Shepherd, but rather like some worthy person of
high estate (which I perceive she did in respect of your excellency and not of
my desert) and willing me to stay in her Palace till such time as she might
learn news concerning the cause of my coming, promised me that I should not
stay in vain, which I have tried to be so, seeing that you are so happily
arrived to this place, as I hope also by the favor of the Gods, and the help
of sage Felicia, to see Periander, if not here, yet in some other place.

Thus Madame have you heard what is passed sithence the time that I saw you
last, now it remains that it may please you to accomplish your promise. And
so I will (quoth the Duches; wherewith she began to declare the whole estate of
her life to Petulca, and the rest of the company. Where we will leave her
discoursing of all such matters as before have been declared, and return to
Periander.

CHAP. XXII. How Periander met with Pharelus, and how Pharelus declared to
Periander what happened in the Court of Albion since the departure of Duches
Brisil.
PEriander after he was departed from the Village where he left Brisil, within
one days travel reached into a Wood, wherein after he had strayed up and down
for the space of six or seven hours in the night, could not find any path to
lead him out of the same desert place. Insomuch that being weary of travel, he
was forced to lie on the ground among the wild furzen bushes and thorns to
rest himself, where he slept till morning, at which time awaking out of his
sleep, he saw a certain Albion Knight stand before him, whom he knew very well,
for he was his fathers Taster, and was called Sir Pharelus; whereat Periander
was so amazed that he could not tell what had befallen him; but the Knight
spoke presently in this manner.

Fair Shepherd or Nymph (for Periander had his woman's attire yet) whatsoever
thou be, be not displeased that I have emboldned my self to press so near the
place where you slept, for seeing that I was loath to wake you out of your sound
sleep and wished to speak with you, I thought best to stay till you awaked of
your own accord; therefore seeing you have given over your sleep, I beseech
you to show me what way I may take to get out of this huge wood in which I have
sore against my will remained three days, not finding any way that leads out
of the same. Periander glad that Sir Pharelus knew him not gave him this
answer: Sir Knight, I have no reason to be displeased at you, seeing that I my
self would in the like case have used as much boldness; I am no Nymph, yet if
I could pleasure you and satisfy your demand, I would the willinger do it,
considering that I would think my self beholding to him that would show us the
way out of this Wood; For yesterday about the decline of the Sun, did I first
enter into it, having traveled this way never before; and seeing I could not
find the way out again, having lost my path, the wearisomnesse of my journey
forced me to take my rest. But pray you Sir (if I may be so bold) what luck
has brought you hither, for I perceive by the strangeness of your apparel,
that you are of some country afar off, seeing that no Genclemen hereabout are
clothed after such a fashion. In truth (quoth Pharelus) it was ill luck
brought me hither fair shepherdess, for you shall know that I am a Britain,
born in the Isle of Albion, and left my Country by the command of our King who
being informed by Letters from the King of Spain, that his son the young Prince
of Albion was broken out of prison, and fled (for he was imprisoned in Sivil by
his fathers command) sent me into Spain, to enquire after him, and not to
return till I had heard of him. But when I was arrived in Spain, I heard that
the King of Spaines daughter Florena went with him, or after him, but no man
could tell me whether she were by him, or had not yet found him, or what way he
was gone. Thus I have traveled up and down Spain, and have not as yet
discovered any more news of him. In truth (quoth Periander) I heard great talk
in our village, of the Kings daughter Florena, how she was conveyed out of the
Court by another Kings son (I know not of what Country) that was imprisoned as
you say by his own fathers command, because he would be married to a young
Duchess whom the King himself would have to his wife. True (quoth Pharelus)
but the Duchess about three or four days before the appointed Wedding day
secretly fled out of the country no man knows whither; which the King took so
grievously, that partly for danger and partly for grief, he kept his chamber
six weeks, at the end of which time he received letters from the K. of Spain,
in which he understood of his sons flight, which news almost set him besides
his wits; for he had purposed to send Ambassadors to Spain for his son, and to
proclaim the Duchess that was fled, Queen of England: and wife to his son
Periander, unto whom he intended to resign the title of the Crown, and to marry
him to the aforesaid Duches, with whom he was promised many years before.
Therefore seeing that Fortune so crossed him, fell into a grievous and
dangerous disease, insomuch that we doubted of his recovery. But after he had
kept his bed one fortnight, by the singular skill and industry of the
Physicians, he began to mend; and calling me one morning to his beds side,
uttered these words unto me. Ah Pharelus, thou see how pitifully your King
has been used both by Fortune and Heaven; for the Gods intending to revenge my
unnatural cruelty and barbarous tyranny against mine own son, though I
repented, yet would both bar me from my desire, and punish my offense. But now,
as I feel by the alteration of my weakness, that they have slaked their
vengeance, and pity my case, so I hope Fortune will in like manner become more
favorable than hitherto she has been. You know how the Duchess Brisil is
fled, and no news can be heard what is become of the poor Lady. In like manner
now is Periander also broken out of prison, and as a banished man runs
astray, perhaps suffering a thousand miseries, and all for fear lest he should
fall into my hands, where alas I would rather ask him forgiveness, then any
way prejudice him seeing he has no way offended me, but I greatly injured him.
And now for as much as the hold of my life consists in the hope which I have
to see both Periander and Brisil here in my Court; I have caused thee to come
hither, to declare my mind unto thee concerning this matter, wherein I will
employ thy service, seeing I have found thee faithful and loyal in all matters
which I ever committed to thy trust, not doubting but that I shall find thee
as ready now to do me pleasure and acquit my self of your duty, as I have been
at other times. My pleasure is that thou make a voyage into Spain, and pass
over all that country to see whether you can hear of my son Periander, to the
end, that if you find him, you may let him know how earnestly I wish to see
him, that he may come hither, and receive the Crown of the Realm. And if it
chance Duchess Brisil be in those parts (for it may be she is with him or in
travel to seek him) insomuch that you meet with her or hear of her. I would
have order taken, that she notwithstanding that Periander be not yet found,
might return to the Court to be crowned Queen, seeing that the Crown by the law
of the Realm apperteineth unto her after my death, being betrothed to my son
if he marry no other, as I know he will not, I will send others to other
Countries you shall only seek them in Spain. I pray you to do all the
diligence you can, and to behave your self herein according to the opinion I
bear of you. And for your reward if you find either of them, I will promise you
less then I will perform. And especially this I will say before hand, that he
that finds and brings Periander and Brisil both, as soon as they arrive at
the Court, I will give him the isle Mon^ to be his and his heirs for ever; and
he that finds either Periander or Brisil, I will give him the government of
West Albion. But as for you Pharelus, you shall receive greater benefits at my
hands if the Gods will favor your journey, yet what luck soever you have, I
will not be unmindful of your labor and readiness.

Therewith the King weary by reason of his sickness, and scarce able to speak
more, ceased, and I thanking his Majesty for his singular favor toward me,
vowed to do whatsoever lay in me to the uttermost of my power, partly for my
duty toward him, and partly for the love I bear the young Prince. Insomuch
that after we had fully concluded the matter, I departed from Albion the next
day with twelve men, which I have all sent to sundry places of this country,
appointing them to meet all at the famous City Leon, situated along the River
Eyla, as the sixth day after to morrow at which time I mean to be there by the
help of the Gods, to know what tidings they can bring me. Verily sir Knight
(quoth Periander) the Kings son would wish to meet with you, if he knew the
good tidings you bring him; I am grieved my self to hear that such great
persons are subject to so much adversity. But I pray fair shepherd (quoth
Pharelus) seeing you say you have heard talk of him in your Village to tell me
where the same vilage is, and how it is called; for if I thought I might there
hear any thing of him, I would take my journey that way. More then I have said
(quoth Periander) shall you not hear there I promise you, and therefore seeing
it is out of your way, take not the pains. And as they were thus talking
together, they espied an old man wandering through the wood so far from them
that they could scarce see him by reason of the thickness of the bushes and
small trees that grew in the wood. But calling unto him, he fearing lest they
had meant to do him some harm, began to run away as fast as his old legs could
carry him. But Pharelus with all celerity followed him so long till he overtook
him at last at the wood end, having run a whole hour before he could come to
him, the old fellow so bestirred his stumps, and seeing he could not outrun
him, he fell down on his knees and asked for mercy, making a large apology
that he was a poor old man and had a wife and children to keep and many good
morrows, fearing that he should have been robbed by Pharelus, which he
perceiving, could not but laugh to see the old man so timorous; and therefore
said, Alack good Father, fear not, for though I perceive by thy fearfulness
that thou art well provided of money, yet I called thee not for thy wealth, but
for thy counsel, for I have been here in this Wood these three days and more,
and cannot find any path to lead me out of the same. And though I perceive that
by following thee I have attained to that which I wished for, seeing I am here
at the wood end, yet I thought good to deliver thee out of the opinion which
thou conceivest of me, who wish thee no harm: Nevertheless, seeing I do not
well know where I am, thou shall do me a pleasure to tell me what way I may
best take toward the famous City Leon. Ah good Gentleman (answered the old
fellow) the cause that I ran from you, was not for fear to loose any treasure,
for I have none; but I heard that there was a poor man slain about five or six
weeks ago in this wood, and seeing I knew you not, I hope you will not think
the worse of me though I was afraid of you. As concerning your request, knew,
that I dwell in the same City you enquire for, and if you dain to travel in the
company of such an homely person as my self, by the help of the Gods I will
lead you thither before three days come to an end. Willingly (quoth Pharelus)
and I thank thee for thy courteous offer, but there is a young shepherdess
that followed me as I ran after thee, of whom I asked the way, and alas she
knew it as little as I, and I would be sorry that we should leave her behind
us; and therefore I pray thee to stay here a little, and I will see whether I
can espy her coming. But if you be wise (quoth the old man) go not in too
deep, lest you lose your way again, it were best for you to call unto her as
loud as you can, or to whistle, for if she hear you she will come, and if she
be cut of hearing, you may chance to seek after her as long as you have already
been in the wood. Pharelus followed his counsel, and whooped unto her as loud
as he might, and seeing that she came not, after he had remained there for the
space of two hourrs, the old man being very hasty to go on his journey, he
would not stay behind, and omit that opportunity, though loath, yet forced to
leave the shepherd, he went with the old man. Periander on the other side, who
for his woman-like shepherd attire, could not follow Pharelus when he ran
after the old man, (for his long coat catched by the thorns and brambles) and
having lost the sight of Pharelus, went quite another way; so that it was no
marvel that he heard not Pharelus call unto him; for he went quite contrary
from the path which Pharelus took after the old man, and came out at the other
end of the wood, where seeing himself out of the troublesome Forest, was
grieved that he had lost Pharelus in that sort, before he had resolved whether
he would reveal himself unto him or no, but yet remembering that Pharelus said
he meant to be at Leon within six days, he was the gladder, seeing where he knew
to find him, if he concluded to return with him to Albion; Insomuch that
sitting down on a bank by the wood side, began in this manner.

Ah unfortunate Periander, now may thou well perceive that Fortune has sworn
to be thy enemy for ever. For has she not first suborned the Traitor
Massicourt to work thy misery, and so laid the foundation of all thy troubles?
He being cut off and his villainy detected, has she not armed thy own natural
Father against th^e, and stirred him up to wrong thee of thy right? And now the
Gods being incensed and provoked to wrath by such impiety, have by their
vengeance moved him to repent? Has she not battered the Fort which I never
thought she should have been able to incorpor^te? Ah Brisil Brisil! never did I
think that Fortune should have triumphed of her victories in making conquest of
the nearest thing that touched my heart, and that she should have braved me
with the trophies of thy disloyalty. Ah how often was I wont to say unto
Fortune, when she threatened me to deprive me of honor, living, renown, yea
life and all, that none of all that was mine, thinking that I might claim
nothing properly to be mine, but lost thy love, faith, and loyalty; not caring
to lose the whole world so I might enjoy thee, whom I thought that neither
alteration of time, nor distance of place, nor mutation of manners, nor change
of estate, nor any thing whatsoever either hell or fortune might procure, could
have withdrawn from Periander. In her was my mind fixed, my hope planted, and
all my confidence seated; seeing therefore that fortune has been able to make
conquest of her, I am constrained to confess and acknowledge that she can do
what she will, and that we may not resist her pleasure.

Insomuch that I strive against the stream, and cast stones against the wind,
in opposing my self against fortune seeing she has vowed my utter ruin, and
will bring her will to pass. The ashes of the old Phoenix breeds the new,
and with me the end of one misfortune is the beginning of another. How can I
then hope ever to enjoy content, seeing I never had happy hour? if fortune
looks on me she lowreth, if she turns her face from me, she threatens me,
if she remember me she is enraged at me, and if she smileth, she flattereth:
whether dissembling to wreak her anger and ingraft her spite against me whom
she could never brook. Yet Periander how can thou so greatly complain of her,
seeing that she so favors thee, that thy father, who was thy foe, is now
becomes thy friend; thou that were but a Kings son, art now when thou will a
King; and where thou did live in imprisonment, in exile, and misery, may
now live in Court, in liberty, and in all the pleasure of the world? No, no,
fond fool, fortune does not this, but the just Gods, and if she be any cause of
it she does it only thereby to entice me to become as disloyal as Brisil, and
so wholly to vanquish and overcome me. But no, though I have acknowledged her
to be never so puissant, yet she shall not make conquest of my fidelity, nor
brag of my disloyalty, seeeing, I will not, nor may give over the love of
Brisil; and thought she neglect and hate me, yet will I love and honor her
till death.

After Periander had thus lamented the loss of the love of Brisil, he
determined to go to the City Leon to meet with Sir Pharelus, and with him to
return to Albion, intending to live there and enjoy his Fathers Crown; but
never to love any but Brisil, or to knit himself in marriage to any other. And
resolved to take his journey by the same village where he left Brisil, meaning
to speak with Malorena, and to leave a Letter with her for Brisil, as he had
done before: in which Letter he purposed to let Brisil know of all that which
he had learned of Pharelus, wohm he found and lost in the wood. He intended
also to write a Letter to Petulca, and to let him know as much, protesting that
if he would come into Albion when he were Crowned, he would give him the
Dukedom pertaining unto Brisil in marriage with her, and do him all the
honor that a Monarch might do to any of his Peers, seeing that Brisil made
such account of him. In this mind Periander returned secretly unto the village
where he had sojourned with Brisil, and changing his attire, apparelled
himself in man's clothes, according to his sex and nature. And being come to
the village he took his lodging in a shepherds house, where he thought he was
least of all known. When he had entered into the house, and caused supper to be
made ready, he asked one of the shepherds daughters, whether they knew not a
certain shepherdess called Malorena, (for he thought to have spoken with her,
and to know of her how Petulca and Brisil were moved at his departure, and to
leave the Letters which he purposed to write, with her, to deliver them to
Brisil and Petulca) wherewith they were half angry, thinking he did it to have
occasion to speak ill of the maids and shepherds of their country, and
therefore gave him this answer. We knew her, but too well, and if we thought
you were one of her favorites, you should have but had lodging here. Pardon me
(fair shepherds, replied Periander) if I offend against my knowledge, for the
cause that I ask for her, is that I am her cousin, and have not seen her this
great while: I as yet have never heard any ill of her, nor ever knew any thing
by her, but that she behaved her self as a maid of her calling ought to do.
Thereby (quoth the shepherds wife) we perceive thee to be but a stranger here,
and therefore to be excused; for as you say, she was famed for one of the most
modest maids of the whole country, but now of late she has committed great
villainy against two of the loyallest lovers that ever the world harbored. And
thus the good wife declared the sum of the whole matter unto Peaiander, how all
things were passed: which so altered his affections, that all they that were
present could perceive that he was moved thereby. Yet least he should bewray
who he was, forced himself as much as he could to abstain from sighing or
weeping til he was alone, at which time he poured forth whole floods of tears
out of his eyes, for grief that he had shamefully suffered himself to be deluded
by Malorena, and thereby brought himself into all these miseries, where
otherwise he should have been the happiest man that lived. Nevertheless when
he had heard what moan Brsil had made for his sudden departure, and how that
she was gone to seek him he was joyful and glad, accounting more of her Love
and loyalty, then all other things whatsoever. Thus Periander both sorry and
glad, wist not what he might best do, to seek for Brisil* or to go to Leon
first, and speak with Pharelus. But considering, that it were a most uncertain
voyage, and doubtful labor to stray after her, he concluded to go to
Pharelus first, and with all speed to return to Albion, where after he were
crowned King, he doubted not, but that she would come unto him, as soon as she
should be informed thereof. Besides, he purposed to send so many to enquire
after her, that in despite of Fortune, he should hear of her, or she of him,
especially seeing she sought for him, which was the chiefest point that
encouraged Periander.

He therefore having his head full of Bees, and building castles in the air,
slept a little that night, and rising betimes in the morning, took leave of the
shepherd, paying and discharging that which could be asked for his lodging and
entertainment, departed toward the City Leon, where he arrived two days after
Pharelus.

CHAP. XXIII. How Periander discovered himself to Pharelus, and departed with
him toward Albion.
PEriander (though he knew not where he might find Pharelus, or how to
inquire for him, yet he) had such good luck and fortune, that walking in the
Marketplace, he espied Pharelus talking with one of the men whom he had
appointed to meet him there: whereupon Periander stepping to him, courteously
saluted him, saying. Sir Knight the cause of my coming unto you, being unknown
is this. About two days ago, I met with a certain shepherdess, who told me
that she understood of you, that you sought for the King of Albions son that
was imprisoned in Spain, and breaking forth ran away as some say with the Kings
Daughter, though others rather think without her. And for as much as I have
heard some certainty concerning this young Prince, where he is, and other
matters touching a certain Duchess that should be his wife or alliance, I
thought good to let you know so much as I have heard, But if it will please you
to go with me half a mile without the City, I will lead you into a shepherds
house, where I doubt not but you shall understand as much as shall content you,
and serve to bring you unto the thing you most wish for. Sir Pharelus hearing
this young man (as little thinking that he should be Periander, as he did when
he met him in the wood in woman's apparel) thanked him with a most pleasant
countenance, rejoicing extremely for the hope he had to find Periander; and
presently without returning to his lodging, he went with him out of the City
toward the place he spoke of. Periander seeing Sir Pharelus so merry for the
news he had brought him, and so ready to go with him, conceived great joy that
he had so friendly a subject; and leading him out of the City, when he came
into a close something far from any house, where he thought he might speak
safely and not be heard or seen of any man but sir Pharelus who was only by
him: (for he had left his man in the marketplace of the City, there to expect
the coming of others that he looked for) he thought good to reveal unto sir
Pharelus who he was, and therefore said thus, Pharelus we are are now come far
enough, I mean to go no further, and I thank thee that thou have done so much
for me as to come thus far with me, when I am King of Albion, I will do more
for thee. Pharelus amazed at these words wist not what answer to give him, and
although at the first he thought he had mocked with him. saying, that he
thanked him for coming so far with him, yet when he heard him speak of his
being King of Albion, perceived that it was Periander himself, for joy whereof,
he could scarce speak, but falling down on his knees craved pardon of Periander
for his ill remembrance. But Periander embracing him, took him up by the hand,
and thanked him for his loyal service, saying that he was so mindful of him
that he should be beholding unto him for ever. For (quoth he) how may I find
fault with thy remembrance Pharelus, seeing thou daily take such care about
me, and suffer so much toil to seek me? As for the outward remembrance,
which consists only in the favor and color of the face, seeing the same is
by continuance of time changed and altered, it is a hard matter to bear memory
thereof, especially when it is estranged with unacquainted and strange attire.
Or else no doubt Pharelus, but you that think on me daily would have known me,
not only when I came to you in the marketplace of this city Leon, but also
when you feared to wake me in the wood, where we were so strangely separated
one from the other, I know not by what mischaunce, but that (the Gods be
thanked it happened greatly to my comfort,

Herewith Periander informed Pharelus of all whatsoever had happened unto him,
since his departure from Albion, and also of Brisils coming unto him in the
prison, her departure with him, their abode, and manner of abode among the
shepherds: and lastly of Brisils last departure, greatly lamenting her
absence, making great sorrow for her, that she now went astray up and down
through the unknown and solitary places of that desert part of Spain to seek
him. Pharelus glad to understand the whole matter, though grievously sorry for
the Duchess Brisils mishap, comforted Periander by all the means he could,
hoping by that they had been in Albion but a month or twain, they should hear
of her.

When Periander and Pharelus had a long time talked of all matters concerning
their return to Albion, they went back to the City again, where they met with
those whom Pharelus expected that day: who being come according to his
appointment, each told as much as he had heard concerning Periander, which was
but little: nevertheless he thanked them all for their diligence and industry,
telling them that he had better news himself, and such news that he minded
to return into Albion, where he doubted not, but that he should find Periander,
if the Gods would be so favorable as he hoped; but would leave them to inquire
and seek for the Duchess Brisil, who was somewhere in that part of Spain where
they were. The men glad to see their Master so frolic and merry for the good
nws which he had heard, promised that they would do as much as lay in their
power according to their duty, and as they had already done. But marvelling
what young man he was that stood by their master (for they had never seen
Periander to their knowledge) asked their master, whether that young man had
brought him those happy tidings? Pharelus unwilling that they should know that
he was Periander, told them that he was so, and that he would lead him into
Albion with him, to the end that if his news were true, he might reward him
accordingly as he deserved.

But Pharelus speedily appointing them what way each should take, willed them
to make diligent search for her, assuring them, that she was in those parts,
and that the same young man that was by him had seen her not long before, being
apparelled like a shepherd and country maid. Besides he charged them to tell
her if they met her, what was passed in the Court of Albion before their
departure, and that sithence she saw Periander last, that he has been at the
village where he left her, and there been informed of the deceitfulness of
Bergama, of her own faithfulness and loyalty, and of all other matters
concerning the traitresse Malorena; and that he is either in Albion, or shortly
shall be, where he will expect her coming. Herewith Pharelus dispatched them
all, and leaving them each one to look to his charge, presently repaired to his
lodging with Periander, where they refreshed themselves being both hungry and
weary. Their repast being taken, they took directions for their readiest way
toward the Haven of Lisbone, intending there to take ship. And so departing
from Leon, they traveled along the river Ezla, leaving the village where
Periander had sojourned with Brisil on the left hand, Where we will leave them
going on their journey, and return to Brisil, whom we left rehearsing the
history of her life, to the shepherd Petulca and Philorenus, with the rest of
their company.

CHAP. XXIIII. How the Aragonians were discomfited by the Castillians: and the
King of Castile carried away Philorenus his mother.
WHen Brisil had ended her tragedy, she said. Thus shepherds have you heard
the whole estate of my life, who I am, of whence, and of what fortune. And
forasmuch as it is not yet near supper time, seeing we are so well met, I pray
you Philotenus (for so I hear you named) dein to make us pertakers of your
fortune, that as I have willingly made you acquainted with mine, so you will
let us know what hap you have had, and what event has made you resort to the
Lady Felicia. For by reason that I heard something concerning your self, of the
nymph Arethee (who before I entered into the Palace) being by me and the rest
of my company asked what shepherds of account were in the Lady Feliciaes
Court, named you among the rest, I am touched with an earnest desire to know
the course of your life, Philorenus answered.

Most gracious Lady if I should do less then you demand, (seeing you may
command) I might worthily be accounted both unmindfull and ungrateful. If
therefore it will please you to give attention to my speech, I will as briefly
as I may (not to be tedious unto you) unfold the occasion of my travel, and
acquaint you with the strange effects of my fortune even from my childhood.

Brisil seeing Philorenus address himself to tell histale, winked unto
Marcelio and Ismenia, who walked, he with his Alcida, and she with her
Lexander, and they being come unto her, she told them of Philorenus his intent,
which they knowing, say down by Brisil and Petulca, with the other shepherds,
making silence, lest they should interrupt Philorenus his purpose, who began in
this manner to satisfy their expectation.

I was born in a little village called Yervedra in the Kingdom of Aragon; my
parents were poor and of base lineage, and lead their lives altogether in the
Country, their name or kindred being of no honor or fame for nobility of
descent though they were known and spoken of in places far from them, through
the whole Kingdom of Aragon for their virtue and honesty. As fortune had
enriched them with many fair possessions, so nature had beautified their
persons with comeliness, and the Gods endued their minds with the heavenly
influence of wisdom liberallity, modesty, gentleness, chastity, and many
other virtuous qualities, which made them samous above all their neighbors,
But Fortune who continually envieth the hap of those that be most addicted to
pity, either willing to try the perfection of their virtuous constitution, or
rather intending to overthrow their honest disposition, began to lowre and
frown on the good and luckie estatin which my father and mother lived, having
store of wealth, an^ no other charge but me: I being about two or three years
of ^ge. For it happened that occasion of Wars and Discord growing between the
Kings of Aragon and Castile, both their Armies were encamped by our village,
insomuch that my father and most of his Neighbors, to avoid the loss they
were like to sustain by the incursion of their enemies, thought best to leave
their country habitation til the times changed, and to sojourn in some of the
next Cities until the wars were ended. To bring which thing to pass, my father
speedily traveled toward the City Targonna, there to provide some house for
his wife and him, there to expect the end of the present troubles, intending,
if he could find any convenient place for his purpose, to return home and fetch
my mother and me with the rest of the family. But within one day after his
departure, it happened, that the two armies buckled together, and the enemy
becoming victorious, pursued our King that fled with all his Nobility through
our Village, to save himself in the aforesaid City of Targonna, seeing his
Camp was discomfited his chiefest Captains slain and all his Soldiers chased
by the enemy, and put to their shifts, having more hope in their heels then in
their hands, Insomuch that the whole Army of the K, of Castile swarming about
our Village as a company of Bees, pillaged and spoiled all the houses and farms
taking the chiefest farmers and husbandmen for their prisoners, setting them
each one at such a rate or sum of money for their ransom, as they thought them
able to pay, according to the substance and wealth which they judged them to
have.

Amongst the rest, one of their Captains entering into our h^use, and asking
for my father, the maids answered, that he was in the City: but he not
believing them, ran into all corners of the house, to see whether he were not
hidden in some secret place: and as he ranged up and down through all the
chambers, at length he found my mother lying under one of ye shepherds beds,
and pulling her out by the hand, when he saw the decent proportion of her body,
the comeliness of her face, and gravity of her countenance, he was on the
sudden so snared in the net of fancy, that he felt himself not a conqueror,
but conquered; and spoke unto her in this order. Beautiful Matron (for I
perceive you are the Mistress of this household) the pleasant weapons wherewith
you fight has given me such a soothing wound, that although it has penetrated
the very depth of my heart, and yielded me thy captive, whereas I was in the
number of those that this day boast of victory, yet I am forced to confess,
that fortune has not a little favored me, in that it was my hap to be
overcome by so sweet an enemy as your self. Fear not therefore sweet, for I am
not come hither to do thee or thy family any wrong, but to do thee pleasure and
service. Wherewith he espying his soldiers busy with raping and pilfering,
pocketing, and bagging up such things as they liked best, commanded them to
cease, and to seek their booty elsewhere; and appointing some of them to free
the house from the incursions of other captains and soldiers, he returned unto
my mother, who could not sufficiently lament our misfortune, that we were not
by my father in the City, not regarding the loss of all her goods, but the
danger unto which her honesty was exposed. The Captain therefore perceiving her
so greeved, began again in this sort to comfort her. Brave dame, I beseech you
do not afflict your self, seeing you have no cause* for where you see among
your neighbors not one escape the fury of the soldier, who spoileth them of
all the substance, of their jewels, of their cattle, of their beasts, of their
dearest household stuff, burns their houses, and takes the Matrons prisoners,
and plagueth them with all kind of warlike injury; you contrarily have not so
much as a broom-staff removed out of your house. And although your husband were
here, as it seems he is not, yet should he not have one hair of his head
impaired. For whatsoever I promise, I swear unto you by the faith of a
Gentleman and soldier, that I will perform no less. And therefore I pray you
cease from weeping, and wash not your cheeks with your tears, bath not your
self in water which is procured with so much grief.

All this could not persuade my woeful mother to give over her sorrow, or to
assuage her grief; for she well knew that when the Sirens sing most sweetly,
they intend most harm; that when the fowler whistleth most pleasantly, he
wishes the birds most misery; and that the fox never praised the hens, but
when he aimed at the cock, and so did she more then misdoubt that these words
of the captain tended to no other purpose but to crop the bloom of her Honesty,
and to become Lord of her Beauty.

The consideration of this so overwhelmed her with exceeding sorrow, that she
ceased not from weeping for all the Captains prattle, nor would she give him
one word in answer to his sayings. Nevertheless he bore her frowardness so
patiently, that he changed not his former tune, but rather continued in his
sweet and mild speeches, trying by all means he could to assuage her dolor,
and to provoke her to accept of his service and friendship, using her so
courteously, that he seemed rather to be some especial friend, then destroying
enemy. For though my mother well marked the cause which moved him to use such
favorable enmity, and espied that he was caught in the snare of her beauty,
yet could she not sufficiently wonder at his modesty, wherewith he sought to
cover and cloak his disease; for though he revealed it unto her at the first,
yet he did not so much as offer her the least disgrace in the world, neither by
word nor deedr

In the mean while the King of Castile (who in proper person had pursued his
enemy our King, who having reached to the Walls of the City, was freed by the
help of the Cannon, which forbad the enemy to approach near) returning again
through our village, being weary, and seeing no house that liked him so well as
ours (for the most part of our neighbors houses were burned) lighted from off
his horse, and entered into the Hall, where he found the Captain by my mother,
who wept so bitterly, that it might have moved any heart to cempassion. But the
King wondering to see her in such a woeful case, and yet marked that her house
was so trim and all things in as good order as if no soldiers had been near
it, asked the Captain what ye woman ailed I sorry of ye Kings coming, yet
seeing there was no remedy since it chanced so, made this answer. Dread
Sovereign (quoth. he) it was my hap to light on this house, where at my entry, I
found this Matron being mistress of this family, and beholding her beauty and
modest plight, I forced my self to give over the rigorous manner of war, and to
use her according to her deserts, whose gravity and comely grace has
privileged her from the fury of my soldiers, insomuch that they have not by
me been allowed to do her the least danger that may be. Yet notwithstanding
does she weep and make such grief as if she were worse used then all the rest
of her neighbors, that have not only lost their goods but also their husbands
and children, yea and their honesty being violated and ravished by the common
anercenary soldiers. Therefore mighty conqueror, what she ayleth or what
cause she has to take on in this manner, it passes my divination to
conjecture. Why then (quoth the King) I pray thee yield over thy captive unto
me, and I will give thee two of ye chiefest noblemen captives of the K. of
Aragons, that I have taken in this flight, in lieu of her: and let me try
whether I cannot find better means to flake her grief and procure her solace
the^ thou have don. As they were busy about changing of captives, news was
brought yt the enemy flocked out of the City being an huge and mighty company,
marching toward the place where he was; whereat the King amazed, caused the
chiefest Marshal of his army to call up the soldiers and to place them in
battle array to withstand their enemy, but all in vain; for the soldiers
strayed so wide to seek their booty, and to benefit themselves with the spoil,
that if they had not in time played scampado, they had been every man slain.
Which the King perceiving, mounting on his Steed, and loath to leave his new
captive behind him, caused my mother to be set behind one of his Noblemen and
so they posted away, where I poor wretch bawled as children of that age I then
was in, being about four years old, are accustomed to do when they be separated
from their mother. My father desirous to know how we fared in the midst of the
enemy, snatched occasion by the forehead and went forth of Targonna with them
that pursued the enemy, and coming home, marvelled to see the house in so good
estate; but missing my mother, asked what was become of her, which he soon knew
by my crying, who said my mother was carried away by the Soldiers. Whereat he
was so moved, as you may well consider how any man might be cheared in such a
case, and therefore I will not waste the time in declaring what exceeding
sorrow my father made for the absence of his wife, resolving to hazard his life
to have her again.

But alas, the King of Castile being fled to a Castle which he had won not
passing four or five days before, saved himself within the walls of the same,
from the fury of his enemy that ceased not to pursue him; and so my father saw
no way to obtain his desire, seeing my mother was within the aforesaid Castle,
which was so strong that it could not be easily incorporated by our men, who
assailed it fiercely but to no purpose: for the soldiers that were scattered
in the slight, met together about a league from the Castle, and having rallied
themselves, in the night time brake into our camp, making great slaughter among
our men, and although they could not discomfit our men, yet they got within the
walls of the Castle, and were joined to the rest of their company, in so much
that our men had no hope to win the Castle, and so departed toward the City,
which my father took very heavily, seeing he was cut from his wife; and so he
returned home very mournfully, imagining and inventing how he might have my
mother again, and redeem her from captivity, though it should have cost him all
whatsoever he might make with the sale of his goods. Yet his hope was but small
to get her again for any price, seeing the maids and servants of the house had
told him yt she was carried away by the Kings command, and declared unto him
how all things were passed, touching the friendly hostility of the Captain, the
Kings demand, the changing of captives, and all other things that concerned the
carrying away of their mistress.

In the mean time my mother, whom the King of Castile solicited to dishonesty,
was most miserably tormented and grieved, that her fortune was so adverse, that
she was in the hands of him that might force her to do that which he pleased,
though the laws of God, nature, and the country, were contrary unto it. But she
purposed rather to die, then to consent to his lewd will, and to esteem more of
her chastity, then his favor, though she were but a mean person, and he a
King; loath to change her honesty for his Kingdom.

CHAP. XXV. How the mother of Philorenus to avoid the lust of the King of
Castile, secretly fled out of the Castle with the Captain; and how, supposing
her former husband to be dead, she married him, and had by him a Son named also
Philorenus.
THe foresaid Captain perceiving that my mother was so grievously vexed with
sorrow for her captivity, came unto her as privily as he might, and comforted
her as much as he could, promising that if she would trust him, he would
release her from her imprisonment, and bring her home to her house or where she
pleased. This, although it did not a little moderate my mothers grief, yet she
feared least she should not so much be delivered out of her misery, as change
the kind of her calamity, and shunning one gulf, she misdoubted to fall into
another, according to the saying.

Incidit in Syllam cupiens vitare Charibdim, which caused her to be very
doubtful in deliberation, not knowing what she might best do in that great
perplexity. Nevertheless considering that the worst that might happen was,
that she should be abused but by a Captain, where otherwise she should remain
subject to the lust and riot of a King, making case of the vice, and not
regarding the persons, she resolved to follow the Captains counsel, thinking
that it might as well prove for her benefit as contrarily, where if she
remained with the King she could not hope for amendment, seeing lust cannot be
quenched by virtue, but rather inflamed and stirred up to further wickedness.
The Captain hearing her willing to use his help, told her that the King
intended the next day after to ride to another Castle, where he purposed to
muster his army, and to besiege the City Targonna, but meant to let him be as
chief governor of the Castle: therefore he willed her to feign that she was
extremely sick, and to yield the King a pleasant countenance at his departure,
beseeching him to leave her there to rest, seeing she was ill at ease, and
promising him that she would be ready, her health recovered, to do his Majeshy
any pleasure and service it might please him to command her. And then (quoth
the Captain) if you do but obtain so much of him, let me al one for the rest.

She th^nking him for his great deserts toward her, promised to use the matter
so, that she doubted not but to obtain so much of the King: as to be short,
she did. For the King marched with his bands, and left her to the keeping of
this Captain, who being appointed Governor of the Castle that night came unto
my mother, and brought her one of his suits of apparel, willing her secretly to
put it on her, and to come to his chamber as soon as she was ready: which she
did, and was no sooner come, but he commanded the Watch to let down the
bridge, and open the gates, for that he minded himself, only accompanied with
one Gentleman, to make the scout-watch, and to epsy whether the enemy were
about the Castle, or had sent any spies to learn whether the King were there,
or to know what they went about.

The watch forced to obey their chief Governor, although they thought it but
little policy, notwithstanding that he might be thought venturous, to
undertake that Service which most private Soldiers seek to put by, they did as
their Governor commanded, and let him go forth with his companion, whom they
knew not.

The Captain and my mother being out of the Castle, he swear there, that he
would for her sake never enter into the same again, or serve the King his
Sovereign any longer, but after he had led her home to her husband, he would
seek his fortune in some strange Country where he might be freed from the harm
that might ensue by reason of the Kings anger and indignation against him,
carrying my mother away from him. Which she wept marking bitterly, that so
valiant a Captain, and worthy a Gentleman should be deprived of all his wealth
and substance, yea of that great honor and credit which by his virtue and
prowess he had won among all his Countrymen, both in the Court and in the
Camp, for her sake. But he most kindly prayed her to content her self, and not
to care for him; for so he might do her pleasure, and so she might by his
means, enjoy her content and wished desire, he should be satisfied, seeing he
desired nothing so much as her bliss, and protesting that his chiefest
felicity consisted only in her prosperity.

She grieved for nothing so much as that she wist not how she might worthily
recompense his deserts, could not be pasified, but wept continually, not caring
for her self, but sorrowing that the good and valiant Knight had abandoned all,
for to restore her to her former liberty, and to free her from dishonor.

But by this they arrived at the village, where my father was not, nor any
person in the world in our house; for my father thought not that he might
safely stay in his own house, for fear least he should be watched for, and by
the King of Ca, styles command, be slain by the enemy. But he had put away all
his servants and taken me with him insomuch that we were in a certain
shepherds house something far from the village which was burned, where no man
durst dwell. The Captain therefore and my mother, entering the house, and
finding no man, marvelled greatly, and by my mothers entreaty, departed thence
toward the City Targonna, where she made great enquiry for my father and me,
but they could not hear of us. But you must note by the way, that the Captain
had changed his apparel and put on a shepherds garment, and my mother likewise
put off her man's weed, and attired self according to her sex. And within two or
three days after they had been in city, they chanced to light on a certain
shepherd; whom my mother knew well, and who knew my parents as well as any of
all our village. Of this shepherd did my mother understand that the King of
Castile returning to the castle where he had left her, and finding her absent,
and the general Governor, whom he would have trusted with a greater charge,
was so enraged, that he hanged the captain of the watch for letting him forth;
and marching with his whole Army toward our village, he destroyed all that he
met with, and put all the country men that he could find to the edge of the
sword, sparing neither man, woman, nor child. This shepherd told my mother,
that forasmuch as he had seen my father and me in a little cottage adjoining to
our village, he thought certainly that we had not escaped the Kings fury, but
that we were both slain: which bad tidings so grieved my mother, that unless
the good Knight had persevered in his comfortable consolations, she had either
died for sorrow, or ended her grief by finishing her life with her own hands.

On the other side, my father, who by good fortune was forewarned of the Kings
furious coming to the village, escaped the danger, which he was like to incur;
but when he heard of the proclamation which was made throughout all the country
by the Kings command, etc. That whosoever could bring him the head of the same
strumpet, which refusing to be his concubine, had by her dishonest enticements
enchanted the heart of Don Alvares de Bazora, one of his chiefest captains in
his wars (for so was the good captain called) and bewitched him to love her,
and carry her from her husband, should have all the livings that belonged or
appertained to the foresaid Don Alvares. I say, when my Father had heard this
Proclamation, thinking that my mother was guilty of the crime she was accused
of, and supposing that she had changed her praised chastity into wantonness,
he thought that she had allured the Knight to lewdness, which so grieved him
that after he had largely and lamentably complained of her disloyalty, he took
me by the hand and departed out of Aragon presently, traveling toward Italy,
where in the Kingdom of Naples in a certain village called Cinqueni, he
purposed to live the remnant of his life. In the mean time it chanced that the
Kings of Aragon and Castile, seeing they could not by war become Lord the one
over the other, they concluded a wished and durable peace among their
countries, making a perpetual league of friendship between the said Kingdoms
of Aragon and Castile. Insomuch that ye King of Castile, returned to his
Country with his whole army; and in short space were the villages and towns
that had been sacked and burned newly built up again, and all the inhabitants
of the country returned home to their houses, My mother therefore desirous to
know whether my father was slain nr no, returned to our village with the
Knight, to inquire for my father and me, but no man could tell her any news of
us. Insomuch that she verily thought that he was dead, and I likewise, she
lived in that state yet three or four months; which time being expired, the
Captain made earnest suit unto her in reward of his service and faithfulness,
seeing her husband was dead, to take him to her husband, swearing and
protesting that he would be as loyal unto her as any man in the world might be
unto his wise. She acknowledging that he deserved more then he requested, yet
loath so soon to marry again, did drive him of as long as she could, till at
length not able to gainsay his lawful request, she married her self unto him,
and to the end she might forget her former deceased husband, the better
thinking it but mere trouble to be cumbred with the remembrance of her dead
husband being remarried, she and her new husband went to some bordering town of
Castile, where they remained four years, having a child the first year named
Philorenus, at my mothers request, she being desirous to have a new Philorenus,
seeing she had lost the other. You must in like manner note, that the Captain
since the first hour that he departed out of the Castle with my mother, named
himself as my father was called (to wit Coreandro) to the end that he might be
unknown; which name he retained as long as he lived.

Thus they having long lived (as I said) four years in the borders of Castile,
certain mutinies rising in the town of their abode, about the strangers that
lived in the same place, they left that town and went into Italy, thinking the
further they went from Castile, the more they should free themselves from the
danger that might ensue if they should be known. In this voyage my mother,
either by the necessity of her destinies, or the labor of her troublesome
journey, fell sick, and passed her fatal day in a certain village of Italy. Her
husband the Captain, though he so impatiently took the death of his dear wife,
for whom he had brought himself into all these troubles, that he cursed the
Fates, and blasphemed the Gods, for ending her life and not rather his own; yet
after she was buried, he took his son and traveled on his journey, intending
to pass over his life in solitary manner, admitting no occasion of joy or
recreation, but only such as he might enjoy by the company of his young son,
whom nature had left him as a pledge of remembrance of her whom he so dearly
love; and it was his luck to sojourne in the same village which my father and
I dwelled in, being called Cinqueni, as I have before mentioned where this
Captain with his young Philorenus, and my father with his also, remained a
fortnight the one not knowing of the other.

This space of fourteen days being fullfilled, the King of Naples sent two
thousand men to burn the same village and slay all the inhabitants thereof, for
what reason I cannot now so well remember, and seeing it makes not for my
purpose, I will not stand upon it any longer, but let you know how that my
father having had some fore-intelligence of the Kings intent (as many more of
our neighbors did, among whom I place the Captain, my mothers second husband)
and therefore thought best to fly unto some other place: yet the Kings command
being something hastily put in execution it happened that my father with all the
rest were so suddenly assaulted in the night time, ye they were compelled to
leap out of their beds in their shirts and take their flight, leaving all they
had behind them: so that neither my father had leisure to take me with him, nor
the Captain to save his Philorenus; yet was our luck such, that though no child
escaped untimely death, yet we the one not knowing the other, found mercy at
the soldiers hands that were sent to execute the Kings pleasure. For they
taking pity on us, thought it was then a sacrilege to kill us that were so
young, and by the disposition of our bodies seemed likely to prove comely men.
In so much that we were both of us privileged from death and carried to the
City of Naples, I by a certain Captain, whose hap it was to light on me, and
the other Philorenus by a Sergeant, who seeing his father fled, ran toward him
to bath his sword in the poor innocent child his blood, for spite that his
father had by flight escaped his fury: and coming near him hearing him cry, his
choler turned into affection, and he so loved the child, being about three
years and a half old, ye he having neither wife nor child, intended to carry
him to Naples, and bring him up as his own son. Thus we lived in Naples seven
years and yet had no knowledge one of the other.

CHAP. XXVI. How Philorenus the elder was brought to the Court by the King of
Naples, who sent him Ambassador to the King of Persia.
I Shall entreat you (most excellent Princess, and ye worthy Gentlemen and
shepherds) to mark by the way, that as we were both alike in name, so we were
in like manner so like one the other in favor, in plight of the body, in
color of hair, and in voice, that it was impossible for any one by the
judgment of the eye to discern the one of us from the other, when I had
attained the eighteenth year of my age, and the other Philorenus to the
fifteenth year of his age; at which time he was fully as tall as I and in
growth reached to the full proyortion of length and thickness that I was of.
The reason where of was, that we both attained to our full bigness at
fourteen years of our age, in so much that when he reached to fourteen years,
he was fully in bigness equal to me.

This therefore being committed to memory, you shall know, that after I had
dwelled three years in Naples with the Captain who had brought me thither, it
happened, that the same Captain marrying the daughter of a certain Knight of
great account, celebrated the feast of his Wedding in very solemn manner. For
not only the chiefest Noble men of the country were invited thereto, but the
King himself also, who disdained not in proper person to honor my Masters
Wedding day.

The ceremonies of the marriage being finished according to custom, in memory
of Hymenaeus, there was a most sumptuous banquet made ready for the King and
those Nobles that were ministered. And it came to pass, that the King casting
his eye upon me (who among other my fellows served my masters guests at that
feast) liked me so well, that he asked the Captain, whether I was of his
affinity or kindred? The Captain said, that I was no kin unto him, but that he
esteemed of me as of his son, in that a father can but give life to his son, as
he had done to me, showing to the King where he had me, and how he brought me
from the village Cinqueni. The King glad that he had saved such a proper lad
from so unhappy and peremptory death, prayed my master to resign over the title
he had to me unto him, promising yt it should be both for his profit and my
welfare. To make few words, of a Captains boy, I became a Kings Page; and that
day taking leave of my old master. I went to the Court, where I so served the
King, that I could not but please him; insomuch that his Majesty loved me as
dearly as if I had been some Noble personage, suffering me to want nothing,
allotting me no worse company then his own son, being about the same age that I
was of, who affected me as if I had been his natural brother. Thus I lived in
this happy estate about two years, till Fortune remembering that she had
brought me to the top of her wheel, began to threatem my hapless dawnfall from
all felicity, into the depth and profundity of adversity, wishing me no better
luck then my parents had had in their time, though she had at the first gladded
me with such good hap, thereby to make me the more impatient to suffer her
cross, and malicious entreatments in time to come. For it is a thing most
certain, that among all men that are oppressed with adversity, none can so ill
away with their mishap, as they that before lived in great prosperity.

But lest I digress from the matter, know that the King having had
intelligence by certain Merchants out of Persia, that the King of Persia
mustered his men through all his dominions, intending to make a voyage into
Spain, and to bring a mighty Army to invade the country of Spain, because the
Kings of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal had refused to give their daughters in
marriage to his son, fearing lest if Spain were invaded, Italy should become
subject, and considering, that he had entered into league with the King of
Persia, and diverse times joined with him against other Kingdoms, but loath in
this expedition (so likely to turn to his wrack) to become a helper or
confederate, purposed to send me into Persia unto the King, to procure a peace
between him and the aforesaid Kings of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal. I, though
I thought my self altogether unfit to be employed in such honorable kind of
service, and matters of such importance, yet seeing it was his Majesty's
pleasure, as I thought it no manners to seem unwilling, so I prepared wy self
to put his Majesty's pleasure in practice, and to provide all things necessary
for such a journey, Therefore knowing the Kings pleasure. and the effect and
sum of my message, I took my leave of his Majesty and the Queen, and in like
manner of his son Hyppolito (who was so sorry for my departure, yt he could
scarce bid me farewell (and so dispatched my self from the Court, being
accompanied with nine men. What success I had since my departure from Naples,
you shall hear afterward.

CHAP. XXVII. How the younger Philorenus, being taken for the elder, was
imprisoned by the King of Naples his command.
THe second day after I went from Naples, the other Philorenus (son unto my
Mother by that Castilian Captain) dwelling in the same Ciwith the Sergeant that
brought him from Cinqueni, chanced in the evening time to pass by a Noble-mans
house, where Hyppolito the Kings son had been at supper; who standing at the
door among certain Gentlemen, espied this Philorenus, and thought undoubtedly
that I was the man, and that I had changed my apparel to the end that I should
not be known to be Philorenus, which he imagined that I should have done, being
unwilling to go in Embassage unto the King of Persia, and yet feared to ask
leave to stay at home, and to be discharged of that so troulesome a service, I
being unaccustomed to deal in affairs of so great moment and importance.

He therefore stealing from his company, followed my brother (for we came both
out of one womb) and when he saw him in place where least company was, he
took him by the slip of his cloak, and calling him by his name Philorenus, bad
him not be grieved though he were overtaken by him, seeing it was his luck
first to be espied by him, that was the best friend that he had in the world.
My brother knowing Hyppolito the Kings son, began to fall on his knees, to
honor him according to the manner of the country, marvelling that the young
Prince used such words unto him. But Hyppolito loath that I should be known
(for the King and all the Nobility knew not but that I was departed from Naples
for Persia) with something an angry countenance, uttered these words.
Philorenus, if thou be wise follow my counsel, and leave these tekens of
honor, lest thou be bewrayed, and if my request will not serve, let my
commandment move thee to be more prudent and follow me. Philorenus my brother,
ravished with marvel what this meant, and fearing to displease him, who might
make him repent his offense, did as he commanded. And so they went together to
the court, where Hyppolito bearing my brother into his chamber, and shutting up
the door lest any of the Courtiers should interrupt them, and know of my being
there, (thinking nothing less then that the same Philorenus was my Brother,
seeing neither I my self knew that I had a Brother, nor my Brother that he had
a Brother in the Court, by Fortune lifted to so high estate) began in this
manner to speak unto him.

Ah Philorenus, who would have thought that the great discretion and wisdom,
whereby you have obtained such love and credit at my fathers hands, had so lost
his force and vigor, that it suffers thee so indiscreetly and fondly to
behave thy self, being employed by his Majesty in a matter which might have
been committed to the chiefest person of the Realm? And art thou so berest of
all thy wits and understanding, that thou think we are all so blind, that
because thou have put on another Garment, we should not know thee? Think
thou that we are so forgetful of thy favor, that the change of apparel is
able to make thee unknown unto us? No, no, Philorenus, and although all other
men were taken with oblivion of thy Face, yet the Picture of thy Visage, the
Lineaments of thy Face, and the very Phisiognomy of thy Csuntenance, is so
deeply engraven in my heart, that no time, no change, no alteration, no color,
nor no deceit is able to raze out the print thereof.

Wherefore I cannot enough marvel Philorenus, that seeing thou know how I am
affected toward thee (insomuch that thou can not ask any thing of me that
lies in my power to grant thee, and be repulsed) thou have notwithstanding so
madly sought so dangerous (if I may say my mind) so cowardly and base means to
shake of the charge committed unto thee by the King; whereas if thou had but
let me know how thou were unwilling to be employed therein, I would have
entreated my father, and persuaded him to send some other into Persia, that I
might have enjoyed your company, for whose absence I doubt not but you
perceived how sorry I was. And now, first you know, that though you were never
more seen by us or known, yet you should be deprived of all the credit and
honor which you had in the Court, being compelled to live in obscurity and base
manner, wanting both wealth and fame.

Besides also; perpend not only what injury you offer the King, but also the
loss and detriment unto his subjects, and the neighbor kingdoms of Castile,
Aragon, and Portugal, in that my fathers intent is frustrated, and an embassage
of such moment, serving for the welfare of so many worthy kingdoms, neglected.
The consideration whereof, I hope will make you come to knowledge of your
fondness, yea rather madness, in committing so heinous an offense and hurtful
trespass, whereby you hade deserved the Kings indignation, who no doubt if he
were acquainted with this your frantic kind of dealing, would with no less
pain then death punish your delict,

But I judge that the Gods tendering thy fortune, have made thee so happy, as
that thou should be espied by me before thy sinister doings were bewrayed
unto any other, and so revealed to the King my father, to the end that I might
provide some remedy in this case, and save thee from the danger which otherwise
thou were like to incur.

My brother Philorenus, who all this while stood astonished, not knowing the
event of this matter, marvelled what fury haunted the young Prince, to make
such a large discourse unto him; he knew not what he meant by his embassage, or
what affair the King should have committed to his charge seeing he had never
been near the King, and was altogether unknown unto him; and therefore he knew
not what he might imagine of this accident. But knowing that who so comes
near the fire is in danger to be burned, that who so plays with the streams
may be drowned, and that they that are near Kings are subject to their power,
began to fear lest this sport should be turned into spite; and this young
Prince his pastime tend to his wrack. And therefore he fell on his knees and
made Hippolito this answer.

Most excellent Prince, I am a poor young man, unknown in all places of honor,
and especially in the Court; howbeit that I know not how your grace knows my
name. For I confess my name to be Philorenus, yet I vow and protest before the
Gods and sacred powers of heaven, that I never lived in the Court, never wore
more sumptuous apparel then now I do; never spoke unto his majesty or your
grace, and that I know no more of what embassage you speak, or what charge you
talk of, then I knew at the hour when I was first born. Wherefore I beseech
your grace to pardon me for I speak the truth, as your grace well knows, who
takes pleasure to mock his humble servant.

What Philorenus replied Hippolito, have thou not told me thy self that thou
were born about the borders between the Kingdoms of Aragon and Castile, that
thy father was called Coreandro, thy mother Delbia (for that was our mothers
name) and that by reason of the wars between the said Kingdoms, thy father
came with thee, and dwelled in the village Cinqueni, being under my fathers
subjection, whence thou were brought to Naples? Is not this most true? if not,
say I lie,

God forbid (quoth my brother) that I should be so impudent as to give your
grace the lie, seeing that I may in more decent manner deny that which is
contrary to verity then so. And seeing I confess all that to be true which
your grace has specified concerning my parents, my country, and my translation
from the place where I was born unto this country, I hope your grace will
pardon me if I deny that I never told the least point thereof unto you: for
heaven confound me if ever I spoke unto your grace before this time.

Hippolito moved to rage, burst out at length into these words. Well Philorenus
(quoth he) I perceive thou art more then mad, and that thou do openly mock
me, for I say that the Gods are not Gods, if they confound thee not for thy
falsehood. It were to be pardoned if thou did only offnd against me, but
seeing thou call the Gods as witnesses of thy horrible falsities and lies, I
cannot forbear it. But I pray thee tell me one thing; have thou any brother
living? No, (quoth my brother.) why then (quoth. Hippolito) art thou the same
Philorenus that my father the King had from the Captain, upon the same day that
the said Captain was married; who said that he brought thee from Cinqueni. True
(quoth my brother) I was brought from Cinqueni, but yet I know no Captain that
was married, or that gave me to the Kings Majesty. And if it will please your
grace to go with me, or send to the house where I dwell, you shall both know of
him that brought me from Cinqueni and all his neighbors, that I have dwelled
these seven or eight years with him, even since the time yt I was brought from
the said village Cinqueni. It is a mavelous matter (quoth. Hippolito)
Philorenus, that thou will go about to persuade me to a tale, and to move me to
believe thy lies. For if thou were a God I durst say thou lie. For thou have
no brother (so thou do confess) and I take all the Gods to witness that
one named Philorenus born in the same place that thou acknowledgest thy self to
be born in, and of the same parents that thou claimest to be thine, and of such
fortune as thou say thine was. Then tell me how is it possible, but that
thou thy self must be the man. And albeit thou had a brother, yet you should
not make me believe that he can be so like thee, as that I should be so
absurdly deceived. Therefore seeing thou art so obstinate, thou shall try what
thou art able to gain therewith.

Herewith Hypolito takes him by the hand and leads him unto the chamber of
presence, where all the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen began to cherish and welcome
him, asking the cause of his sudden return and why he had so disguised himself
in apparel.

My brother almost out of his wits wist not what to think, but that either they
were all more then foolish, or he born to be scoffed and mocked at: yea he
could not a great while be persuaded but that he dreamed. But Hyppolito looking
upon him, and seeing what countenance he bore, burst out into these words, all
the Courtiers standing aboot O most cunning counterfeit who ever saw the like?
No doubt Philorenus does not or rather will not remember, that ever he knew any
of all this noble company of Gentlemen and Ladies, whereas notwithstanding,
they all disdain not to acknowledge, yea and claim old acquaintance. As he had
so said, the King came into the chamber of presence to see what the matter was,
(for he had already heard something touching my coming as they thought) and
seeing my brother, welcomed him after this manner, Ha our Ambassador, you
have either had wings to fly, or you have as much seen Persia as I have seen
Jove; but I pray you tell me what may be the cause of this your
holi-day-coat? Have you met with fools by the way? or are you a weary of a
Courtiers life? if the one, I was well addressed to send such a Legate to
Persia, and if the other, I will soon relieve thee from that care.

With that the King being angry at the heart, commanded his son Hyppolito to
take order that he might be put into prison till he had deliberated what death
he should die. Which thing when distressed Philorenus heard, he fell on his
knees and began thus to entreat his Majesty to be merciful unto him. Most
excellent Monarch, I beseech your Majesty by the religion and duty that all
mortal men owe to the divine powers, to hear me clear my felf of all such
crimes which it should seem that I have committed against your majesty. For I
perceive that either it pleases your Majesty to exhilirate and glad your
Courtiers with my misery, and threaten me imprisonment and death to give them
occasion to laugh at my simpleness and innocence, or there has been some
other man of my name and like me, that has committed this heinous offense
against your Majesty, which most falsely is attributed unto me. For I protest
before heaven and earth that, I am not that Philorenus (if such an one has
been here) as I will prove by the soldier that brought me from Cinqueni, with
whom I have dwelled ever since I was by him brought to Naples; as he and all
his neighbors shall testify, or I Will die what death your Majesty shall please
to appoint.

The King hearing him so soberly protest and swear that he was not the same
Philorenus they took him to be, commanded him to tell one of his guard where
the same soldier dwelt, which when my brother had done, the King commanded the
same man whom my brother said was his master, and four or five of his chiefest
neighbors, should the next day come before him.

Insomuch that the same Sergeant being called Signori Valentino, accompanied
with three or four Gentlemen of great credit dwelling in the same Parish, with
him were brought, appeared before his Majesty according to his command and my
brother being brought before them, the King asked them whether they knew that
fellow?

They all answered yes, and told the King all other circumstances concerning my
brothers Parents, and his coming from Cinquent to Naples, affirming all what
they had said, upon their oaths.

The King marvelled that all things agreed with the Philorenus for whom he took
him to be, both his name, the place where he was born, the name of his parents;
and other accidents only this different, that he had dwelt with a Captain
which gave him to the King, where these men testified that that Philorenus whom
they had present, had dwelt with the Sergeant till that present day, and never
entered into the Court; insomuch that the K. began to think that there were two
brothers of them, and that they themselves knew it not, by reason that they
were separated one from the other so timely. But to the end that he might be
the surer of this matter, he sent for the Captain of whom he had me. Who being
come, and having seen my brother; the King asked him whether he knew any privy
token about my body whereby he might know me, if there were one in the world so
like me that he might hardly be known from me. Such token (answered the
Captain) I know none, my Sovereign Lord; neither is it necessary, for I nor any
man that has eyes can doubt of this man, but that it is Philorenus whom I
brought from Cinqueni, and I will not only say so, but also affirm it by oath,
and die upon the same. The other Gentlemen that were present said that he might
be deceived, for that they had already deposed the contrary.

To make few words if the King had not been present, they had gone together by
the ears, and tried the matter not by words but by wounds rather, and by fight
come to knowledge of the right Philorenus, but the King commanded them to
return to their mansion place, and to leave the person concerning whom the
question grew, (to wit my brother) with him, for that he would not be
satisfied, but would have him kept in hold till such time as he might send into
Persia after me to know whether I were there or no: imagining that if I were
found there, then the same Philorenus that they had in the Court should be my
brother; and if it were so, the King intended to give him some high office; but
if contrarily I were not found in Persia, then it should be manifest that the
same Philorenus was no other but the man who he was judged by all the courtiers
to be, and both he and his pretended master, with the other Gentlemen that were
before the King, should with death be punished for their madness, in taking
upon them to depose such falsities, and so openly to mock with their King and
Sovereign.

Well, they being returned, and my brother clapped in hold, two Knights were
dispatched from the court to Persia, who taking their journey the same way that
I was prescribed to take, at every City that was of any fame, he enquired for
me, but in vain; for they passed into Persia, and yet could hear nothing of me:
neither in the way as they went thither, nor in the Court of the King of
Persia, the reason whereof was as follows.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the elder Philorenti, going on his journey, was taken by
Egyptian Robbers. How the other Philorenus escaped out of prison by the means
of Mistress Ceraf^lla.
AFter I had traveled two days from Naples, as I rode with my men through a
huge wood, we met with five and twenty Egyptians, who having certain Cells in
that Wood, lived upon the spoil of those that passed through the same. These
Villains, ugly in countenance, in color resembling Devils, and in stature
Giants, having espied us, and seeing that we were able to outrun them being on
horseback, marched on before us, as if they had not thought of us till they had
reached to a place serving fit for their purpose, where our horse hindered us
more then they could advantage our valor. For we entered into a Thicket full of
Thorns and Brambles, where we were compelled to alight, and lead our horses by
the bridle, and had more trouble to pull them after us, then to pass our selves.

Now the Egyptians therefore thinking it time to pursue their prey, came all
of them toward us, and being most of them armed with demi-pikes and javelins,
set upon us so fiercely on the sudden, that we scarce knew whether were the
best, to resist their fury, or yield to their mercy. But seeing we had no time
to deliberate upon the matter, quick expedition was necessary, and I perpending
that all the mercy that such villains had was more then cruelty, I thought it
better to die in the defense of our honor, then to fall into the hands of such
barbarous rascals.

Then I drew my sword, as also all the rest did that were with me, and
abandoning our horses, we dealt with the villains in such sort, that we wounds
three or four of them deadly, but yet we could not escape their hands, by
reason that they were so many of them, and had the vantage of us, in that they
had half-pikes, and we had none. To be short, the end of the conflict was such
that I could more deplore it then avoid it; for the most of my men were slain,
the rest escaped by flight, and I being thrust through the arm with a pike, was
taken by the Egyptian villains, and bound hand and foot, and so htey cast me
upon one of our horses, and brought me to their cells; whither they also
conveyed the horses and my baggage. When I was brought to their cell, they
began to consult what they should do with me. For they thought it pity (which
affection did not proceed from any good disposition in them, seeing they were
bereft of all good qualities, but rather was bred in them by the will and
pleasure of the Gods, who being moved to mecy would deliver me from the wicked
villains) to kill me, seeing they had gotten so great a booty by me; and on the
other side, they feared that if I should escape, their knavery should be
detected, by reason that I did not only know their wicked kind of dealings,
but also the place where they kept themselves, being the most secret place in
the world. But after they had a long time deliberated upon the matter, they
came by me and brought me such meat as they had (though I had no great lust to
eat) and untied the cords wherewith they had bound me, but they put on a pair
of shackles on my legs, for fear I should outrun them. Thus I lived among
them the space of nine or ten months in such misery, that I wished death every
day to deliver me from the wretched life which I led in that pitiful kind of
captivity,

But I will return to my brother, whose hap was evil by reason of my mishap.
For the knights that were sent into Persia to enquire for me, returned to
Naples, and informed the King, that they had not heard any thing of me, and
that they could assure his Majesty, that I had not been seen in Persia, nor in
any place between Naples and Persia, save only in one town about one days
journey from the Court, in which place they had certain intelligence that I had
been seen. Other information they had none. The Sergeant my brothers master,
and the other Gentlemen his neighbors upon this news, fled, fearing lest they
should have been unjustly put to death, blaming Fortune for that she dealt so
cruelly with them, that they were compelled by flight to save their lives when
they had not in any manner deserved death. But the King being informed of their
flight, caused all their lands and livings to be confiscatcd, and adjudged to
his exchequer, and my brother Philorenus was the same day arraigned and
condemned to be torn in pieces with four horses. But it chanced on that day
which was appointed for his execution, that the Queen fell in labor, and was
delivered of a daughter to celebrate the feast of whose birth, my brothers
execution was prolonged thirty days; for the King would not have any such act
committed all the time the Queen lay in childbed. In the mean time (most
gracious Princess) may you think in what taking my poor brother might be, that
wist not how he might escape that cruel death which he was ordained to die,
although his conscience cleared him of all offense or crime, whereby he might
deserve any punishment.

But at last, Fortune minding either to alleviate his grief, or to bring him
into greater troubles, suborned a certain knights daughter which attended on
the Queen, to snatch occasion at the delay which she heard the King had
commanded to be made concerning the putting of my brothex to death; and to seek
means to deliver him out of prison, and thereby to save his life, For this
Gentlewoman being called Cerasilla (whom I loved better then my self) thinking,
with the King and all the rest of the courtiers, that my brother was the same
Philorenus that courted her, and so earnestly made love unto her, that she
might eastly perceive that he loved and honored her above all other women; when
she heard that Philorenus was condemned, she was exceeding sorry. But the good
chance of the Queens childbearing, by reason whereof the time of his death was
prolonged, something assuaged her dolor, and gave her hope, that she might
find means to recompense the service which she suposed he had done her.

Therefore upon the third day after the young Princess was born, considering
that all the Courtiers were merry, and took more care how they might pass over
the time with making good cheer, and recreating themselves with diverse sorts of
pastimes* then they did in looking who were present or absent, or who went in
or out of the chamber of presence; she stepped from the Queens privy chamber
to her chamber, and there araying her self in man's apparel; (for she had a suit
belonging to her brother, which he had left in her chamber) and taking her
apparel under her cloak, she hieth to the Gentleman that kept my brother, and
finding him busy with playing at tables, asked him how it fared with
Philorenus? the Gentleman thinking that she had been Mistress Cerasillaes
brother (for he knew the clothes, and her brother being but a young youth
without any hair on his face, she was not misdoubted to be any other then he
himself) told her that Philorenus would perhaps be as merry as the rest, if he
knew not the day of his death, which though it were prelonged, yet it abated
not his grief. I pray you (quoth the transformed Gentleman) may not a man talk
with him? Why not (quoth the Gentleman?) If you please to speak with him, I
will open the chamber door where he is, and you may go to him. And with that
the Gentleman let her in, and went to his tables again with the Gentlemen that
kept him company. She being entered into the chamber where my brother walked up
and down very heavily, salute^ him and spoke unto him in this manner.

Philorenus, albeit you perhaps are of opinion that I did indeed despise the
courtesies which you have offered me at diverse times, as I seemed to make light
of them in word, and that I rewarded thy service with inward hate, as I feigned
by outward frowardness, yet I hope thou shall in time by trial prove this
surmise false, and be forced to confess that she is not ungrateful whom thou
so often have accused to be cruel. For though I did repay thee with a frown
when I wished thee a favor, and yielded thee a lowering countenance when I
wished thee a pleasing smile, to make proof of thy constancy: I doubt not, but
now seeing I make thee acquainted with the cause, thou will not take the effect
in ill part.

My brother, admiring at the strangeness of this speech, wist not what to
answer. For he knew not the person that spoke unto him, and was in doubt
whether it was a man or a woman, her apparel showing the one, and the course of
her talk the other: and therefore he thought best not to interrupt her
discourse, but to hear the end of her tale, which she continued on in this
manner,

And considering (sweet Philorenus) that the greatest pleasure that may be done
unto any man is to save him from the terriblenesse of untimely death, I am
resolved to show thee no less gratuity and recompense for thy faithful and
loyal service, then to free thee from the Kings rage, or my self to incur the
same danger that you be in your self. Unto which purpose I have my self put on
my brothers clothes, and brought mine under my cloak to attire you therewith,
and so lead you out of this chamber where you are imprisoned, and rid you from
the danger which you know that you now are in.

And for as much as delay breeds danger, I pray you dispatch and follow my
counsel, for the Courtiers are all so filled with wine, that we may pass and
repasse without suspicion.

My brother was so perplexed, being surprised with gladness and grief
together, that he could scarce tell what he should do; for though he suspected
that this Gentlewoman mistook him as the King and the other courtiers did yet
he feared least she had been suborned by the King to brin,g him into a fools
paradise, and so to agravate his misery. Wherefore as he stood amazed doubting
what were best for him to do, she urged him in this manner to make speed.

Loving Philorenus do thou now make so strange of her, that to save thy life
puts her own in hazard? Have thou forgotten whaf pleasure thou were wont to
say I did thee in giving thee leave to speak to me, and art thou so chary now
of thy tongue that thou will not utter one word? Thou have oftentimes sworn
that thou would not spare thy life to do me service; and now I venture mine
to do thee pleasure, will thou not accept of my service?

My brother considering that the worst that might ensue was death framed her
this answer.

Sweet Lady, if I have displeased you with ungrateful silence, persuade your
self that the only cause thereof did proceed of the joy which I conceived of
your presence, whereby I was wrapped in an ecstasy; insomuch that my tongue and
my other instruments of speech, as I thought to have welcomed you, denied me
their accustomed duty, having lost their operation by reason of the excess of
gladness which possessed my soul. But I beseech you go not about to undo your
self to save me, least in seeking my weal you procure your own woe, and so
where but one should suffer death you bring both in danger.

Mistress Cerasilla glad of his answer, but sorry to see him make no more
have, to do that which she desired, she spurred him forward saying.

Sweet Philorenus doubt not but I am persuaded of thy love toward me, and that
I think of thy silence as thou say. As for the rest, let me alone I hope
where you fear we shall both fall in the trap, that we shall neither of us be
snared in the net, and therefore be ruled by me, seeing women's wits have
sometimes brought that to pass which men's minds has admired.

To be short, my brother became mistress Cerasilla in attire, and was
apparelled in her clothes, whose body was the habitacle of my heart,
accompanied by the Saint whom I worshipped though absent, and in whom my mind
dwelled, though my body was in subjection to the villains that kept me in
their cells after they had robbed me and slain my men. Yet if I had then known
of the love and affection of my mistress toward me, and how willingly she
would have endeavored to deliver me from the barbarous entertainment of the
Egyptian thieves, if she had known that her faithful Philorenus was so
afflicted; my misery (though it had been greater) could not have been half so
troublesome unto me, nor my filthy prison so noisome. But least I be
troublesome unto this worthy company by digressing from the matter, know that
my brother passed for mistress Cerasilla, and she for her brother, and bidding
the Gentleman that was charged with him Adieu, they departed leaving him so
busy at his game, that he tended his play more then his prisoner. Insomuch
that they making all the haste they could, marched through the Court, and
resembling that they went to walk in the fields, they spared not their legs,
but sometimes running, sometimes going a round pace, they did advantage their
journey in such manner, that the next morning (having traveled all night) they
reached to the wood where I was, there thinking themselves out of danger, they
rested.

CHAP. XXIX. How Philorenus the younger, and Cerasilla lost each other in the
wood: and how the elder Philorenus, was delivered out of the Egyptians Cell by
Cerasilla.
NOw though they had made sufficient provision of money, yet when hunger began
to gnaw them, having disgested their meat by their walk or rather flight, they
wist not what shift to make for victuals. Insomuch that they went straying up
and down the wood to see if they could find any roots or wild fruit growing
there, intending to feed on them, till finding the way to some house they might
buy other kind of meat. But mistress Cerasilla, being weary of raunging and
overtaken with sleep, lay down amidst the bushes, and prayed my brother also to
rest himself a while: but he having more mind to eat then to sleep, bid her
take her rest and he would in the mean time seek for some victuals against she
waked. Insomuch that he marked the place where he left her, and went toward
the side of the wood whence he might see a chimney smoking. Whereof glad,
though he feared lost he should be met with, he ventured and went to the
house, where he found a poor old woman sitting by the fire all alone, and
desired her of all friendship, to let him have bread for his money. The woman
perceiving that he was some Gentleman of account (in mean time may it please
you to note that my brother and mistress Cerasilla had changed apparel in the
way. each taking that suit which agreed to their sex) told him that she had
bread, but she feared it was too brown for his eating but he desiring her to
let him have it such as it was, she brought him four loaves, which he took, and
paying her as much as she asked, to the wood he returned as fast as he could:
where he had espied a fountain, and therefore stayed not with the old woman to
drink, she proffering him a glass of Cydar, being a kind of wine made of
apples. For he purposed to carry mistress Cerasilla bread first, and then to
lead her to the said fountain, and there with her to quench his thirst. But
when he came to the place where he left her, mistress Cerasilla was not there;
for waking out of her sleep, she went to see if she could meet with him; for
because he had been something long away (seeing the place whither he went for
bread, was about one league from the wood, and he had wandered up and down the
wood about two or three hours, ere he came to the wood side whence he espied
the smoke) she suspected that he was lost in the wood, and could not find the
way to come unto her again. And so it came to pass, that she seeking him lost
him, and he not finding her, lost himself. For he was so distracted with sorrow
and grief, that as a man abandoning all hope, and in a manner dispairing, he
sat down, and laying his elbow on the ground to support his head, began in
this manner to exclaim against Fortune for her spighfull entreatment,

Ah Fortune, I perceive my destinies have ordained me to be the subject whereon
thou may work thy power, and show thy inconstancy: and whereon thou do
plant the banner of thy forces, and hang up the trophies of thy victories: For
who is there that is acquainted with the course of my life, that dare deny, but
that every part thereof has bin guided by Fortune, and subject to her
accidentary government? For after the day of my birth (the circumstance whereof
may be attributed to no power but to the hidden secrets of dame Nature only)
was it not a chance and accidental cause. that I should with my cradle by my
parents be carried out of my country, and live in exile, before I knew what
exile, yea what life was? was it not (say I) a token of the sparkles of anger
which began to glister in the heart of Fortune, and a manifest sign that she
began to menace and threaten me some disastrous hap in time to come? For I
lived not many weeks after, but I saw the fire flame, which was kindled of the
former sparkles, and I tried the force of her menaces- For before we could
reach to any place where we might sojourn, death bereft me of my dear mother,
before nature allowed me to acknowledge the benefit which by her I had and did
receive.

This done, Fortune seemed not not to have wreaked her anger sufficiently, and
as yet became nothing more meek; for after my mother was buried, and her
funeral rights celebrated, we came to the village Cinqueni, where I was
deprived of my father, all the hold of my hope, and the pillar of my welfare.
Now Fortune thought her self prettily well revenged on me that had never
offered her any wrong, and began to turn her frowns into smiles, and her anger
into favor. For who can deny, but that it was an especial good turn of Fortune
to snatch men out of the cruel claws of griping death, whereas none other might
escape the rage and fury of the massacring soldiers that were sent to
overthrow the said village, being the place of our habitation? Unless it be so
that I had some brother, who (though I knew him not) received the same favor
at Fortunes hands that I had, to the end that after we had been shrined up by
Fortune, I in the house of the good Sergeant, and he in the court, we should
both of us fall into the gulf of extreme misery, and that being led into
adversity, we should feel the effect of Fortunes anger, which for a time she
dissembled, feigning to favor us, where she procured means to wrong us.

But among other calamities, what can be more grievous unto me, then to be so
separated from my brother (if I may by Natures consent claim any such title)
that I never should have seen him yet, nor be like to see him hereafter?
Neither is it a less torment for me, that by him I should be brought into
these miseries, and that he should be cause of all my mishap, who no doubt, if
he knew it, would if he could redress my calamity. But seeing he is not in
Persia, assuredly some mischief has befallen him, wherewith Fortune has
purposed to work both our destructions. The Gods grant that I may prophecy
falsely, though the apparent show of all things force me to divine the contrary.
And lastly, this latter pinch of Fortunes spite, in that she is absent who is
the cause that I am present, (yea, simpliciter that I am, for without her I had
now not been at all) in rancour does surpass all the malice that hitherto she
has ever endeavored, labored, or enterprised against me. Ah sweet Cerasilla,
courteous Cerasilla, yea most loving Cerasilla, how will thou blame and accuse
me of monstrous ingratefulness if thou suspect that I have puposely left thee
of free will and counsel, and voluntarily abandoned thee? But I hope thou will
not hold such opinion of me but rather impute this hapless chance to Fortune,
who has sworn to make me miserable.

And alas whither shall I go, or what way shall I take? since ye sweet guide is
taken from me in whose company I came hither, my coming is not from
imprisonment to liberty, or thral, dom to freedom, or from death to life; but
rather from one kind of captivity, bondage and death, into an other; altering
the manner of my misery, not abating the extremity of my calamity.

Therewith my brother Philorenus, not able speak to any longer for the
multitude of sighs which he fetched from his heart, and tears which spouted out
of his eyes, he wept most bitterly, in which plight I will leave him a while,
and declare unto you what Fortune mtstresse Cerasiila had: who having strayed
up and down the wood a long time, and calling for Philorenus as loud as she
could, weeping and lamenting his absence in most grievous manner, at length she
espied the cel where I was penned up by the villains, who had that morning
shifted me, and taking my apparel with them to sell it, gave me an old garment
of theirs to cover my body withal; and so leaving no man but me in the cell,
barred the door on the out side and went their way: and Cerasilla having eyed
the cell, hoping to find Philorenus my brother there (for she had forgotten her
hunger) made have to draw near, and knocking at the door she heard her first
Philorenus speak, for whose cause she made such account of the other being my
brother. For when I heard one knock, I asked who was there? whereupon she
answered. Ah sweet Philorenus! (thinking that I was the other whom she had
lost, for our voices were not more different then our faces) what art thou
there? I must confess my self beholding to Fortune for this good hap; but why
do thou not let me in? I having forgotten her voice, it being altered by
reason of the affection wherewith in a lamentable manner she pronounced her
words, replied. Whatsoever you be whom fortune has sent to comfort me after my
long imprisonment, if you will see me, then must you from the outside undo the
door, and remove such bars or stops that hinder or let you from entering seeing
I am shut in, and cannot come forth.

Cerasilla marvelling at my speech, with a knife she cut the string wherewith
the cell door was fastened, and opening the door, asked me where I was?
insomuch that I looking by the light that came in at the door (for it was dark
within) I saw Mistress Cerasilla stand before the cell, the sight of whose
presence cast me into such a trance, yt it might have been thought I had been
metamorphosed, as they that looking on Medusaes head were transformed into
stones. But when Cerasilla saw that I neither came, nor gave her any answer,
she stepped into the cell, where she saw me lie on the ground, not only
tongue-tyed without speaking, but also leg-tied, being bound with a strong
cord. Which sight, although it was sufficient to make her lose her wits, and
become as much altered as I was my self: yet the necessity wherein I was
requiring aid, moved her to overcome her own passions and to ad her helping
hand to wake me out of the ecstasy wherein I lay. At length being come to my
self, I said. Ah what fortune has sent thee to this solitary wood to deliver
me from this misery? Whose presence is more welcome to me, then if some
heavenly Godess had come to lose the bands which your most delicate fingers
have untwined. and therewith twisted the knot of the true and sincere love,
wherewith I most loyally honored thee for the time that I lived in the Court.
Ah Cerasilla had I known that thou had been so mindful of my service, and
that thou did accept of the pains or rather pangs which I suffered for love
of thee, the calamity which I have been pestred with in this noisome prison, for
the space of these ten months or more, had not been so grievous unto me as it
has been. For the sweet thought and pleasant conceit which my brains has been
occupied with, in perpending and remembering your excellent beauty and rare
virtues, has taken more force in the pareke of my understanding, and so
combred my mind with the delightsome memory of your personage, that it had
quite blotted out all thought of the injury which I have received at fortunes
hands, and expelled all such grief from my heart which I did take for the
pitiful and lamentable entertainment which I have had in this loathsome cell.
Where ever since the second day that I departed from the Court for I have been
compelled to abide, being fallen into the hands of certain Egyptian thieves,
who haunting these woods, violently set upon me and my men, being either all
slain, or some fled, robbed me of all my treasure and baggage that I had with
me, and either pitying to kill me outright, or rather supposing they should
use me too courteously if they ended my misery with death, they have kept me
here in this cell in such manner as you find me; leaving me here this morning,
and going to some town or other to sell the apparel which I had, seeing the
money which they found in my male was much diminished, and their store greatly
impaired.

Cerasilla ravished into admiration by the strangeness of this accident, was
doubtful at the first of me, thinking that I had been the same Philorenus that
came with her from the Court, and whose life she had saved by her policy: but
well perpending my words, and applying them to the things both passed and
present; she remembered that the Knights who were sent into Persia said, that
they had heard that I had been seen in a certain town within two days after
I departed from Naples, and besides, she did see that I had on other clothes
then the man whom she left in the woods, which forced her to believe me, and to
know how she had been deceived in taking another man instead of me.

CHAP. XXX. How Philorenus the elder came to the Court with Cerasilla; how he
came to meet with his brother, and apprehended the Egyptian thieves.
I Will not here make mention of such congratulations and cherishments as she
made me; leaving it unto your discretions to judge how joyful men be at such
happy meetings. In the mean time, it may please you to understand, that
Cerasilla told me all that had happened in the Court concerning the other
Philorenus, how he had not only my name, but my favor and my fortune, being
born where I was born, exiled where I was in exile, and had the same parents
that I had for mine; how that he was in the Court taken of all men for me, how
that the Knights were sent into Persia, and bringing news that I had not been
there, he was condemned to be torn in pieces by four wild horses. And finally,
how she had delivered him from danger of death, and lost him in the wood,
supposing that it had been he when she heard me speak. Whereat I did the more
marvel, by reason yt I never heard yt I had any brother. But after we had
parleyed of all things, fearing lest we should be taken together by the
villains before we were out of sight of that accursed cell, we went into the
wood as deep as we could; partly to escape them, and partly to find Philorenus
my brother, for as Cerasilla could not be altogether merry for the hard luck
that he was lost, so was I exceeding sorry, by reason that I so greedily
desired to see him; to know whether he were my brother indeed or no. And as we
had for the space of one whole day and night ranged up and down the same huge
wood, at length we purposed to return to the Court, and to certify the King of
all matters, informing his Majesty of the right truth. Hoping that his Majesty
would not only pardon Cerasilla, who was forced by love to do whatsoever she
had practiced in going away with Philorenus my brother; but also by
proclamation recall him again, and the Gentlemen in like manner, that were fled
to shun his unjust wrath and anger, restoring them their goods and livings that
were confiscated. As in truth his majesty did. For when we were returned to the
Court, not without great admiration of the King and Hyppolito the young Prince,
with all the rest of those that were in the Court, and kneeling before his
Majesty, had declared the whole estate of all such accidents and events as had
happened, he did not only pardon Cerasilla, but descending from his chair of
estate embraced me and so courteously welcomed me, that I well perceived that
his Majesty was no otherwise affected toward me, then he was at my departure
from the Court.

Furthermore, he rested not* but the same day recalled the Gentlemen that had
testified how my brother had dwelled with the Sergeant, and not only restored
them their goods and lands, but also bestowed no small gift on the said
Sergeant my brothers master; taking order besides, that my brother should also
be recalled, promising that as soon as he were returned to the Court, he would
Knight both him and my self: in memorial of that so rare an example of two
brothers, that were so like one the other, the one nevertheless not knowing of
the other.

But I to revenge the injury done unto me by those Egyptian thieves, and to
punish them according as they for the cause of their abominable and wicked
life merited, I obtained leave of the King to take one of the companies that
lay in garrison in Naples, for the custody and safeguard both of the City and
Court; therewith to march to the Cel where those villains had kept me so long:
and coming thither we had such good luck, that we took them all saving one
being but newly returned to the cell the night before. But missing one of them
I commanded two or three soldiers to go into the cell, to see whether they
could find no more there. They finding none but one being bound in such manner
as they had used me, thinking that it was some poor man that the villains had
caught (for they could not see what he was in the cell) brought him forth unto
me, whom I and all the company that was with me presently knew to be the other
Philorenus my supposed brother. Which thing so filled my heart with joy, that I
embraced him before he was unlosed. He not knowing who I was at the first
marvelled, but after he had heard me declare unto him how I had found
Cerasilla, yt had showed him favor, he perceived yt I was ye same Philorenus
whom he was thought to be, and beholding me, at length burst out into these or
such like words.

Sir, seeing I neither dream, nor behold my proportion in a looking glass I
confess that both the King had great cause to bear an opinion of me as he did,
and these villains to use me as they intended; who meeting me in the wood as I
had lost mistress Cerasilla, thinking I had been the man they robbed and kept
in their cel, and because I denied I knew either the^ or their cel, they
appointed to kill me as soon as their fellow was returned, whereby I perceived
that you had been in their hands, and had got from them, seeing they could as
little be persuaded that they had never seen me, as the King and all his
courtiers; for in truth I my self, if I had not known as much as by fortunes
frowardness I have tried, concerning the similitude and likeness between your
person and my self. I would now have thought, that you had been of the nature
of the glass that receives the color of every object body: whereas you say
that the Gods strive against fortune to free us from her frowardness, I am
constrained to say no less, seeing that it has pleased their Deity by him to
lose me from this danger of death, by reason of whom (though not by his
procurement) all my troubles and miseries took beginning. Wherefore seeing that
our luck is such that as the evil success of your fortune was cause of my
misery, so the recovery of your hap has bred my bliss, and delivered me frem
the extreme peril wherein my life was placed. What may I say less, but that
the Gods knowing how we have by fortune been wronged, have rescued us from her
fury.

But because it would be too long for me to rehearse, and tedious for you to
hear the end of his speech, and the other talk which we had between us,
concerning such matters as had happened by reason of our great likeness, I
will only tell you, that after we had had some conference touching our parents
and other matters, we caused those Egyptian villains to be tied to the horse
tails, and so trailed along the ground till we came to Naples, where the
hangman saved his labor, seeing that no person thought he had done his duty
unless he had helped to pull and tear the flesh of some part of those Egyptian
wretches, that had caused such confusion, and wrought so much harm, had not the
foresight of the merciful Gods hindered their intent. Insomuch that within two
hours after these Egyptian slaves had entered the gates of the City, they were
by the people halled and pulled into a thousand pieces.

I will not here make long rehearsal, how honorably my brother was used by
the King, but it shall be sufficient if I declare how that the King after he
had welcomed my brother in all courteous manner with a pleasant countenance,
as well bewraying grace and mildness, as Majesty and glory, remembering his
promise made unto me in word, did perform no less indeed, and Knighted us both
together the same day.

Now (most excellent Princes and worthy shepherds) did we think that we had so
trodden fortune under foot, that she was not able ever to rise again, or impair
us any more. Now lived we as two brothers in all kind of prosperity, and so
high hoised to the top of bliss, that we little thought that any power had
been able to cast us down and deprive us of our present felicity. But alack we
found the contrary by trial, and were compelled to acknowledge our error by
experience. Better had it been for us with the careful and waxy Mariner to
consider that an extraordinary calm, is token of some future tempest to come on
the sudden: for then as he at such times strikes his sails, and shunning the
dangerous seas, commends his bark to the secure haven; so we foreseeing the
danger unto which we were subject in our great prosperity, might have escaped
the events which brought our adversity. But seeing things past may be deplored
not recalled, and repented, not amended; I must needs say that we bought had I
wist, at a dear price: as you shall understand by the sequel of this history.
But seeing I have not yet mentioned any thing concerning my father, and the
Captain my brothers father, since that they fled from C^nqueni, at the time
that we were brought from thence to Naples, I mean first to let you know what
luck they had in their flight, before I go any further in declaring the success
we had, so securely triumphing in the Court, after we were delivered from so
much misfortune and evil hap as for a time we suffered, only by the malice of
those Egyptian villains which were suborned by fortune to shake the foundation
of our felicity.

When Cinqueni the place whence we were brought to Naples, was by the soldiers
sent by the King to execute his wrath on the inhabitants thereof, pilled and
spoiled, Coreandro my father thinking that I was dead (for he had heard that
none in all the village were left alive, neither men, women, nor children, and
he did not know that I was saved by a Captain and led unto Naples) thought to
return home again to his country, and there live among his friends, seeing he
had no other comfort in the world, being by fortunes pestilent hatred, bereft
not of goods only, but of wife and child also. Insomuch that he having
resolved to return home to the place of his birth took his way from the said
village along the coasts of Italy toward Aragon, where after he had marched
one day, the next morning rising betimes, to take the advantage of cool Aurora,
before Phoebhs rays compelled the travelers to seek for shadow amidst their
journey, he passed through a little short wood where he heard the other
Coreandro, the good captain my brothers father, lament and bewail his hard
fortune, in this manner.

Ah Fortune, men paint thee standing upon a Globe, as thereby decyphering thy
inconstancy: which their opinion made me always deceive my self with vain hope,
trusting that thou would once turn thy frowardness into lovingness and thy
frowns into favors. But I perceive thou have made choice of me by experience of
mine own miseries and adversity, to oppose my self against al men in thy
defense, seeing that where as they all generally hold opinion, that thou art
the very essence of inconstancy and mutability, each one particularly
exclaiming upon thee, and blaming thee for thy fleeting unstablenesse; I in
contrary manner am forced and compelled to affirm against them all, that thou
art not inconstant or unstable, but rather too much constant persisting and
stiff in thy purpose, hard to be moved, stiff-necked, continuing to the end,
tough, and hard to be overcome.

All which may be manifestly proved by the course of my life, by the adventures
that by thy appointment have chanced and happened unto me, which all of them
have been so unhappy, so unfortunate, and so unluckie, that it were a hard
matter to judge which of them deserves the superiority in name and title of
infelicity. In all which my abversities, thou have so constantly remained in
thy envious and malicious frowardness, that in this my latter mishap thou have
not any whit deflected or turned aside from that cruelty which thou did use
against me in all my other misfortunes. What shall I then say? shall I call
thee constant because I am forced to say that thou art inconstant or mutable?
No, no, constancy is too laudable a virtue to be attributed to such a
spightfull and hard-necked Goddess. Thou art not constant, because not
inconstant, for ye extremity which corrupts ye virtue is as contrary to
virtue as virtue to vice. Insomuch that I cannot attribute unto thee ye name of
constant, unless it be in envy, spite and cruelty, for so thou art ever, and
in hatred, rancor, and malice, do thou continue always. Thy delight is to
see others grieved, thy sport to see others spurnod with the kick of adversity;
thy play to see others pained; thy pleasure consists in plaguing them yt
implore thy help. Thou laughest at them that weep for their mishaps to move
thee to pity, thou scornest the^ yt honor thee, thou mockest them that praise
thee; thou deceivest them that trust to thee; thou abusest them that flatter
thee, and them that despise thee, thou endeavourest to be revenged of them;
though they of all others least care for thy might, least fear thy power, and
therefore are least injured by thee. Fret at them thou may and some, stare,
and stamp, but hurt them thou can not, for it passes thy Deity to overthrow
them that with true patience* forbearance and sufferance, shield and arm
themselves against thy spite and rancor.

Therefore seeing that those that invoke thee most religiously, are most
unrighteously by thee injured; that those that most deserve to be rewarded, are
most punished; and that those that account most of thee, and think of thee most
reverently, are most neglected, and most villanously dealt withal by thee. I
that have thus long most zealously made thy altar smoke, by reason of the
incense which I have always from my cradle offered unto thee, will and do now
forsake and leave thee, as knowing at last, and acknowledging the error and
heresy wherewith I have thus long been infected. Hereafter shall not Coreandro
serve thee any more, or offer thee sacrifice, seeing thou have not only
spoiled him of his goods and riches, but also deprived him first of his dear
and well-beloved Delbia, and now at last, of his dear son Philorenus, whom thou
have appointed to be most barbarously killed and murdered fn his childhood,
and left me alive to bewail and lament his untimela death.

My father hearing the latter end of the Captains plaints, marvelling what he
might be that so railed at fortune for an other man's mishap and mischance; for
he having heard him repeat the injury which she had offered Coreandro, he
thought he had meant of himself, and went into a certain thicket, where he saw
the man that so blamed and exclaimed against Fortune for her severe and cruel
dealings with Coreandro, in depriving him of his lawful wife Delbia, and his
welbeloved son Philorenus: but because he knew him not, nor remembered that he
had ever seen him before that time, marvelled greatly what he should be, and
how he came to know him and me, for he had heard him name both him and me.

Wherefore after he had well looked on him, and thoroughly beheld him, he spoke
unto him in this order. Sir, I pray you not to be displeased with me for
pressing so near you seeing the cause which moves me thereunto, proceeds not
from malice, or intent to trouble or injure you any way, but rather from love
and affection, desiring and wishing to comfort or pleasure you according to my
power, which by Fortunes frowardness is so impaired and weakened, that my good
will is more to be regarded then my ability. I perceive by your face and heavy
countenance, that you have some cause to exclaim against Fortune either for
your self, or for some other. But by the way, I am moved by the remembrance of
the good amity and great friendship which in times past has been betwixt me
and Coreandro (whose mishap in losing his wife and son I heard you so pitifully
to lament) to be so bold as to ask you why Coreandros case so grieveth you, as
that he himself could not more bewail his own misfortune, or be more grieved
thereat, then you are?

The good Captain not knowing my father more then he was known by my father,
framed him this answer. Good sir, though I had had any occasion (as I have had
none) to be displeased at your coming to me, yet by reason that you have been
so well acquainted with Coreandro, as you say, your coming unto me, could not
but have been so welcome unto me, that all displeasure would quickly have been
banished and forgotten. For the great love and affection which I bear unto that
man, and did bear to his wife Delbia, and his son Philorenus, above all other
creatures in the world, is the cause that I so lament and bewail his miserable
and pitiful mishap. Wherefore seeing I have answered your question, I pray
you tell me where you have been so acquainted with Coreandro? Where (quoth my
father?) in Spain, in Aragon, in Italy, at Cinqueni, and in every place where
Coreandro himself has been, insomuch that he was no where, but I was with him,
nor I any where but he was by me. But I pray you (quoth my brothers father) do
you know him if you see him? Should I not know him (quoth my father?) As well
as my self. Why then (quoth the Captain my brothers father) you know that I am
Coreandro, do you not? Nay (quoth my father) rather do you know that I am the
man, Then I perceive (said the other) that you came to mock with me, and so
entreated me not to be displeased with you, intending to give me cause of
displeasure before you meant to depart from me. Nay verily (answered my father)
now I mark what the matter is; you knew that I was to pass this way, and
therefore you came to this place to lament the misfortunes of Coreandro, to
draw and entice me to come unto you, and so to be mocked and laughed at. But
know whatsoever thou art, that if thou be so favored of fortune, that thou
challengest license to scoff at them that by fortunes spite are forced to
grieve for their cross hap, thou may so be punished by the just jugement of
the revenging Gods, that thou shall be moved to cry peccavi too late, and to
acknowledge thy offense, when it will be too late for thee to repent.

The good Captain hearing my father so earnest, wist not what he might think of
the matter; but he began to remember, that his wives first husband was called
Coreandro, and that he also had a son called Philorenus. But because he thought
that he had been dead long ago, he could not think it should be he; especially
because it seemed by him, how that he had lived af Cinqueni, and that his son
Philorenus (that is my self) should have been killed of the same soldiers that
had slain his own son, who was also called Philorenus, for the same reason
which has already been told you. For it seemed scarce credible to him, that
the other Coreandro and his son, whom he thought both to have been dead long
since, should have lived so near him, and that he should not have heard of him;
yet he thought best to set aside all anger, that in case it were he, he might
shun all occasion of strife and immoderate speeches: and therefore though he
saw my father so hot, yet he nothing changed, spoke thus cooly to him. Sir, I
neither knew of your coming by this way nor ever saw you or knew you before to
my knowledge, and therefore the Gods punish me with their wrath if I tither
scoff or mock with you: but as I came from Cinqueni, being over-burthened with
the sorrow which I conceive for the loss of my child, which was killed at the
said village by the barbarous soldiers, I entered into this grove, and was
forced by the muliitude of my miseries, and greatness of my grief to rail at
that most cruel Goddess Fortune, who takes delight to glut her self with the
overthrow of mortal men. And was your son (quoth my father) called Philorenus?
Yea, that he was (quoth he.) And was your wife (quoth my father) called Delbia?
She was, answered he again. Why then, quoth my father, if thou be Coreandro,
thy wife Delbia, and thy son Philorenus, what shall I be with my Delbia, and my
Philorenus? For if I am not Coreandro that had to wife Delbia, on whom I begot
Philorenus now massacred at Ginqueni, heaven plague me.

The good Knight hearing my father so solemnly protest that he was Coreandro,
desired him to make him some copious and true relation of his life, what he
was, where he was born, in what place he was married, and by what fortune he
was brought into Italy; and how that then he would satisfy him in all points,
and so content and certify him that he should not only know, that he did not
jest nor mock with him, but also confess and acknowledge, that he had very
great reason to think himself mocked of him.

Whereupon my father very largely rehearsed unto him, the whole discourse and
history of his life, whereby the good Knight knew that he was that Coreandro
whom he thought had been dead, and therefore had married his wife Delbia by
whom he had his son Philorenus. And presently he told my father all whatsoever
had happened and chanced between my mother Delbia and him, how he saved her from
the villainy which the King of Castile intended to use against my mother, how he
brought her to her village house to look for him, and not finding him there,
they went to the city Targonna to seek him: and how they afterward understood
of certainty that he was dead, as he could verify and prove by diverse of his
wives friends at the City Targonna.

Besides, he told my father in like manner, yt coming out of ye Castle to
escape the better, he called himself Coreandro. And when he was come forth, he
being credibly informed of his death, married Delbia, and that he had within a
year after a son by her, whom she would have also named Philorenus, in
remembrance of her first Philorenus, whom she supposed to be dead. In a word,
he left nothing untold, but let him know the cause of his wife my mothers
death, with his voyage to Cinqueni, and all other things that happened even till
their meeting.

My father greatly rejoiced at this discourse, partly for that he heard such
particularities of his wife, of whom what was become, he never had heard any
certainty, and partly also, because he was disburthened of that heavy load of
false suspicion, bred in his breast by reason of the King of Castiles odious
proclamation made against my mother Delbia. For until the very hour that the
good Knight, the other Coreandro my brother Philorenus his father, had informed
him of the true verity of all matters concerning my mother Delbia, did he
verily think and persuade himself, that my mother of wantonness got secretly
away from the King of Castile, not to seek him her husband, but to run away
with the Knight, and lewdly to live with him, setting aside and quite giving
over her kind love, and amiable kindness which she was wont to profess to her
quondam dear husband. And therefore now knowing the contrary, although he made
exceeding sorrow for her death, yet the persuasion which reason by means of the
good Knights true and not dissembled relation, had ingrafted in his heart of
her loyalty, did not a little comfort him in this his singular perplexity, both
for the loss of so good a wife, and so dear a son. And besides all this, the
company of so valiant and worthy a Knight, and virtuous a person, (in all
points as little beholding to fortune for prosperity as himself, seeing they
both lamented the death of one woman, and especially the pitiful mishap of us
their sons (thinking that we were massacred at Cinqueni) which were unto each
of them most pleasant objects to remember their Delbia our mother, and most
sure pawns and tokens of her chaste and loyal love toward them our fathers) did
breed him such solace, that he thanked the Gods for bestowing so much comfort
upon him in this his latter, and greatest extremity. In like manner the good
Knight Don Alvares de Bazora, of late Coreandro, pouring out tears incessantly
for joy of his good hap in meeting so luckily with my father, thought himself
in ample manner beholding to the Gods for that singular benefit; profesting
that he could not, being in that case, have wished for a more blessed day then
that, wherein he so happily met with my father. Thus joining in company, they
marched together toward the City of Targonna in Aragon, intending there to
live and die together, enjoying each others presence, glad of each others
company, having each of them lost his son. Where I will leave them in this
their journey, and return to the rest of mine own fortunes, and my brothers,
who now both of us were lifted up to high estate, and so prosperously lived in
all kind of sovereign pleasurs, that we thought it as possible for fortune to
abase the greatness of our weal, as for us to impair the divine estate of the
heavenly powers.

CHAP. XXXI. How Mistress Cerasilla died for sorrow that she could not discern
the elder Philorenus from his brother. How he became enamoured on Aureola, and
the conference that passed between them in the Garden.
TO the end that I may let you understand how soon we were forced to recall our
minds from that heresy it may please you, most excellent Princess and noble
shepherds, to know, that we (I mean my brother and I) living in this most
happy estate, began by reason of our great leisure, which the peaceable
quitnesse of the Neapolitan Estate yielded us, so to give our selves to all
kind of sports and pleasures, that we thought that day ill spent, wherein we
had not invented some new delight to pleasure our Mistresses withal. Now we
invented new kinds of dances, now strange manners of Vaulting, now rare
Masks, now new devised Enterludes, and in one word, all kind of toys that
Italian wits had bred in times past, we either altered or augmented; wherein we
used such dexterity, that we seemed to have been born to that purpose. But
howsoever we behaved our selves therein we were so liked of all the Courtiers
of both sexes, that our company was grateful to all men, and shunned by no
man. The King the Queen, and Hyppolito the young Prince, so loved and favored
us, that they would not deny us any thing that we could ask. And we, as we
found our selves to be brothers (having the same Name, Parents, Country,
Shape, and fortune) so we swore everlasting friendship, and allegiance one to
another, so loving one the other, that though I know that it were impossible
for any man in the world so to love any one as I loved him, yet am I forced by
the consideration of his wonderful deserts toward me, and by the trial which
I have had of his loyalty, to doubt whether my love or his were the greatest.

And because we would in all things be alike, and deprive the world of all
means to know and discern one of us from the other, we continually apparelled
our selves alike, both in the same color, fashion, and order. Insomuch that it
was hard for the best discerning wit that the world could bring forth, to know
the one from the other, or to find any difference between us. Which thing, as
generally it troubled most of all the courtiers, so particularly it was cause
of Cerasillacs death, who (as I told you before) bearing me good will, and
taking my brother for me, when she conveyed him out of prison, and saved his
life, and having lost him in the wood, afterward also delivered me from the
villainous Egyptians, and so was cause of all our bliss. This poor
Gentlewoman, loving us both excellently well, and deserving likewise to be
honored of us, for very sorrow that she could not discern me from my brother,
pined, and falling into a consumption died. Whereof though we were passing
sorry, yet the youthfulness of our young hearts receiving the impression of
the beauty of a young Gentlewoman, sister to the Countess Verina, quickly
forgot the funerals of Mistress Cerasilla. Yet because we could not but
acknowledge that we were in great sort beholding unto her, we bestowed this
Epitaph upon her.

Sweet sweetness lies beneath this marble stone,
Which prays all loving hearts her death to mourn.
Her flower is fallen, though were her years but green;
When Life's most sweet, she bitter Death has seen.
We, that of her this here have written in,
Had, but for her, now neither of us bin.
By Phi lore nus. Phi lore nus.


But leaving her in her sepulcher, I will return the sister of Countess
Verina, who being a most beautiful Gentlewoman, named Mistress Aureola, so
enchanted my mind by the commanding force of her sweet face and sugared tongue,
that I admiring the much decent color of the one, and the well governed
volubility of the other, was so ravished in the pleasing delight which her
perfections caused in my heart, that I judged no woman fair, none witty, and
none eloquent, but golden Aureola. Who as she passed all women in comeliness
of body, and pure snow-like whiteness of skin, so none came near her in those
hidden qualities which bred in the brain and fostred in the heart, are made
known by the tongue. But to be short, such were her graces both inward and
outward, that they pierced my heart in such manner, that I was forced to
acknowledge my self her servant, and Cupids captive, being subdued by his
policy in using the imperial beams of her beauty, instead of darts to infringe
and break the privilege of my liberty. Well, I loved Aureola, and so loved
Aureola, that for the love of Aureola I could have hated my self.

I then being in this case, began to employ my brains in searching out manner,
and procuring means to make my affection known to the Saint I so truly
honored. And truly in short time not Aureola's self only, but my brother
also, began to perceive the fire which being kindled in my heart, did cast out
such a cloud of love-smoak. Now I glad that Aureola knew the manner of my
sickness, but gladder that she seemed not malcontent of my
welcontentednesse, and nothing displeased that my brother was acquainted with
my passion, seeing that he was an Alterego, my self in. I will not say another
body, (for it was too like mine to be differenced) but another place; thought
my self the happiest man that lived.

Ye may judge how much more blessed I would have accounted my self to have
been, if I might have doubled my single life by marriage with her. Unto whom to
lay open the pain which punished my heart for the cause of her, I sought
occasion very diligently. Insomuch that opportunity being presented unto me
within a few days after, and espying her walking by her self and the trees
alone in the garden, where her sisters lodging was, I thought it but a
negligent part to omit that fortunate hour, and therefore knowing that the
Countess her sister was gone to the Queen, I posted to my mistress with a
sound courage, hoping to return victorious, or with good hope of victory. Into
the Garden I stepped, and having set on half a dozen paces forwards toward
her; I might see her turn, being at the end of the walk. Whose heavenly face so
dazeled mine eyes with the glance that she cast from the other end of the
garden, that I soon acknowledged, that no Sun could so have dimmed my eyes, but
the double Titan which like two little worlds of grace are such ornaments to
her face, that as they are beholding to it for that it hourdeth them, so is it
bounden unto them because it is by them adorned and beautified.

At length I came so near her, that manners warned me to salute her, though I
was so astonished at her celestial shape, that I could more fix mine eyes to
behold her with admiration, then fashion my mouth to salute her with civility.
Yet love taught me to beware of committing so foul and gross a fault, as not
to give her a courteous good morrow, who was the efficient of my disquiet
evenings. Therefore greeting her after the humblest and lovingest manner my
passion forced me she answered me after this manner. Good morrow sir Knight,
you are very maticuous this morning, whatsoever the cause be; but I pray you
what weather drove you toward these quarters so early? Truly Madam (quoth I)
my good fortune: seeing I have met with no worse company then your sweet self.
For as I passed by the Garden wall, by chance looking over with a long neck, I
espied you walking by your self alone and so I thought it good manners to step
near and give you the buen giorno. And if I thought that my boldness in
pressing so near you, perhaps in such time as you had rather give respite to
your solitary delight, then otherwise be troubled, should offend you; as I came
intending not to displeasure you, so I would depart without performing any
thing whereby you might have occasion to be discontented. No, no, sir Knight
(quoth she) beshrew me if ever I could be offended with good company, neither
have I any such melancholy humor as to delight in being alone, but that
sometimes I am compelled to be solitary for lack of good company. And then I
must of necessity walk alone, and recreate my self with viewing natures
diligent business in beautifying the earth with such pleasant ornaments and
fair tapestry, as passes all artificial industry, I mean these fine herbs and
flowers, which both in smell and color so delight humane senses, that we must
needs acknowledge our selves beholding to dame nature, for presenting us with
such a worthy kind of delectation. But you are now come even in good time to
let me know your opinion in one thing that I am breaking my brain upon. What is
that Madam (quoth I?) Marry (quoth she) this. You see here Violets Roses, and
Lillies, growing all together in one place, I have been musing with my self a
great while which of all these three should bear away the praise, if question
were made which of them were the finest flower; for I promise you, in my mind
they seem to strive each with other in excellency. They do verily Madam (quoth
I) and seeing you desire to have my foolish verdite in judgment of their
excellency, I think in this case, we ought to have a regard unto natures
intent, and take advice of her who seems to use policy in the manner of the
growing of these flowers, that the Rose-bush grows thick and untowardly, the
Rose budding out in diverse places without order, and seems rather to serve
for a wall or hedge to environ other flowers, as is apparent by the intent of
him that has planted these roses as the curtain running about the bed where he
placed the Lillies. In like manner the Violet also grows confusedly and low,
close to the ground to be token humility, and so the Gardener has planted them
in this place to be as it were the foot-cloath and coverlet to shroud the
homely face of the earth from the glorious aspect of the stately Lillies, which
growing most proudly on one stalk, being erected most straightly, and bearing
majesty, seem to challenge the supremacy. Insomuch, Madam, that my opinion,
following the intent both of Nature and the planter, is to crown the Lilly with
the garland, bearing title of the finest flower, as unto which, I deem all
flowers inferior for diverse respects. And therefore no doubt did Juno the
Queen of heaven, challenge the Lilly as presently belonging to her calling it
her Rose: for thereby has and is the Lilly yet called Junonis rosa. By my
faith, sir Philorenus (qu^th she) you have said prettily well as touching this
matter. But yet me thinks we ought to consider the inward virtue of the flowers
as well as the outward bravery. The Lilly is stately indeed* but yet the Rose
it serves for many good uses, and being either preserved or co^served is kept
a long time ln Apothecaries shops, to be ministered unto men in their sickness,
whereas the Lilly only serves for the senses of smelling or sight, and being
fully opened, is either with the wind blown of, or withers and decays in
the pride of Phoebus, being mounted in his noon-point. Nay but Madam (quoth I)
I think you formed your question which was the sinest flower, which I meant not
for the virtues or natural efficacy of the flower, but rather the exterior
shape and show thereof. And yet I doubt not but the Lilly has many hidden and
secret virtues; for I have have heard that the water of the same flower, yea
and of the herb thereof is very good for diverse purposes, which by hap you
better know then I my self, seeing they be peculiar and proper to your sex.
Well, well (quoth she) be it so sir Philorenus; But as you well mentioned, I
understand the matter as you do, and move not the question for the interior
quality, but for the exterior accidents.

Compare then the Rose to the Lilly, what fairer sight can the clearest
discerning eye see then a Rose, so providently formed Nature, that it seems
rather to be some artificial collection of leaves wrought by science, then a
natural bud spreading it self abroad, and making show of such a glorious beauty
as all the most learned workmen of Italy cannot do the like.

I perceive Madam (quoth I) that you are an especial favorite to the Rose, but
for my part the Lill shally bear away the honor: for if you stand upon the
form or fashion of the flower, I pray you how can a fairer or better made
flower be seen then the Lilly? which being made in the form of a Bell with the
Clapper in it, has been by diverse Ladies called Campana Virginea, the Virgins
Bell And to say no less then is true, me thinks it well deserves the same
name, seeing it does in stately growth, resemble the well-fashioned proportion
and stately countenance of maids, in color their whiteness, and in the
yellowness of the seed, the golden locks of their glorious hair: insomuch that
diverse parts are beholding unto the Lilly for arguments of similitude and
comparison which it yields them, thereby to exorn and commend the whiteness
of diverse Gentlewomen, whose praises they penned, saying they were Lilly white,
like Lillies stately, soft and slick as Lillies, and as the Lilly so sweet. And
to aver a very truth, what is there of all sweet sweet scents comparable to the
sweet sweetness of the Lilly? Nay stay there sir Philorenus (quoth she) for
what sweeter smell can the nicest nose wish for, then that which the Rose
yields: for in my judgment the Rose casts the most glowing smell of any
other flower. The most glowing smell indeed Madam (quoth I;) for it is of such
a forcible and strong scent, that it gives sufficient notice to men, that it
is bitter in taste. And to say that which must be said, in my fantasy, it
gives too strong a smell to be compared to the sugared sweetness and sweet
delicateness of the dainty Lilly, which yields the choicest smell, and most
fragrant scent that can be. But in the mean time sir Philorenus (uuoth she)
whilst you magnify tho Lilly, and I the Rose, the forgotten Violet may justly
complain of the wrong we offer it, that we so contend and strive to set forth
the praise of the Rose and the Lilly, that we give no commendation to it,
though it deserve to be highly esteemed: notwithstanding that you said before,
that it grew low in token of baseness. And seeing you do so stoutly stand for
your stately Lilly me thinks I dare nevertheless compare the base Violet as you
term it, to the proud Lilly. For does not the sweet Marjoram grow lower then
the rank Fern? and yet how far the lower excels the taller in sweetness and
virtue, you will not, nay you cannot deny. In like manner the fragrant Time, so
beloved of the painful, grows close to the ground, where the Broom sprouts very
high; yet is the Time of other virtue than the Broom. And so of many more
flowers which I need not mention, seeing one or two may serve for an instance
to falsify your small reasons. But I pray madam (quoth I) deal not so
sophistically with me, as to argue with me a Male conjunctis. For I say not
that the Lilly is the finest flower because it grows highest, for so I would
grant my reason were but fondly grounded; neither do I say, that the Lilly
deserves the head praise among all flowers because it grows not confusedly, but
in decent and comely order; for there are many flowers that growing disorderly,
in sweetness of scent surpass diverse well ranked flowers; and lastly, I say not
that the Lilly is the excellentest flower because it is so sweet a flower: but
thus I form my reason. That, stately stateliness, white whiteness, gallant
gallantness, and sweet sweetness, all these predominant qualities meeting
together in the bravo Lilly, make her worthy to be honored as the fairest,
finest, and bravest flower that Nature has framed.

By this the Countess Verina being come to her lodging, Mistress Aureola was to
retire from the garden to her sister, and so I was forced to leave her, having
missed of my purpose, and no time to break my mind to her in plain words,
although amidst our dispute concerning the excellency of flowers, I used such
passionate looks, that she might well perceive whereto my discourse tended; but
howsoever she thought of it, I know not, but our parting was so amiable, that
after I had lost the sight of her, I felt that I parted from her without
parting. For my body might well be contained in some other place than hers, but
my mind followed her wheresoever she went, as trustily as her own shadow.

CHAP. XXXII. How Philorenus the younger was enamoured on Aureola, concealing
it from his brother; and how his brother came to the knowledge thereof.
IN the mean time (excellent Princes and worthy thy shepherds) you may note
that my brother loved her (I mean my golden Aureola) as entirely as I my self,
his love being unknown to me. For though he knew that I loved her, yet was I
not as yet acquainted with the love that he bore Aureola. And in truth, because
he knew she was the only air by which I lived, rather then he would do any
thing to procure my disquiet, resolved himself to die for love of Aureola,
rather then he should opportunate Aureola to love him, and to deprive me of
that without which I could not live. Insomuch that although he so loved her,
that for her he would willingly have yielded to death, and resigned his life,
yet he no way to offend me, did not only conceal his love from Aureola, but
also occasion being offered him to talk with her, did spend all that time in
commendation of me, protesting unto her, that I was so faithful, constant and
loyal, that if she would dain to reward my love with love, and if she did love
me, she would have cause to glory of her hap in fancying him, and placing her
love on him, who would prove the faithfullest Amant that was in Italy.

Besides this, he made diverse verses in praise of her, and together with sundry
brave and precious jewels presented them unto her, saying that I had sent them;
whereas in truth I knew not any thing of them. Insomuch that more by his
industry then mine own diligence (though I neglected no dutiful service
required in that case) at length I obtained the love of mine Aureola. For she
loved me so affectionately, that I might judge her love to be of as great force
as mine, though indeed it was of such nature, that it was divided between us
both, I mean my brother and me, for we being so like one to other that we
seemed to be but one, we could not shun reciprocation in love; but whosoever
loved me, could not but love him, and whosoever loved him, could not but love
me. And although I had certainly known that Aureola loved my brother equally
with me, as well as I did but guess that it was so, yet had I been nothing
sorry, but rather rejoiced greatly that I had obtained so fair a Lady to be
both my love, and my brothers friend. For in verity such was my affection
toward him, that I could not wish any thing to my self wholly, without wishing
part of it unto my brother, being most ready always willingly to part from any
thing which I knew he wished, and with a good heart to cease and leave from
desiring or wishing any such thing whatsoever he had a mind unto. But my
brother marking that Aureola could not tell which of us two she loved best, or
which of us was most worthy of her love, and thereby equally loved us both, was
very sorry, fearing least I might be grieved that I did not my self only enjoy
all the love of Aureola. And therefore he began to exhort me to seek means to
be joined unto her in marriage, thinking that so she should be forced to
withdraw her love from him, and wholly be addicted to me being her wedded
husband. To effect which matter, she continually urged Aureola to make promise
of marriage unto me very forcibly persuading her thereto; and telling her that
I who thought my life no life but in respect of hers, should never be able to
live perfectly until such time that I being united and tied unto her in the
knot of wedlock, might enjoy her as my wife: until which thing were brought to
pass, I should live a most lamentable life full of doleful discontent.

Furthermore he promised her, that if she would vouchsafe to condescend to my
honest desire, and his earnest request, he would move the King and Queen to
deal with her sister the Countess, and her other friends, about the
contracting this marriage, and obtain their good will and consent thereto.
Aureola. although she was very unwilling to do so, yet because he should not
think that she would not grant my request for that she equally loved him with
me, seemed to grant our request, and to be willing to have the marriage
contrived between her and my self. Yet she would not have any mention made of
it unto any of the Court till three months were ended, for certain respects
which moved her to conceal the matter so long. Which were none other (as
afterward we knew by experience) but such as proceeded from her own
unwillingness to be tied to me, and so to be deprived of the love of my
brother, For it afterward was manifested, she so loved us both that she wished
in her heart, that she might have been married to us both; thinking that she
should not perfectly have enjoyed one of us, if any other woman had been
married to the other* judging that we were both but one, and ought not to be
separated. And therefore above all things did she desire that she were beloved
of us both, seeing we were both engraved in her heart, that she might not think
of the one, without remembering the other.

But my brother thinking that Aureola had a bonnefoy purposed after the time of
three months expired, to marry with me, made me glad with the news which he
brought me of her mind, although himself therewith was utterly spoiled of his
felicity and welfare, which I came to know by this means.

It happened even upon the expiring of three months, on a certain morning
betime, that I rising something early, walked abroad in the fields without the
City, to a little wsod not far off, to recreate my self with a solitary walk,
being as it were wearied with the turbulent multitude of people, both Citizens
and Courtiers. Which wood, when I had but even entered, me thought I heard one
sorely lamenting his estate* and by the voice knowing that it was my brothers,
I listened very attentively to know the cause of his complaints, whom I heard
thus to cry out against fickle fortune.

Yea, Fortune, yea, Thou art Mistress, and wilt be Mistress, Philorenus must
testify the same, and register in the bottom of his heart, that he was born
to be crossed by Fortune I thought that the Gods had forbidden thee to vex me
any more, but I perceive thou will do what thou will, though heaven deny. But
accursed may thou be of heaven, earth and hell, for so denying mortal
wights, that thou seem to have no Deity, but such as is procured by the
glory which thou take in making men miserable. Yet why do I so blame Fortune,
seeing that if another man were in my case, he would think himself infinitely
beholding to her, in causing all things to fall out so agreeing to his humor.
For thou love Aureola, how much thou know; then seeing thou have had
sufficient token of her love toward thee, and considering that he that loves
desires nothing so much as mutualsy to be loved of her whom he does love. how
can thou complain of Fortune?

Again, when your mind was such that you wished her to be wholly your brothers,
and desired that she should be his wife, you see al things happen to your
pleasure, considering that Aureola has promised to marry her self to him, and
yet you will will exclaim against Fortune: all this is true. But the Hag does
let all things fall out according to my mind, knowing that in doing so she does
most torment me. For she has made my life so miserable, that no content can be
harbored in my disquiet breast, being the very habitacle of restless thoughts.

And in this thing is ye means which she uses in vexing me contrary to all
other mishaps and evils, in that she vexes me with effecting those things the
effect of which I most wish for and desire. Which thing how strange it is I
leave to the consideration of those that have the use of their wits* seeing by
fortunes envy I am my self deprived of that benefit. Alack, what shall then
poor Philorenus do, seeing he is so entangled in the love of Aureola that he
must either die or enjoy her as his own? and yet so loves his brother (who
cannot in like manner live if separated from the same Aureola) that he will die
a thousand deaths rather then be disloyal to him. Die therefore Philorenus,
die; and seeing there ore not as well two Aureolas as there be two Philorenus's,
make thy self lifeless and thy brother happy, he being one Philorenus alone,
and enjoying one only Aureola, And put case thou were dead, Philorenus, and
dead for no other purpose but to make thy brother happy in the highest degree,
oh how sweet a death would such a death be unto thee! But yet thou might be
deceived; for thou know, nay so know that thou can not doubt, but that,
that life will be but a bitter life unto him, thou being without life, and so
thou might by thy death procure to him either a bitter death, or a life worse
then any death. What then rests thrice miserable wretch, if that thou can
neither live to thy mind, nor die to thy mind? Die living and live dying, and
yield thy heart to receive each print of grief; that thou may always die,
being torn with tormenting pain, and yet never be dead, least thy plague
rebound from thee to thy brother: and therefore I bid thee farewell Aureola,
farewell, my brother must enjoy thee, and I must suffer you both.

After that he had so shut up his complaint, as if he had signed it with the
seal of death, he fell down on the ground, being unable to stand on his feet
any longer, and there he lay struggling as if soul and body would have parted,
so strong and vehement was the pang that pinched him. Insomuch, that although I
was loath to show my self unto him there, lest he should know that I had heard
and seen him, yet compassion becoming master amongst my affections, for that
he needed help in that case, forced me to run happily to him to aid him. But
he no sooner espied me but leaped up again so suddenly that if I had not both
seen and heard his former scrikes and cries, I would have surely been persuaded
that he did but show me a tumbling trick, and that he had been exercising his
body to some acts of nimblenesse.

And besides also, before I could salute him by reason that I so marvelled at
the strangeness of his change, he spoke unto me so cheerfully that I could
scarce answer him for admiring at ye force which his love toward me had
suddenly procured him. His legs were scarce able to hold his body, and seeing
me his heart commanded them to support him, his eyes which were so hidden with
the tears which he shed, that no man could have seen them, as soon as they
beheld me, seemed to have recalled the floods that came out of them and to have
in a moment swallowed them up, and his face which did as it were swim in tears,
seemed to drink up the moisture at my coming, as the morning dew vanishes in
the presence of Phoebus, when he sends his golden beams from his fiery
chariot, to cherish the pleasant fruits of the earth after they have wept, by
reason of the dark coldness of the mirthlesse night. Wherefore I seeing that
my brotherly brother was so loath to make me acquainted with his passions, only
because he would not give me occasion of grief, but kept it all to himself; I
dissembled as much as I could, lest I should by letting him know what I knew,
quite discomfort him, and truly make him comfortless. And although by reason
of that which I knew of him, pity caused such grief in me for his discomfort
and passionate torment, that I think if he had not been in place, I had sunk to
the ground, for a stronger foundation to hold up my distracted body, oppressed
and weighed down by the heaviness of passing sorrow, then my legs, which
seemed to shake like the pillors of a Church that is falling, yet nevertheless
for that time, I plucked up my spirits, and though not so well able as he, yet
as well as I could, I dissembled my passion, and answered him as cheerfully as
possibly I might, entertaining him with such talk as I thought most expedient,
to cause him not to misdoubt of any thing. Insomuch that he neither thought
that I had heard him, nor knew that I felt the pain which he himself suffered.
And after we had there walked an half hour or thereabout, we returned both of
us together to the Court. And as we passed by the Countess Verina's Garden, he
espied the Countess walking all alone, whereupon he began to urge me, in any
case not to let that occasion slip, but that I should go unto her, and make her
acquainted with the love and affection between me and her sister Aureola, and
that he would go with me to bear me company, and to persuade the Countess to
consent to the contracting of a marriage between me and Aureola. He said
furthermore, considering the three months which Aureola appointed to have the
matter during that time concealed, were expired, he had the day before spoken
with the King concerning this matter, and that his Majesty had promised him to
be wholly ours in this point, as he had ever before been in many other; and
besides told him some things which he should make relation of to the Countess,
concerning this match. And to tell the truth, he grew so importunate to have me
go to the Countess in all have, that I knew not how to shift off this
readiness. But because I had purposed to bring that to pass which I will by
and by show unto you. I found this excuse to delay our conference with the
Countess; that mistress Aureola for certain causes had urged me to promise
her, that I would not speak unto her sister concerning any thing touching her,
before I forewarned her, or let her know both that I would do it, and the time
when I would do it. Which promise (quoth I) being passed, I may not break it.

Whereupon he well contented, seemed to take my excuse so well, that he rather
liked of my unwillingnesse to go to the Countess, then persevered to persuade
me thereunto. So that we went both to my lodging, where we began to read
certain chronicles of the ancient estate of Italy; things done in times past in
the Kingdom of Naples, to drive away the rest of the time till dinner were
ready, that we might have some ancient history or other to delight the King and
the Queen withal while they dined. For they took such delight in hearing their
predecessors deeds and sayings, that we could not have done them a greater
pleasure then to rehearse either some pretty saying, or some other worthy act
of such Kings or Queens as had before them swayed the scepter of Naples. But
not to be that which I am loath to be, I mean tedious unto you (noble Princes
and shepherds,) I will hasten to that which I even now promised to let you
know, concerning that which I had certainly of rips counsel in my heart
concluded to do, after I knew by my brothers passions that he himself loved
Aureola, and yet continually furthered my desire to his uttermost part.

For indeed I was fully resolved to leave Aureola unto him and my self to the
hazard of fortune, and being so resolved, I performed no less.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Philorenus the elder, secretly left the Court of Naples; and
how his brother and Aureola went to seek him severally.
THe next morning I departed very secretly from the Court, for Cinqueni,
thinking to inquire whether I might hear any thing of my father, and to be
certainly informed whether he were slain among the other unhappy inhabitants,
or by hap fled, and so avoided the furious slaughter which many suffered. But
before I departed, on the cover-lid of a looking-glass that was in my brothers
chamber window, I wrote him this farewell, I Philo * to * Renus.
THou which to deck, by workman formed art,
Serve to unfold the cause which made me go:
And without leave, my brother leave and part,
From Court, wherein my only joy does grow.
Love bad me to enjoy my love and stay,
And love commanded me to go away.
Self-love would have me stay and means procure,
Loading my self with grief my self to ease:
considering therefore well the matter sure.
Self-love does bid me go my self to please.
For who else is my brother, but my self?
And tendering him, right tender I my self.
Then know my self the cause which made me part,
Was love which warned me from love to cease:
For of two loves my heart felt double smart,
One love gave place that the other might increase.
Enjoy thine Aureola, for I am gone,
And therefore gone, that she should be thine own.


After my brother had missed me, marvelling where I should be so long, he went
to his chamber to drive away the time, and to deceive the tedious hours with
some kind of reading exercise, thinking that I had been somewhere abroad in the
fields in my solitary haunt, and that I would ere long return to the Court. And
leaning on his window, he chanced to spy something written on the cover-lid of
his looking glass, which he might ealsiy do, by reason that I had written with
red ink the lid being of white ivory. And so taking it in his hand, he read the
verses which I had left there, to yield a reason for my sudden departure. But
he being ravished into admiration, and by admiration led into astonishment,
fell in an ecstasy. Which ecstasy, he being by himself alone, and therefore
deprived of help, in such a case required had almost brought him to his last
home. Yet after he had a long time lain in a trance, he came at last to himself
again and then began to curse and rail at fortune, for dealing so partially
with him in revealing that unto me, the revealing of which only could make him
miserable. Insomuch that now he knew that which before he not once mistrusted,
to wit* that I the other morning had in the wood heard him lament his ill
fortune, whereby I knew that which I also never dreamed of, concerning his
loving of Aureola. But so grievously did he take my absence, that all his body
received the disposition that is caused by a disquiet soul; and his face became
the very subject of sorrow, his countenance being mournful and his eyes being
grown to be the very seats of tears. Insomuch that whereas no man as yet could
suspect or dream that I should be so gone as I was, yet seeing him so woefully
fashioned, straightways judged that he could not be so altered but upon such a
cause: and whereas they should have known that he was so distempered by reason
of my so being gone, they contrarily knew of my being gone by reason that he
was so distempered. To be short he was so tortured by the Butchers of Greece,
that he was almost deprived of his wits and the use of his understanding: and
the rather, because he was brought in doubtful resolution* whether he should
leave Aureola and follow me, or leave me and comfort Aureola; lest ranging
after me through unknown places, he should both lose me and himself also. He
therefore being drawn now to this conclusion, now to that, hung in the air
hovering between heaven and earth not knowing whether he were best by slight
reach to the one, or by falling come to the other. So that his mind being thus
suspended, he perpended the reasons for both parts, which were most forcible to
persuade him to the one or the other; yet in such order, that neglecting fully
his own case, as one altogether careless of his own welfare, he referred all
matters to the effecting of that which seemed most expedient and necessary to
make me happy, and to work my felicity. Insomuch, that he began to consider,
that if chance he should have left Aureola, and commit himself to the
laboursome seeking and uncertain finding of me, the loving Gentlewoman might
have taken the absence of us both so heavily, that she might have thereby
fallen into some desperate sickness* and perchance remediless. Well (quoth he)
put the case should die, were it not better that she should die, then that I
should suffer my brother to live in despair, to run round about the world, to
carry hell with him wheresoever he goes, having his affections like furies and
fiends, teaxing and rending his brotherlike heart, to irrisate the barren
ground with millions of tears, to disturb the guiltless air with lamentable
shrieks and cries* accompanied with sighs and sobs, and in a word to be always
dying, and yet never die? Death is the lock that shuts up misery, and ends
all calamity and trouble, If Aureola then die, O happy she! but unhappy I! Nay
my sweet brother, thrice unhappy thou, For no doubt if Aureola should die, the
pain which thou would sustain, the grief which would molest thy soul, and
the torment which would ravish thee in the very gulf of all vexation, would so
far in extremity pass the anguish wherein thou now do pine, that it would be
greater then the pain which causes the soul to depart from the body, Why then
I will rather remain by Aureola, and so both save her life, thine and mine own,
though scarce mine own, seeing that I shall scarce be able to live, he being
absent. And what will he think, nay what will all the world say, but that I
(forsooth) for love of my brother, entertain his love and that I so love him,
that to show my love toward him, I must needs love his Lady, and so defraud
him of that wherein his chiefest felicity consists; the jewel of his heart,
the treasure of his desires, the object of his delight, the subject of his
conceits, the hold of his hope, and the only and chief pillar of his life, and
cause of his being, sweet Aureola, worthy to be all this unto him, he deserving
to be as much unto her, none of them both owing less one to the other.

As he was thus quite turning from that mind to the other, and resolving to
leave all to follow me, the beams of Aureolaes beauty reverberating the window
wherein he lay musing what he might best do, warned him, that that Sun was in
the garden, whose light was able to strive with the Rays of Phoebus for force,
seeing that his beams may well shine upon men, not in them; whereas ye bright
lines that glister from the golden forehead of Aureola, did penetrate men's
bodies, and shine, not upon them only, but also within them and through them.

He therefore espying Aureola walking in the garden alone* wept that he saw not
me with her* saying, O sacred powers of heaven, seeing that your Deities have
been divinely worshipped by me since my Cradle, why hate ye poor Philorenus
your Servant so, that the sight which ought to be unto his eyes as gold to the
covetous man, is unto him as poison to them that wish to live long? Not for
that I take any disgrace by the gracious presence of Aureola, but that my joy
is eclipsed, when I behold her without him by her, who seemed born to be
inseparably joined with her as white unto snow cold to ice and to use a more
familiar comparison, as beauty to Aureola. Having so said, as carried away with
a sudden strong gale of wind he hasted to the garden, and having passed the
courtesies used in salutation and greeting, being asked for me (for she knew
him by reason of a secret token which we had given to her only to discern him
from me, and me from him) he up and told her all the matter concerning my
sudden departure, yet so coloring the cause thereof, that she thought that I
was gone, because I despaired that she should love him better then me. For he
thought, that so she might be moved to pity, and by pity to sharpen her
affection, which should have increased her love toward me. Whereas if he had
let her know the true cause of my absence, that I was gone to leave her to be
his, she might have been moved to disdain me, which disdain should have
nourished the fire which was kindled in his breast by the affection which she
bore him, and so might she have allured him to to leave me in my pilgrimage,
and enjoy her, to displease whom he did count it a sacrilege.

But she construing of the matter as my most careful brother and his
brotherlike carefulness informed and being subject to that custom which by
nature is an unseparable companion to the desires of all women, I mean to wish
and covet that which seems most impossible, and to long for such things as
cannot be gotten, or very hardly had: now she heard that I was gone no man knew
where, whereas before her love inclined rather to my brother then to me, she
was so ravished with desire to be with me, that she presently concluded to her
self in heart, to take the pains to seek me: and although she did conceal the
same unto him, and dissembled the passion which she felt by reason of my
absence, by words whilst he was by her; yet by deed she sufficiently
afterward showed it unto all the world.

For after she was separated from him by the hastiness of her resolution to
execute that which she had purposed, she went to her chamber, where after she
had made her handkerchief drunk with sipping up and drinking in the tears which
abundantly issued from out her eyes* most fertilly yielding fruit of the seeds
of sorrow sown in them; and having astonished the stones and walls with the
admirable shrieks, and moved the lifeless pictures that hung in her chamber to
pity, she impoverished her rich apparel by laying it off, and enriched her
sisters Cooks wives poor clothes, putting them on her ivory body, and so making
provision of nothing but a knife to conquer Fortunes envy, if chance she would
go about to make her miserable in the highest degree, by prolonging her life,
when as she could not live but discontented, she committed her self to her
journey, and her journey to the Gods, calling upon their Deities to be directed
in her way.

O ye sacred powers (called she) that in heaven take care of us poor mortals,
who wholly depend upon your favor or disfavor, if ever my vows have been
acceptable unto you, and my offerings pleasing, let me now have you tender my
case, and pity my estate.

For if I have not of wicked wantonness or idle lusts framed self a fit subject
for love, and made my mind a Tennis-court for the balls of fancy to be tossed
to and fro in it, but rather have been conquered by the force of not to be
resisted love; then allow me to love and maintain my love in spite of Fortune.
Let your imperial power command the winds by their blasts to guide my steps,
and by my steps to bring my body to the blessed place that is made happy by the
excellent burden of my virtuous Philorenus. O thou lofty coachman of the
stately sky, in whose heavenly body are great hidden Deities, let thy
cherishing beams exhilerate no place but that which serves to support the
weight of my woeful and heavy Philorenus, therefore heavy because mine: that
so thy corruscant Rays falling down as a Golden shower of Rain over him, may be
as a token and a mark whereby I may direct the course of my voyage. Lastly, O
ye Stars, whose twinkling pride does bewray the stateliness of the Grand-Court
and High Palace made by nature, and challenged by the sovereign Gods, to be
the habitacle and lodging for their Deities, help poor Aureola, help distressed
her; and when Phoebus has stabled his fiery horses all weary with daily toil,
and put on you the charge of guarding and watching the sacred seals of heavenly
powers, then take Crystal wings to your fiery body, and fly through the air
unto my souls Philorenus, that as he shall understand by your coming, Aureola,
even poor she is hasting toward him, so I, wretched I, (nay most happy I, if
ever so fortunate as once again to behold him the paragon of virtue, and sole
object of my conceits) following the light which environeth your bodies, may be
brought unto him, even him, whose sweet self only is worthy to be sought for
of Aureola. Finally, chaste and fair Diana, thou that know the purity of my
thoughts and art acquainted with the furious assaults wherewith Cupid has
battered the bulwark of my chaste mind, and shaken the fort of my constant
purpose to inviolable chastity; yet, O mighty Goddess, seeing that I have not
filthily or dishonestly nourished fancy with shameful hope of lust, but am
rather overcome by such unresistable love, that if it had been attempted
against some Goddess, she had been forced to yield; I beseech thee to march
before me in your secret night walks, that being comforted by thy divine
presence, I be not affrighted by the ugly grimness of the dark night, and so
diswaded, or rather discouraged to pass through woods and dales after my
Philorenus. O sweet Philorenus, O beautiful Philorenus, O virtuous Philorenus!
What wood is made so happy by thy mishap, as to shroud thy face so fair from
scorching Apollo? What green is made so fortunate by thy misfortune, as to
become the bed whereon thou do rest thy wearied body? What lake is grown to
be so blessed by thy curse* as to refresh thy tender stomach, falling down thy
Alabaster throat into thy Marble belly? Blessed be that wood, that green and
that lake which serves for his scarff, his bed, and his drink; seeing that
Nature has wished, Fortune procured, and the Gods granted them that honorable
favor.

Thus Aureola invoking the Gods, and calling upon heaven, betook her self to
her uncertain journey. She wist not which way to go, nor whither to go, but
went being guided with love and accompanied with hope. In the mean time my
brother having been informed that she was secretly departed the Court, stayed
not to hear what rumors were spread abroad in the Court of her going, but lest
he might be accused of negligence and carelessness of the welfare of so good a
brother, incontinently went from Naples, but so that he took his leave of the
King and Queen, promising to return, his brother being found, unto them again;
having acquainted them with the true cause of my so leaving the Court without
even any of their Majesty's knowledge.

Thus you see (Noble Princes and shepherds) how those whom Nature seemed to
have made to live together and be as one, were now by fortune separated so far
asunder, that there was little (I will not say hope, for every one of us were
pricked forward with the spur of hope, being warmed with desire, but)
likelihood in reason that ever we should see one another again.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How Aureola came to see the shepherds Pastoral Solemnities,
hoping to find Philorenus there.
NOw Aureola understanding by a shepherd, that about four days journey from
Cinqueni, there was a most solemn feast to be celebrated by the shepherds of
that whole Country, to the honor of their God Pan. within three or four days
after that she heard of it; wherefore she knowing that I very greatly delighted
to be at those Pastoral Solemnities, and considering that the report of the
same feast was so famous, and the rumors thereof spread so general, hoped that
it might be her good luck to find me there, supposing that I being warned of
the feast to be kept, by the rumor and talk of the shepherds, and being led by
the delight which I take in such pastimes, would have come thither to recreate
my sorrowful and distressed mind, with the pleasant sport of the shepherds
that celebrated the feast of their God. But she was frustrated of that hope,
for coming there she could not hear any thing of me. She arrived there just
upon the principal feast day in the morning, where the shepherds and
shepheardesses being in number many, gathered there by reason of these
solemnities, first went all of them into a temple dedicated to Pan, where after
they had mumbled I know not what kind of rural service for their pastoral God,
they came all out again* and fell a dancing and singing; until such time that
Phoebus being raised to the full height of his course, hanging right over their
heads, they were warned by the messengers that he sent from his burning
chariot, that they should shun the heat of his fiery beams, and under the roof
of their barns shroud themselves from his scorching rays. There they fell to
their meat, and plied Bacchus and Ceres so well, that in Aureola's opinion they
might have held a second feast the next day for their honor. After they had
sufficiently recreated or refreshed themselves with all manner of delicates
used in the country, they hied to the temple again, where passing the time as
they had done in the morning, some kind of afternoon ceremonies added, at
length toward evening they returned to their dancing again. Where, in a fair
green being walled in, with most stately Cedars, yielding a more then pleasant
shadow up reason that the Sun did cast his beams liberally against the sides oi
these trees, hasting to his Western Court, they met all together. The grass,
was thick under foot, thick and short, as green as greenness it self, and so
bestrewed with all kinds and colors of small flowers, that it seemed rather a
footcloath laid there for the Gods to pass over it with their divine feet,
then a pavement for homely shepherds to track up and down in. Now over head
were diverse long chains, made of no other thing but flowers, so cunningly
twisted and woven together, that the sight of them passed the gallant Ivory in
show, and seemed rather to be ropes of Rubies, Pearls, and Diamonds, and all
other kind of Iems and precious Lapidaries, then lines knit of flowers. These
chains were cross wise laid, one overthwarting the other, being many of them
in number, and diverse in making, and were fastened to the upper branches of the
tall Cedars that grew about the same Paradise.

In the midst and very center of these lines and chains, hung by three brave
chains wrought after the same manner, a most gallant garland with a fair laurel
bush hanging by one line under it, so artificially knit and twisted that both
the garland and the bush with the lines by which they were fastened, seemed to
be wrought by the fine fingers of Diana, and either cast down from heaven unto
them, or brought thither by the nymphs of that Country, who had so beautified
that place for the shepherds to solemnize their feast day according to the
worthiness and excellency thereof. The garland was to be taken off by him of
the enamoured shepherds that could say best for his love, and by him to be
given unto her: and the laurel branch was to be taken down by her of the loving
shepheardesses that bore away the praise of best dancing, and by her to be
presented unto her sweetheart. Insomuch that Aureola desirous to see the
proceedings of the country youths in their shepheard-like pastimes, was a
spectator amongst them, though longer then the desire she had to see me, could
patiently allow her, yet till she saw both their dancing and their singing
ended. There were about a dozen or half a score of the most choice and select
shepheardesses of all that country and part of Italy, being daughters to the
richest farmers thereabout, which maids being all heavenly beauty and
contending fairness, each purchasing praise even with silence, among them
danced for the laurel bush. Which sight but to Aureola, yea and to Aureola,
save when she seeks Philorenus* (said she when she rehearsed the sum of her
adventures) could not but have been so delightful and pleasant, that it would
have made them forget themselves, much more their grief or sorrow. Besides, she
remembered that the maid that won the laurel was called Benedetta, daughter to
the old shepherd Rosseo, farmer to her sister the Countess Verina, and she
gave it to a young shepherd named Pardo, son to a rich and wealth? farmer of
great credit, whose name Aureola knew not.

CHAP. XXXV. The Verses of the shepherds, sung by them for the Garland, at
their Pastoral solemnity, and how Otto obtained it.
THis being done, all the maids, they as well that had been spectators as
actors in the dance, sat down on the green, al orderly ranked, Benedetta as
the Queen, placed in the midst of the row, and beheld the action of the young
shepherds, who being far more in number that contended for the garland, then
there had maids done for the laurel, yet Aureola having her mind something too
much busied with the cumbersome remembrance of me, could not so carry away all
their names and verses, but that she forgot the greater part of them. But those
which she remembered she imparted unto me, as I am ready to do unto this worthy
company, seeing I have the papers yet in my pocket. The first shepherd that
should have sung, was called Argalo, being a brave young youth, whose face
seemed to be made by nature, to tell women's eyes that they should persuade
their hearts that he was fair, and whose proportion was such as could not but
delight. If any fault was in him to Aureola's judgment, it was that he
sustained too stately a gate for one of his vocation, being an husband-mans or
farmers son; for modest and low behavior becomes men of low birth; yet she
told me, that his proud erecting of his head and settling of his shoulders, his
feet withal, marching as if he had lead a troop of footmen to muster, did (to
her mind) as harbingers deliver their messages, that the inward loftiness of
his mind was far greater then in shepherds is usual. These were his verses
which he not sung, but with a more then pastoral grace uttered.

Argale.
A Pipe no worse then Pans sung Fieras praise,
loves thundering style averred she was fair,
As Venus well agreed with lovely phrase,
And high Diana bravely did declare.
Fair Fioras name is written in the sky,
And there eternized shall never die.
The second youth that was ready to say something for the winning of the
garland, was called Porcio, and though he was not fair skinned as the former,
yet in Aureola's eye deserved as much commendation for comeliness as he,
yielding a most gracious sight to their eyes that beheld the making of his face.
These were his verses which he sung to a Citharen, used among the shepherds of
that country. And it seemed by the strangeness of the tune, that not only
that which he sung, but also that which he played was of his composing, having
made both the matter and the music. By which means he was thought to be
something well skilled in playing on his instrument. But O his voice! (said
Aureola) it was either like to Orpheus sweet note, or it was Orpheus voice it
self, being through many bodies, at length come within Porcio, according as the
Pythogoreans hold opinion of men's souls, that after they issue out of their
corruptible habitacles, they enter newly into some other to maintain their
eternity.

Porcio.
Jove rained, his showrs were gold, but yet in vain,
Covetuous was Danae, but Bina not,
For though whole worlds fell down of golden rain,
Yet Bina chaste, disdain would Danaes lot.
If Gods could virtue hate, vice to embrace,
Vice she would shun, incur though their disgrace.
After this Porcio, were some shepherds that sung to the sound of a Harp, some
the sound of a Viol, some to the sound of their corn-muse, whose virtues for
that they were more passionate then passing, and seemed rather to be harbingers
of love then of wit, being more pitiful then pithy, she heard them in like
manner with a mind mollified with commiseration, unwilling to trouble her
memory with the remembrance of the^. But at length she spied a little short
dapperdy, busling to come among the rest with a paper in his hand, wherein his
verses were written in such manner, that a man might have read them as fast on
the backside of the paper, as he on the inside. But whether he had his paper,
to assist his weak memory, or to show his cunning that he could both write and
read, Aureola knew not. His name was Polemon, and his verses were these: which
he did not sing, but thwacked them out (looking in his paper) as if he would
have dared Radamanthus that appoints the shadows their penance in hell from
his infernal chair.

Palemon.
EVen beauty it self is Palla, not beautiful, or fair,
If beauty any have, of her that all they do borrow,
Not white, but whiteness: sweetness and comeliness it self,
Not sweet, not comely: as yielding that to all othess
Of which they boast. It Is Pallaes list she to claim it,
Next Polemon, came an old shepherd though never married, who thinking that he
had offended Cupid to let his young and strong years slide and slip away,
without doing him service, purposed to make amends by pining for love in his
old days, for such a face had the follow, and a body well befitting such a
face, that he might well love, but never be loved, unless Cupid would be
revenged of some Vesta minded maid for neglecting and dispising his Deity, and
so make her dance in the net of folly with this old lovelesse face, both of
them crying Peccavi and penas domus. His name was Schalco, and as Aureola was
informed by the shepheardesses of the country, he most importunately made love
to the fair shepherdess Ura, daughter to one of the King of Naples farmers.
Which maid so did hate him, that although he was most wealthy, having store and
abundance of all manner of country riches, yet she thought her self discredited
in that she was loved of him. These were his verses.

Schalco,
AS I my sheep by Phoebus fall went homeward for to drive.
He promised a gift full gay, ere long he would me give.
One of his golden beams shot from his chariot of fire,
Which I to Vra will present to be her winter fire.
Oh Phoebus cross thy beams with silver lines, even latherwise,
That I with Vra might mount up, and dwell with her in skies.
Next to old Schalco young Dorus, a pretty stripling to be chamberlain to
Cupid, made haste to tell his tale, For as he was rival to Schalco, so he would
not omit to say something that might please Ura. And therefore hoping by
deriding of Schalco (whom he knew Ura could not abide) he thought to gain her
favor. These were his verses.

Dorus.
IN skies old Schalco would with Vra dwell,
And ride with her in Phoebus golden coach*
Where when on him she thinks death does incroach:
And rather then with him would dwell in hell.
Give her a winter sire, thou shall do well,
But see thou burn thy bones by that same fire,
So will she love thee, which since you desire:
Seeing not in skies, procure the same in hell.
One more beside this did Aureola mark, whom she therefore marked, because she
judged him worthy to be marked. He was called Otto, (and as she had heard)
son to a Duke in France, and passing through Italy to see the country saw the
fair shepherdess called Laurea, of whose beauty and graces, fame had been
very prodigal; and he having seen her with liking, liked her with love, and
loved her with constancy. In so much that to become hers, he ceased to be his
own: and leaving parents, land, honor, and living, became a shepherd to win
the love of Laurea, who once had told him that she might fancy no higher then a
shepherd. But oh heavenly Laurea, (quoth Aureola) thy modesty was too great to
be of base birth, thy humbleness too gracious to be of low parents. No, no,
nature has not wronged thy virtuous beauty, and beauty made more beautiful by
virtue, but fortune has envied at thy perfection. Thou were found in the wood
by old Panteo, who possesses thee as his daughter, and whom thou for thy
bringing up do reverence as thy father; why might not as well hard-hearted
Kings as poor beggars have left thee there swadled in base and poor clothes?
Insomuch that Aureola was fully persuaded that Laurea, was some noble born
maid, though by fortunes hard intreatment she was not known what she was.
Neither did Aureola guess amiss; for afterward it was well known that this
Laurea was sister to the Dukes son that loved her. It fell out after this
manner.

There was great war between the King of Gaul, and the Emperor of Greece. The
King sent a mighty army into Italy, to be revenged of the Italians that had
assisted the Emperor with men and money. Among many other Noblemen that were
in the Kings army, was Duke Otto this new become shepherds father, with the
Duchess his wife, and young Otto his only son, being of two years old, having
no more children then him. It chanced that the Kings army was overthrown* and
the Duke and all his retinue taken prisoners, saving the Duchess who was fled
unto a certain wood being all alone, where, after she had been one month
nourished by a poor old woman that lived a solitary life in that wood, she was
delivered of Laurea, whom she named Sylva, after the place where she was born.
Within a week after the Duchess had been brought a bed, died their good old
hostess, to her great discomfort. But then she takes her child and thinking to
march toward some village, she went from the cave about six miles, where she
espied the village where Laurea was brought up. And pondering with her self how
she might pass unknown* for that all the inhabitants of those countries were
enemies to the King of Gaul, she laid her child down by a broom bush because
she might go the lighter, meaning to go back to the cave and put on the dead
woman's clothes and so to return again presently. But before she could reach to
the Cave, she was met withal by a certain Italian Knight, who liked her so,
that he secretly conveyed her to his house, notwithstanding that she most
earnestly entreated her to let her first go fetch her young babe, which she had
left but three or four miles off. For he mistrusted that she had but invented
that excuse to delay the time, and fearing lest some other company might pass
that way before she found the child, among his men carried her to his house.
The same evening Phoebus having enclosed his heat within his western tower, the
old shepherd Panteo, according to custom, hied to the wood to fetch wood to
warm his old limbs the next winter, with the fire he hoped to make of it; and
so he found young Sylva by him called Laurea. The Knight being importuned by
the Duchess, sent his men to the wood to seek fyr her child, but they could not
find it, and therefore could hardly believe but either she lied, or some body
else had taken it up. The Duchess was daily solicited by this Knight to yield
her body to his pleasure, but she would not: he kept her close prisoner 8
years, wc being expired the Knight being beheaded by the command of the
Nobility of Italy, by reason of some trespass by him committed, and some kind
of treason by him put in practice against the state of the country) she got
away, and came to France, where she found her husband the Duke Otto, but not
her son, the young Otto, who was sent by his father into Italy to study at
Padua, to learn the Italian language, and after three or four years space that
he had been in Italy, he came acquainted with this Shepheardess Laurea, toward
whom he so hotly pursued his suit, that at length she condiscended to be his
wife, Whereof he as glad as if he had gotten a Kingdom, speedily made a
journey toward France, intending either to get his fathers good will to marry
her, and fetch her home to his Country, or to provide as much money and jewels
as he could get, and bid France and friends adieu, for that friend. But when he
came home, and found his mother there, whom he thought to have been dead many
years since, and heard her talk of her adventures, and many other things, how
she had had a daughter, and he a sister, and might yet have had, had not
Fortune too hardly dealt with her, even as soon as she was born, considering
the circumstances of time and place, with other points concerning the matter,
he found Laurea to be his own natural sister; Whereof he was glad for her sake,
that she was not of base lineage, but sorry was he (I promise you) for his own
part, that he might not enjoy that beauty which he so loved. But howsoever he
took the matter, he rested not till he had by his fathers help and counsel,
brought her home to her parents to the extreme joy of them all, and all their
friends. Thus (noble Princes and shepherds) have you heard the history of
Laurea, briefly and verily reported, according as I have been informed since I
came to the Lady Felicias Court. But because I will not forget to set down
Ottos verses (by reason of which I made this digression in rehearsing his
history) which he sung to the sound of a Lute being in shepherds attire; for
indeed he had a flock of sheep in the next village, for the cause which I have
above declared.

Otto.
Jove did mislike his stately Iunos pride,
Her Majesty to Laurea therefore gave,
Our lovely Venus did unchaste abide,
Whose beauty therefore Laurea must have.
Minerva had offended too I guess,
For Laurea does her learned wit possess.
Yet was there one more whom I had almost forgotten, the shepherd Pardo, unto
whom Benedetta had given the Laurel bush; for he hoped to get the garland,
that he might have requited her curtesse, but it fell out otherwise then he
expected, as I will afterward tell you. These were his verses, which he sung
with a most sweet voice passing by many degrees the common manner of shepherds
singing.

G. Pardo
THe Maid whose face is full of lovely grace,
Whose body without fault deserves praise:
Whose speech most graceful, fit for such a face,
Whose birth her inward virtues all bewraies.
Is Benedetta called, a blessed name,
Which far and wide is spread by flying Fame.
When Pardo had done, then was the garland to be given to him that had done
best following the judgment of ye maids that were present, by whose voices it
was to be given. And indeed though Pardo came near it, by reason that the Queen
who had won the Laurel, had four and twenty voices to give, by reason of her
dignity that day, which voices she gave all unto him for affections sake, (save
one which she gave to Otto, because she would give some token of her mind, that
she thought he deserved it, though none but Otto should have gotten any away
from her loving Pardo) yet by reason that Otto had all their voices that
contended in the dance for the Laurel with Benedetta, they having each of them
half as many voices to give as Benedetta, because they had danced with her,
where the others had but each of them their single voices, which also the most
of them gave to Otto, few to Pardo. and some to Argale, who began the game; it
was Otto's chance that day to win the garland, which he had no sooner looked
upon, but he wished it on his Mistress head and could no sooner wish it, but
she being by, he performed the same, but with such a grace, that all the
shepherds and shepheardesses, whereas they were wont to envy at their King,
yet then by force of his virtue were constrained to love him, and glory that
they had so worthy a King to honor their solemnities; the end whereof Aureola
would not stay, seeing she had missed of that wished encounter which she hoped
for.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Aureola in her journey came to Yervedra; how she was
overtaken there by Philorenus the younger, taking him to be his brother
Philorenus.
BEfore Phoebus had bidden the earth farewell with his weaks countenance until
the next morning. Aureola purposed to reach to a certain village, where she had
thought to rest that night, and at the early appearance of Aurora she intended
to hasten on her journey. But she being in those quarters, and ill acquainted
with those ways, as not over-cunning in finding or going any way, happened to
come to a fair path, which flanked the village on the right side; the finenesse
of which way so liked her (as commonly all things that yield but even a taste of
pleasantness, or show of beauty, present great pleasure and liking unto those
that love) that she could not choose but go that way; which led her quite past
the village six or seven miles before she thought of the village, till being
even benighted, she began to wonder that she had not reached to the place she
hasted to, having so long traveled without staying or resting either body or
mind. For indeed as she went her feet carried her mind so fast over a great
deal of ground in a little space, that it forgot how to direct their pace to
bring the Coach (her precious body) wherein it did ride, to the place where she
had purposed to rest.

But now the knowledge of the place where she was being taken from her by
reason of the darkness, which was a sorrowful messenger (she being there alone
without any company save mine in her mind) that Phoebus had with the obscure
curtain of the night closed himself in his bed, wist not what to do; but
protecting her body under a large branched tree, from the rain which then fell
from the skies, even as tears, witnessing heavens sorrow for her mishap; she
laid her tender body down upon the hard earth, which seemed to shake as panting
for gladness of the sweet new burden it did bear.

There she thought to repose her wearied body and grieved mind, hoping by sleep
(the causer of forgetfulness) to make truce with her sorrowful remembrance
for a time. But her restless thoughts so waked in her, that however her body
was at rest, in mind she traveled still on her quest after me. The night being
past, and the morning aproaching, she rose from her bed (soft in no respect,
but that soft she had lain there,) and on she went although she knew not
whither, yet whither her feet (led with no certainer guide, then Love and
Fortune) did carry her. And having coursed through Italy without hearing any
thing of me, she visited the coasts of Spain; for she knew that I was born in
those quarters, and so began to think, that I might be taken with a desire to
take a view of my Country (which she resolved to go to, because it was my
Country,) deploring nothing so much, as that she had not the luck to see it,
but with seeking but in it, and yet would she have counted that seeking but a
pleasure if she might have found me, the end of her dessrous.

But no, she sought and so sought that she left no place in the Kingdom of
Aragon, which she had not seen or rather which had not seen her, and she could
not hear so much of me, as whether ever I had been seen or heard of in that
country before, being the place of my birth: the reason was* that I lived in
exile with my father as soon as my feet had learned that they had no need of a
bearer. But to be short at length after many a troublesome journey, she came to
the village where I was born, called Yervedra, where lodging one night in an
old Farmers house, after she had made some enquity after me, she learned that I
was born in the same village: for that old Farmer remembered my name very well,
though I think few others could have kept it in memory; but if she had known my
fathers name, she had by inquiring for him sooner have come to Yervedra. Yet
what was she the better? for when she knew that that was the place of my birth
and that she could not hear any thing of me there, then began her hope to fail,
and to yield to despair, insomuch that weary not so much of going any longer as
living any longer she wished either that she might find me or death. Yet
thanking the old man as heartily and courteously as a civil guest may an old
and friendly host away she got from Yervedra thinking to go into Castile, and
so to see the beautifulness of that Kingdom which she had so much heard spoken
of. But having paced about a mile from Yervedra, she entered into a little
Wood, which was nothing either long or large or thick: but so pleasant a place,
as that it seemed to be made by nature only to delight the neighbors that
dwelled thereabout. Yet could not this place of pleasure any thing at all
mitigate Aureola's grief (now even bringing her to the gates of despair) but
rather increased her sorrow. And whereas it was went to be a place where many
men came to delight and recreate their minds in unto her it yielded a
memorandum of all her misfortunes and adversities; for no sooner had she
entered into that place, but marking the pleasantness of it, she began to
remember the unpleasantness of her own conceits; then began she to be sorry
that she was so grieved with sorrow; afterward she became angry with her self
in finding such humors; next to that she found fault with Nature for making
her so unperfect as not able to resist such accidents. But at last, paufing at
that chancing word accidents, she fell a railing at Fortune, calling her the
sole and only mistress of all mischiefs that happen unto men.

And leaving her there, busy with her bitter invectives against Fortune (which
she did as well as she could do, and could do as well as she would or list to
do, being provoked thereto with such affections as anger and despite armed her
withal,) I will in brief manner let you know* that after he had been in diverse
places and countries (having made more speed and have in his search then
Aureola) at length in the borders of France, it was his luck to meet with
Laurea, first called Sylva, whose history I have shortly rehearsed, until she
was brought home to her fathers house by her brother Otto, who had among the
shepherds so long courted her, but the rest of her adventures she her self may
declare unto this noble company, opportunity being offered, she being now in
this house with the Lady Felicia. Yet thus much I must say of her (seeing it
concerns our history) that my brother having found her in the frontiers of
France, in a defart all alone, very nigh in the same plight that Aureola was,
at first when he saw her before he spoke to her, doubted whether it was
Aureola, for she was so drowned in fears, that indeed the judgment of the eye
could little prevail at first sight, to discern what or who she was.

Nevertheless, greeting breeding parley, and parley knowledge, he found that
she was some other Gentlewoman that was pinched with the same pu^ishment that
tortured Aureola's soul. But after long talk, they came to like one of another
company so well, that they purposed to travel together into the Castilian
region, over the bordering mountains betwixt France and Spain. Insomuch, that
they came into Castile, before that Aureola had been in Aragon, where in the
famous City of Civil, my brother was constrained to leave Laurea, she having
been dangerously sick; yet before he departed from her, she was so amended that
danger of death was past; yet by reason of her weakness she was not like to be
able to go on her journey in six or seven weeks after. So that he took his
leave of her, promising her, that if he might make the course of his journey
serve, so that he might within a month or twain return that way, he would come
to her again, and so to her no small discomfort, parted from her; traveling
toward Aragon, where he happened to pass through the wood where Aureola was
lamenting her hard luck, and railing at fortune for so hardly using her.
Insomuch that my brother before he was by her eyed had espied her a far of, and
thinking certainly it had been some other kind of woman for that she had but
base apparel, having put on the Countess her sisters maids clothes, which he
knew not, he went softly and used the bushes for a curtain to hide his body
from her sight, that he might come so near that he might learn by her words
what she was, for at the first sight he straight perceived that whosoever she
was she b^re the impression of a distressed mind in her face. And therefore
listening to her cries he heard her utter these or such like speeches, with her
knife unsheathed in her hands.

IS this the world in which men strive to live?
Is this the life which men as pleasant love?
Is this the pleasure world and love does give?
Is this the gift that age to wish does move?
Age, life, world, pleasure, seek not to please me,
For I such gifts most poor account to be.
Life is a pain, shall I with thanks buy pain?
Life breeds my woe, shall I for sorrow wish?
Life is my loss, shall I account it gain?
Life hates my hap, shall I it call my bliss?
I loath to live, but more the life I live,
Sweet death unto my joys beginning give.
Yet death you make no have to pity me,
Whilst life the tyrant, still his part does play,
And makes me grieve, and grieve to call for thee:
But I will make you both learn to obey.
Know, I your Mistress am, who with one blow
Can teach you both your duties quickly know.
This is is the wand that beats life away,
This is the wink to which death comes in have,
This is the cast that makes double play,
This brings sweetness wrapped in bitter taste.
How sweet must Death needs be, since Life is sow'r
For contraries be of contrary power.
My Brother knowing her by her voice, and hearing her desperate resolution,
would not stay the end of her tragical Sonnet, fearing lest it might have
brought unto his eyes too tragical a spectacle; but stepping out of the bush
behind her, as she was proceeding forward, beginning the next verse thus.

Death therefore now I call, and Death must come;
I will not live more, therefore needs must die.
Why die I will die, --
Which my brother thus interrupted, Nay rather sweet Aureola, let Philorenus
die to redeem thee from death. She incontinently looking back and thinking that
it was I (for that she knew not certainly whether my brother had followed from
Naples to seek either of us) fixed her so steadfastly in his face, that her soul
seemed to issue out of her body through them, to join it self unto him. For she
sunk down, and the knife fell out of her weakened hands, her lips were knit, her
tongue tied, her eyes turned her color gone, her body as if it had been without
life at all.

Which dismal sight so dismayed my brother; that unless provident Nature had
strengthened him, where he so much needed his force, he had certainly veen in
no better case then Aureola her self. But falling down by her he strived to
wake her out of that unnatural kind of sleep, where with much a do he felt her
crush his hand between her thumb and her other fingers while he pulled her
sweet hand, to have some token of recovery. And at length obtaining the power
of her sight again, turning her eyes toward him, she unsealed her fast closed
lips* and with a sigh breaking the knots wherewith her tongue was knitted, she
said; Ah Philorenus, why do thou not revenge the injury offered thee, by her
that is cause of thy exile? My guilty conscience accuses me, and therefore
crave I pardon. My brother was so galled with that, because he knew that he was
the only cause indeed (though sore against his will) himself, which made me
leave the Court, yet because he had told her that I was gone because she seemed
to love him better then me, and perceiving that she now took him for me,
purposed for her better comfort to hold her in that opinion: and therefore
framed her this answer. Lovely Aureola, thou blamest thy self to make me blush
who cannot, but be ashamed that I have put thee to all this trouble in taking
so tedious and dangerous a voyage* fraught with so much grief and sorrow, and
only for my foolish and rash departure, being grounded upon no reason moving
me thereto, but only the force of my passions becoming masters over reason
brought me to this absurdity, and thy self to this extremity, wherein I find
you in this place, whither no doubt the Gods pitying your case, and hearing
your vows, sent me to stay so pitiful and tragical event as otherwise had
happened. For the Gods themselves with tears of blood, would have deplored the
death of such a heavenly person as is Aureola. Why then, what would all the
world have done? what mourning would all mortals have made? had they been
deprived of that beauty whereof men glory in the East and West, and where not?
Ah sweet Aureola, what should miserable Philorenus, (nay and more then thrice
miserable, being the cause and author of so great loss) have done, who would
have, nay does yet think that no ^orment neither in hell nor elsewhere, would
have been sufficiently extreme to punish his offense, in offering unto thee,
the world and himself, such wrong. Whereupon Aureola replied; No no, my heart,
thou can not offer me no wrong unless it be in doing thy self injury. For I
for my part am in thee I am not thine, but thy self, I am not any more Aureola,
separable from thee or any other distinct person different unto thee, but I am
even thine own self. And therefore in hurting thy self thou may harm me, not
else.

But here may we leave them (noble Princes and shepherds) talking together of
their adventures happened to each in their journey, noting this (as I have
already admonished) that Aureola knew not but that she was with me, and that it
was I that came so happily unto her in her uttermost extremity. For my brother
to comfort her (though so doing he did me displeasure, seeing that I rather
wished him that happiness then my self) still dissembled, not revealing unto
her who he was, and suffering her to delight her self in that pleasing opinion,
thinking she enjoyed my presence which she then wished for above any other in
the world, yea and above his own, whom she before seemed to love better then
me? Which her change, did so tear his loving and brotherlike-heart, that he was
pestred with incredible grief, and yet gloried in himself that the matter
succeeded so well for me, wishing for nothing else but that he might find me,
to give me Aureola, and to see us married. For he doubted not but he might use
such means, that if ever he could find me, she should not know but that it was
he whom they jointly together sought, and not I. For whereas Aureola very
earnestly urged him to return to Naples to be married, my brother to hinder
that purpose spoke thus unto her. I have been said he by certain shepherds
informed, that my brother (you must consider gentle reader, that this is spoken
of himself and so to be understood, seeing he is now of Aureola taken for me,
in which opinion he did continue her) after he had let you know of my sudden
departure, and afterward had heard that thereupon you were gone secretly from
Naples to seek me, he in like manner taking his leave of the King (having of
his Majesty license thereto) left Naples and pursued his quest after us both.
Wherefore (said he) dear Aureola, let us first seek my, nay our dear beloved
brother, that we may all three together return to the Court, and so have our
marriage feast celebrated in full joy, no cause of sorrow eclipsing our mirth.
Which persuasion printed so good a liking in her heart, that he obtained the
same of her: she being ready to go any where, so she went (as she thought) with
me. Here (noble Princes and shepherds) seeing the Lady Felicia expected our
coming to supper, will to morrow or some other time, whenever it shall please
your worthiness to hear the rest, opportunity being thereto offered.

The Duchess Brisil with the other Ladies, Gentlemen, and shepherds,
thanking Philorenus assured him that he had done them a pleasure more then
mean, in that he had taken so much pain as to delight them with that rehearsal
of his own fortunes promising that he should find them as ready to pleasure
him. But the Duchess above the rest, told him that she hoped as he had begun
to delight her with the beginning of his history, so he would work the
perfection of her delight so begun, with the end of the same, occasion
presenting time and place fit for the purpose as he had promised. And therewith
they went altogether into the palace, where the Lady Felicia meeting them at
the garden door, most courteously saluting them, being by them saluted, first
the Duchess Brisil, old Eugerio next, then Marcelio and his Alcida, with her
brother Polydor and his sister Clenarde, and so Lexander with his Ismenia, and
then Philorenus with his Petulca, and the rest of the company: which
courteously finished, she led them all into a fair state^ly hall, most
sumptuously and gorgeously furnished, where the cloth was laid, for that the
evening bringing something too cold an air with it, she thought it better to
sup there then in the bower in the garden, where they had dined, While supper
continued, the Nymph Arethea sung this sonnet to the sound of her Lute.

Arethea.
MY song is love, yet strange love, not mine own;
And though I love not, yet my tongue will spend
In praise of love, though many that alone
Which theirs is, will vouchsafe for to commend.
But now my thoughts from passions being free,
My words as true as truth it self shall be.
Love is the thing through which all men have being,
Love is the thing which mankind does preserve:
Love is the cause of heavens and earths agreeing,
Love is the Lord whom Gods and men do serve.
Love is the knot which sexes does unite,
Love in estate maintains every wight.
Love is the tool which finest wits does file,
Love unto worthy things men's hearts does bind,
Love frames the tongue to use a flowing style,
Love is the touchstone of a ver^tuous mind.
Love is the spur to valorous exploits,
Love does exalt thy mind to heavenly thoughts.
Love is the joy wherein Lordings delight,
In Love do Ladies think the time well spent:
In all is love a comely courteous sight,
In men a grace, in maids an ornament.
All this of Love, and more, if more may be,
I know, though nothing Love does know of me.
Arethea having ended her Sonnet, the Lady Felicia asked Perierio how he liked
it, and whether he thought not, that lovers were beholding unto her for so
extolling the Saint that rules their affection. But he framed her this answer.
Divine Lady your Nymphs Encomion of love, has so sweetly touched mine ears,
that they most willingly and readily carried the meaning of her speeches to my
mind, who receiving them with no less delight, was moved to think so well of
them that it now comandeth my tongue to let you understand. And in truth Madam,
as I am glad that I now love not in respect of diverse circumstances so I should
be singularly sorry if I thought I should never love again. And more directly
to answer your question, I think my self not a little beholding to Arethea, for
esteeming so much of Love* only for that I have once loved; much more think I,
will such as now feel the fire of fancy glowing in their hearts, make account
of her, for making such account of that wherein they have placed their chief
felicity.

CHAP. XXXVII, The dispute which happened between Perierio and the Duchess
Brisil, occasioned by the Song of the Nymph Arethea, in commendation of Love.
ALL the company hearing Periecrio speak in this manner, marvelled at the same;
for they knew nothing how the Lady Felicia had used him in her study. by giving
him the drink of oblivion: And therefore they were amazed to see Perierio, a
man before so full of melancholy, and so pathetical, now so freely speak of
Love as one not now in Love, whereunto he was before so earnestly addicted, yt
he seemed to be bound apprentice unto it for ever. But among the rest the Lady
Brisil spoke unto him in this manner, But I pray you sir, you that ere while so
furiously loved, are the hot flees wherein you so madly flamed already
quenched? yet they seemed unextinguish^ble. I think they be, fair Princess
(answered Perierio) for they are not quenched but allayed: and in this degree
it is that I commend love, and no doubt but Arethea so thought of it when she
so effectually describe it. Yet am not I of ye opinion, answered the Duchess,
for that were neither hot nor cold: whereas if love should do and cause all
those worthy things which Arethea attributes unto it, no doubt it must be
extended to some extreme point: or else how should it be able to work so many
excellent matters as she speaks of, nay rather as truth it self averreth even
by the mouth of all such as know the excellency of love? You say well quoth
Perierio) but yet I hope you will likewise grant that as in all other virtues,
so in love also there may be an extremity in excess, which is a vice* and not
to be defended. An extremity (quoth Brisil) I grant in this, that one may love
too coldly, but too hotly one cannot, in my mind. For seeing love is
commendable as none here gainsay it; the more one does love, the more does he
that which is worthy of commendation, how shall we then blame him as doing that
which is vicious? For love is not to be considered as liberallity or other
virtues; for being too easy in giving and bestowing, as more then one is able
he falls from liberallity, and cannot be accounted to be liberal but
prodigal: in that he lavishly makes havoc of more then his ability well can
allow or reason persuade him. But love the more it possesses man, the more he
loves, and the more he loves, the more he possesses. For though by being
liberal without measurs, that ability waineth, and riches decay, yet by loving
how extraordinarily soever, love never waxes less nay increases. For the
more one loves, the more still does his power to love grow, and the more able
does he become to love. And so long cannot he fall from love and be accounted
no lover, as they that by too much spending fall from ^eing too liberal to
become prodigal. Nay but (quoth Pe^^^^o) by loving without reason do we fall
from love to madness: for frantic I account that love which is not guided by
reason By reason! (quoth the Duchess) why love is too noble a thing to be ^i^d
to any respect either of reason or any other thing (...). For love being
considered in it self is a certain kind of mo^i^^ ^f the mind, which moves of
it self, and will not be subject unto any part of the mind; and I hold opinion
th^^ reason is governed of love, and not love guided by reason. For when love
has once taken hold of the heart when it thinks good, it calls for the
counsel and assistance of reason; but otherwise it will not wait or attend
upon reason to be directed by it. Neither do I judge them to be reasonable
lovers, that in love take counsel of reason, or go about to love with reason.
For they that love indeed, unless they do many ways surpass that which reason
teaches them, or do more then by reason they are moved to do; I think their
love to be but of a small account, and scarce to be called love. And not to
fetch any instance a far of, but even from your self, if you had not left your
father and your sisters (as I have heard you say) to seek the Lady in whose
beauty your soul danced, and forsaken your country (for so I call the place
where your dwelling was planted) to travel through desert places and unknown
regions, to find out her who was cause that you lost your self; no doubt you
would not have thought that you had loved; nor any man else would have said
that you had done so. And yet if you had hearkened to reason undoubtedly you
had not left your aged father and comfortless sisters deprived of your
company, to seek the company of the Lady who fled your company; for reason
would have conducted an whole army of arguments to dissuade you from that
enterprise, which would have been nothing else but to force you to cease from
love. For certainly had you stayed at home, you had either not loved at all, or
at least but very little been troubled with passion. Insomuch that you see how
that reason and love cannot agree together, for they are opposite enemies one
to the other. And therefore I cannot see what love it is that you say you would
have guided by reason. That love Madam (quoth Perierio) which I only account
love, and not I only, but all such as will not disgrace the excellency of so
worthy a thing as love is. For to let you know how I would have love guided
with reason, I understand the matter so, that I would have them that love,
therein to shu^ such inconveniences as breed shame, infamy, and reproach unto
them that love, if they be not avoided. As to love that which ought not to be
loved, as Pasiphae loved the Bull by whom she bore Minotaurus, many other things
which might be considered, which only can be judged by the rule of reason.
Besides, I remember many that describe love, (whose descriptions I like not for
my part) say, that love is full of dissembling, hypocrisy, strife, debate,
brawling, vice, offense, quarrelling, envy, hate, jealousy, murder,
prodigality, greediness, covetousness anger, and many other mischievous
inconveniences: which I think one that loves may very well avoid all, I mean by
the help and counsel of reason, which tells us that they ought to be shunned.

Why but good sir (quoth the Duchess) that love whereof you talk is not love,
but lust, the gulf of all mischief: for lust is subject to all such vices, and
more; but not love. Why then (inferred Perierio) must you grant, that love not
limited by reason, is lust. Nothing so (quoth the Duchess:) for love in the
very nature and essence thereof considered (otherwise it is diversely taken) is a
knot or bond, which tieth, knitteth and uniteth two hearts inseparably* and
makes them one; insomuch that love it self so considered, to attain to the
very purity and singularity thereof, is to endeavor and labor by all means
whatsoever to the making of them Two hearts One, and to that one thing must all
actions be directed. Insomuch, I say, that such persons as will claim the right
title of lovers must neither be feared with dangers, nor driven back by force,
nor chased with terror, nor removed with reason, from endeavoring and working
to make themselves deserve to be inseparably joined with that which they love,
and to become as the same thing it self and one thing with it. Wherein I pray
you cannot this be the only and very force of love and not of lust? Very well
Madam, quoth Perierio. So sir, quoth she, I pray you have you forgotten that
you even now said, that you accounted all love not guided by reason, lust?
which how grossly it was spoken. I will thus with one small example make you
confess your self. Put case the Duke of Florence loves some Lady either for
her beauty, grace, comeliness, virtue, or other gifts by God and nature bestowed
on her; which Lady he cannot enjoy as his own, I mean, have her heart united to
his, as his is tied to hers and be loved of her as he loves her, (for there
must be reciprocation in love) unless he spend all his Revenues, his Dukedom,
and afterward, having obtained his hearts desire of her, and has of her heart
and his made but one* yet cannot enj^y her by reason of her parents, that for
one reason or other would have her either married to some other, or rather not
married at all then to him; and so lives still in body separated from her,
though in heart and soul never but by her: his Dukedom gone and all his wealth
consumed, thinking the jewel which he has thereby gotten of a higher price
then all his substance, I mean the love of his Lady, being only content with
this, that she loves him. Now let me ask you this question would not reason, if
the Duke had guided his love by the rational measure of his understanding, have
counseled him not to lose his credit* his wealth his renown, and not to have
undone himself for that which he might not fully enjoy (though he enjoyed as he
desired? It may be so, Madam, quoth Perierio, but what then? Marry this (quoth
she) Then his love was not guided by reason; yet there is no man that will,
nay, can say, but that it was pure love, not spotted with the blot of any lust:
and therefore against your former principle, are you forced to confess, that
all love, not guided by reason, is not lust.

Perierio marking the subtilty of the Duchess, in taking hold of his words and
going about to canvas him that way, seeing she could not go through with her
matter, which was to prove, that no love could be too extreme great, and that
upright love was not to be guided or governed by reason; he unwilling to let
her yet so carry it away, made answer thus: Many things may be spoken, which
diverse ways are to be understood. For sometimes things properly taken, are
improperly applied to sundry purposes. And so when I said, that love not not
guided by reason was lust; I understood not lust as it is properly taken for
the carnal desire, and libidinous cipidity of ye flesh, ^ut rather for the vice
which is committed, by desiring that which ones affections urge him to covet,
and so harkening to the lure of his passions, boweth his will to their beck,
and draws his will to will that which his affections will: which may be and is
improperly called lust also. For as properly it is so called by reason of the
filthy desires of the flesh, so improperly is it so also called, for the desire
of ones passions and affections; when one sets aside the sound persuasion of
reason, and applies his will to follow that which his affections move him
unto. And thus did I say, that all love not guided by reason was lust, in that
they that so love do not what reason wills them, but what they lift, and what
the will of their affections as it were forces them to do.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Perierio and Marcelio, with the rest of their company,
taking leave of the Lady Felicia, departed.
THe Lady Felicia hearing Perierio and the Duchess so earnestly each stand to
their own sayings, merrily brake up their gentle cavil, saying: I perceive
(Gentiles) if my Nymph had not ministered occasion of talk we had been very
silent all supper time. But yet (quoth the Duchess) with our rude discourse,
it may be we have bred trouble to your ears, and this company. Not to me truly
quoth Felicia.) Nor to us I dare say for the rest (quoth Marcelo.) As for me
(said Alcida) I have conceived great delight in hearing the well agreeing
strife between the two disputants; considering that though in words they
disagreed yet in sense, they both agree in one: as in speeches the Duchess
has showed, that love needs not to respect reason, so in very deed has she
by example showed, that she has virtuously loved, and therefore her self
guid^^ her love with reason. And no doubt quoth ancient Eugerio) where she
says, that love must not be tied to reason, her meaning is, that they which
love, ought in such manner to pursue their love, that they do things which are
beyond the common expectation of men; and indeed such things as may seem to be
against reason. so long as they are not contrary to virtue: for considering,
that she would have such as love, not to overrun virtue, in my opinion she
cannot be much discrepant from Perierio in that he would have love guided by
reason meaning thereby that he would not have so excellent a thing as love is,
disgraced with vice, which cannot be committed by the counsel or consent of
reason.

Thus was supper time spent, which being ended and the cloth taken up by the
Nymphs, the Lady Felicia with all the company walked out into the fields to
recreate themselves, and take the evening air: which done the curtain of
darkness being spread all over the air they were warned to return to the
Palace, where they were all accompanied to their lodgings by the Nymphs. The
next morning, Marcelio with his Alcida, and her father Eugerio, and her brother
and sister Polydor and Clenarde, took their leave of the Lady Felicia, yielding
her as many thanks as they might, and departed thence to end their journey which
they had taken to Lisbon, there to celebrate their marriage as they purposed
when they took ship. In like manner, the beautiful shepherds Lexander and
Ismenia, departed from the Lady Felicia to return home to their village, being
glad they had so hapily met in that place.

Furthermore, Perierio now delivered from the furious passion that overturned
his understanding before, merrily takes leave of the company, and takes his
journey to Salamanca. The Duchess Brisil remained with the Lady Felicia, until
she heard some certainty of Periander, which Felicia said would not be long.
The rest of whose histo^y, with the event thereof, what happened to him before he
was married to Brisil and crowned King of Albion; with the success which Maffeo
had, after he departed from Felicia to seek his Eleonora; and lastly, the
adve^tures of Perierio, with the loves of his beautiful, virtuous and noble
sisters. Euphilia and Perina, after the death of their aged father, Camillo, if
almighty God give me life and leisure, I will write hereafter for ye pleasure of
my loving countrymen. In the mean time I commit my self to their prayers, and
them to the tuition of God,

FINIS.

