THE CHARACTER OF AN AGITATOR.

November: 11th.

Printed in the Year 1647.

THE CHARACTER OF AN AGITATOR.
AN Agitator is a late spurious Monster of John Lilburnes generation,
compounded of these Sects unites into one body, an Anabaptist, a Jesuit, a
Seperatist, and a Seeker, by whose principles he is agitated, and steared in
all his excentrick Motions; He is an universal Enemy to all Order, and
Government, both in Church and State. He will have, and acknowledge, no King,
Parliament, Majestrate, or Superior Power in the State but himself, and the
very Rascallity of the Common People, who have been purified from all their
iniquities, and made unspotted Saints, not by the blood of Jesus, but by some
new dippers Rebaptization. He solicites day and night, that the King, and
Members of both Houses of Parliament may be brought to public Trial, and
Execution, as the greatest Tray^ors, and Tyrants, and according to their Father
Lilburnes Principles [ See his juglers discovered, page 3* 4.] and
Protestation; Make no more scruple of conscience, with their own hands to
destroy the King, and Members of both Houses of Parliament, (whom they term
the Tyrants at Westminster, who have destroyed all Law, and Justice, Equity,
and Conscience, by their Arbitrary and Tyrannical Will) then to destroy so
many VVeasells.and Pole-cats. He will acknowledge neither our Churches, nor
Ministers, nor Sacraments, nor Ordinances, nor yet the Trinity, or sacred
Scriptures themselves, and ere long will deny there is any God at all either in
Heaven or Earth to control or prescribe any Laws or Rules unto them. He is a
mere Atheist in his heart, a Heretic in his brain, a Devil in his tongue, a
Jesuit in his Consutations, a Traitor in his Agitations, a Saint only in his
pretention; he is very zealous against Tithes, and condemns them as
Antichristian, because he would starve the Ministers, and as zealous against
Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, and yet Petitions for all their Lands and
Tithes to satisfy his pretended great Arreares, though as Antichristian as
their late Possessors, or any Tithes, or Ministers. He loves Venery so well,
that he so liciteth the Houses for all Forest Lands to be settled in his
fraternity, it seems they are either such wild Beasts already as are fit for
nothing but to be sent a grasing into Forests, or desirous to restrain the
King, his Heirs, and Successors from the sin of overmuch hunting, or
surfeiting upon Venison. He would have Coppy-hold Tenants, pay no Rents or
Fines to their Landlord, but himself. The earth is the Saints, and the
fulness thereof, and to pay Rents on the four usual Saints days (now
abolished) to any but Saints (and that for pay or free quarter which now eats
them out) it mere Popery and Superstition.

In brief he is such a Monster as dares imprison and murder his King, force
and blow up a Parliament, mutiny a whole Godly Army into high Treason, ruin a
most glorious City and Kingdom, impeach the faithfullest Members, and
Parliaments best friends of those Treasons of which himself in most guilty,
pleads for a Toleration of all Religions, being himself of none, or any at his
pleasure, a mere Lawless Libertine, a firebrand of Superstition, who cares
not what he speaks or acts, fears not whom he offends or slanders, is a
common enemy to all, a true friend to none, a wandering Meteor, a raging Wave,
of the Sea, a new upstart Mushrome, all Head and no Body, White in the morning,
Black Worm eaten, and rank Poison before night, and hates a Scot and
Presbyterian more then either Pope or Devist. He was begotten of Liburne (with
Overtous help) in Newgate, nursed up by Cromwell at first by the Army, tutored
by Mr. Peter's, counseled by Mr. Walwin and Musgrave, patronised by Mr. Martin,
(who sometimes sits in Counsel with them though a Member) and is like to dye
no where but at Tyburne, and that speedily, if he repent not, and reform his
Erroneous Judgment, and his Seditious Treasonable Practices against King,
Parliament, and Martial Disciplin^ it self.

FINIS.

