To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The Humble Petition of William Caddy of Taunton, and Nicholas Ward of Chard,
in the County of Somerset.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners have faithfully served your Honors with the expense of
their dearest blood and estates, from the very beginning of the late rroubles,
in opposing the late King and his Party, and especially Sir John Stowel, and
his bloody Adherents, who was the first that drew blood from your friends in
the West of England.

That your Petitioners, (besides the plunder and loss of their estates, by the
said Sir John Stowel and his Party,) have received such wounds and maimes in
their bodies, that they are disabled to labor in their lawful Callings; And
your Petitioner Caddy has lost three Sons in your service, (who were as the
staff of his age,) and himself cast into a loathsome Goal at Ilchester,
where he was fourteen months together laid in irons, by the immediate Command
of Sir John Stowel, for no other cause but his faithfulness to the Parliament.
And your Petitioner Ward for the same cause, had his Nose and one of his
fingers cut off, and one of his eyes cut out, with twenty six wounds at the
same time, by Sir John Stowels own eruel hand, and that in cold blood, your
said Petitioner Ward being unarmed, and all this without any provocation from
your Petitioners.

That your Petitioners are by this means utterly undone; and whereas
heretofore they were (by the blessing of God,) able to relieve others, they are
now like to perish for want of food, with their Wives and Children.

That your Petitioners in Order to their relief, six years since brought their
several Actions against Sir John Stowel, wherein they obtained Judgments,
namely your Petitioner Caddy for 212 li. and your Petitioner Ward for 107 li.
10 s.

That these judgments have been so far from being a remedy, that they have
proved a great increase of their misery, in respect they can get no benefit
thereby, and have spent as much money in their journeyes and attendance, as the
said judgments amount unto.

That your Petitioners, yet further to increase their misery, have been lately
summoned by Sir John Stowel from their country, (sevenscore miles from
London,) to appear and answer his Petition before the Honorable Commissioners
for Articles, in relation to their said judgments, where he has caused your
Petitioners to attend for the space of eight weeks last past, their Wives and
Children like to starve at home in the mean time, your Petitioners no way able
to relieve them; They petitioned the Honorable Commissioners for Articles, and
are only permitted into their country, till further order of Summons from the
said Sir John Stowel as may appear by the Copy of the said Order hereunto
annexed.

Your Petitioners therefore in this their great extremity, do humbly address
themselves to your Honors, as their last Refuge; And do humbly beseech you
(amidst your many weighty affairs,) so far to cast your gracious eye on this
their sad and just complaint, that some relief may be afforded them by your
means, that they with their poor Wives and Children may not utterly perish, and
be ^ longer a reproach to your enemies, who are encouraged to insult over them.

For prevention of which, your poor Petitioners humhly prostrate themselves;
and their lamentable condition at your Honors feet, begging the Lord to move
your hearts to pity, and to find out some way for their relief either out of
the Jointure of the Lady Stowel, or her fifth, which she now enjoys by the
favor of your Honors; or in some other present and effectual way, as to your
wisdoms shall seem best and most fitting.

And your Petitioners, their Wives and Children, shall ever pray, etc. WILLIAM
CADDY,
NICHOLAS WARD.

Excheq. Chamber Westminster. Wednesday Feb. 9. 1652.
By the Commissioners appointed for relief upon Articles of War.
Upon motion made by Nicholas Ward and William Caddy, summoned by themselves,
or some one authorized for them, to give answer unto the Petition of Sir John
Stowel, depending before this Court, praying to be discharged their further
attendance, having delivered a Petition into this Court, which is by the
consent of the said Sir John Stowel declared by his Council, accepted as their
answer thereunto. It is by the like consent of the said Sir John Stowel
declared as aforesaid, ordered, That the said Defendants be permitted to
repair to their several habitations, there to remain until this Court shall
find cause to give further order in that behalf.

Tracy Panncefote Regist.


