THE SEVENTH-DAY Sabbath. Or a Brief TRACT ON THE IV. Commandment. WHEREIN Is
discovered the Cause of all our Controversies about the Sabbath Day, and the
means of reconciling them. More particularly is showed 1. That the seventh day
from the Creation, which was the day of Gods rest, was not the seventh day
which God in this Law commanded his People to keep holy; neither was it such a
kind of day as was the Jews Sabbath Day. 2. That the seventh day in this Law
commanded to be kept holy, is the seventh day of the week, viz. the day
following the six days of labor with all People. 3. That Sunday is with
Christians as truly the Sabbath Day, as was Saturday with the Jews.
By Thomas Chafie Parson of Nutshelling.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. and are to be sold by J. B. at the Gilded
Acorne in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the Worshipful RICHARD MAIJOR OF HURSLEY, Esquire.
SIR,
THis Tract on the fourth Commandment, though little in Bulk, yet found great
opposition before it could come to light. The Author was charged to be such as
Ishmael, whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him;
whereas next to the Glory of God in maintaining this his law to be in force,
and his Sabbath to be observed, his principal scope is to discover the cause of
all our Controversies about the Sabbath Day, that so a mean may appear for
ending all differences thereabout; and that the great offense given the Jews
of Christians not keeping the Sabbath Day be wholly removed. Yet is it likely
for all this to find evil-willers, and not a few; wherefore I have made my
self bold to send it forth under your Protection. You have so indeared unto
you the whole Country round about, by your uncessant endeavor for the Peoples
Welfare, that the credit of your name written in the front hereof, shall
procure it the better acceptance. Yet will I not make so bold an adventure, as
to send this abroad under your name without your Approbation; wherefore first I
present it unto you, as for your judicious trial and warrant; so also to be a
testimony of thankfulness, for both your countenance, and many benefits; and
also an Obligation wherein I stand bound to pray for you, and be

Your Worships in any Christian Office to be commanded, THO. CHAFIE.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Believe thou art not ignorant of the many dissensions and contentions that
have been among the People of God about the Sabbath Day. Some stood for the old
Sabbath (so called by some) meaning the Jews Sabbath Day. Some for a new
Sabbath (so called by some) meaning the day of Christ's Resurrection. And some
for no Sabbath but what Magistrates do appoint. No small Controversies have
been between all these about the Sabbath Day, as I believe thou know. But
the ground and cause of all such their Controversies; and how for Peace and
Agreement sake it may be removed and taken away, I suppose thou do not know:
both which I will discover unto thee.

The ground of such their differences is a misunderstanding of these words of
the Commandment, Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work, but the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner
of work. By the six days must be meant, either the six days of Gods work, or
the six days of work with men: either the six first days at the Creation, in
which God wrought, and made all things; or else the six workdayes of the week
in use with men where they live. So also the seventh day must relate to the six
days of Gods work, or else to the six days of men's labor: it must be the
seventh day from the beginning of the Creation, or the seventh day from men's
beginning their six weekdays of labor; It must either be the day of Gods
rest, which immediately followed the six days of his work, or the day of rest
with men, which immediately follows their six days of work where they live.

They, between whom the said dissensions have been and are, have and do hold
generally, that the seventh day must and does relate to the six days of Gods
labor, and not of man's: It must be, they all think, the very day of Gods rest,
the seventh day from the Creation. Thus they all thought that the Jews
Sabbath Day, which was from Fridayes Sunsetting to Saterdayes Sunsetting, was
the precise day of Gods rest: and every of their other six days of the week,
to be the very same with the six days of the Creation, whether they lived in
Judea, in Babylon, in Spain, in Ophyr, or in any other place, it makes no
matter, think they. Though Sunday with Christians be the day immediately
following their six days of labor; and on which they having labored six
days, do then rest from their labor according unto Gods example; yet at no
hand will they yield Sunday to be the seventh day and Sabbath of the Lord:
Sunday they hold to be the first day of the week, and the very same with the
first day of the Creation with Christians wherever they live. From this common
error sprouted out various opinions, which set them all at variance.

1. The Jews, and such as adhere to their superstition, do and will still
plead for the Saterday-Sabbath: the Saturday they believe to be the day of Gods
rest, the day he blessed and sanctified: they cannot conceit well of a new
Sabbath, they know not whence it is. Though an Angel should come from heaven
and tell them, that Christ the Son of God came into the world, and has taken
away their Sabbath, and has established another contrary to what God the
Father instituted; so that whereas before they had the seventh day for a day of
rest, Christ instituted that seventh day to be a work-day: That whereas God the
Father blessed and sanctified the seventh day, Christ took off the blessing
from it, and gave it to the first day: That whereas God the Father appointed
his people to work before they did rest, Christ appointed them to rest before
they did work: That whereas before they were to work, and do all that they had
to do in six days, and rest on the seventh day, according to Gods example; now
they must rest on the first day, and work the six days after, which is
contrary to Gods example. I say if an Angel from heaven should come and teach
them thus, they would not believe him.

2. Some there be, and they not a few, godly, precious, and tenderhearted
Christians; who knowing that the Church of God has ever since our Saviors
Ascension observed the Sunday for their Sabbath, and that not against, but with
the approbation of the Apostles of Christ, do slight the Seventh-day Sabbath,
and are tooth and nail for the first day of the week (so they count Sunday to
be, neither can they count it otherwise, as long as they hold the Jews Sabbath
to be the seventh day from the Creation) believing that the Apostles of Christ
by the appointment of our Savior, changed the old Sabbath (so they call the
Seventh-day Sabbath,) to the Sabbath of the first day of the week; so that now
the Church of God is to rest before they labor, and unto, not from their
labor.

3. Some again, knowing that the Jews Saterday-Sabbath was Ceremonial and
abrogated, do thence hold and maintain the Seventh-day Sabbath to be abrogated
also; and for that they know not any other Sabbath Day appointed by divine
Authority in stead thereof, do infer, that Christians now in time of the
Gospel are to have and keep no Sabbath Day at all.

Thus kind Reader, I have showed thee the ground and cause of these various
and different opinions about the Sabbath Day. Whence have issued most, if not
all the Controversies that are now on foot between them.

The only mean to stop all future Controversies, and bring all sides to accord
in one truth about the Sabbath Day, is to take away, and wipe off from their
minds the aforesaid error, which occasioned all their differences. For as
long as they or any side of them hold, that the seventh day which God blessed
and sanctified, and commanded to be observed by all his people, does relate to
the six days of Gods work, and not of man's; that is, as long as they hold the
seventh day here commanded to be the very day of Gods rest, the seventh day
from the first beginning of the Creation, they will never come to agree in the
truth, but more and more differences will still rise. Whereas if they all
consent in the true understanding of the aforesaid words of the Commandment,
that the seventh day relates to the six days of work with men, and so must be
the day after the six week-dayes of labor with people wherever they dwell;
Agreement then of all sides will be had. That great stumbling block given the
Jews of our not keeping the seventh day, according to Gods Precept and
Example, which does so stave them off from affecting our Religion, will be
wholly taken away; they cannot then but acknowledge that we keep the seventh
day of the week, the day following our six days of labor, the very Sabbathday
pointed out unto us here in this law. They also who now stand for a new
Sabbath Day, who say the Sabbathday is changed, and the first day of the week
to have been instituted in stead of the seventh will have no ground for such
their assertion. And lastly, they who say the Church of Christ never observed
the Sabbath since Christ's Ascension, and would from the practice of the
Apostles, and the Church of Christ argue the abrogation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, will quickly be of another mind, and acknowledge, that as
the Jews observed that day for their Sabbath, which in this law was commanded
by the Lord God, so Christians also have ever done; they have observed the same
day, the last day of the week, the day following their six days of labor
according to Gods example.

But Courteous Reader, happily thou doubtest here, and would be satisfied,
that whereas God commands by this law all his obedient children to keep the
seventh day of the week, which is the Sabbathday, holy unto his honor: If the
Jews then keep the Sabbath Day on the seventh day of the week, according to
Gods command; How can Christians who keep their Sabbath a whole day after, be
said to keep their Sabbath on the seventh day of the week too, according to
Gods Commandment?

For thy satisfaction herein, let me now ask thee one Question like unto thine?
thine answer to mine will satisfy thine own.

Suppose the Pope made a decree that all his obedient children should keep the
25. day of December, which is Christmas day holy to the honor of Christ. If
the French then keep Christmas Day on the 25. of December, according to the
Popes decree; How can the English Papists, who keep their Christmas Day full
ten days after, be said to keep their Christmas Day on the 25. day of December
too, according to the Popes decree?

Thou will answer me, that the French and English Papists, did all of them keep
their Christians-day on the same day of the month, on the 25, day of December
according to the Popes decree: and that the reason why the 25. day of December
with the French came to be ten days sooner then with the English, was for that
they began their months sooner by ten days then the English did, ever since
Pope Gregory altered their year. The like answer I give thee: the Jews and
Christians all of them keep their Sabbath on the same day of the week, on the
seventh day of the week: and that the reason why the seventh day of the week
with the Jews, came to be a day sooner then it did with Christians, was
because they began their week a day sooner then they did before, and sooner
then the Gentiles did, and Christians now do, and that did they ever since the
Lord caused them, after their coming out of Egypt, to alter their year and
their months as I have showed, in the 3. and 10. Chapters more fully.

So that if we could agree in the true understanding of the aforesaid words of
the Commandment; that by the seventh day is not meant the day following Gods
six days of work, but the day following men's six days of labor, all our
controversies about the Sabbathday will soon end.

Wherefore to clear, and make apparent unto all men, that this is the true
meaning, and that the said words of the Commandment are so to be understood, I
have in this ensuing Tract.

First, discovered that old, and rotten root from whence this error of holding
the day of Gods rest to be the same with the Jews Sabbath, wherever they
lived, had its first spring: and that was from a mere supposal of the earths
superficies to be plain as a champion field, as is showed fully in the 11.
Chap. Indeed if the earth be plain, every day must be the same day with all
people. Every of the six days at the creation must be every where the same day
of the week, and so the seventh day from the first beginning of the creation,
the day of Gods rest must be the seventh day of the week with the the Jews in
Judea, in Ophir, in Spain, and in all other places: the which cannot be if the
earth be round, as thou may see more at large in Chap. 11.

Object. But the days of the week begin sooner in some places then in other;
Then so may the day of Gods rest also.

Answ. One and the same weekday does not begin sooner in some places then in
other. The day which men call Sunday at Jerusalem begins sooner then the day we
call Sunday here: But they be not both one and the same day. One and the same
day is for one and the same place only. If one and the same day should begin
sooner in some places then in other, then it must needs be that either it must
begin in some one place or other first, before it began in any place else
either East or West thereto; or else that it was infinite without any first
beginning at all. Either of which no understanding man will affirm; much less
that the day of Gods rest begins sooner in one place then in another.

Secondly, I have proved sufficiently that the day of Gods rest could not be
the same with the Jews Sabbath Day, nor the same kind of day; and that all,
and every of the days of the creation were far different from week-dayes
that were in use with the Jews, or are, or at any time have been in use with
men. To this purpose I have showed what kind of days our week-dayes be; and
what the Jews week-dayes be; and what the days of the creation were: and how
they all differ in kind from each other, in Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And then what
kind of day the Sabbath Day must be in Chap. 7.

Thirdly, I have showed, what day the Sabbath Day is to be in respect of order
and tale. That it is to be the seventh day: Not the seventh day from the first
beginning of the creation, nor the seventh from any set Era, or Epoche, but the
seventh day from the time we begin the week for labor where we live, in Chap.
8. Concerning which I have showed, why the Lord set the Israelites a time when
they, after they came out of Egypt, must begin their week; whereby in count of
their week-dayes, and so also of their seventh sacred day they differed from
all other Nations, in Chap. 8, 9, 10. and what weeks be; and the difference
between a week, and the week: and between a seventh day of the week, and the
seventh day of the week; which last is the Lords day, or Sabbath of the Lord,
in Chap. 11, 12. and also the antiquity of weeks, and, the answer unto to the
main objection thereto in Chap. 13, 14.

Fourthly, I have showed that Sunday was of old the seventh day of the week
with the Gentiles, and most probably was the seventh day of the week also with
the Patriarchs before the flood; and has continued with Christians their
seventh day of the week even unto this present day; and doubtless ever will to
the worlds end, in Chap. 15.

Christian Reader, my hearty desire is that thou, and all other the obedient
servants of Jesus Christ be rightly informed concerning our observation of the
Sabbathday. Happily thou did before the reading hereof hold, that this fourth
Commandment is a branch of the moral law; that it is agreeable to the law of
nature to have a day in seven to be for Gods worship; that Sunday is our
christian Sabbath; as Saturday was the Jews Sabbath; and that as God wrought
six days, and rested the seventh, and consecrated the seventh day unto
holiness and rest, even so all Gods obedient people should not be slothful,
but diligent in their callings on the six work days, and rest on the Sunday
according to Gods example, and keep it holy. If this was thine opinon thou were
in the right, and did hold nothing in all these but what godly and learned
men, and the servants of Jesus Christ did generally teach in former time the
people of God here in England, as may plainly appear to thee, if thou read
only that Homily, which is for the time and place of Gods worship. But since
that, subtle heads have been employed to the subverting hereof, and bringing
in a dangerous error, opening a floodgate to all licentionsnesse on the Lords
Sabbath, they have publicly taught and published to the world, that the
seventh day commanded to be kept holy, is none other but the day of Gods rest.
They would bring People in hand, that the Jews Sabbath was the very seventh
day from the Creation, and none other but that to be the seventh day of the
week with any People, and so Sunday to be with us the first day of the week. To
this end (I suppose) they would have the name of our Sabbath Day, which the
Jews called in their tongue The first day of the Sabbath, to be translated (as
it is in our Bibles) not The Lords day, or Sunday, by which names Christians
(whose Ancestors were Gentiles,) ever called it, but The first day of the week;
that so People may conceive hereby (though a new name does not alter the nature
of the thing) that Sunday with us is not in order the seventh day of the week,
viz. the day following the six days of labor, but the day going before the
six days of labor with us, and therefore not the Sabbath Day here commanded;
for the rooting out of which error, and confirming all in the truth concerning
the Lords day, I have sent abroad this little Tract. If now by thy serious
perusal hereof thou art the more encouraged to render the Lord his due honor
in the heedful observation of the Lords day, which with us is Sunday; not for
customs sake, because thy forefathers, and the Church of God ever observed the
same since the time of the Apostles: nor for that the Magistrates have
commanded us to keep this day holy: Nor for that the Seventh-day Sabbath is
abolished, and this to be a new Sabbath instituted: but for that God in this
his law which is perpetual and unalterable, has commanded thee, and all
People, expressly to keep holy the seventh day; Give God the glory, and lift up
a Prayer unto him for me a poor sinner.

T. C.

The Synopsis or Abridgement of the whole Tract.
In this fourth Commandment there be two parts. viz. 1. The duty commanded, in
which we be to know What day the Sabbath of the Lord is; concerning which know
1. What kind of day the Sabbathday is; and therein note There be four kinds
of days which we shall meet with in the Holy Scripture, which are these, --
viz. the Artificial day. Chap. 1. Universal day. Chap. 2. Horizontal day. Chap.
3. Meridional day. Chap. 4.
They differ every one from the other. The Artificial day differs from all
other. Chap. 5. The Universal day differs from all other. Chap. 5. Horizontal
and Meridional days differ one from the other. Chap. 6.
Which of these four kinds of days is the Lords Sabbath. Chap. 7.
2. What day the Sabbathday is to be in respect of orderand tale, wherein note
1. The Sabbath Day is the seventh day of the week, that is, the day following
the six known days of labor. Chap. 8. 2. The cause why the Jews had Saturday
for their Sabbath, was to take them off from the Assyrian idolatries,
concerning which note, that 1. The Assyrian idolatries were their worshipping
the Sun, and the other planets all called the Host of heaven: And also their
worshipping Belus called Baal. Chap. 9. 2. From their example, all nations as
well as Israel worshipped the Sun. Chap. 9. 3. Among many means God used to
take the Jews off from worshipping the Sun one was, that instead of Sunday,
they must have Saturday their seventh day sacred. Chap. 10
3. The vain opinion of some, who think that the Sabbath, that is, the seventh
day of the week, must be the day of Gods rest. Chap. 11 4. What a week is, and
what the week is: and that the seventh day of the week is the Sabbath. Also why
many of the ancient Writers called the Jews Sabbath the day of Gods rest: since
they knew that it could not be that very day. Chap. 12 5. Weeks proved to be
from all Antiquity. Chap. 13 6. Week-dayes had their names from the planets, as
they were the Heathen-gods, and not from their supposed hourly Government.
Chap. 14 7. Sunday was the Gentiles seventh day of the week sacred to the Sun;
and most probably was the seventh day sacred with the Patriarchs before Noah's
flood. Also that Christians did not, neither ought to have chosen any other
then the Sunday for their seventh sacred day, although it had been much abused
before to idolatry. Chap. 15

What it is to keep holy and sanctify the Sabbath day. Chap. 16
2. The Lords special provision to bring all people to a heedful keeping the
duty commanded, set out in sundry particulars. Chap. 17


THE SEVENTH-DAY Sabbath.
EXODUS 20.8, 9, 10, 11. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. Six days
shall thou labor, and, etc.


CHAP. I. The Division of the Text. The Artificial Day.
THe Lord God, who made Heaven and Earth, and all for the good of man, made man
for his own honor, in his own Image, and to bear his Image in the world to his
glory, done by the due observation of the Moral Law, whereof this fourth
Commandment is a part; in which God makes known unto man the special time and
day which he has destinated unto his worship, commanding man to sanctify the
same, and keep it holy to the Lord.

In this text are these two parts.

First, the duty commanded, which is to keep holy the Sabbath Day. Secondly,
the care and provision had by the Lord, for man's heedful keeping and observing
the same, in all the other words and branches of this Commandment.
I will first treat of the duty commanded, and in it for our better observing
the Sabbath Day, we are to know First, what the Sabbath Day is that is here
commanded to be sanctified. Secondly, what it is to sanctify the same, or to
keep it holy.


Touching the former of these we are to know First, what kind of day the
Sabbath is to be. Secondly, what day it is to be in order or tale.


Concerning the former of these. There be four kinds of days which we shall
meet with in holy Scripture.

1. The Artificial day. 2. The Universal day. 3. The Horizontal day. 4. The
Meridional day.
These terms or appellations I confess are not common; but the use of them is
needful, for the better distinguishing them one from the other; whereby it may
the better appear which of these kinds of days the Sabbath Day ought to be.
And now I will 1. Show what every of them is. 2. How they differ the one from
the other. 3. Which of these kinds of days man is to observe and keep for his
Sabbath.


Of the Artificial day.
The Artificial day, as it is generally taken, is the whole time between
Sunrising and Sunsetting with any people.

This kind of day was especially in use with the Jews.

They divided this day always into twelve equal parts, which they called
hours, which hours were ever proportionable to the day: In Summertime the
longer their day was, the longer were their hours: and at Winter, when their
day was not ten of our hours, yet was it twelve of theirs. Of this kind of
day mention is made in diverse places of sacred Scripture John 11.9. Psalm.
104.23. Mat. 20.2, 3, 6.
. And the hours thereof are now called Jews hours Horae Jndaicae
; And Antique hours Horae Antiquae
, for that not only the Jews, but other nations also did anciently so divide
the day into twelve such hours. Thus was their Dial divided into twelve
hourelines, whereof the fifth Persius Pers. Sat. 3. Quinta dum linea tangitur
umbra.
will have to note out the fifth hour with them, which is about ten of the
Clock with us. Martial Mart. li. 4. Epigr. 8. Prima salutantes atque altera
continet ^o^a, etc.
also in twelve verses distinguishes the twelve hours of the day then in use
in the like manner.

CHAP. II. The Universal day. The days of the Creation. Why Moses set the
Evening before the Morning.
THe Universal day is, that which is one, and the same day in all places
through the whole Universe; as well in respect of its beginning, as of its
duration, and ending. It is not one day at one part of the earth, and another
day at another part; but when it begins or ends any where, it begins or
ends every where at the same time.

This kind of Day cannot properly be said to begin either in the East or in
the West, or at Sunrising, or at Sun setting, or at Midnight, or at Noon, as
other kind of days do. For there is neither East nor West, nor Sunrising nor
Sunsetting; nor midnight nor noon in respect of the world; though in respect
of the parts of the world, all and every of these may be said to be; yet so as
what is East or morning to one part, is West or Sunsetting to another part;
and midnight to one part is midday to another part; but neither of them
properly can be so said to be the whole world. Such kind of days were those
which Moses spoke of in the first of Genesis. Genesis 1.5, 8, 13, 19 23.31.
And of which mention is made in this text and elsewhere Ex. 20.11. and 31.17.
Acts 2.20. Rev. 6.17. 2 Pet. 2.9. and 3.7, 10. Joel. 2.31.
. In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, etc. and rested the seventh day.

That these days (which some do term, and fitly enough may be called The
days of the Creation) were such Universal days, I will endeavor to clear, by
giving instances in every of them which Moses spoke of, in rehearsing the Works
of the Creation.

The first of those seven days was such an Universal day, when it began any
where, it began every where; no where then was it no day, nor any other then
the first day.

The first things God made were day and night: or light and darkness. They
were neither of them in time before the other, but were both coetaneous.

There was in nature before, though not in time, a mixed or confused darkness,
which Moses called (...), Genesis 1.2.
which Arias Montanus, correcting Pagnin, translateth and calls it Caligo; it
was neither perfect day nor perfect night.

But when God had thence formed the light, and made it to shine out of the
darkness 2 Cor. 4.6.
, and had divided the light from the darkness, so as that they should never be
both in one Hemisphere, but succeed in order each other, which is called Gods
Covenant of the day and of the night Ier. 33.20.
. God then called that light so divided Day, and that darkness so divided,
called by Moses emphatically (...), God called night Genesis 1.4, 5.
; the full Revolution of both which was the first day; in this division of the
light and darkness, or day and night, though the night was before the day in
one Hemisphere, and the day before the night in the other; yet in respect of
the whole Universe, neither of them was before the other in time. When the
first day began somewhere when it was night at the same time that first day
began some otherwhere when it was daylight; every where did the first day
begin at the same time.

The second day and the third day in like manner were universal days. When God
stretchd out the firmament on the second day, it was every where then the
second day. On the next day also, whersoever God the Universal Worker did his
work, throughout the whole round, in gathering together the waters, making the
seas and dry land, there every where was it the third day. And after that every
where was it the same third day, where God made the earth to bring forth
grass, and herbs, and fruit trees Genesis 1.11, 12, 13.
, no where was it then either the second or fourth day.

The fourth day in which the Sun, Moon and Stars were made, was an
Universal day. When it was the fourth day any where, it was the fourth every
where. It is not revealed in what part of the fourth day those lights of heaven
were made; but most certain is it, that when the Sun first appeared to the
world on that day, it was over some part of the earth at that time, making it
to be noone there, and in all places in that Hemisphere, which were in the same
Meridian with the Sun. And that in many places ninety degrees East from
thence it was Sunsetting; and in as many places ninety degrees West from
thence, it was then at the same time Sunrising. Also that in the other
Hemisphere to which the Moon or Stars appeared, it was then night, and midnight
there in those places that were in the same Meridian with the Sun. So that
although on that fourth day Sunsetting was before Sunrising in some places,
and Sunrising before Sunsetting in some other places; and in some places
noone was before either of the other; and in some other places midnight was
before them all; yet in respect of the whole earth not one of them was on that
fourth day before the other: But at the Suns first appearing, and shining
over half the earth, it was at that very instant the fourth day, as well where
it was Sunsetting, or Sunrising, as where it was noone: and likewise it was
then the fourth day also in the other part of the earth to which the Moon, or
Stars first appeared; For neither the Sun, Moon or Stars appeared to any
place on the third day, which was the day before they were made, and the fifth
day was not then begun.

The like I say for the fifth day, and for the sixth day; when God made fish
and foul on the fifth day; or when he made Adam the last of his creatures on
the sixth day, it was then after Sunsetting in some places, and before
Sunrising in some other places; and it was then noone in some places, and
midnight in some other places, yet all on the same day.

The like I say also for the seventh day, the day of Gods rest: When God rested
from all his works that he had made, it was no where then the sixth day, but
every where the seventh day. The day of Gods rest began in some places at
Sunrising, in some places at Sunsetting, and in some at noone, and in other
some at midnight in the same day. For so was it on the fourth day when the
Sun first appeared, and so when it was half ended; and so likewise when it
was fully ended; and therefore so was it when the fifth, sixth or seventh day
began, or ended. It is not revealed, and therefore no man can know, what, or
where in the earth those places are, where it was Sunrising, or Sun setting,
or noone, or midnight, either when the Sun first shined forth to the world, or
when half of that fourth day was ended, or when it was fully ended; and
therefore no man can tell, nor possibly can any find out, whether here in
England, (or in any other particular place or Country) it was Sunsetting or
Sunrising, noone or midnight, daylight or night, when the fifth, sixth or
seventh day, the day of Gods rest began, and yet at the beginning of that
seventh day it was either of these somewhere or other.

Quest. But some may say, why then did Moses, rehearsing every of the six days
work of the Creation, set the evening before the morning, so if the evening was
not before the morning?

Answ. I answer, Moses naming the evening in order before the morning in the
first of Genesis Genesis 1.5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31.
, does not thereby make either of them to be in time before the other; one he
was to name first; and the reasons why he named the evening before the morning,
may be these.

First, for that after the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, (and I suppose
this History to be written after that) their year, their months, and the days
of their week were all changed in respect of their beginnings and endings; so
that whereas they began their days with the morning; thenceforth they
constantly began their week-dayes with the evening Sec chap. 3.
; as I shall show more at large in the next Chapter. If Moses now should have
set the morning before the evening, he might have seemed to dislike this their
new custom of beginning their days of the week with the evening, for which he
had direction from the Lord God.

Secondly, or else it may be for that they, (who were best skild in dividing,
and distinguishing of time, as were Astronomers; such as doubtless Moses was,
who was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians Acts 7.22.
) began the day at noone, making the evening, that is, all the time from noone
to midnight to be the former part of the day; and the evening, that is all the
time from midnight to noone to be the latter part; as I will more fully show
in the fourth Chapter See cap. 4.
.

CHAP. III. The Horizontal day. What the parts of the Horizontal day are: And
which part is the former.
THe Horizontalday with any Nation, is that space of time in which the Sun is
in going from their Horizon at its rising, until it comes again into their
Horizon at its next rising: or from their Horizon at its setting, until it
come unto their Horizon again at its next setting; or more briefly thus.

The Horizontal day is the time between Sunrising and Sunrising, or between
Sunsetting and Sunsetting.

The parts of the Horizontal day are two; the one is the Artificial day, or day
light, of which we may read of in Genesis Genesis 1.5, 14, 16. and 8.22. and 31.39.
, the other part is the night or darkness, called by Clav. de Sphoer.
Clavius the Artificial night; and which in ancient times was divided with the
Jews into three watches: the evening watch, the middle watch, and the morning
watch; but after that when they were subdued by the Romans, they divided the
night as the Romans did into four watches.

The Artificial day, or daylight was anciently counted to be the former part
of this day, and the night the latter part, and so not only before the
Israelites coming out of Egypt, but after their deliverance did they count this
day so to begin in respect of their civil affairs, as may appear,

First, for that when the parts of this day were mentioned, the morning was set
before the night, before the Israelites coming out of Egypt Genesis 1.16, 18. an
8.22, and 7, 4, 12.39.39, 40.
; yea and commonly, afterward too Lev. 8.35. Ex. 13.21, 22. Numb. 9.21.
, though they had the beginning of their days altered.

Secondly, because at what time soever of the daylight they spoke of the night
following, they expressed the same thus, To night, this night, this same night
Genesis 19.34. and 26.24. 1 Chronicles. 17.3. Numb. 11.32 Ios. 4.3. Judge. 6.25. and 79.
, as belonging to the same day, and not to the day after that. And whenever
they at any time of the daylight, spoke of the night past, they never used
such expressions, whereby it may seem to belong as a part of the day following,
but contrariwise, showing it to be a part of the day before-going; as
yesternight Genesis 31.42 and 19.33.34.
, the night of yesterday. Also at night when they spoke of the day following,
they used not to say To day, or this day, as they did of the day before-going;
but To morrow, or the morrow after Numb. 33.3. 1 Samuel 19.11.
, and to morrow signifies another day Mat. 6.34. Jam. 4.13, 14.
.

When the Israelites came out of Egypt, the night was made the former part of
the day, even from that night in which they had their deliverance. It was a
night to be much observed unto the Lord, for bringing them out from the land of
Egypt. This is that night of the Lord, to be observed of all the children of
Israel in their generations Exodus 12.42.
. They were commanded after that time, to celebrate their Sabbath from Even to
Even Lev. 23.32.
. And therefore so did they begin their weekdays also, whereby their
Sabbath Day was measured out to be unto them their seventh day; otherwise their
seventh day would not have been proportionable to their six days of labor.
Their year also had thenceforth a new beginning. They must not begin their
year in Tisri as they did before, but with that month in which they had their
freedom. This month shall be unto you the beginning of months Exodus 12.2.
. This month called by the Hebrews Abib Exodus 13.4. and 23.15. Deuteronomy. 16.1.
, and by the Chaldeans Nisan Esth 147.
, (which consisted partly of our March, and partly of April, being with them
the month after the Vernal Equinoctial,) was their first month thenceforth;
so that whereas before they began their year after their harvest, and after all
their in-gathering of the fruits of the earth was ended Exodus 23.16. and 34.22.
, which was partly in our September; after this they were to begin their year
farthest off from that time. They had then a new year, and a new month, and a
new day, to begin their year withal. No otherwise then if the day of their
deliverance had been their birthday; for their deliverance was a kind of a
new birth unto them: The beginning of the year was then changed, for the
greater luster unto the birth of the Church, says Calvin. And a new time of
the day had they to begin their first day of the year, (for their Caput anni,
or New-yeares day was a sacred day with them) they began it at even at the
going down of the Sun, at the season they came forth out of the land of Egypt
Deuteronomy. 16.6.
; then was their deliverance made and sealed up unto them in the Passover. So
that although in respect of their Civil affairs they began their year, their
months and their days as they did before, yet in this their New,
Ecclesiastical, or Sacred year, or Computation of time, they began their day
at Even. All their Sabbath Days, and all other their sacred days, and so all
their week-dayes, for measuring out unto them their sacred days began at the
Even: they had the evening to be the former part of the day. And this may be
one reason why Moses in rehearsing the works of Creation, sets the evening
before the morning, as I said before See chap. 2.
.

CHAP. IV. Meridional day, what it is. The parts thereof, and which the former
part.
THe Miridional day is the time from midnight to midnight, or from noon to noon
with any People, or more largely thus. The Meridional day with any People, is
that space of time in which the Sun is in going from their Meridian at
midnight, until it come into that part of their Meridian again at their next
midnight; Or else from their Meridian at noon, until it come into that part of
their Meridian again at noon.

The parts of the Meridional day are these two, The Morning and the Evening.

The Morning is all that time in which the Sun is in its rising, until it come
unto its greatest height: that is, all the time between midnight and noon is
the morning.

And the Evening is all the time the Sun is in its descending, that is, all the
time between noon and midnight.

Thus Christians generally now do, and formerly have counted and called these
parts of this day. If common service unto God has been done in Churches or
Colleges, at any time in the forenoon, either at three, four, six, nine or
eleven of the Clock, it was commonly called by the name of Mattins,
Morning-service, or Morning-Prayer, and if it had been done at any time in the
afternoon, it was then commonly called Evening-Song, Evening-Prayer,
Evening-service, or such like, though it had been done by daylight, or by
Candlelight. So also the People of God did in ancient times divide the day
into such parts; one whereof they called the Morning, and the other the Evening
Genesis 29.23. Eccles. 11.6. 1 Samuel 17.16. Ier. 6.4.
, though an act was done before day, yet did they count it to be done in the
morning Genesis 31.55.
. Laban rose early in the night, according to the vulgar translation, which in
ours is early in the morning. The like is said of Moses Exodus 34.4.
. Mary Magdalene's coming to the Sepulcher was before day, (...). that is, the
darkness or night yet in being John 20.1.
, notwithstanding that time was counted to be in the morning, and the time of
our Saviors Resurrection was before that, yet was it in the morning.

This kind of day, that is the Meridional day is, and ever has been in common
use with all Christians, who do and have counted the day as their Heathen
ancestors did before them: after midnight reckoning one, two, three, (and so to
twelve of the Clock) in the morning; and the like in the afternoon for the
evening. So we at this time do begin the day from midnight, making the morning
to be the former part of the day; and the evening the latter part. So did the
Egyptians who were for dividing and observing of time excellent; and so did the
Romans, and accordingly so did Christians begin the day from midnight.
Aegyptii and Sacerdotes Romani a media nocte in alteram mediam noctem
numerabant diem, quae consuetudo adhuc in Ecclesia Romana permansit, says
Clavius Clav. in Sphaera Jo. de sacro Bos. ubi de officiis Meridian
. In like manner did the Jews begin the day with them in their ordinary and
common account of time, making the morning to be the former part of the day;
though the Jews from their coming out of Egypt began all their sacred days or
Sabbaths from the time of the setting of the Sun See chap. 3.
, and also the days serving to mete out to them their sacred days Exodus 13.6,
7. Lev. 23.5, 6. Ex. 12.18, 19 Deuteronomy. 16.4.
, all which were Sabbatical days, and called by the Jews, The first day of
the Sabbath, the second day of the Sabbath, etc. for thus they called the days
of their week or Sabbath. Yet otherwise commonly and generally, they continued
to count their day to begin with the morning as before. Never did they begin
any day of their month, but with the morning, making the evening to be the
latter part of the day. As for instance, the day before their coming out of
Rameses, was the fourteenth day of Abib Number. 33.3. Ex. 12.6.18.
. In that night, that is, in the night of that fourteenth day, they did eat
the Passover Exodus 12.8.
, and in that night before the morrow, they burned what of the Passover they
are not Exodus 12.10.
, and not one after that till midnight was past, and the morrow come, was to go
out of the door of his house Exodus 12.22.
. At midnight all the firstborn in Egypt were slain Exodus 12.29.
. But the next day, that is, after midnight, Pharaoh and the Egyptians urged
them while it was night, to rise and haste away. Insomuch that the Israelites
took their dough before it was leavened, and so in haste went from Rameses
Exodus 12.30. 31, 32, 33, 34, 37.
. Whence it is evident that the evening in which they ate the Passover, and
were not to stir out of doors till the morning, was part of the fourteenth day,
and that the time after midnight, in which they were urged to haste away, and
in which they went abroad out of doors to provide their cattle, to consult
about their journey, and their going from Rameses, was on the fifteenth day.
They ate the Passover on the fourteenth, and took their journey on the
fifteenth day Numb. 33.3.
.

Secondly, The flesh of the Peace Offering was to be eaten on the same day it
was offered, and might not be eaten after the whole evening was fully past. The
same may appear also if the offering had been a vow Lev. 7.15, 16, 17, 18.
.

Thirdly, the day in which Jesus Christ ate the Passover with his disciples,
was the fourteenth day of the month: on the same day Christ's disciples asked
him, where they should provide and prepare for him to eat the Passover, and on
the same day Peter denied his Master, and the Cock crew Mar. 14.30. Luke 22.34.
I say, the Question demanded of Christ by his disciples, the killing the
Paschal Lamb, the eating the Passover, Peter's denying this Master, and the
Cocks crowing, were all done on one and the same day of the month; though the
eating the Passover, Peter's denial, and the Cocks crowing, were done in the
evening, in the latter part of that fourteenth day.

The Astronomers especially, and some others in ancient times, began the
Meridional day at noon. John of Holifax tells us, that the Arabians began
their day at noon, and gives this reason for it; Because when the Sun was made
and appeared to the world, it was then in a Meridian Jo. de sacr. Bosc. in
libello de Computo Ecclesiastice.
. In the day so beginning at noon, they had the same parts of the day, viz.
morning and evening, only they made the evening to be the former part. And it
is more probable then otherwise, that when the Sun was made, and first appeared
to the world, it was then in the same Meridian that Paradise was of, making it
then to be noon there: At that time does the Sun show it self with the greatest
light, Deuteronomy 28.29. Job 11.17, 5.14. Psalm. 37.6. Isa. 59.10. Amos 8.9.
luster, strength and glory: making it to be Sunrising, ninety degrees from it
westward; and Sunsetting, ninety degrees from it Eastward: and daylight in
all places in either side. Now I see no reason, and I think no man can give any
to the contrary, but that the Sun should rather thus appear in its glory unto
Paradise first, then unto Spain, Judea, America, or to any other place
whatsoever. And then if so, Moses had good reason even from hence to set the
evening before the morning See chap. 2.
. And then it is likely that God made the living creature after his kind, and
Adam also in the afternoon, and that in the night following, (I mean when it
was night in Paradise, though it was then day in some other places,) the deep
sleep fell on Adam, when God made the woman, and that she was brought unto him
in the morning. The naming of the creatures may be after this for ought we know
to the contrary, yet all before the next evening, that is, before the next day,
beginning at noon there.

But if any will contend, that unless there be better proofs given then
probabilities, we should not conceive the days of the Creation, either the
fourth, sixth or seventh, to begin in Paradise rather at noon then at midnight,
Sunrising or at Sunsetting. Yet sure it is more then probable, that Moses
would have the evening to begin at noon. What else could he mean by the two
Evenings, which he in diverse places mentions Exodus 29.39. Numb. 28.4, 8.
, if he meant not thereby the time between noon and Sunsetting, viz. the time
between the evening of the day in common use with the Jews which began at
noon, and the evening of the day in their sacred account, which began at
Sunsetting, as I showed before See chap. 2.
. On the fourteenth day of Abib, they were commanded, even the whole Assembly,
to kill the Paschal Lamb between the two evenings Exodus 12.6.
, as it is according to the Hebrew text; and to eat the same at the beginning
of their sacred day of the Passeeover, which began at Sunsetting Deuteronomy. 16.6.
Luke 22.14.
. Their taking the Lamb, killing, skinning, and making it cool and fit for
roasting; yea the roasting it, and preparing it with herbs for the table, al
was to be done between the two evenings before the setting of the Sun. The
killing their Passover (very likely) was about that very time of the day when
Christ our Passover was slain, which was between the two evenings; The former
of the two evenings mentioned by Moses Exodus 12.6.
, began at noon, at the beginning of the seventh hour of the day with the
Jews.

So Lyranus, According to the Hebrew Doctors, the Evening here mentioned,
begins from the seventh hour, for at that time the Sun begins to incline
toward the West Lyra. on Ex. 12.6.
. The seventh hour with the Jews ever began at noon, as their first hour
began at Sunrising. Masius Masius on Josh. 5.
on Joshua confirms the same also. But if any doubt hereof, let him look only
in Buxtorfius his Lexicon Buxtor. lex. edit. Basil. An. 1645.
, at the word (...), where he makes it clear that (...), Between the two
evenings, which was the time for killing the Paschal Lamb, mentioned in the
12. of Exodus, had its beginning from noon at the end of the sixth hour, or
beginning of the seventh, proving the same also out of learned Authors, as well
Rabbines as others.

CHAP. V. Of the difference between those four kinds of days.
HAving showed what all and every of those four kinds of days are. I will
now show how they differ from each other.

First, the Artificial day differs from all the other three, in that it has
only daylight and no night, but ends at Sunsetting, whereas the other have
night as well as daylight.

Secondly, the Universal day differs from horizontal days and meridional
days in two respects.

1. The Universal day is constant and unalterable; it cannot be made longer or
shorter by all the wit and industry man can use, much less may a day thereof
be gotten or lost by man's endeavor. But week-dayes with all People whether
they be Horizontal or Meridional days, may be either lengthened by traveling
Westward, or shortened by traveling East, yea a whole day may thereby be
either gotten or lost, and so he that was the firstborn may become the younger
brother; as in the Law-Case between John and Johannes, I will not affirm the
story to be true, but it will serve to illustrate the truth of what I before
said, and let it be taken as I had it.

William Douse of Portingh had by his wife Hellen two sons at one birth,
within one hour, and either of them was named John, but for distinctions sake,
the father and others called the younger Johannes. When they came to be five
and twenty years of age, John the elder obtained moneys and leave of his father
to travel with Sir Francis Drake, when he made his voyage round the world.
Johannes lived at home with his aged father, his mother being dead; but did so
mis-behave himself toward his father, that the old man, by his continual
vexation became so weak and faint, that he despaired of life; yet before he
died he heard that his son John was returned into England safe with Sir Francis
Drake: whereupon he caused his Will to be altered and new written, wherein he
gave all his goods and chattels to John his elder son; saving only ten
pounds, which he gave to John his younger son, and shortly after died. When
John had heard of his fathers death, he hasted home; but before his coming,
Johannes had in possession, and disposed of all his fathers goods and chattels
left. Of all which John at his coming home demanded the possession, to whom
Johannes tendered only ten pounds, telling him that was all which his father
gave him, and therewithal gave him a Copy of his fathers Will; telling him also
that he by his travel had lost a day of his age, and that he himself was John
the elder, when his father made his last Will, and being possessed of the goods
he meant to keep them. John seeing his brothers resolution would not finger the
ten pounds, but took the Copy of the Will, and hasted to Plowden, commonly
called Ployden, the Lawyer; to him he opened his Case, and showed the Copy of
the Will, craving his Counsel, Ployden having perused the Will, demanded of
John who was firstborn, that was I, quoth John, and my brother does and will
acknowledge that. Why then your Case is good and sure, and the goods are all
undoubtedly yours, quoth Ployden, but yet tell me under what pretense does your
brother claim and detain them? Why, quoth John, he says, that by my voyage
that I made with Sir Francis Drake round about the world I lost a day of my
age, and so he at the making of the Will was the elder, and so lays claim to
all. Sir Francis Drake, quoth Ployden, did take such a voyage indeed, but did
you travel the whole Circuit with him? It is true, quoth John, I did. Nay then
the case is altered, quoth Ployden, and you have lost a day of your age indeed.
You be John Primogenitus, but your brother is John Senior. This is strange,
quoth John, we kept a most exact account of every days journey till we came
home. Can you show when or where we should lose a day? You lost not your day,
quoth Ployden, at any one longitude, nor at one time, but by little and little.
Answer me one question, quoth Ployden, and thereby you shall make this clear
your self. It is a Problem that Plutarch has, and now is common in use. The
ship Argos, in which Jason sailed for the golden fleece, when the voyage was
ended, was laid up in the Road for a monument: where decaying by little and
little, they always pieced it anew where it wore away; till in the end the
whole substance of the old vessel was gone, and nothing remained thereof, but
only the figure, which every where was answerable to that of the old. Now tell
me whether this ship was the very same in which Jason sailed, or another
diverse from it? and if another, when was it changed? Sure, quoth John, it
could not be the same ship, and it was altered by little and little, and at no
time wholly altered till at the last. Just so, quoth Ployden, may I say for the
day you have lost, you lost it not all at one time, but by little and little.
Every degree that you went westward, you pieced your day, and made it the three
hundred and sixtieth part of a day longer then it was, but therewithal you
losed the three hundred and sixtieth part of your day in tale; you must look to
lose one way if you gain another way. In your travel of the whole round, which
is three hundred and sixty degrees, you gained a whole day in the length of
your days, but you have lost thereby a whole day in tale. For tell me, when it
was Sunday here at your coming home, what day was it then with you? Indeed,
quoth John, it was but Saturday with us, and I wondered much, why we in the
count of the days of our week came still a day short of what they counted
here. But I pray tell me what counsel you will give me in the case between me
and my brother? why, quoth Ployden, be ruled by me and fear not: make one
voyage more, and go back the same way that you came, and you shall certainly
find again the day which you lost, and then come to me and I will warrant your
Case. Though now I approve not Ploydens judgment in every point, yet I say,
what he told John of the lengthening his days, and losing a day in tale at his
return, whereby he had not lived so many week-dayes as his brother Johannes had
by a day, is very true, whether he counted the week by Horizontal or by
Meridional days. But yet John lived as many Universal days as did his brother
and losed not one hour, or minute of an hour of the Universal day; it could
neither be lengthened or shortened by continual travel. When the Sun came to
that Meridian, in which it was, when it began the fifth, sixth or seventh day,
at the first Creation, then did the Universal day end, and the next began both
with John and with his brother, though they were half the Compass of the earth
distant from each other.

2. Week-dayes, whether they be Horizontal or Meridional, cannot be the same in
all places; much less can their parts or hours be the same. But the Universal
day is not only the same day in all places, but every part or hour of that day
is without any variation, the same every where

The last day in which Christ shall come to judge the world, which must needs
be on two week-dayes with People, if it be on Sunday with some, it will be on
Saturday or Monday with some others; and on different times also of the
weekday, if it shall be at midnight with some, (not only midnight of security
Mat. 25.6, 13 24.39, 50.
, but in respect of the weekday) it will be at noon with some others, etc. Yet
will it be on one and the same Universal day, therefore every where in holy
Scripture that time is called a day John 6.39.40, 54.11.24. Acts 2.20. Mat.
10.15.
, not days. It shall not be on one day here, and on another day elsewhere, but
on one and the same day. It will be a general day of judgment; not only in
respect of all conditions of men, but also of all places, they shall be gathered
from the four winds Mar. 13.27.
, from all quarters of the world. Yea his coming shall then be not only on one
and the same Universal or general day, but on one and the same hour of that
day in respect of all People. In an hour of that day the trumpet shall sound
Mat. 24.36. 1 These. 4.16.
, then all in all places shall hear the voice thereof at that same moment,
even at the twinkling of an eye 1 Cor. 1^.52.
. In vain shall the plea of any be, alleging that it is Tuesday then with
some people, and it is but Monday with us: O let us tarry till Tuesday too: or
that it is but one of the Clock with us, and it is three or more with others,
and therefore too soon for them. No, for their account of the day will not
serve the turn. All shall find that hour to be a general hour, of a general
or Universal day, that is, not sooner in one place then in another.

CHAP. VI. The difference between Horizontal and Meridional days.
THere is not a little difference between the Meridional and the Horizontal
day, as may appear by what has been before said.

First they differ in length and duration, for the Meridional day, whereby the
Jews counted the days of their months, and we the days of our weeks and
months, is in time four and twenty hours without any sensible difference.
But the Horizontal day, by which the Jews count the days of their weeks, from
Sunsetting to Sunsetting, (or from Sunrising to Sunrising, by which some
other have counted the days of their week) is sometimes in some places near
five and twenty hours; and at some other time in the same places, it will be
but about three and twenty hours in length.

When I say the Horizontal day is the time between Sunsetting and Sunsetting;
or between Sunrising and Sunrising; I mean so in all places in and between
the temperate zones; and not in places near either of the Poles, where it is
continual daylight for many days together. From Sunsetting to Sunsetting, in
those places cannot properly be termed a day, having in it many revolutions of
the Sun, never was it in use with any People, to mete out unto them their week,
month, year or age. Men living in such places measure out their weeks and
months by Meridional days as we do. Neither is there any mention made of such
days any where in sacred Scripture, and it is of such kind of days as are
there mentioned, which I promised to speak of See chap. 1.
.

Secondly, they differ much in respect of their beginning and ending. Here in
York and other places of England, there is sometimes five, sometimes eight, and
never so little as three hours difference between their beginnings; and the
like between their endings. Whence it must follow, that every of the week-dayes
with the Jews, consisted partly of two days of their month: and that every
day of the month with them, consisted partly of two of their week-dayes; the
days of their month being meridional, and their days of the week Horizontal
days, as I said before.

The knowledge hereof is very useful for the reconciling diverse places, and
resolving diverse doubts in the sacred Scripture, about the Jews customs in
observing their feasts, as for instance, if it be demanded,

1. Whether the Israelites ate the Passover in Egypt, and came out of Egypt,
from Rameses on one and the same day; Since it is said, that on the fourteenth
day at Even they ate the Passover Exodus 12.8.
, but it was the next day, being the morrow after, viz. the fifteenth day when
they came from Rameses Number. 33.3.
?

Or whether our Savior Christ ate the Passover with his disciples, and after
that suffered death on the Cross on one and the same day; Since it was the
fourteenth day at Even when he ate the Passover, and gave then his body and
blood Sacramentally, when he instituted the Lords Supper, but it was the
fifteenth day when he wrought our full Redemption, and actually and really gave
his body and blood for us on the Cross?

The answer to both these are the same. It was on one and the same day of their
week, but not of their month: for it was on the fourteenth day of Abib on
which the Israelites ate the Passover in Egypt, but their going out of Egypt
from Rameses was on the fifteenth day. So also Christ are the Passover with
his disciples on the fourteenth day of the first month, according to the law
of the Passover; but he was crucified on the next day, which was the fifteenth
day. In the fourteenth day of the first month at Even is the Lords Passover,
and on the fifteenth day of the same month is the Feast Numb. 28.16, 17. Lev.
23.5, 6.
Yet both in one and the same day of their week, for the days of their week,
ever after their freedom from slavery, were as I showed before, Horizontal
days; every of which began at the Sunsetting of the former day, at the time
they ate the Passover in Egypt, so they were commanded to begin their
Sabbathdayes Lev. 23.32.
, and therefore so also did they begin the days of their week called the
Sabbath, for meting out to them their Sabbath-dayes. And herein the Romanists
do not a little Judaize, who continued the like custom of beginning all their
sacred days, as Lyranus tells us, In diem feriam, viz. decimam quartam, etc.
On the fourteenth day of the month, in the Even whereof the Lamb was
sacrificed, and the solemnity of the Passover began, which was celebrated on
the fifteenth day of the month. According to which custom the solemnities of
our Church do begin with the evening of the day before going Lyra. Postil. in
Joan. 13.
Christ with the disciples ate the Passover, and was crucified also on one and
the same weekday, which was the sixth day of the week with the Jews: which
consisted partly of our Thursday, and partly of our Friday: as their
Sabbath Day consisted partly of our Friday, and partly of our Saturday.

2. If it be demanded, Whether the demand made by the disciples, where they
should prepare the Passover, and their killing the Paschal Lamb, and their
eating the Passover, and Peter's denial, and the Cocks crowing were all done in
the same day? The answer hereto is like the former. They were done in the same
day of the month, but not in the same day of their week. The disciples demand,
the killing and preparing the Passover was all in the fifth day of their week,
but their eating it, and Peter's denial, and the Cocks crowing were done on the
sixth day of their week: Yet all on the fourteenth day of the month, and all
done on our day of the week which we call Thursday.

3. If it be demanded, How we may conceive it to be on the first day of
unleavened bread, in which the disciples asked of Christ where they should
prepare for him to eat the Passover; Since the Evangelists Mark and Luke do
affirm it to be on that day Mar. 14.12. Luke 22.7.
: yet the first of the seven days of unleavened bread began not til the time of
eating the Passover?

The answer is as before: The first day of the week of unleavened bread was not
then begun, but the first day of the month of unleavened bread was begun long
before. Though there was just one week or seven days of unleavened bread: yet
were there eight days of the month of unleavened bread: On the fourteenth day
of the first month, they were commanded to eat unleavened bread, and so to the
one and twentieth day at even Ex. 12.18.
. From the Even of the one to the Even of the other, was just a week or seven
days: but since they began to eat unleavened bread on the fourteenth day,
according to the Commandment, that fourteenth day of the month was properly
their first day of unleavened bread: and the one and twentieth was the eigth or
last. Thus St. Matthew calls the first of those eight days in which they ate
unleavened bread, the first day of the feast of unleavened bread Mat. 26.17
.

The like answer is made unto those who object out of John 13 John 13.1.
. that Christ ate not the Passover on the feast day of the Passover, but on
the day beforegoing. And many more such like questions and doubts may hereby be
resolved.

CHAP. VII. What kind of day the Sabbath Day is. Not known when the day of
Gods rest begins.
THe Sabbath Day of the Lord is not an Artificial day, which has no night, nor
is but a part of the Horizontal day See chap. 1.
.

For the Sabbath Day is proportionable unto the other six days of the week
allowed for labor, every of which has a night or darkness as well as
daylight: and in which night men may as lawfully labor as in the daylight.
Joseph and Mary fled by night Mat. 2.14.
. The disciples of Christ rowed by night, and in the fourth watch of the night
Jesus went to them Mat. 14.25.
. Some Countries are so hot, that their chiefest work is in the night, and so
dangerous by reason of wild beasts, that their chiefest care over their flocks
is by night. Jacobs special care over Labans flock was such Genesis 31.40.
And when Christ was borne, an Angel brought the glad tidings thereof to the
Shepherds by night as they were watching their flocks Luke 2.8.
. If the six days of labor which God allows man be such as have nights as
well as day-lights, then such ought the Sabbathday of the Lord to be also.

Neither is the Sabbath Day here commanded an Universal day, such as was the
very day of Gods rest. For then there would have been an impossibility in
respect of the thing it self, for men to keep the same, and that for these two
reasons.

First, it is unpossible for any man to know within half a year, what time of
the year it is with us when the first year of the world began. Some have
presumed to tell the same to a day: and in the Calendar prefixed to our
Church-Bibles and Common-Prayer-books, suppose it to be the five and twentieth
day of March, and there the same day is supposed to be that in which Christ was
conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary; which if granted, the thirtieth day
of the same month of March, must be yearly the day of Gods rest. For if one be
the first day of the Creation, the other must be the seventh.

Again, let it be, as supposed so granted, that the 25. day of March yearly is
truly the first day of the Creation; yet not a man living is there, that can
tell within three days what day of our week that five and twentieth day of
March was, which was the first day of the Creation. All the art and endeavor
of man is not sufficient to find out whether the first day of the Creation was
Sunday, or Satcrday, or Monday, etc. and therefore not whether the day of Gods
rest was Thursday, Friday, Saturday, etc.

Let it yet be further granted, that it was Sunday on which the first day of
the Creation began, and therefore the day of Gods rest must then have his
beginning on Saturday; No man can for all that tell within eleven hours at
what time of the Sunday the first day of the Creation, or at what time of the
Saturday the day of Gods rest began either here, or in Virginea, or in Rome,
Jerusalem, Paradise, or in any other place whatsoever, whether it was at
Sunrising, Sunsetting, Noone, or at the hour of one or two, etc. in the
forenoon or afternoon. Wherefore, if by the seventh here commanded, had been
meant an universal day; it must be then that seventh universal day on which God
rested; the which cannot be observed by men, because they cannot tell on what
day of their week, nor about what time of their day, they should begin the
observation thereof.

Secondly, an universal day, such as was the day of Gods rest cannot be
observed of all the People of God. Though it should be granted, what is of some
believed, that the day of Gods rest began in Paradise on Saturday, and at the
rising of the Sun there; yet all Gods People cannot observe that very day. For

1. The earth being global, and the true longitude of the place where Paradise
was, being unknown, no man can tell when to begin that day in the place where
he lives. We know when it is Saturday in some places, it is then Sunday or
Friday in some other places. We know that when Christ rose from the grave, it
was then Sunday at Jerusalem in the forenoon, and we know that it was then
Saturday in Virginea in the afternoon, but no man can knowingly say that the
day of Gods rest begins on the Saturday, in the forenoon with him, though it
be granted that it so began in Paradise.

2. Though the day of Gods rest, (or any other universal day) be made known
unto men, at what time, and on what day it began in Paradise; and the very
place where Paradise was, be made known also: Yet all Gods people could not
possibly keep that very day of Gods rest; By reason of the diversity of
longitudes of the places wherein they may live, they cannot keep all of them
one and the same day.

This has been proved unto us fully and plainly, even by the opposers of the
Sabbath. Dr. Heylyn has even demonstrated the same, that men could not
possibly have kept one and the same day for their Sabbath had it been commanded
Heyl. part. 1. page 45, 46, 47, 48.
. And further shows, that the Jews themselves kept not the very day of Gods
rest Page 125.
, though they had one day in seven set apart for holy rest and meditation. Mr.
Ironside also Irons. chaf. 18. page 164.
from the diversity of Meridians, proves that one and the same day cannot be
universally kept, and therefore never commanded the whole Church. One and the
same day could not possibly be observed a Sabbath by all the Jews, in the
East-parts and Westparts too of Judea, and in Babylon, and in Rome, by reason
of their diversity of longitudes. And if it be supposed to be but two or three
degrees difference of longitude; yet will that difference make the days as
truly to differ from being the same, as will an hundred and three, though it
will not make them so much to differ. The like argument has Doctor Francis
White late Bishop of Ely Dr. Francis White, in his of the Sabbath Page 175.
, and diverse others. Wherefore since the universal day, such as was the day of
Gods rest, cannot be possibly kept by all Gods people, no more then any other
set particular day can, it is not the day here commanded by the Lord,

The Sabbath Day here commanded to be kept holy, is such a kind of day, as may
be known, kept and observed by men, wheresoever they inhabit; though in many
and diverse longitudes of the earth. Such as might have been kept in the
wilderness where the law was delivered; and in the East and West-parts of
Canaan, and in Babylon, Rome, Spain, and in all other habitable places, and
therefore ought to be either an Horizontal or else a Meridional day. In all
places of the world, none other but Horizontal or Meridional days are now, or
at any other time heretofore have been in use with men, for measuring out unto
them their seven days or week: and such as are their six days of the week for
labor, such ought the seventh day, even the day for holy rest to be also. The
Sabbath Day with the Jews was an Horizontal day, but then such were the other
days of their week also: and what Nation soever have their week to consist of
Horizontal days, ought to have their Sabbath Day to be so also. In the North
of Russia, and of the King of Denmarks and Queen of Swedens Countries, where
the Sun makes many Revolutions at some seasons of the year between his rising
and setting, men cannot count their week by Horizontal days, but they do and
have counted their weeks by Meridional days. And so do all Christians
generally, of what longitude or latitude of the earth soever they are of, mete
out their weeks by Meridional days, then such ought their seventh day of their
week to be also.

CHAP. VIII. What day the Sabbath is to be in order or tale.
NOw is to be shown what day in tale is to be the Lords day, or Sabbath of the
Lord, and this the Lawgiver himself has plainly pointed out unto us in this
law, to be the day following the six days of labor, so that none need to say
the knowledge hereof is hidden from us, who shall ascend for us into heaven,
and bring the knowledge thereof to us, that we may know it and observe it? But
it is clearly demonstrated unto us by the Lord God, so that he that works
with the Spade, may know the same as well as he that handles the pen. Six
days shall thou labor, and, etc. but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. The seventh day, that is, the day following the six known days
of labor, is none of ours, it is the Lords day.

We may not make the Sabbath Day to be the sixth day, for then we should show
our selves unthankful, in not receiving the Lords own bountiful allowance: nor
the eighth day, for then we should encroach on the Lords right, and not be
contented with his liberal allowance of six days for our selves, reserving
only the seventh for himself, much less ought we to make it the fifth, or the
nineth or tenth, or any other then the seventh day. Our weeks are not to
consist of more or less then seven days, the last day whereof is the Lords
day.

Some call this day the standing day of the week for Gods worship, some the
Lords day, some the Sabbath of the Lord, some the seventh day of the week, and
in this law it is set out to be the day after our six days of labor. Though
these appellations do much differ in letter, sound and phrase, yet they all
signify the same thing; it cannot be the seventh day of the week, but it will
also be the day after our six known days of labor, and the standing day of
the week for Gods worship: this is the Lords day, or the Sabbath of the Lord,
or to the Lord: and this is not only a seventh day of the week, as all and
every other of the week-dayes are, but it is the seventh day of the week (...).

There is not appointed from the Lord by this law any set time, whence men
should begin their week or sevening, for to find the Lords day: so that no
People, Jew or Gentile are tied by this Commandment, directly to keep their
Sabbath, precisely on such or such a day; or to begin their Sabbath at any set
particular time; as from midnight, or from Sunrising, noon or Sunsetting.

God separated the tenth of grapes, of lambs, of corn, etc to the use of the
Priests and Levites. As the seventh day is in this Commandment said to be the
Lords, and sanctified by the Lord, so were those tenths said to be the Lords,
and sanctified or holy to the Lord. But it cannot there be meant of the very
tenth Lamb that fell in order from the Damme, or of the tenth ear of corn, or
of the tenth cluster of grapes, first appearing or grown ripe; this was too too
difficult for to find out; but of the tenth in proportion successively,
according to the customary manner of their tithing in the places where they
lived. No more can it be meant here of the seventh day from the first beginning
of the Creation, which cannot be found out, nor from any particular time set by
the Lord, but the seventh day in proportion successively, according as any
Nation or people do customarily begin their week, in what longitude of the
earth soever they do inhabit: that seventh day by the express words of this
law is the Lords day, or Sabbath Day to or for the Lord, not of the Lord in
that sense which some take it, as if it were the very day of Gods rest, but the
7th day unto the Lord, that is, sacred or holy to or for the Lord: so do the
very words of the text import, (...), On the seventh day is the Sabbath to the
Lord, so also in the Septuagint, (...), hereto does the Chaldee Paraphrase
accord; Die autem septimo Sabbatum est coram Domino; And on the seventh day is
the Sabbath before the Lord. Also Jun. and Tremel. Dies vero septimus Sabbatum
est Iehovae. But the seventh day is the Sabbath to the Lord. The sense then and
meaning of these words of this Commandment, The seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord, is this: The seventh day of the week, or the day following the six
days here allowed man for labor, is the Lords day, or is sacred to the Lord
thy God. As we say in tithing of corn, wheresoever men by agreement do begin
to tithe, that nine cocks or stacks of corn are the Farmers, but the tenth is
the Parsons, or is due to the Parson: So in sevening out our days, at what
time soever, according to men's custom they begin their week or sevening; six
days are ours but the seventh day is the Lords, it is his due, and not our own.
God has not bound men by this law to any set time, when to begin their week,
either at the Sunsetting as the Jews began their week; or at midnight as
Christians begin theirs, or at any other set time, but in every Nation, however
they begin their week, the seventh day thereof is the Lords.

It is true, that the Jews had a set time when they should begin their week or
sevening; and so had a set and peculiar time or day on which they were to keep
their Sabbath: but this they were not bound unto by this law. That Saturday was
their seventh or sacred day, and that it began at Sunsetting, rather then at
another time, was not by any express out of this Commandment, but
accidentally: that thereby they might be the better taken off from the
Assyrians idolatry, wherewith they and generally most Nations, were deeply
infected; of which I will speak more particularly in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. The Assyrians idolatry. All Nations worshipped the Sun.
THe Assyrians idolatry, wherewith Egypt, the Israelites, and generally other
Nations were infected, was both the worshipping of Baal, and the adoring of the
Host of heaven. The one was a man deified and worshipped; the other were the
Stars, viz. the Sun, Moon, and the rest of the Planets The other stars were
honored but as subservient unto these.
, whom they magnified and adored as gods and governors of the world,

Concerning Baal, and how he came to be worshipped, we shall thus find in
Histories and ancient Chronologies.

Nimrod that mighty Hunter before the Lord, being a great and strong Giant,
began to suppress and tyrannize over others, bringing others in Shinar under
him, and he ruled as King over them. The beginning of his Kingdom was Babel,
wherefore he was called Saturnus Babylonicus. For the most ancient Kings, and
first founders of a Realm or People they called by the name of Saturn, and
his eldest son or heir by the name of Jupiter: and his daughters were called
Junoes Guevar. Epist.
. Thus they called his father Cush, Gush Saturnus Aethiops; for that Aethiopia
was peopled by him: And his Grandfather Cham they called Saturnus Aegyptius; for
that he and his son Jupiter Mizraim peopled Egypt. Beside Babel, this Nimrod
had Erech, and Accad, and Calneh in the land of Shinar Genesis 10.9, 10, 11, 12.
. In Process of time Nimrod left the Kingdom of Babel unto his son Belus, whom
they called Jupiter Belus, not driven out of his Kingdom by his son, but Nimrod
left the same unto him, and went into Ashur, and there he tyrannized over the
children of Ashur, and there he built Cities also, Niniveh and Rehoboth, and
Calah and Rezen. Ninus succeeded his Father Belus and his Grandfather Nimrod in
their Kingdoms, and enlarged Niniveh, calling it by his own name Niniveh, and
much enlarged his dominions, and became a Monarch, This Ninus so condoled and
took such grief for the death of his father Belus, that for his own comfort and
his fathers honor, he had a goodly image and representation of his father
made, which he had in much honor. Others seeing it pleased Ninus, reverenced
this image, by degrees more and more, and had faults often pardoned for the
image-sake, insomuch that at length Bell or Belus his image was held to be the
Protector of Assyria, and so adored as their Protector. Yet was he not
worshipped in a Temple till after Ninus was dead. Semiramis the Emperesse, and
the Relict of Ninus, amplifying yet more the dominions of her late husband,
built for Belus a sumptuous Temple, and in it a costly pillar for this idol, in
which pillar was engraven these words or Epitaph.

Mihi pater Jupiter Belus: Avus, Saturnus Babylonicus: Proavus, Chush Saturnus
Aethiops: Abavus, Saturnus Aegyptius: Atavus, Caelius Phoenix Ogyges. Ab Ogyge
ad meum Avum Sol orbem suum circumlustravit semel, tricies, and centies Ab Avo,
ad Patrem sexies and quinquagies. A Patre ad me, his and sexagies. Columnam,
Templum, Statuam, Jovi Belo Socero, and Matri Rheae, in Olympo Semiramis dicavi
Guevara ep. to Don. Fra. Villo.
. Guevara, that great Antiquary, makes no mention who first translated this
Epitaph, or in what language it was engraven, but thus is it from his words
Englished.

My Father was Jupiter Belus: my Grandfather was Saturnus Babylonicus: my great
Grandfather was Chush Saturnus Aethiops: my great Grandfathers father was
Saturnus Aegyptiacus: my great Grandfathers Grandfather was Caelius Phoenix
Ogyges, (so she called Noah). From Noah unto my Grandfather Nimrod were one,
thirty, and an hundred years, (note that the Chaldees and Assyrians read and
count their numbers from their right hand, as we do from the left) From my
Grandfather Nimrod unto my father Belus were six and fifty, (so long Nimrod
reigned) My father Belus reigned two and sixty years. I Semiramis have
dedicated this Pillar, Temple and Image unto Belus my father in law, and Rhea
his mother in law in Olympia, in the name of my late husband Ninus. This was
the first idol that ever we could read of to be worshipped in a Temple.
Assyria becoming a great Monarchy, other Nations either for fear or favor had
this Belus also for their Protector too, calling it according to their several
languages, Fascicul, tempor.
Bell, Baal, Baalim, Beelphegor, Beelzebub, etc. with this idolatry, as were the
Egyptians, so were the Israelites much infected.

The other maine idolatry set up by the power of the Assyrians,, trough the
help of their Chaldees was the worshipping of the Host of heaven, that is the
Sun and Moon, and the rest of the Planets.

The skilful in Astronomy and Astrology do unanimously testify of the Fathers
and Patriarchs before the flood, that they were the first Founders and
excellently skilful in Astrology or Astronomy; and this may witness the two
Columns which they built, the one of brick, the other of stone, in which were
engraven the principles thereof; that Posterities after the flood may be
skilled also in the knowledge of the heavens and motion of the stars as well as
they: one where of remained in Syria in the time of Josephus as he himself
relates Josehus Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 4, 8. Clav. de Sphae. in Jo. de Sacro c.
1. Snd. in. Ram.
. Yea it is not altogether unlikely that the idolatry of worshipping the Host
of heaven, was long before the flood, and that men called then the week-dayes
by the names of the Planets, as now men do. Dr. Hammond in his tract of
idolatry commends Maimonides for the soberest of the Jewish Writers: he tells
us, that from the days of Enosh the stars were worshipped as gods, to whom were
built Temples; and Sacrifices were offered; After which in time the great God
was generally forgotten; no man knew the true God, save Henoch, Methusalah,
Noah, Sem and Heber, and so continued till Abraham was borne. Thus much Maimon
Maimor. de idol. primo.
. How he should come to the knowledge hereof I cannot conjecture. But be it
granted, that before the flood, when Astrology principally flourished, men were
not so wicked then to be carried away to the adoration of any of the Planets,
yet sure enough Sem, who lived a long time before the flood, did also live unto
the time, or near to the time when the Planets were held to be the universal
Governors of the world. Though he lived not unto Moses days, yet did he live
till Abraham was an old man, if so he lived not after Abraham was buried: and
this idolatry of worshipping the Host of Heaven, was before that set up by the
Assyrians and their Chaldees.

After the flood Astrology continued to flourish in and about the countries of
Shinar, but especially in Chaldea, and such as excelled others there in
Astrology were advanced by the Assyrian and Chaldean Monarchs; However
Nebuchadnezzar would in his wrath had them to be killed for not telling him his
dreams Dan. 2.12.
. They were called the wise men Dan. 2.12, 13, 14. and 4.6.
. And by those who had their plantations westward, they and such Astrologers as
they were, were styled the wise men of the East. These Chaldees or Magi were
held in that honor and esteem with the Assyrians, as were the Sophi with the
Persians, or Priests with the Egyptians Boomus ubi d. Assyria.
Boemus certifieth us further of them, that the planets were their proper and
peculiar gods, and that as Scholars now study Divinity, so did they Astrology:
and as we catechize and teach our children in the knowledge of God, so did they
theirs in the knowledge of the stars; Children were taught Astrology of their
Parents; they sucked it (according to him) even from their mothers breasts
Boemus ib.
.

They who went from thence into remote places, to find new Plantations, could
not apply their time unto such studies; building, and fencing, and planting,
gave not them the leisure. Egypt had small knowledge hereof when Abraham came
out of Chaldea, and after that came into Egypt, and there (as losephus Josephus
de Antiq. Jud. l. 1. cap. 15, 16.
and others write) instructed their Priests more fully in the knowledge of the
stars, for which he was of the King rewarded with rich gifts Rudolph. Snel. in
P. Rami. Geom. in prooemio.
. The Grecians were far more ignorant thereof, till near about six hundred
years before Christhis incarnation: when Anaximander, Melisius, Thales
Milisius, Pythagoras; and in Platoes time Eudoxus (nidius brought the knowledge
of Astrology into Greece, having learned the same of the Egyptian Priests and
Chaldees Clavius in Sphaer. Jo. Sacr.
. The Romans grew more ignoraut then the Grecians; the farther off Shinar they
went, the more ignorant, rude and base they grew; even to worship beasts and
base creatures for their gods; which we find not that ever the Assyrians or
Chaldeans did, before they were subdued and mixed with other nations; but the
Host of heaven, that is, the Planets were their gods. These their gods they
worshipped by course Jo. Gregory in his Assyrian. Monarchy. Page 203.
; every one on his day had some peculiar worship done unto it; and the day on
which any of the Planets had his worship according to their order, that day was
called by the name of that Planet so worshipped. As Saint-worshippers do call
the days of the month, on which they give special worship to St. Peter, St.
John, St. James; St. Peter's day, St. John's day, and St. James day. So did those
Sunworshippers; on what days of the week they gave special worship to the Sun,
or Moon, or Saturn; those days were called by the names of the day of the Sun,
the day of the Moon, the day of Saturn. The time of the day for their worship
was ever the forenoon, not the whole forenoon for them all, but at the rising
of the Sun, when the first hour of their day for such worship began. And that
Planet which came to be worshipped by course the first hour of the day, was
counted trump or Lord of that day.

They gave not equal honor unto the Planets, neither were the days of their
week alike sacred; but they had the Sun in the greatest honor, and for their
most high God; next to him was the Moon, and next Saturn, so accordingly were
their days sacred, their chiefest day of the week being then the day of the
Sun, of which I shall speak more when I come to speak of their seventh day
sacred. Boemus tells us, writing of Assyria and their customs, that four of
the Planets they had in less esteem then the rest; His words are these;
Martem, Venerem, Mercurium and Jovem prae caeteris observari: quoniam velut
proprium cursum sortiti futura ostenderent, tanquam Deorum interpretes: quod
ipsum adeo persuasum habuerunt, ut quatuor ista astrauno nomine Mercurios
appellarent Boemus ubi de Assyria.
. That they diligently observed Mars, Venus, Mercury and Jupiter, for these by
their proper course would foreshew things to come, as being Interpreters of the
gods, out of considence whereof they called all these four stars Mercuries.
And my opinion is that as Boemus does here orderly recite their names; in the
same order did the idolaters place them aloft in their Temples; Mars on the
right hand, and Venus on the lest hand of the other three chief, then Mercury
on the right hand next to Mars, and Jupiter last, on the left hand; according
to this form presented to the eye. Whereto for distinguishing them I have set
their usual characters, being not skilled to make a lively draught of them, as
Verstegan has done in his Restitution of decayed Intelligence in Antiquities.
And I have set down under them their names also, not in the Assyrian language,
but as the ancient Saxons of old, when they were Heathen called them,
(according to Verstegan aforesaid) and worshipped them, calling the days of
their week also by the names of these their gods or planets, which then they
worshipped; Sunday, Monday, Tuescoes day, Woodensday, Thorsday, Frigaesday,
Saturday. And we from them to this hour so call our week-dayes, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, etc. I suppose the Saxons to be a very ancient
Nation, for that among many other they come nearest to the Assyrians in their
ancient idolatry: But behold the form.

diagram comparing the Norse or Saxon pantheon with the planets of the solar
system Woden

Tuisco

Moan

Sone

Sater

Friga

Thor



Note here that the Assyrians read from the right hand to the left, and so we
are to read the names of these Planets.

The reasons moving me to think these Idols to be thus placed aloft in their
Temples, are especially two.

First, for that the Romish Church when they had got some power into their
hands, and did in Pope Boniface the fourth his days suppress the Idolatries
of the Heathen, who worshipped their Idols in the Temple at Rome, which was
dedicated to all the gods, and then called Pantheon; and having instead thereof
set up another kind of worship like unto that, even of the Virgin Mary and All
Saints; whereupon that day was by that Pope Boniface made an holy day, called
by the Name of All Saints day, and the Temple also dedicated to the Virgin Mary
and All Saints, called thenceforth Ecclesia Beatae Mariae rotunda Tho. Val. and
Nic. Triveth. Com. in Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 4.
. I will deliver the words of an old Chronologer hereof. Iste Bonifacius
(scilicet Quartus) consecravit Pantheon, (id est) Templum omnium Deorum, ubi
Christiani periclitabantur a Daemonibus. Et est pulchra similitudo, quomdo
Spiritus Sanctus, ex malis institut is Paganorum scit eligere Sanctum
exercitium devotionis, quasi medicina fiat ex veneno. Vbienim impii colebant
Daemones, ibi Christiani colunt omnes Sanctos: sic ars deluditur art Fascicu.
tempotum.
. And a little after; Festum omnium Sanctorum institur a Bonifacio quarto. Then
at that time I suppose were the images of the Saints placed up on high in their
roode, which common people here with us call their rood-loft, in imitation of
the Heathen. For commonly when the Romish Church put down any idolatrous custom
of the Heathen, then they set up another resembling that which they put down;
and this did they either for avoiding the greater scandal of the Heathen, which
were then potent; or to win them the better by degrees to Christian Religion
or for some other by-respect.

As the Heathen had some one or other particular Planet or Idol, to be the
Patron and Protector of some one people or other, and so many Protectors as
there were nations: Belus for Assyria; Diana for Ephesus; Jupiter for Rome;
Juno for Samos; Bacchus for Thebes, etc. So when that idolatry was suppressed, in
stead of these idols, the Roman Church had holy Saints to be invocated; and
had for Protectors in like manner. Thus was St James for Spain, St. Dionysius
for France, St. Andrew for Scotland, etc. As the heathen idolaters had for
several occasions, several gods and goddesses on whom they called for help;
Bellona in time of war; Cunina for infants; Segetia for standing corn;
Forculus to keep the doors Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 1.
, etc. So the Roman Church to win the heathens by degrees, suffered them to
continue in idolatry still: but instead of their Demigods, they should
invocate Saints: St. Rumbal for the toothache; St. Petronel for the ague; St.
Loye for horses; St. Anthony for pigs: St. Gregory for Scholars; St. George
for soldiers, etc.

What were the Monks and Friars, the chaste shavelings and holy Nuns, but the
natural successors of Berecynthia's and Vesta's Priests and Virgins? Rome
heathen had two goddesses in special reverence Berecynthia and Vesta;
Berecynthia they held to be the mother of the gods Aug. de Civ Dei. l. 2. c. 4.
. Her Priests were chaste unmarried men; and if it happened that any one of them
could not live chastely, yet he lived warily; until that Atys Tho. Vallois and
Nic. Triveth. in Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 4, 7. and l. 7. c. 25.
, one of her dearest Priests, lived neither chastely nor warily, wherefore he
was caused to be gelded Ovid. de fast. l. 4.
; after which time the Priests of Berecynthia (otherwise called Cybel) were
gelded also, and (as some Commentators on Augustine say) were called Galli, id
est, Castrati Tho. Val. and Nic. Trivethiccis praedic.
. When these were put down by Christians; Popish Priests and Friars succeeded
in their room until this time. It has been wished by not a few, that these had
been gelded also, as were the former; for though these have lived caute,
chastely, no more then Atys did, witness the many bones and sculls of infants,
that have been credibly reported to have been found in their motes and ponds
Nic Fox. his Martyr. p. 1155 Andr. Willet. Synops. Pap. Controv. 5. Quaest. 5.
. As for the other goddess Vesta, Ovid and Augustine witness, and none
denies that her Priests were Virgins; that idolatrous custom being put down
also, this of Nuns and Votaries of chastity unto the honor of the Virgin- Mary
much like unto that was set up.

Now I say, these and other the like practices of the Roman Church, in putting
down the idolatrous customs of the Heathen idolaters, and setting up such of
their own near alike, and resembling them, make me to conceive, that the idols
which the Heathen worshipped in their Temple Pantheon, and in other their
Temples were placed aloft in a row or rank, in like manner as I showed before;
for that the images of the Saints, which the Roman Church erected to be
worshipped in stead of the other, were so set.

Secondly, for that, as Lyranus tells us, the learned Doctors expound these
words of Ezechiel, And lo they put the branch to their nose Lyra. in Ezec. c.
8.17.
; thus; their idols were lifted up aloft, therefore the idolaters reached up
rods or branches to touch them; and after that, they put their rods or branches
to their mouths or noses, in reverence to their idols. Had not their idols been
placed aloft in manner as the images of the Saints afterward were, I suppose
those Doctors would not have given such an interpretation of that text. The
placing of the idols of the heathen in such manner as is before said, I
confess is my opinion, and for the reasons before given, which if they seem
weak to any, I leave the same to his better judgment, not willing to contest
against any herein, being not a matter of great concernment. But that the
planets were the proper gods of the Chaldeans and Assyrians of old time, and
that the days of the week were first so called by the Chaldeans, according to
the names of the Planets, which they worshipped and had for their gods, as I
before said, is not mine opinion only, but learned men have testified as much.
And People as they multiplied and planted themselves the nearer to Chaldea and
Assyria, the more did they either for fear or favor, imitate them in their
idolatries; insomuch that among the Persians none were to be honored as Kings
unless they were Astronomes Clav. in Sphaer. Je. de Sacr. Bos. c. 1.
; neither were any to be Priests with the Egyptians but such. They all were
worshippers of the Host of heaven generally: and called the days of the week
by the names of the Planets, as the Chaldees did.

And as the Chaldees had the Sun and Moon in more special honor then the
other planets so had other Nations also. Concerning the Egyptians, thus says
Eusebius of them. Priscos Aegyptios, cum oculos in hujus mundi contemplationem
defixissent, cumque rerum omnium, etc. That when the Egyptians in old time had
fixed their eyes in the contemplation of this world, and with the greater
admiration wondered at the nature of all things, concluded that the Sun and the
Moon were everlasting gods and governors of all things Eusebius. de Praepa. Evan.
l. 1. c. 9.
. So did many other Nations also count the Sun and Moon to be chief, him to be
King, and her to be Queen; worshipping them in the form of men and women, and
called the Sun Phoebus, and the Moon Phoebe; him Delius, her Delia; him
Cynthius, her Cynthia; him Titan, her Titania; him Janus, her Iana (or Diana,
by prefixing the letter D. according to Nigidius, quaelitera saepe ante I
decoris cansa apponitur, (of which see Macrobius Macro. Saturn. l. 1. c. 23.
) him they called Jupiter, her Juno: him Dux and Princeps luminum, the King of
Heaven; her Astroarche, the Queen of Heaven. Yet gave they not equal honor and
worship to the Moon, or to any other of the Planets as they did to the Sun: him
they held to produce and order all things: and all the others to be as Rulers
and Governors under the Sun, acting no further then they had power and
commission from the Sun, from whom they received their light, influence and
power of working. Wherefore, as Papists say, that in worshipping Peter, James,
Magdalene, and the rest of the Saints on their days, they worship Christ in
them, Christ in his Saints: So the Sun-worshippers thought, that in honoring
the Commissioners and chiefest Officers of the Sun, they honored the Sun, who
was the Lord of them all. And therefore when they worshipped any one of these
planets on his day, they regarded not whether the planet was before them or
behind their backs, or over them or under them, or in what Meridian soever it
was, but always worshipped Eastward toward the Sunrising Ezech. 8.16.
, and that at the rising of the Sun only, And such as were more devout then
other, would have their places for worship on the tops of hills, or at least on
the roofs of their houses 2 King. 17.10, 11. and 16.4. Ezech. 6.13. Esa.
65.757, 7. Zeph. 1.5. Jer. 19.13.32, 29.
, where they may adore the Sun at his first approach into their Horizon. And
the images of the other planets, were all called the images of the house of the
Sun Ier. 43.13.
. The Gentiles had a multitude of gods, by which they honored the Sun; and
which they honored as gods from some virtue or excellency of the Sun. Diversae
virtutes solis nomina Diis dederunt, as Macrob. shows fully Macrob. Saturn.
l. 1. c. 9.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
, and that Jupiter, Mars and all the Rabble of the Heathens chiefest gods, had
their godship from the Sun.

As the Chaldees had the Sun for their supreme God, everlastingly governing,
not only all the rest of the planets, but all other things in the world; whereby
the world was by them held to be eternal, without either beginning or ending;
and the memory then of the Creation, and of the Creator himself vanished from
among them. Even so had other nations also the Sun for their chiefest Governor
of the world, and thus they reasoned the Case. Si Solut veteribus placuit, Dux
est and moderator luminum reliquorum, and solus stellis errantibus praestat,
ipsarum vero stellarum cursus ordinem rerum humanarum pro potestate disponunt,
(velut Plotino constat, placuisse significant) necesse est ut Solemn, qui
moderatur nostra moderantes, omnium quae circa nos geruntur, fateamur auctorem,
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 17.
etc. If the Sun, according to the opinion of men in ancient times, be the
Chief and Governor of the other luminaries, and he alone surmounting in
excellency the other planets, according to the virtue of whose motions the
order of all humane affairs is disposed; (or as Plotine would, is signified)
it necessarily follows that we should acknowledge the Sun, who governs
those that govern our affairs, to be the Author of all things that are brought
to pass among us.

Men by the glimmering light of nature knew that there was a God, but what God
is, natural reason could not dictate unto them. Plato when he was to speak of
God, as Macrobius relates Macrob. in somn. Scip. l. 1^. c. 2.
, Dicere quid sit non ausus est: hoc solum de eo sciens, quod sciri quale sit
ab homine non possit: solum vero ei simillimum de visibilibus Sotem reperit.
Sol ipse de quo vitam omnia mutuantur, etc. and in Timaeo, speaking of the
eight Spheres, he calls the Sun, Dux and moderator, and Princeps luminum
reliquorum, Cor Coeli, Men's Mundi, etc. No creature could men see which might
set out the glory, power and excellency of our God better then the Sun. Apud
Priscas Gentilitatis Nationes, nil prorsus inter creata cuncta, quod mortalium
mentes in sui Venerationem alliceret, pertraheretque magis quam ipse Sol, ob
nimium splendorem eminentiamque sui comperiebatur Glos. Mag. in G^n. c. 1.
Diodor. Sicul. Ant. l. 1. c. 2.
.

Not any Nation of note under heaven, but adored the Sun, and had it in honor
as their great God. For besides the Chaldeans, the first setters up of this
idolatry, the Persians worshipped the Sun their God: and this idolatry
continued in Persia after our Saviors incarnation. Sozoman shows us at large
the Martyrdom of Simeon the Archbishop of Seleucia S^z^m. Eccl. hist. l. 2. c.
8.
, for that he refused to turn from the true God to worship the Sun. And also of
the Martyrdom of Vsthazar, who was the Guardian and Bringer up of Saboris then
King of Persia, yet for that he being converted by Simeon aforesaid, refused
any longer to worship the Sun, he was condemned even by Saboris himself to die,
and so was martyred.

Secondly, the Sun was the Egyptians God, as I showed before out of Eusebius;
yea and that many years before Joseph or any of Jacobs Posterity came to set
their feet in Egypt. Irshemesh, in the Septuagint (...), was the City of the
Sun, in which was the Temple of the Sun Lyra. In Jer. 43.13.
, wherein the Sun was worshipped, and wherein were the images of the planets,
all called the images of the house of the Sun. This City was called On, and he
that was Priest of the Sun in that City in the days of Jacob was Potipherah, a
man in great honor with the Egyptians, else doubtless Pharaoh, when he so
highly advanced Joseph, would not have given him Asenath, that Priests daughter
to wife as he did Genesis 41.45.
. In the Bishops translation he is called the Prince of On. And I suppose the
cause thereof to be, for that the translators might think him, being the Priest
of the Sun, to be the chief Priest above other Priests, as an Archbishop was
above other Bishops, and such were styled by them for honors sake Princes: but
this Potipherah in the Septuagint is called (...), the Sacrificer in the City of
the Sun.

3. The Phenicians had the Sun for their God: and the idol in which they
worshipped the Sun, was called Heliogabalus. In later times those two Emperors
Aurelius Antonius, and Severus Alexander, were both of them Priests of the Sun
before they were Emperors in Rome; the former was called Bassianus, the other
Alexianus, as Herodian Herod. de vita Imper. Romans l. 5.
, who wrote this history testifies. The former while he was Bassianus, and
Priest to Helingabalus, was highly beloved and praised for his virtues; but
being Emperor, he became altogether as vicious and hated of the People; but
most notorious did he become after such time as he married a Vestal-Virgin; and
also had in Rome, made a marriage between his God Heliogabalus, and the Moon
called Urania, the idol of Carthage, but the Phenicians, (...), says Herodian,
they called her Astroarche, the Queen of Heaven. This Emperor gloried in this
his marriage made; affirming (...); that it was a meet marriage, the Sun to be
joined to the Moon. This his dallying with his God, brought infamy on his name,
and he is ever since known by the name of Heliogabalus.

4. The Sun was the Trojanes God, they had diverse gods, but their chiefest were
the Sun and Pallas. As Belus was the Protector of Babylon, so was Pallas of
Troy; her Image in which she was adored, was kept in the strong Temple, or
Tower of the Sun, as the Images of the Planets, with the Egyptians were kept in
their house of the Sun Ier. 43.13.
: So the Image of Pallas, called the Palladium, feigned to be sent them from
the Sun, was kept in the Tower or Temple of Phoebus, as in a place most safe,
and there was it adored; and he that was the Priest of the Sun, and for that
Tower, or Temple, when Troy was taken, was a very honorable man of the house
of Otreus and brother to Hecuba, called by Saint Augnstine, Pantheus Aug. de
Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 2.
. So Virgil also called him.

Ecce autem telis Pantbeus elapsus Achivum,
Pantheus, Otriades arcis, Phoebique sacerdos Virg. Aencid. l. 2.
.
5. The Sun was the Grecians god, and in Athens, once the chief City in Greece,
the Court or place of Judgment was to be open, without any covering, in full
view of the Sun; holding that the Judge would not dare to give wrong judgment
in the sight of the Sun, who was said by Homer to have (...) a revenging eye,
and who sees all things, and hears all things: according to the said blind
Hemer.

(...) Hom. Iliad. l. 3.
, which to do (says Plato) is the power of none but of God Plat. de legih. l.
2.
. The Court of Judgment aforesaid had its name from the Sun, and so had the
Judge also. The one was called (...) and the other (...) and their Philosophers
for the generality of them, held the world to be eternal, like as the Chaldees
before them did.

6. The like I say for Rome, that was built by the posterity of the Trojane
fugitives; though Pantheus was dead, yet they had their Temple Pantheon, which
continued to be so called till the days of Boniface the fourth, as I showed
before See chap. 9.
. Under diverse forms and names did the Romans worship the Sun, as Macrobius
shows, Romani solemn sub nomine and specie Iani Dydimaei Apollinis, etc,
Appellatione venerantur: says he Macrob. Sacarn. l. 1. c. 17.
.

7. The Massagethites, that Scythian and unhumane Nation had the Sun for their
God, though they would not acknowledge any other, as Boemns records of them.
Deum quendam, sed non Deos agnoscunt, ex Diis enim Vnum Solemn venerantur; cui
equos immolant, ut pernicissimo sideri, e pecoribus omnibus pernicissimum
mactent Boem. ubi de Scythia.
.

8. The Ethiopians, Cathaines, Tartars, and other Nations worshipped the Sun
their god, as the said Boemus records, writing of their manners and customs.

9. Doctor Francis White, late B. of Ely, in his Book against Theophilus
Brabourne White p. 197.
, speaking of the Pagans in general, tells us, that they worshipped the Sun.

Now to take off the Israelites from this Idolatry, so generally practiced by
the Nations, the Lord used diverse means; of which this was one, that they
should not have the day of the Sun for the day of his worship, but the day
before that: but of this in the next chapter.

CHAP. X. The means God used to take the Israelites off from worshipping the
Sun.
THe Israelites living in Egypt were deeply tainted with the aforesaid Assyrian
Idolatries which the Egyptians from them had learnt and set up. Doctor Heylin
proves out of Cyril that the Jews worshipped the Sun and Moon, and Host of
heaven, as in those times the Egyptians did. And to the end they mght
acknowledge God alone to be the Creator; their Sabbath Day was set unto them,
etc. Heyl. hist. part. 1. p. 74, 75, 76.


It is very true indeed what Doctor Heylin says of them touching their
Idolatries. Insomuch, that when the Lord brought them out of Egypt to be a
peculiar people to himself, God then used many means to draw them off from
worshipping the Sun, Moon, and the rest of the Planets, all called the Host of
heaven, whereof the Sun was the chief.

First, God gave them a special charge that thenceforth not any of them should
serve the Sun, or Moon, etc. And that if any man or woman among them should be
known to serve the Sun, or Moon, or any of the Host of heaven, then the party,
whether man or woman was to be stoned to death without mercy De t. 17.2, 3, 4,
5.
.

Secondly, God charged them not to speak of those gods, or to have their names
come out of any of their mouths Exodus 23.13.
. They might not call the days of the week by the names of the Planets, the
day of the Sun, the day of the Moon, etc. as other Nations did, and do for the
most part: but they called them thenceforth the first of the Sabbath, the
second of the Sabbath, etc. Insomuch that all the Evangelists in recording the
day and time of our Saviors Resurrection, say not, In the morning of the day
of the Sun, as other Nations commonly called that time, and we now, In the
Sunday-morning; but In the morning of the first day of the Sabbath: so did they
call our Sunday. Saint Paul also, though he wrote to the Church in Corinth, yet
writing in the behalf of somes Jews in Judea that were in want, called their
weekly meeting day, not the day of the Sun, as the Gentiles called that day, but
the first day of the Sabbath 1. Cor. 16.2.
, being the proper name thereof with the Jews.

It is true, that Saint John (though he was a Jew, yet writing not to the Jews,
but to the Gentiles lately converted Diod. in lo.
, that is, to the seven Churches of Asia Rev. 1.4.
) called our Sunday, not by the name of the day of the Sun as the Gentiles
called it, nor by the name of the first day of the Sabbath, as he and the Jews
commonly called it, but he called it The Lords day. John called it not the day
of the Sun, for he was a Jew; nor did he call it the first day of the Sabbath,
for that he wrote to the Gentiles, to whom the name of the Sabbath was odious,
as was the name of the day of the Sun to the Jews; and we find not that
Christians who descended of the Gentiles, did in many years after this use the
name of Sabbath in their writings: nor did the Jews use the name of the day of
the Sun in theirs. But John called it the Lords day, being as truly the Lords
day with the Churches of the Gentiles, as was the Saturday with the Jews.

Thirdly, the Lord caused them to alter their times which were measured out to
them by the course of the Sun, as years, months, weeks and days. Whereas
their year before began in Tisri, when the Sun was in the Autumnal Equinox;
they must thenceforth begin the same, when the Sun is most remote from it, that
is, in Abib. Abib now must be their first month, and Tisri their seventh,
which was their first before See chap. 4.
. Their weeks were then wholly altered: the day of the Sun, which was the
Gentiles seventh sacred day (as I shall show anon See chap. 15.
) must thenceforth be with them a common or ordinary workday; and the day which
they must have for their seventh sacred day, was thenceforth to be that day,
which the Lord pointed out unto them by Moses, that is, the day following their
six days of gathering Quails and Manna Ex. 16.23, 26
, when they were ready to perish through want of food. Also to draw the people
unto an awful obedience hereto, and that they might not think it to be an
innovation raised by Moses, (as the Heathen generally thought it to be Cornel.
Ta. Diurn. l. 21. Trog. Pom. l. 36
) the Lord confirmed this new order of their week-dayes miraculously; insomuch
as on that seventh pointed out unto them for their Sabbath, there was no sign
of Manna to be seen; and the portion thereof gathered the day before, and kept
unto their Sabbath Day stanck not. The miraculous feeding them many years after
this manner bred in them a custom of observing the week according to this new
assignment. The Lord by Moses caused them to alter the beginning of their days
of the week too, for whereas before they began their days, as other worshippers
of the Sun did, at the first appearance of the Sun in the Horizon, counting the
first hour of their day to begin at Sun rising, thenceforth they must begin
their day for the service of God, when the Sun is furthest off from his rising.
Sunrising was the time when the Gentiles began their worship to the Sun, but
theirs must begin at Sunsetting. Their evening sacrifice, was their prime
sacrifice Psalm. 141.2.
. Their Feast of the Passover must be at the setting of the Sun Deuteronomy. 16.6.
, and their Sabbaths must begin with the evening; from evening to evening were
they to celebrate their Sabbaths Lev. 23.32.
, that so they may the better remember and acknowledge the Lord God their
Creator and Governor; that it was he and not the Sun, Moon or Host of heaven,
that wrought their great deliverance in bringing them out of Egypt.

Fourthly, to bring the Israelites into the greater dislike and detestation of
worshipping the Sun toward the East, as the Nations did, the Lord would that
they should turn their breech or back-parts toward the Sunrising when they
worshipped him. The idolatrous Nations in those days, when they worshipped the
Sun, Moon, or any of the Host of heaven, bowed toward the East, that is,
toward the Sunrising in honor of the Sun; but now in contempt of that
idolatry the Jews were to have their faces toward the West or Sunsetting; and
their breech toward the Sunrising, when they bowed and worshipped God. The
holy place therefore in the Tabernacle was toward the West, as Dr. Willet
proves Willet. Syn. Con. 9.
. And when the Temple of God was built, the house of God was so placed in the
inner Court, as that they who came thither to pray, when they bowed had their
Posteriours, (as it is in the Hebrew) toward the Sunrising, and their faces
Westward toward the house of God.

5. Lastly, the day of the Sun must no longer be their seventh sacred day. The
having that day sacred might have nursed them in, or have drawn them again to
the said idolatry of worshipping the Sun; but that they might be taken wholly
off from it, the day of the Sun was to be with them common or profane, and
another day, the day before the day of the Sun, even that which was the seventh
from their first gathering Quails and Manna Exodus 6.12, 13, 23, 26.
. The day which the ancient Saxons called the day of Seater, and we from them
Saturday, was thenceforth to be their seventh-day sacred.

Yet all these courses which the most wise God took with them prevailed not,
they would not be reclaimed from their idolatry, they were resolved to uphold
their wicked custom; not only the meaner sort but the Kings of Judah, the
Princes, the Priests and wicked Prophets, loved, sought, served, worshipped,
and walked after the Sun, Moon Ier. 8.1, 2.
, etc. Great charges were their Kings at, for making horses and chariots, which
they dedicated to the Sun; the which good Josiah afterward in zeal to the Lord
of Hosts did burn with fire 2 Kings 23.11.
. Yet could he not root out this monstrous abomination of worshipping the Sun,
but they strengthened themselves therein, insomuch that even in the Temple of
God, in the place where they should worship the Lord of Glory, with their faces
Westward toward the house of God, they would in a most high contempt worship
the Sun; and bow with their breech toward the house of God, having their faces
toward the Sunrising; Of which contempt the Lord complains to his Prophet
Ezechiel, to whom he showed their great abominations, and greater, yea and
greater then those; at length he showed him this which outpassed all the other.
Turn thee again, says the Lord, and thou shall see greater abominations then
these, and he brought me into the inner Court of the Lords house, and behold,
at the door of the Temple of the Lord, between the Porch and the Altar were
about five and twenty men, with their Posteriors toward the Temple of the Lord,
and their faces toward the East: and they worshipped the Sun toward the East
Ezecb. 8.15, 16.
. The women were resolute to worship the Moon too, after the manner of the
Heathen. We will certainly do, said they Ier. 44.17, 18.
, whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of
Heaven, and to pour out drinkofferings unto her, as we have done, we and our
Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem, etc. The Heathenish women against their time of Childe-bearing,
sought and implored the Moon for ease and safety; the like custom the Hebrew
women seemed to have had, who did knead their dough to make Cakes to the Queen
of Heaven Ier. 7.18.
. Of this I will be sparing of my own, but deliver you the very words of that
learned John Gregory, as he lays them down in his Assyrian Monarchy thus. The
Assyrians worshipped the Moon under the name of Mylitta, which word Scaliger
has well noted, in their language signifies Genetricem, in which sense it may
not unaptly be applied to the Moon. The reason he gives for it, is, for that If
the Moon did nothing help the second causes in generation, yet in the bringing
forth it is evident; for this is most certain, though every Midwife has not
observed so much, that the most easy delivery a woman can have, is always in
the increase toward and in the full of the Moon, and the hardest labors in the
new and silent Moon; which was the reason that the Midwives heretofore, (he
means among the Jews as well as the Heathen) did always in such a Case
implore the aid of that Planet, for the safe and easy delivery of their
infants; an example hereof you may have, one among many in the Comedy Terent.
A^^dria.
, where the woman in the extremity of her travel cries out to the Moon, Juno
Lucina fer opem, and this amongst others must needs be a reason why the
Assyrians worshipped the Moon, and why they worshipped her under that name. The
Prophet Jeremy makes mention of this worship in the seventh Chapter, where he
calls the Moon the Queen of Heaven, as our English Translation has very well
rendered. The reason which he gives why the women called on the Moon at such
times, I omit here to relate, being the same which Physicians commonly do give.
The Prophet adds that the women made Cakes to this Queen. This Custom of
offering Cakes to the Moon, our Ancestors may seem not to have been ignorant
of; to this day our women make Cakes at such times, yea the child it self is
no sooner born, but it is baptized into the names of these Cakes, for so the
women call their Babes Cake-bread. So much John Gregory, and more.

Though Israel forsook the Covenant of their God, and went a whoring after the
gods of the Nations, chiefly after the Sun: yet the Lord was not wanting, in
affording the many means aforesaid for reclaiming them, where of this was not
the least, in that he took them off from the memory of the day of the Sun, and
assigned unto them the Saturday for their Sabbath. Concerning which we may
truly say, that as their Sabbath Day was their seventh day from their first
gathering Quails and Manna, and as it was to begin at Sunsetting (which Moses
termed the season that they came out of Egypt Deuteronomy, 16.6
) so was it Ceremonial; a sign and token whereby they were known to be Gods
peculiar people Exodus 31.13.
, and distinguished from all Nations that adored the Sun. Unto the observation
of which seventh day, from their first laboring for Manna were they bound, and
none but they; and they no longer then till the coming of him, of whom Moses
their Captain said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear Acts 7.37.
: Even Jesus Christ who is the Captain of our salvation Heb. 2.10.
: who is greater then Moses, who brought us out of a greater bondage then Moses
did the Israelites, and who gave us not Quails and Manna, but his own flesh;
he gave us the true bread that came down from heaven, that we might live
through him. After whose coming, as all other shadows and Ceremonies, so this
of their Saturday. Sabbath from Sunsetting to Sunsetting did vanish also. The
day of Saturn was thenceforth no more holy then the day of the Sun. The Jews
might as lawfully, with their general consent, have kept the Sabbath on the
Sunday as on the Saturday. Saint Paul's practice taught Christians then, that
difference of days was taken away. Unto the Jews, (says he) I became as a
lew 1 Cor 9.20.
. When he was with the Jews he kept the Saterday-Sabbath as the Jews did Acts
17.2. and 18.4. and 13.14, 42.
. But when he was with the Gentiles that were turned unto Christ, and embraced
the Gospel, he observed and kept the same seventh sacred day they did, which
with them was called the day of the Sun, on which day they usually met together
1 Cor. 16.2. Acts 20.7.
. There arose no small difference between the converted Jews, and the
converted Gentiles hereabout. The Jews esteeming the Saturday to be more holy
then the Sunday, condemned the Gentiles for Prophaners of the Sabbath, because
they observed not the Saturday: and for that they kept the day of the Sun, the
Jews held them to be Worshippers of the Sun as other Gentises were. The
Gentiles on the other side upbraided the Jews as superstitious, for their
observing their set holy days, (whereof their Saterday-Sabbath from evening to
evening was one) which were abolished. This upbraiding and condemning one
another in things indifferent St. Paul speaks against, and writes to the
contrary in his Epistle to the Romans Romans 14.5.
, and to the Colossiaus Col. 2.16.
. The Jews were no more bound thenceforth by the law of God to keep their
Sabbath on the Saturday then on the Sunday. The Sabbath Day by the Lord
commanded to them, and to all in this law, being not this or that day, but the
seventh, relating to the fix days of our labor before-going, is the seventh
day of the week with all people. Now that it may the better appear what the
seventh day of the week is, and that Sunday is the seventh day of the week with
us, and generally with all Christians, I will show

1. What some have held to be a week, in chap. 11. 2. What a week, and what the
week is; and what the seventh day of the week is, in chap. 12. 3. The Antiquity
of weeks, in chap. 13. 4. What has been chiefly objected against the Antiquity
of weeks, in chap. 14. 5. That Sunday was the seventh day sacred with the
Gentiles, in chap. 15. 6. Why the Gentiles after their Conversion, continued
Sunday to be their standing day of the week for Gods worship; though it had
been before idolatrously abused to the worship of the Sun, in chap. 16.
CHAP. XI. The Opinion of some concerning weeks. How it is hatched from the
earths supposed plainness.
IT has been the general Opinion, not only of the vulgar, but of the learned
also, that the seventh day commanded us in this law, has relation only to the
six work-dayes of the Lord God, and not to the six work-dayes with men, as if
the meaning of these words of the Commandment, Six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath to the Lord thy God, (so it
is in the Hebrew) should be thus. The six days in which I wrought when I
created all things, shall be thy six work-dayes, in them thou shall do all thy
work, but the seventh day wherein I rested thou shall rest, and do none of thy
works on any part of that day; but shall keep that day holy, it is the day of
my rest.

From hence they will have a week to be none other with any people, but seven
such days, whereof the six former days be the same with the first six days
of the Creation, and the seventh be the same with the day of Gods rest. Weeks
in use with the Jews they held to be such; the first six days of their week,
to be the same with the six days on which God wrought; and their seventh day,
which was from Friday at the setting of the Sun to Saterdays Sunsetting, to be
the very day of Gods rest. Though Sunday be the day following the six days of
labor with us, and on which we rest from our labor, having wrought six days
before, yet we do not rest on the seventh day (as they say) according to Gods
example; but on the first day: from Sunday to Sunday they will not have to be a
week, but from Saturday to Saturday only.

And from hence do they, who deny the Morality of the Seventh-day Sabbath teach
and write, that the boundary or seventh day of the week must be the day of Gods
rest; and that the day of Gods rest was the very day which God blessed and
sanctified, and in this law commanded to be kept holy, and that the Jews
Sabbath only was the seventh-day Sabbath, which in this law is commanded to be
observed holy; and that the Jews Sabbath Day being Ceremonial, and abolished
by the coming of the Messiah, the seventh-day Sabbath in this law expressly
commanded to be sanctified, is abolished also, and not to be observed by
Christians; and that since no other set day is instituted in stead thereof by
any divine authority, it rests in the bosom of the Church or Magistrates, to
appoint what day they please for Gods public worship.

Though all and every of these be very false, yet are they all by these men
held to be even as true as their Creed; they little considering from how
unsound and rotten a root, these and every of them have had their first spring,
and that is from a supposal that the earth is plain and not round.

It is an odd, but an old conceit of some Philosophers, which afterward was
held and maintained by the ancient Fathers, that the earth was not round, but
plain as a Championfield. They thought there could be no dwellers under the
earth which go foot to foot against us: and that if there should be any
Antipodes imagined, yet them not to be Adams Posterity, whom they held to have
all dwelt upon the earth, and to have been all drowned except eight persons,
when Noah's flood covered all the face of the earth. So strong did this opinion
prevail with the said Fathers, as that whoever held the contrary, was counted
near as bad as an Heretic. Witness Vigilius whom some call Virgilius, who was
complained of by Boniface unto Zachary then Pope, and was degraded for holding
that there were Antipodes, and that they had a Sun and Moon to shine unto them
as well as to us. This story may be seen in Aventine Aven. Annal. Bar. l. 3.
, and in Baronius, who sought to cover the fact with fig leaves.

Now that the adversaries to the Morality of this law held all those tenants
before-said, and that they all sprang from this error of the earths supposed
plain superficies, I will next show. For the clearing whereof I need not cite
many of them, one may serve for all, being approved by them all. Neither will I
tell here all that he writes hereabout, but that which chiefly concerns the
point in hand.

Mr. Ironside a Reverend Divine, and of singular gifts and parts, but
over-swayed by the stream of late times, does in his book called the Seven
Questions of the Sabbath, dedicated to the late Archbishop of Canterbury,
William Laud, tell us.

First, that it is necessary, not only for the learned, but also for the weak
and inferior sort of people, to know to a minute when the Lords day or Sabbath
does begin, and when it does end, and that for two special reasons. The one is
for the Peace and quiet of their consciences, which else would be wounded and
disquieted. The other is, for that unless the very day and the whole day be
kept to a Minute, all the duties done on that day are lost. His words are these.

It is necessary to inquire of the dimensions of this day, of what duration and
continuance of time it must be Irens. 7. Quest. page 2.
. Amongst those things which disquiet and perplex the Consciences of the weak,
concerning the Lords day, this is not the least, where it is to begin, and how
long it lasts. For God requiring of us perfect and entire obedience, without
diminution or defalcation; unless every minute of time, which the Lord
requires of us as his tribute and homage, be duly tendered to him; our whole
labor bestowed upon the parts and pieces of the day is not regarded Page 126.
. It is also that which concerns the most sort of our inferior People to be
satisfied in, lest the Commandment requiring one thing, their employments
another, they many times wound their consciences, and rob themselves of that
Peace, which otherwise they might enjoy Page 127.
. 2ly, that God might have his due tribute, and the weak (if they will) may
keep their consciences quiet in observing the true and full time of the
Sabbath, he sets down the precise day of the Sabbath (as he conceives) and
the exact time to a minute when the Sabbath Day is to begin. As for the day, he
tells us that the Sabbath Day, must be precisely the day of Gods rest. Thus

As Soon as God had ended his work, he ordained and appointed, that the seventh
day, the day of his own rest, (else he will not conceive that it can be the
seventh day) should be that on which the Church should rest Page 21.
. Unless we rest that very seventh day in which God rested, we no more
resemble his rest, then a man that has a ladder resembles Jacob that had a
vision of a ladder Page 90.
. As for the exact time when the Sabbath is to begin and end, he tells us, that
the very minute in which the Sun is in the Horizon at his rising, is the true
beginning of the day, and he proves that it must so be, for that when the
fourth day at the Creation began, the Sun was then in the Horizon at his
rising, so that any of the inferior sort of people, he before spoke of, may by
looking in his Almanac, tell to a minute (if Mr. Ironsides rule fail him not)
at any time throughout all the year, and in any place through out the world,
when the 4th day of the Creation, and the very day of Gods rest, and so
consequently when the Sabbath begins. These are his words.

If the natural day be measured by the Revolution of the Sun, as all
confess, sure it is that until the Sun begin his course, the day cannot begin.
At what time now did the Sun set forth, upon the fourth day at the Creation?
Common reason will say, when he first appeared in the Horizon. The rising
therefore of the Sun in the Horizon, must needs be the first Period of the
natural day I rons. 7. Qu page c 123.
.

3ly, he tells us that the Jews Sabbath Day was the day of Gods rest; and the
same with that which God blessed and sanctified, making no difference between
all these three. His words are these.

That particular Sabbath Day given unto the Jews, even the day of Gods rest, is
not a Sabbath, but the Sabbath, even that which God sanctified. The Sabbath
must be the same with the seventh, or else there is no tolerable sense, or
congruity in that law Page 70.
. Whereas he says, the same with the 7th, he means by the 7th, the 7th day
from the Creation, even the very day of Gods rest, which he proved to begin at
the rising of the Sun like as the 4th day did.

Now whereas some may, and that not without just cause, doubt how the day of
Gods rest which began at Sunrising (as he says) and the Jews Sabbath, which
ever began at the setting of the Sun whersoever they dwelt, could be one and
the same day: Since that they, as well in respect of their beginnings, as also
in respect of their endings are heavenly wide the one from the other: even as
far as the Sunrising is distant from Sunsetting; between both which there
must be half a days difference. And so the day of Gods rest must begin either
at Sunrising before the Jews Sabbath Day began; or at the Sunrising after. If
at the Sunrising before, that is on the Friday morning; then the Turks Sabbath
(so Doctor Heylin calls it) may more truly be called the day of Gods rest,
Heyl. part. 1. page 48.
then that of the Jews: But if at the Sunrising after; then our Christian
Sabbath Day ever began on the day of Gods rest, the which the Jews Sabbath
never did.

For the wiping off this, and all such doubts, Mr. Ironside tells us both at
what time, and also by what means the day of Gods rest and the Jews Sabbath was
made to be one and the same day; which were always two before. His words are.

When God commanded the Jews their Sabbaths from evening to evening, the order
of the natural day was inverted by him; not so much looking to the number of
four and twenty hours, as to the time of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt,
which began when the Passover was eaten at even Iron. pa. 138.
, etc. His meaning in these his Words may be conceived to be this: When God
commanded the Jews, after their coming out of Egypt, to keep their Sabbath on
the Saturday, and to begin the same at the Sunsetting of the day before-going,
that is on the Friday at the setting of the Sun, God miraculously at an
instant turned the East into the West, and so the place of Sunrising came unto
the place of Sunsetting so close, as that they kissed each other, as he says,
the end of one contiguum is the beginning of the other. Iron. pa. 138.
If such should not be his meaning; it is not to be conceived how he should
make Sunrising, and Sunsetting, or the day of Gods rest, which he says,
began at Sunrising, and the Jews Sabbath, which began at Sunsetting, to be
one and the same.

Fourthly, and lastly; he tells us that the observation of the Sabbath is
abrogated; this error is strong with him, because the Jews Sabbath Day is
abrogated; he thinking no difference to be made between the Jews Sabbath Day,
and the Sabbath Day here in this Law commanded to be kept holy; whereas they
differ, as does the species from its Genus. And from hence he infers that
it wholly rests in the power of the Church, and Magistrates to appoint the
time for Gods public worship. His words are these.

The Observation of that Sabbath which is pretended to have been commanded Adam
in Paradise, is abrogated by Christ, as he is the Messiah, even that day, on
which God rested; and which he sanctified Iron. pa. 12.
. The letter of the Law of Moses being wholly ceremonial, it must be, that the
determinate time of cessation from works, together with the manner, in regard
of the strictness thereof is wholly left to the power, and wisdom of the
Church, and Magistrate pa. 225.
. Now if any reasonable man will weigh these tenants of Master Ironside, he may
plainly perceive that they, and every of them do flow from the supposal of the
earths plainness. If this be true, so must the other: and if false, then so
must all, and every of the other be false also: they all either stand, or fall
together: and so will their contraries also issuing from the earths roundnesse.
For

Let it be granted that the earth is plain, all these following will be true,
and not otherwise. Let it be granted that the Earth is round, all these
following will be true, and not otherwise. 1. There is but one Horizon to all
nations and places. 1. Every Nation and place have a several Horizon differing
from other. 2. The Sun was in the Horizon at his rising, when on the fourth day
of the Creation he first appeared, and began his course for that day. 2. The
Sun when he first appeared, was directly over some part of the earth or other,
and shone most gloriously on half the earth, making it to be noon then in the
place under him, and in all places of the same Meridian The Sun cannot properly
be said to be then in the Horizon, unless it be meant to some particular place
or other; as in the Horizon to London, etc. 3. The rising of the Sun in the
Horizon, was the first period of the fourth day, and of the seventh day, the
day of Gods rest. 3. The first period of the fourth day, and so of the day of
Gods rest, was noon in some places, and one, two, three, etc. of the Clock in
the afternoon in some, and eight, nine, ten, etc. of the Clock in the forenoon
in some other places. 4. Men who can tell exactly, when it is Sunrising with
them, may tell to a minute when the day of Gods rest does begin with them in
any place. 4. The wisest man on earth cannot tell, either at York, or at Rome,
or at at any other place, the just time when the day of Gods rest did or does
begin, within eleven hours of our day. 5. Every weekday is the same day in
all places, all having the same Sunrising. 5. As People are distant in place,
so have they different Horizons, and as their Horizons differ, so do their
week-dayes from being the very same. 6. The seventh day, even the day of Gods
rest, is the seventh day of the week with all people, as well in Dublin,
Salisbury, Jerusalem, Virginea, Japan, as in all other places, all having the
same Horizon. Though the day of the coming of the Son of man in glory be
unknown, and likewise the hour, whether at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing,
or at the day-dawning, yet if it shall be on the Saturday with some, it shall
be on the Saturday with all; and if it be at midnight with some, it shall be at
midnight with all; or if at the Cock-crowing or at the day-dawning with some,
then so shall it be with all. 6. The day of Gods rest, which is the seventh day
from the Creation, is the same universal day with all people, but it cannot be
the same day of the week with all people. If the day of Gods rest be Saturday
with some, it must needs be Friday or Sunday with some other people. So
likewise the time of Christ's coming to judge the world, if it be on the
Saturday with some, it will not be on the Saturday with all, but on the Sunday
or Friday with some others, also if it be at midnight with some, it shall be at
Cock-crowing with other some, and at day-dawning with some others, but it will
not be at midnight with all: nor at Cock-crowing, nor at day-dawning with all.
7. As the seventh day from the Creation, even the day of Gods rest, is the
Saturday, that is, the seventh day of the week with all people, so be all the
six days of the Creation, the same with the six days of the week with all
people. 7. As the day of Gods rest cannot be the Saturday nor the seventh day
of the week with all people: so cannot the six days of the Creation, be the
same with the six days of the week with all people. 8. The seventh day which
God blessed and sanctified, and commanded in this law to be kept holy, was the
very day of Gods rest, which (after God had inverted the day, turning morning
into evening) came to be the same day with the Jews Sabbath where ever they
dwelt; and began at Sunsetting in all places wherever the Jews abode, as in
Arabia, Jerusalem, Babylon, Rome, Spain, Ophyr, and in all other places, where
the Jews had never any abiding place; for all places having one and the same
Horizon, must have their day to be one and the same, and to begin at one and
the same time. 8. The seventh day which God blessed and sanctified, and
commanded in this law to be kept holy, was not the day of Gods rest. For this
cannot any where be known when it begins or ends, and if it should be
known, yet all Gods people in all places could not keep the same, though they
had never fallen by Adam. And whether there was or was not an inversion of the
day made as aforesaid, yet the day of Gods rest could not be the same day with
the Jews Sabbath: for this they did or might keep from Sunsetting to
Sunsetting, in Arabia, Jerusalem, Babylon, Rome, Spain, Ophyr, and in all
other places of their abode: but the day of Gods rest they did not, nor
possibly could they keep the same from Sunsetting to Sunsetting, in all
places where any of them had their abode, unless the surface of the earth had
been plain, and not round. 9. The Jews had not rested on the seventh day
according to Gods example, had they not rested on that very seventh day on
which God rested. 9. The Jews neither did, nor could keep that very seventh
day on which God rested, in all places, as has been showed. But as we
according to Gods example, work six days and rest the 7th, so did they. As the
Sunday with Christians was ever the day following their 6 days of labor, so
was the Saturday with the Jews. 10. The Jews Sabbathday, being the day of
Gods rest, and the day which God appointed by this law to be kept holy, is
wholly abolished, and abrogated by the coming of the Messiah, and no other day
is commanded by the Lord instead thereof, therefore it now rests in the power
of the Church and Magistrates to appoint what day they please for Gods public
worship. 10. The Jews Sabbath Day was not the day of Gods rest, as has been
showed. Neither as it was the Saturday, their seventh from their first
gathering Quails and Manna: Nor as it began at the setting of the Sun, was it
directly by this law commanded to any. In these respects it was Ceremonial and
abolished. That which is expressed in this Commandment, they and all else are
still bonnd to; which is, that having wrought the six days of labor, they
rest on the seventh day according to Gods example, and keep it holy to the
Lord. From this neither they nor any else living is freed. It is Gods law, it
will be great impiety, and intrenching into the Prerogative of the most high
God, for any persons whatsoever, and under any pretense soever, to seek the
alteration or change hereof: or to set and appoint any other day for Gods
public worship, in the stead of that which he himself has set and appointed.
If the earth be plain, all and every one of the ten before-going are true; but
if round, they must be all false. If the earth be round, all and every one of
the ten before-going are true; but if plain, they all must needs be false.

I Having now showed the opinion of the most concerning weeks, and the ground
from whence that and many other errors sprang, among which this is none of the
least; That the day of Gods rest, the precise seventh day from the beginning of
the Creation, was the seventh day, which God commanded his Church in this law
to keep holy, as if the seventh day which God blessed and sanctified, and
commanded us in this Law should not relate to the six days labor of the week
in use with men where they live, but to the six first days of the Creation, and
so should be with people where ever they dwell, the very day of Gods rest; from
whence all our many and great contentions about the Sabbath have been raised
and fostered: I will in the next show what weeks are.

CHAP. XII. What a Week is. The Seventh day of the Week is the Lords day.
A Week is the space of time made by seven whole days without intermission.

By seven days, I mean seven such days as are all of one and the same kind.
If any of them be horizontall days, they are all to be horizontal days, such
as were the seven days of the Week with the Jews. And if any be meridional,
they are all to be meridional days, as are the days of the week with
Christians. The Jews Sabbath, or seventg day was from Sun-fettinh to
Sunsetting; therefore so should the six days of their week be also. The six
days of our week are from midnight, to midnight and therefore the seventh is
not to be from Sunsetting to Sunsetting, but from midnight to midnight also.
The seventh day must relate to the six days before-going. The seventh day,
which was the day of Gods rest, cannot relate to the six days of work with any
people: Nor can the seventh day of the week with any people relate to the six
days of Gods work at the creation; these were not of the same kind of days
with the week-dayes that now are, or at any time heretofore have been, or can
be in use with men, as I have already fully proved See Chap. 5.
.

That seven whole days without intermission from any time, as from Sunday to
Sunday, or from Saturday to Saturday, or from Monday to Monday is a week may
appear.

First, from the several names and appellations by which a week is called with
people of several tongues and languages. Our ancient Saxons, and we from them
call it Sennight; and two such weeks fortnight; that is seven nights, and
fourteen nights. The Romans called it Septimana; that is, seven mornings,
taking the morning for the whole day, as the Saxons did the night. With the
Greeks it was called (...), which is defined to be Intervallum septem dierum:
That is, seven days. The Hebrews called a week not seven nights, as the Saxons
did, nor seven mornings, as the Romans did, but as the Greeks did (...) seven
days, or (...) that is, a seveny of days

Secondly, frequently in holy Scripture, seven days from any set time is
counted a week. Laban bade Jacob fulfill her week Gen 23.27.
: meaning the seven days of Leas marriage: Such was the usual time for
marriage-feasts in those days Judge. 14.10, 12.
. If a woman was at any time delivered of a man-child she was to be unclean
seven days; or a week: but if she was delivered of a maid-childe Lev. 12 2, 5.
, she was to be unclean (...), that is, two weeks: And so is it in our last
Translation. The Lord appointed the Jews to count for their feast of Pentecost
called their feast of weeks, thus. On the morrow after the feast day of the
Passover (which never fell on the same day of the week two years together)
shall thou number unto thee seven weeks Levit. 23.11, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 16.9.
. So that it is evident, that these their weeks for meting out unto them their
feast of Pentecost, began from different times, or days of their Sabbatical
week.

Thirdly, seven days so succeeding each other, as that their boundary be the
seventh day, every indifferent man will grant to be a week. But such may be from
any set time, or day. Such were the seven days of unleavend bread: they began
sometimes on Monday, sometimes on Tuesday, and sometimes on other days, and
never two years together on one and the same day of the Jews Sabbatical week.
Yet were those seven days a week with them, even their week of Sweet Bread;
the boundary whereof was the seventh day Lev. 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.8. Exodus 12.16.
. There is no difference made either in respect of letters, vowels, or accents
between the seventh day of the week of sweet bread before-said, and the seventh
day of their Sabbatical week, which with them was the Sabbath Day of the Lord.
The like is to be said of the weeks appointed to their Priests for their
judgment in the case of Leprosy Lev. 13.5, 27.
. And of the weeks of Daniels mourning Dan. 10.2, 3.
. By all which it is clear that a week is seven days succeeding each other
from any set time, or day: and that if the first day thereof be known, the
seventh day of the same will be known also.

Next, we are to know what the seventh day of the week is, being the day here
in this Law commanded to be kept holy.

There is much difference between a seventh day and the seventh day. Every day
of a week is a seventh day; but only the boundary thereof is the seventh day of
that week. In like manner, there is much difference between the seventh day of
a week, and the seventh day of the week. The seventh day from the birth of a
child is the seventh day of a week, and the boundary thereof; then was the
child a week old. The last day of the week of unleavened-bread was the seventh
day of a week; and so was the seventh day appointed to the Priest in the case
of Leprosy, as before was showed; but it was not the seventh day of the week,
of the week whose boundary is sacred, and commanded to be kept holy. This week
is the week (...), it has some excellency in it, which other weeks have not:
and that in respect of its use, constancy and universality.

First, it is more excellent then other-weeks, in regard of its excellent use;
which is to measure out to men what days are common, and what are sacred:
which are their six days in which they may work, and which is the Lords day in
which they may not work; according to the Lords own standard held out unto us
in this Law. Six days shall thou labor, etc. But the seventh-day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. God by this Law tyeth no nation to a set
hour, or time when to begin their week: nor by what names they should call the
days of their week. But he tyeth all Nations that at what time soever they
begin the week, they work not on the seventh day, but sanctify it: It is the
Lords. All other weeks are for use inferior to this. Other weeks may serve for
to show the just time for payments of moneys, weekly or monthly billetting of
soldiers, taking of journeys, and for a thousand other reckonings in Civil
affairs, but all inferior in use unto this.

Secondly, other weeks are more inconstant then this, they vary in one and the
same place, or else continue but a short time. The weeks of Sweet bread varied
every year with the Jews, like as their Passover did, which never fell on
the same weekday two years together, but were as unconstant as the Moon.
Weeks for payments of moneys, billeting soldiers, etc. are of short
continuance. Of those that do use them, seldom or never do all of the same City
or Town begin them at the same time; Whereas weeks in use for pointing out the
seventh day sacred are constant.

Thirdly, other weeks are not generally in use with all. All do not billet by
the week, nor pay, nor receive wages by the week, neither do men generally make
their reckonings and accounts by weeks. But weeks for measuring out the six
days of labor, and the seventh day sacred, have been in use with all People
and Nations of any note and fame, not only with Christians and Jews, but also
with Turks and Heathen-Nations. Though the week was not the same with them all,
and therefore their seventh day sacred could not be the same with all; yet all
had seven days to the week, and all had the seventh day of their week sacred.
The Turks seventh sacred day with them called Algama is on our Friday, because
on that day Mahumet fled from Mecha to Jethrib Twiss. p. 119.
. The Jews kept their seventh sacred day on our Saturday, beginning the same
on Friday at the setting of the Sun, because at that time the Israelites first
began their six days of gathering Quails and sustenance; as may appear in
Exodus 16. And because at that time of the day their deliverance out of Egypt
was assured and sealed unto them Deuteronomy. 6^6.
, and also for that the Lord commanded them to do so Lev. 23.32.
. And Christians keep their seventh day sacred on the Sunday, beginning the
same with the morning; chiefly for that our Lord and Savior at Jerusalem made
his glorious Resurrection on the Sunday morning. The Gentiles also had the
Sunday for their seventh sacred day, though they kept it sacred in honor of
the Sun, of which I shall say more anon See chap. 15.
. In these respects this week may truly be said to be more excellent then all
other, and the boundary thereof to be not only the seventh day of a week, but
the seventh day of the week.

CHAP. XIII. The Antiquity of weeks proved.
THe Antiquity of weeks may be gathered.

First, from that it has been the general practice of most Nations, to have
just seven days to the week: and every particular day of the week to bear the
name of the same Heathenish god, or planet with them all; even with those
Nations between whom there was no commerce or traffic; and were unknown the
one to the other. How can it be conceived, that many Nations should have
neither more nor less then seven days to the week, and to have the day of the
Sun to be Sunday with them all, and the day of the Moon to be Monday with all,
and so every weekday to be the same with them all, (except with the Jews and
Turks, who only as far as I can read of, altered their week, the Jew beginning
the same on the Sunday, and the Turk on the Saturday, for the reasons before
given) had not their Ancestors (before ever they were dispersed, far from the
land of Shinar and Assyria) under the Assyrian Monarchy, in the time the
planets were held the gods of the world, so counted the week, and called every
weekday by the name of the same planet, as now generally we do.

They who shall be alive in America three hundred years hence, and see there
so many Nations of different tongues, and all to have just seven days to the
week, and all to have Sunday for their seventh sacred day, and call every of
their other week-dayes alike, will they not say or conceive that this could
never have so happened, had not their Ancestors in Europe observed weeks, and
had just so many days to the week, and call every day of the week by the same
names before ever they removed thence, and were dispersed into so many and
various plantations in America? The like may we well conceive of the ancient
Saxons, Romans, Egyptians, and other ancient Nations, that it could never so
have happened, that every of them should have weeks, and just seven days to
the week, and every weekday to be called by the name of the same planet with
them all, had not their Ancestors under the Assyrian Monarchs, who first set up
the idolatry of worshipping the planets, observed seven days to the week, and
called the week-dayes by the same names of the planets, before they came to be
planted abroad in several Nations.

Secondly, Adam at first had no other measure to mete out his age and time, but
days and weeks. These he had from the Lords standard, who having wrought six
days and rested the seventh, did sanctify the seventh day. Adam knew all
ereatures at the first sight of them, and gave names to the creatures suitable
to their natures. He knew them to be not eternal, nor a year old, and therefore
might as well know their age to a day. When the Lord brought Eve unto him he
knew her by sight. He knew she was not three days, nor a day old. He knew that
she was made of him, and on the same sixth day in which he himself was made;
and that the Lord on the next day rested from his works of Creation. By this
pattern and standard of the Lord, he might mete out time by weeks before he
could have any experimental knowledge of months and years, which were
afterward in time gotten by observation of the course of the Sun and Moon. And
we find, that in ancient times there was much difference and variation in the
count of years and months with people: Some had but three months, some ten,
the Jews had sometimes twelve, and sometimes thirteen months to the year.
Their months did also much differ for length, but never was the week counted
to be more or less then seven days with any people.

Thirdly, from the testimony of sundry learned and pious Writers. Chrysostom
thus, Jam hinc ab initio doctrinam hanc nobis insinuat Deus, erudiens in
circulo hebdomadae diem unum integrum segregandum, and reponendum ad
spiritualem operationem Chrysostom. Homil 10. in Genesis
.

Aug. Steuchius on Genesis 2. speaking of the seventh day, affirms it to be in
omni aetate inter omnes Gentes, venerabilis and sacer.

Beda in his Hexameron testifies, that the rest of the seventh day semper
celebrari solebat.

They who compiled the book of Homilies, tell us, That it is according to the
law of Nature to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest
from our lawful works Hom. for the time of Prayer.
.

Mercer commended by Dr. Heylin for a learned Protestant Heyl. part. 1. page 5.
, is of opinion, that the first Fathers being taught of God, kept the seventh
day holy.

Philo Judaeus also makes this challenge, Quis sacrum illum diem per singulas
hebdomadas recurrentem non honorat Phil. de vita Mos. l. 2.
?

Josephus to the same purpose, Neque est ulla Civitas Graecorum aut Barbarorum:
neque ulla gens ad quam septimi diei, in quo vacamus, consuetudo minime
pervenerit Joseph. Cont. App. l. 2.
.

Fourthly, from the testimony of ancient heathen Poets, such as Homer, Hesiod,
Gallimachus and Liuus, who have spoken very laudably of the Creation and of the
seventh day Clem. Alexan. Strom. l. 5.
. This knowledge of the Creation, and of the seventh day, and consequently of
the count of days by sevens or weeks, they could not have but by tradition, or
from the Books of Moses. From the Books of Moses doubtless they had it not,
for they were not extant in the Greek tongue, until Prolomie prevailed to get
seventy two Seniors of the Jews to turn them into Greek, which was many
hundreds of years after Homer. While-as the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah
flourished, the Gentiles could never get the least parcel of sacred Scripture.
The Jews counted it to be an high profanation of the Books of Moses, if they
were any ways communicated to the Heathen. John Gregory plentifully shows
and proves, that before this interpretation was made by the said 72 Seniors,
the Heathen had no light from the Books of Moses Jo Greg. discourse of the
seventy, etc.
. If it should be supposed that the Poets got the knowledge of the seventh day
from the Books of Moses, then must it be the Jews Saterday-Sabbath which they
spoke so laudably of; but they knew that to be an holy day with them no
ancienter then Moses, Septimum diem more Gentis Sabbatum appellatum in omne
oevum jejunio sacravit Moses; The seventh day with that Nation, called the
Sabbath Moses made a perpetual Holy day, says Trogus Trog. l. 36.
; for which supposed innovation brought in by Moses, the Heathen generally
envied them, and their Poets wrote very disgracefully of them about their
Sabbath Day. It was not then from Moses, but by tradition, that they had the
knowledge of the Creation and of the seventh day.

Fifthly, Gomarus, who with all his might opposed the Morality of the
Sabbath Day, does yet acknowledge, that Adam, Methuselah, Sem and Abraham, had
knowledge of the Creation and of the seventh day Gomar. de Sab. p. 113.
; And why not Moses also, and thousands beside them? Moses indeed had a full
knowledge by divine revelation, and infallible inspiration by the Holy Ghost,
which guided him in the Historical relation of the Creation of all things, and
of the day of Gods rest, as well as of other things related in his books, yet
questionless he had some general knowledge by tradition, of most things he
wrote of, as they were delivered from father to son unto his days. It would
have been a very wild conceit of Gomarus to think, when he wrote that the
knowledge of the Creation and of the seventh day, came from Adam to Methuselah,
and from him to Sem, and from Sem to Abraham, that the knowledge thereof was
intailed to the heirs male, or to some persons in a lineal descent from Noah
to Abraham, and not to others also. Incredible is it, that Noah should teach
the knowledge thereof to Sem only, and not to Cham and Japhet too; and that Sem
should reveal the same to Arphaxad only, keeping it as a secret from all other
his sons and daughters: and that Arphaxad should do the like unto Sala, and
he to Heber, and he to Peleg, and he to Reu, and he to Serug, and he to Nahor,
and he to Terah, and he to Abraham: and that none of them should impart that
knowledge to any other of their sons and daughters: and that the remembrance,
as well of the seventh day, as of the Creation, was wholly extinct with
Abraham. Without all peradventure Cham and Japhet, and their Posterities had
and retained the knowledge thereof for many generations; some of them to the
days of the before-named Poets, and long after too. Orpheus, Aeschylus,
Aratus, Pindarus, Epicharmus, and others mentioned by Clemens, could else never
have spoken so truly of Jehovah, (whom they called Jove,) as he relates them
to have done Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 5.
.

Sixthly, from the testimony of those who have been the chief Writers against
the Sabbath.

1. Mr. Ironside professes that he makes no question, but that the Heathen
who never heard of a seventh-day Sabbath, have weeks as well as months and
years Irons. chap. 4.
. But he thinks they had the knowledge hereof by the subdivision of months, as
if knowing most of our months to consist of one and thirty days, by
subdividing them there must be just seven, rather then eight days to the week.
And a little after, It is true, says he, that Clemens Alexandrinus brings many
Authorities out of Homer, Hesiod and Callimachus, to prove that the very
Heathen knew that the seventh day was to be kept holy Irons. chap. 9.
; which they could not know or do without the observation of weeks, but herein
he holds them to be thieves of holy things, having stolen this light out of
Moscs writings, which they had translated: whereas the Heathen had not Moses
books translated, hundreds of years after Homer, as I before showed; concerning
which I refer the Reader to that learned Discourse of John Gregory of the
seventy Interpreters.

2. Dr. Heylin in his History of the Sabbath, and in the second part, tells us,
That Christians of the first ages called the days of the week according as
they found the time divided, and that we retain those names amongst us
(whereat some are become offended) which were commended to us by our Ancestors,
and to them by theirs He, l. Part. 2, page 61.
. He shows out of Polydore Virgil, that Pope Sylvester hating the name and
memory of the Gentile gods, (by whose names they called the week-dayes) gave
order that the days should be called by the name of Feriae, and the
distinction to be made by Prima feria, Secunda feria, etc. And out of Honorius
Augustodunensis, that the Hebrews call their days, (he means their
week-dayes) the first of the Sabbath, etc. The Pagans thus; The day of the Sun,
the day of the Moon, etc. And Christians thus; The Lords day, Feria Prima, etc
Page 62.
. He says further, That they are more nice then wise, who out of a desire to
have all things new, would have new names for every day (of the week he
means) or call them as sometimes they were, The first day of the week, the
second day of the week, etc. and all for fear lest it be thought that we do
still adore those gods whom the Gentiles worshipped. St. Augustine as it seems,
had met with some this way affected, and thus disputes the Case with Faustus
Manichaeus. The Gentiles (says the Father) gave unto every day of the week the
name of one or other of their gods: and so they did also unto every month. If
then we keep the name of March and not think of Mars, why may we not preserve
the day of Saturn and not think of Saturn? Dr. Heylin adds, Why may we then
not keep the name of Sunday, and not think of Phoebus or Apollo, or by what
other name soever the old Poets call him Heyl. par. 2. Page 63.
?

3. Dr. Francis White, late Bishop of Ely, who has also written against the
Morality of the Sabbath, does yet acknowledge one day in seven for Gods
worship, to be most agreeable to reason Dr. White de Sab. page 90, 107, 151.
, which presupposes weeks to be from the beginning, unless men were then void
of reason.

4. Gomarus also, who has stoutly written against the Sabbath, does confess
that Methuselah, Sem and Abraham, retained the knowledge of the Creation, and
of the seventh day Gomar. de Sab. p. 113.
, though he will at no hand grant that they kept it holy, yet their retaining
the memory and knowledge of the seventh day, proves them to have observation
of weeks.

Seventhly, they who compiled the book of Homilies, tell us, That it is
according to the law of nature to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein
we ought to rest from our lawful works Hom. for the time of Prayer.
; but this could never be done without the observation of weeks.

Lastly, Dr. Twisse shows and proves, that the distinction of time by weeks,
was observed by the Gentiles from all Antiquity, and confirms the same out of
many learned Writers, to whose book of the Morality of the fourth Commandment I
refer the Reader, and therein chiefly to these pages, 12, 13, 15, 59, 60, 63,
77, 78, 151, 152, 153, 189, 199, 200, 208. to 214. As also to Rivetus, de
Origin Sabbati, and therein chiefly to the pages, 15.16, 63, 64, 65, 66. to 81.

CHAP. XIV. Objection against Antiquity of weeks answered. The hourly
Government of the Planets is feigned.
THere be many who have published abroad to the world, that there is a certain
hourly Rule or Government which the planets have given them of the Creator, by
which every of them successively, and in a vicissitude, does govern his hour
according to this common distich, Cynthia, Mercurius, Venus, and Sol, Mars,
Jove, Satur,
Ordine retrogado sibi quivis vindicat horam.


Hence they say, that until this hourly Government was by skilful Astronomers
found out and known, the Gentiles had no weeks, and having no weeks they could
not have the seventh day sacred; supposing none before this to have weeks but
the Jews only, and therefore none but they to have a Sabbath Day.

Among many other Doctor Heylin was of this opinion, who from hence does argue
the Sabbath Day not to be moral, being not observed or known but by the Jews
only. He would have us take it for granted, that no Nation without the
knowledge of Astrology, (the Jews excepted) whereby men came first to know the
planets hourly Government, and so consequently what planet governed the first
hour in every day, could have weeks, or call the week-dayes by the names of
the planets. The Gentiles (says he) following the motion of the planets, gave
to each day the name of that particular planet, by which the first hour of the
day was governed as their Astrologers had taught them Heyl. par. 2. page 61.
. And he assumeth that Astrologers found out this knowledge of the Planetary
government but in later times. All the Chaldean Astrologers, all the Magicians
among the Persians he held to be ignorant herein, and therefore during the
Assyrian and Persian Monarchy weeks not to be in use. Yea he tells us farther
that neither the Greeks, nor Romans when they were in their greatest flourish
for Arts and Empire had weeks, because they had not as then gotten this
supposed excellency of Astrology, to know by the motions of the planets, what
planet governed the first hour in every day Heyl. part 1. page 84.
. Though the planets had (as some say) this orderly and hourly government,
even from the day of their creation; Yet the Doctor holds that neither Plato,
nor Pythagoras, nor any of the famous Astronomers before Eudoxus, had gotten
this excellency. First says he, the Greeks learnt the motions of the planets
of Eudoxus, and therefore could not know the week before. He does grant that
they might have great. Astrologers among them, and yet be ignorant of this
hourly government of the planets, whereby they constantly point out the week
and the days of the week. For he says of the Romans, that they were well
enough acquainted with the planets in their later times; Yet they divided not
their Calendar into weeks till near about the time of Dionisius Exiguus, who
lived about the year of Christ 520 Heyl. par. 1. page 84.
. But he holds that they (being ignorant of the Scriptures) could not have
weeks before they had gotten this knowledge by the motions of the planets. And
from hence concludes, that the Chaldees, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, all the
four great Monarchies did observe no Sabbaths, because they did observe no
weeks.

In answer hereunto I say, that if it be true which the Doctor would; that
without the holy Scripture weeks could not be known but by the knowledge of the
said hourly government of the Planets; and that this government of the Planets
was not found till the Egyptians of late times, and Eudoxus from them had
gotten the knowledge thereof; it must needs be confessed, not only what the
Doctor thence infers, that all the four great Monarchies did observe no
Sabbath, because they did observe no weeks. But that the Patriarchs before the
flood, and all Nations, and people whatsoever (the Jews only excepted) were
without a Sabbath Day, and could not have the seventh day sacred with any of
them till about the time of Eudoxus, who was Platoes scholar, because they
neither had nor could have weeks before.

But for answer in plain terms. It is very untrue what the Doctor alleges.
There was never any such hourly government of the planets found out, but
feigned. Neither had the week-dayes their names first from the planets
governing the first hour of the day. Both which I will clear and make apparent.

Touching the former; There is no such hourly government found out in deed and
truth; but there has such an one feigned to be; and that upon a new order, or
situation of the planets made by Astronomers in later times.

For in ancient times the Moon was held to be the lowest planet, and the Sun
to be next unto her, and all the other five planets to be above the Sun. This
was the order of the planets generally held in ancient times by Astronomers
Macrob. in Somn Scip. l. 1. cap. 19. Plut. brev. de Decr. Not l. 2. Clov. de
Sphae. page 7.9.
, excepting very few, as Aristarcus, Samius, and two or three other whom
Copernicus followed making the Sun to be below them all; but afterward, about
Eudoxus time, or not long after, Astronomers partly by the aspects and
parallaxes of the planets, and partly by the difference of the time, in which
they finished their courses, found out a new order and situation of them;
making the Sun to be the middle planet, three to be above him, and three
below him; according to this common versicle, Post SIM SVM sequitur ultima Luna
subest.

This newfound order of the planets set many Wits to the grinding-stone a
sharpening to bring forth so me rare inventions in laud of the planets new
situation. Two whereof, that were more remarkable remain yet in memory. The one
was that (...), which (as many say) was the ground of Music Macrob. Clav. de
sphaera page 84.
. Feigning the week days to answer the supposed harmony, of the Spheres; every
fourth planet in that order perpetually to sound out the name of the next
succeeding day. The other was this hourly government before-said, first brought
to light in Egypt, as is supposed; by which it will so fall out, that let every
planet be supposed to govern his hour successively according to this new
order, it will so fall out that the planet which shall come to rule the frst
hour of the next day, will be the very same whose name that day does bear.
Both these I confess, are very witty: but a mere fancy. And they, who urge
from hence, that the planets have such an hourly rule, and government given
them by their Creator, by which every one in seven days does constantly, and
by course Rule the first hour of a weekday, and that thereby men came to have
seven days to the week, and to call the days of the week by the names of the
planets orderly, as they came to govern the first hour of the day, are merely
deluded. For had there been in truth such an hourly government given them, and
had they exercised the same; then sure

First, Adam should have gotten this knowledge before all men. And then it
would follow hence, that men had weeks from the beginning, even from this
hourly Rule of the planets: butindeed, Adam had better ground for weeks, then
the Planets could afford; which was Gods working six days and resting the
seventh.

2. If Adam had not known this rarity, or if he had known it, and would reveal
it to none of his children; Yet the Astrologers before the flood would
doubtless have found out the same: they were most excellent in the knowledge
of Astrology, as Josephus, and many other in their writings tell us. they had
such experiments in, and of their observations, which men in future times,
living not the tenth of their days, could never attain unto. Doubtless had
there been such a Rule indeed, they would have known it; and also written this
rarity in those Pillars Josephus mentions Joseph Anti. Jud. l. 1. c. 4, 8.
, that future ages might not be ignorant thereof. Surely those long-lived
Astrologers deserved not to be of that name and fame, if ignorant of the said
hourly government of the planets, had there been any such Rule, or government
then in being.

3. If it be supposed that none before the flood were such excellent
Astrologers, yet the Chaldees, whose Religion was in adoring the Host of
Heaven, and in searching after the motions and effects of the Planets, who
bestowed their whole time therein, even from their childehood: who instructed
their little children in the knowledge of the stars Beemus ubi dee Assyria.
, as we teach children the Catechism; these I say of all other since the
flood, should have been the finders out of this Rule and Government of the
Planets had there been any such among them. A vanity is it to imagine, that
such an excellency should be kept secret from the Creation during thousands of
years, and not found out till in late times, by some Egyptians of no note or
name; whereas the discoverers thereof (had there been such a thing indeed found
out) deserved to have their names engraven in marble for their lasting memory
to all succeeding ages.

4. If this hourly Government be really true, then there can but one planet
govern the first hour of one and the same day, at one and the same place; and
which shall give name to that day; if otherwise, then this hourly rule is not
sound, but feigned. Now we know, that one and the same day at one and the same
place, may be Friday, Saturday and Sunday to several persons. I will clear this
in Dr. Heylins own words.

Suppose (says he) that a Turk, a Jew, and a Christian should dwell together
at Jerusalem, whereof the one does keep his Sabbath on the Friday, the other on
the Saturday: and the third sanctifies the Sunday Heyl. part. 1. p. 48.
(he would not call Sunday our Sabbath, as he does Friday the Turks Sabbath)
Then, that upon the Saturday the Turk begin his journey Westward, and the
Christian Eastward: so as both of them compassing the world, do meet again in
the same place: the Jew continuing where they left him. It will fall out, that
the Turk by going westward, having lost a day; and the Christian going
Eastward, having got a day; one and the selfsame day will be a Friday to the
Turk, a Saturday to the Jew, and a Sunday to the Christian. Since then one and
the same day came to be a Friday, a Saturday, and a Sunday unto these three by
their travel, there must be three several planets to govern the first hour of
that day; or else the planets must by little and little have gotten and lost a
whole course of governing, as the travelers did by little and little gain and
lose a whole day by their travel; both which will show this hourly rule of the
planets to be both vain and feigned.

Touching the later, that week-dayes had not their names from the supposed
hourly rule of the planets, may from these reasons be gathered.

First, this hourly rule does flow from the names of the week-dayes, and not
the weekday names from it. Men must first know by what planets name the day is
called, before they can tell what planet must govern the first hour thereof.
For suppose the two travelers before-said, the Christian and the Turk, had met
at any place before they had ended their journey: it must be as Dr. Heylin has
demonstrated the like Heyl. par. 1. p. 46, 47, 48.
, Sunday then with the Turk, when it was but Saturday with the Christian then
at their meeting. Now let the most skilful of Astrologers be demanded, what day
it should be unto them both, either Saturday or Sunday? whether the Sun or
Saturn ruled the first hour thereof? he will answer as the Chaldees did
Nebuchadnezzar, There is not a man upon the earth that can show this matter
Dan. 2.10.
Yea though the place where those travelers met were made known also, yet
would the question remain unresolveable, unless there be some line or other
supposed, where the planets should begin their Government, and from whence the
calculation is to be made: but in that supposal there is no certainty. Now if
the said travelers agree together, to have that day of their meeting to be
Sunday, then any Astrologer will readily tell them, that the Sun was he that
ruled the first hour thereof: or if they make it Saturday, then Saturn was he.
First therefore the week-dayes must be known, before men can know the said
planetary Rule and Government. I would not have any conceive, that by the
Planetary Rule and Government, I should mean here that Government and Lordship,
which the planets are of old said to have in their own home and houses; it is
the hourly Rule of the Planets, mentioned in the beginning of this chapter
that I mean. I confess my self to be but little skilled in the one; but this
he that has but the use of a pair of Globes may demonstrate to be false, and
to have no truth in it.

2. The Germans had weeks, and called the week-dayes by the names of their
gods whom they adored, which were the seven planets, and this long before they
came to have any knowledge of this hourly rule of the planets, which Henricus
Hassianus got in Paris, and then after taught the same in Vienna: and that not
yet four hundred years since. The Doctor says, That the Grecians had not
weeks till Eudoxus had taught them this excellency in Astrology, which he
brought from Egypt a little before; he might with as much truth have said, that
the Germans had not weeks, till Henricus Hassianus had taught this knowledge
in Astrology, which he brought from Paris a little before. There is the same
reason in them both, but this is known to be far from truth. If any say that
the Germans had learnt to have weeks, and to call the days of the week by the
names of the planets, since the said hourly rule was found out, and that
either from the Romans or Grecians, or from some other Nation with whom they
lived, before they came to inhabit in Germany: as the French, the English, the
Dutch, and other people in America have weeks, and call the week-dayes by the
same Names those Nations did, with whom their Ancestors lived before they came
into America. My answer is, they are much mistaken; for Germany was a very
ancient Kingdom, as Theodore Bibliander, and Verstegan also do acquaint us.
Twisco, who before he died was a King, and the first King of the Germans was
borne long before there was a Monarchy of the Romans, Grecians or Persians
either. He was ancienter then Abraham's father. Bibliander thus writes of him,
Tuisco, quem aliqui putant, etc. Tuisco, whom some think to be Aschenaz, the
Nephew of Noah erected the Kingdom of Sarmatia, and from whom the Dutchmen are
called Teutshen. Tacitus holds him to be the son of Terra or Arezia, Noah's
wife Theod. Bibl.
. Mannus who was Twisco his son, and the second King of the Germans, was
borne not twenty years after Abraham. And Wigwoner their third King was born
before Abraham went out of Vr, a town of the Chaldees, and therefore according
to Bibliander, before the Egyptians had learnt Astrology. For it seems the
Egyptians as well as other Nations, severing themselves from Noah's Posterity,
remaining about Chaldea, Assyria, and other parts of Shinar, busied themselves
so about their new plantation in Egypt, that they neglected and forgot
Astrology, till Abraham came out of Chaldea, and went down into Egypt, where,
as Josephus says, he taught Astronomy unto them, being ignorant thereof before
Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 15, 16. See Chap. 9.
. The Germans were a Nation and a Kingdom before Eudoxus knew what a planet
was. Verstegan also tells us, that the Saxons had in ancient times the seven
planets for their gods, whom they called Son, Moan, Tuisco, etc. and also
called the days of the week by the names of those their gods, before ever they
had any Commerce with the Grecians or Romans either.

3. Week-dayes bear the names of the planets, not from the said late invented
hourly rule, supposed to be given them by God when he created them, but as
they were the Heathens gods, and were orderly worshipped and adored by them.
Thus the day we call Sunday. was by the Heathen anciently called the day of the
Sun, because of all the planets who were held to be the Lords and Governors of
the world; he was that Lord and Governor which had special worship done unto
him on that day, and for that his worship began with that days beginning, even
at the Sunrising, (for at that time did the Heathen begin their worship to the
Sun, and to every of the rest of the Host of heaven, as I have showed before,)
which was the first hour of the day with them; he has been said and held, to
begin his Lordship or Government on the beginning, or first hour of that day;
and hence is it that that day was by the ancient Heathen called the day of the
Sun: the like may be said of the other names of all the weekdayes.

That the week-dayes were by the Heathens called by the names of the planets as
they were the Heathens gods adored by them is evident, not only from the
testimonies of sundry learned men, but also from Dr. Heylins own pen. He
himself does say as much, for ask this question of him, and he will tell you
yea, and says, That they are more nice then wise, who out of a desire to have
all things new, would have new names for every day, or call them as sometimes
they were, the first day of the week, the second day of the week, and sic de
caeteris; and all for fear lest it be thought that we do still adore those
gods, whom the Gentiles worshipped Heyl. part. 2. page 63.
. Ask by whose Authority he proves weekdayes to have their names from the gods
of the heathen? He tells us by St. Augustines, and alleges these his words,
Deorum suorum nomina Gentes imposuerunt diebus istis, etc. The Gentiles (says
the Father) gave to every day of the week the name of one or other of their
Gods, etc. Ask him again why Pope Sylvester changed the names of the
week-dayes, and would no weekday to be called by the name of any of the
planets, but all to be called by the names of Feria prima, Feria secunda, etc.
was it, for that Eudoxus had learned the aforesaid Government of the planets,
and so he, and other Astrologers after him taught this rariety in their
schools, whereby many (admit all) Grecians had weeks, and called the
week-dayes by the names of the planets, as their Astronomers taught them; and
now the Pope fearing lest the Romans from the example of the Greeks should in
time come to have weeks (for till that time, and after that too, until the
Romans had admitted Christianity throughout their Empire; Dr. Heylin says
they had no weeks Heyl. part. 1. page 84.
) and should call the weekdays by the names of the planets, as the Grecians
did? No sure, it was for that the Gentiles generally, as Romans and Greeks,
did call the days of the week as they were taught from their Ancestors, and
they from theirs, even by the names of their gods which of old they adored, who
were the seven planets; and for that Christians also generally (except Jews)
did call them so in like manner, as their Heathen Ancestors did, even in the
time when this Pope lived: which so displeased the said Pope, that in
detestation of the memory of those Heathen gods, he changed the names of the
week-dayes, and decreed to have them called by the names of Feriae. Dr. Heylin
proving this, cites Polydore Virgil for his authority, Sylvester Romanus
Pontifex ejus nominis primus, vanorum deorum memoriam in abhorrens Pol. Vir. de
Inv. rerum. l. 6. c.
, etc. Sylvester the first Pope of that name, hating the name and memory of the
Gentile gods, gave order that the days should be called by the name of Feriae
Heyl. part. 2. page 62.
, etc. Had the planets such power and virtue given them of God, so to govern by
an hourly course, as that thereby every weekday was designed and pointed out,
Sylvester had cause rather to magnify the Creator, who revealed the knowledge
hereof unto some, which was kept secret from all generations till then; and to
have in love, and laud the Parties though Heathen, to whom the Lord had made
known this rarity, whereby the Grecians had weeks in his life time; and the
Romans and other Nations might in short time come to have weeks also, then to
bear such spite and hatred to the planets for such their virtue given them, or
to the finders out of this Planetary Government, as should move him to take
away the memory either of the Planets, or of this their Government, or of the
finders out thereof, by changing the names of the week-dayes; sure his dislike
and hatred was against the idolatry of the Heathen, who still continued to
count the Planets as gods, and to call the week-dayes by their names: hence is
it that he made the change, even to take away theremembrance of their names out
of men's, especially out of Christians mouths.

Thus having now been showed, first that there is indeed no such hourly
Government as is pretended; And secondly, that the week days had not their
names from thence: Any man may see the weakness of Dr Heylins principal
argument, to prove thereby, that neither of the four great Monarchies, nor any
People else, the Jews only excepted, had weeks, and therefore no Sabbath.

CHAP. XV. Sunday was the seventh day with the Gentiles. Sunday continued to be
the seventh day of the week with Christians.
HAving declared what weeks are, and the long continuance of them; and also
answered the main objection made against their Antiquity; I will now endeavor
to make apparent, that Sunday was not only a seventh, but the seventh day with
the Gentiles.

Concerning which it has already been proved, 1. That the seven planets were
of old the Gentiles gods. 2. That the seven days of the week were deputed to
those their gods; and as John Gregory does assure us Jo. Greg. in his Assyrian
Monarchy.
in his Assyrian Monarchy, that the days of the week were called of the
Assyrians by the names of the same planets, unto whom the week-dayes were
severally dedicated; and that all Nations did from them call the days of the
week in like manner. 3. That the Sun was of all their gods held the chiefest
and supreme.

Now common sense and reason will tell us, that the day which was by them
dedicated to their chiefest God, and bare his name; the day of the Sun, which
we call Sunday, must be with them the chiefest day of all the seven in their
estimation; and therefore was it with them not only a seventh day of the week,
but the seventh day (...).

Neither was Sunday the 7th day of the week with the idolatrous Gentiles only,
but was also, as it is most probable, that seventh day which the Patriarchs
before the flood held to the honor of the Creator, in remembrance of the
Creation, and of Gods resting on the seventh day. For when Nimrod otherwise
called Saturnus Babylonicus, Belus his son, and other Potentates of Assyria
and Chaldea, had idolatrously set up the whole Host of heaven, that is the
Sun, Moon, and the other planets, with constellations subservient to them;
which of the seven days of the week, will any reasonable man imagine, did they
dedicate to the honor of their greatest god the Sun, rather then that, which
before was held to the honor of God the Creator? surely not any other. And
when these Assyrian and Chaldean Powers had, as much as in them lay, robbed God
(if I may so say) of his Titles, Attributes, Providence, Works of Creation,
Government and Worship; and gave the chief of all their spoils to their
chiefest god the Sun; Nimrod giving him the name Baal Jo Greg. Assyr. Monar.
, which he afterward assumed to himself Jo Greg. Assyr. Monar.
, Belus giving him the name Jove Jo Greg. Assyr. Monar.
, ( Jehovah in the Hebrew) the which he assumed afterward unto himself Jo Greg.
Assyr. Monar.
, and was called Jove Bell Biblian.
. They called the Sun God, and held him the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, and
Governor of all things: and that the world was not created, but was from
everlasting governed by the planets, the Sunbeing chief and sovereign Ruler:
Would they not do the like, may any one think, with that day which was held to
the honor of the Creator? All that was known to be for the worship and honor
of God the Creator, they gave to the honor of the Sun; and therefore
doubtless they deputed to the Sun that day also.

Again, when they assigned to every of those gods the seseveral days of the
week, no indifferent understanding man but will conceive that they would
dedicate to their greatest god the Sun, the day held before to the honor of
the great God of heaven and earth, rather then to the Moon, Mercury, or other
inferior gods. So that most likely, the seventh day with the Patriarchs, was
none other, but that which afterward was the Suns day with the Assyrians, and
from them was called the day of the Sun with other Nations also, as the other
week-dayes were called by the names of the other planets: and so by custom
have they continued to be called with all Nations of any note for Civility and
Knowledge, except with the Jews only, who after their coming our of Egypt, had
another day assigned unto them for their seventh sacred day; and had a special
command given them, not to make any mention of those gods of the Nations, nor
to have their names at all in their mouth, as I have showed before.

2. Sunday was the seventh day of the week with the Gentiles, as may be
collected from the pens of many learned Authors, as well Christian as Heathen.

Aug. Steuchius in Genesis 2. speaking of the seventh day, affirmed, that it was
in omniaetate inter omnes gentes venerabilis and sacer. The like do
Chrysostom, Beda, and other more, whose words I have before in the 13. chapter
expressed; Also amongst the most ancient Poets, diverse of them do testify the
same, as Linus, Callimacus, Hesiod and Homer, who was above two hundred years
before Eudoxus knew what Astrology was. All of them were Heathen, yet all of
them spoke very laudably of the seventh sacred day. Their words for brevities
sake I will not here rehearse, since they are to be seen, and are urged by many
Writers, as namely, Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 5. Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. l. 13.
c. 17. Rivetus in Genesis c. 2. and in his Dissert. de Origin Sabba. Also Dr.
Heylin in his History of the Sabbath par. 1. c. 4. Now the seventh day so
laudably by them spoken of, was the day of the Sun. For 1. It was not Saturday
the Jews seventh day. The Gentiles liked the Jews Saturday, as (said a
Papist) the devil does holy water. It was counted by them a disdainful novelty;
their Poets commonly would have one lash or other at the Jews for it, and
never spoke in honor thereof. 2. The Adversaries themselves do grant that the
day of the Sun was the seventh day, and sacred also with the Heathen; but
here is their evasion, The seventh day sacred to the Sun with the Heathen, say
they, was the seventh day of the month, and not the seventh day of the week.

Now that the day of the Sun was the seventh day of the week with the Heathen,
and not the seventh day of the month, thus I prove.

1. Clemens and Eusebius, both allege the said Poets, to show that the
Gentiles had the seventh day of the week sacred with them.

2. Other Authors generally take Sunday with the Gentiles for a weekday, and
not for the day of a month.

3. Had the seventh day sacred to the Sun been the seventh day of every month,
as they affirm, the Greeks doubtless would have noted the same down in their
Calenders. Though they could not set down constantly the seventh day of the
week, by reason of their intercaling so many days at a time, no more then
others then could do; and no more then we can set down the moveable Feasts that
were with us, unless it be in a yearly Almanac, before that Julius Caesar had
corrected the year. Yet never shall we see a Calender, in which the principal
immovable sacred days were omitted. Now there is an ancient Attick Calender to
be seen in Scaliger de emend. temp. wherein things of less consequence are
noted; but this seventh day sacred to the Sun in each month cannot be found.

4. Dr. Frances White and Dr Heylin also tell us White of the Sabbath p. 197.
Heyl. part. 2. p. 53.
, that Christians of the first ages, because they kept the Sunday for their
sacred services, and bowed Eastward in their worship, were upbraided for
Sun-worshippers, though they neither worshipped the Sun, nor called their day
of worshipping God Sunday, but the Lords day, being their Sabbathr sacred day
of rest to the Lord. Surely if Sunday had not been with the Heathen, who were
Sun-worshippers indeed, a weekly service day, but the seventh day of the month
only, there had been no cause or ground, why either Jew or Gentile should have
cast such an aspersion on them of being worshippers of the Sun.

5. This may further appear by the decree of Pope Milchiades, whom some call
Miltiades, the last of all the Popes that were Martyrs. He to make a clear
difference between the observation of Sunday by Christians, and the observation
of Sunday by the Heathen, ordained that all Gentiles who were converted and
were Christians, should not fast on the Sundays nor on the Thursdayes, as the
other Gentiles did. Note, that as Wednesday, Friday and Sunday, were now in
late times called sacred or Prayer-dayes; so were Thursday and Sunday in old
times; on which days they filled not themselves as on other days till their
sacred services were ended. The decree Sever. Binius on the life of the said
Pope sets down thus: Jejunium vero Dominici diei, and quintae feriae nemo
celebrare debet; ut inter jejunium Christianorum, and Gentilium veraciter, etc.
He would not that Christians should fast on the Thursday, and on the Lords day,
called by the Gentiles Sunday, that so there might be an open and apparent
distinction between Christians and the Heathen in the observation of those
days. From which time till of late, our tables have testified obedience to
that decree, being usually furnished with more variety of dishes on the
Sundays and Thursdayes, then on any day of the week besides. If any one here
say, that these days were not sacred but Fasting days, because Binius calls
them jejunia; I would have him informed, that sacred days were with the
Heathen called Fasts, because they abstained from feeding themselves till their
services were ended: the like did the Jews, yea and Christians too in old
time. Trogus writing the customs of the Jews, when he would tell us that
Moses ordained the Saturday, being the seventh day with the Jews, to be a
sacred day perpetually, he thus expresses the same. Septimum diem more Gentis
Sabbatum appellatum, in omne aevum jejunio sacravit Moses Trog. li. 36.
. Doctor Heylin shows plentifully that the Heathen Poets, and others called
sacred days Fasting days Heyl. part 1. pa. 102.
. But to put us out of doubt that the Thursday, and Sunday were not only
fasting days but sacred also with the Heathen, Platina resolves the case:
who, on the life of the said Pope, sets down his decree thus. Miltiadis
institutum fuit, ne Dominico, neve feria quinta jejunaretur; quia hos dies
Pagani quasi sacros celebrant. Whereby it appears, that Sunday was a sacred
day, not of the month, but of the week with the Heathen.

6. Lastly, the testimonies of diverse learned writers show that the day of the
Sun with the Gentiles was a weekday, even the same which we call the Lords
day.

Sozomen tells us that Constantine commanded Dominicum diem, quem Ebraei
primum Sabbati appellant, and Graeci Soli deputant, etc. a cunctis celebrari
Sozom. Eccl. hist. li. 1. cap. 8.
. Constantine then held that the day which the heathen Greeks deputed to the
Sun, was the very same which we call the Lords day.

Justin Martyr in several passages called the Lords day no otherwise then
(...); as then the Gentiles, or Greeks called it; says Doctor Heylin Heyl.
par. 2. page 62.
. and we call it now.

Bonaventure acquaints us how Christians spoiled the day of the Sun of its
Idolatrous worship, and so kept it in honor of Christ. Secundum Gentiles, dies
Dominicus primus est; cum principio illius diei incipit dominari principalis
planeta Sol; propter quod vocabant eundem diem Solis, and exhibebant ei
venerationem. Vt ergo error ille excluderetur, and reverentia cultus Solis Deo
exhiberetur, praefixa fuit Dominica dies, qua populus Christianus vacaret
cultui Divino Bonav. in. 3 Distin. 37.
.

Cael. Rhodigin. lect. Antiq. li. 13. cap. 22. thus shows, Nos jure optimo,
diem, quem Mathematici Solis vocant, Domino ascripsimus dicavimusque and illius
cultui totum mancipavimus.

It seems by these that Christians at first, divested the Sun of the
worship given him on the day of the Sun, and gave the whole right of worship
on that day unto the Lord God. They served the day of the Sun as the men of
Israel were to serve their captive maidens; the things that grew
excrementitiously on them, as hair, and nails were to be shaven, and cut Deuteronomy
21.12
; and so cast away, etc. and then the men lawfully might keep, and use them: So
Christians of the first age after Christ's ascension, pared off, and cast away
what did excrementitiously (if I may so say) grow on the day of the Sun, as
the adoration, and superstitious services given to it on that day; and then
they lawfully might, and did make use of the same; and it became their standing
service-day unto Gods honor.

Diverse other testimonies of sundry authors may be given to prove the day of
the Sun with the Gentiles to be, not their seventh day of the month, but
their seventh day of the week; all which I here omit: only I refer the reader
for his further satisfaction to Doctor Heylins history of the Sabbath Heyl.
par. 2. page 53, 61, 62, 63.
, wherein he shows that not only the days of the Moon, of Mars, of Mercury,
etc. with the Gentiles were the same which we call Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
etc. But also that the day of the Sun is the same which we call Sunday,
proving the same out of Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Saint Augustine and others.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, that since the Sunday was the day sacred
with the Heathen, dedicated to the Sun, and to the dishonor of God so much
abused by their Heathenish superstition, and Idolatry: Whether Christians in
the Apostles time, or afterward should not have done well to have chosen
Friday, or Saturday, or some other day for their standing day of the week for
Gods service rather then the Sunday?

Answer, To alter or change the Sabbath from the seventh day, and to make it
the eighth, ninth, sixth, or any other then the seventh, which is the last day
of the week, is against the express law of God, as before has been showed,
though it be nowhere forbidden to alter the whole week by beginning the same
sooner, or later.

Secondly, they lawfully might, and did alter and change both the name, and
also the worship, or service done on that day; for they called it no longer
Sunday unless in their common-talk with the Heathen, but they called it the
Lords day; being the day which the Lord in this law commanded to be sanctified;
Neither did they adore, and worship the Sun any more on that day, but the
Lord their Creator, and Redeemer.

Thirdly, It is true that all the week-dayes were abused to the Idolatrous
worship of the planets, though not in the like degree as was the Sunday: And
that one day, in it self, was no more holy then another; Yet Christians should
not have done well in changing, or in their endeavoring to have changed their
standing service-day, from Sunday to any other day of the week; and that for
these reasons.

1. Because of the contempt, scorn and derision they thereby should be had in
among all the Gentiles with whom they lived; and toward whom they ought by
Saint Paul's rule to live inoffensively 1 Cor. 10.32
in things indifferent. If the Gentiles thought hardly, and spoke evil of them,
for that they ran not into the same excess of riot with them 1 Pet. 4.4
: what would they have said of Christians for such an Innovation as would have
been made by their change of their standing service-day? If long before this,
the Jews were had in such disdain among the Gentiles for their Saterday-Sabbath
(which the Gentiles held to be a singularity, and innovation brought in by
Moses) insomuch that Jeremy lamenteth the same Lam. 1.17.
. How grievous would be their Taunts and reproaches against the poor
Christians living with them, and under their power, for their new set sacred
day, had the Christians chosen any other then the Sunday? Had Sir Francis
Drake, and Captain Cavendise, and their companies, who traveled round the
earth with them, either out of tenderness of conscience, or else out of
obstinacy continued to keep that Sunday sacred which fell to them by course, and
true tale of the days succeeding each other: they must needs have had their
Sunday on our Monday, and our Sunday would be their Saturday: When it was holy
day with them, it would be workingday with us; and holy day with us when they
would work. So Tacitus said of the Jews, Profana illic quae apud nos sacra,
rursum concessa, quae nobisillicita Cornel. Tacit. Diurnal. li. 2^.
. Now how unquiet, may any one imagine should those Travelers have lived among
us, as long as our Sunday was a weekday with them. Would not every
ballad-maker have had them in their rimes? would they not have been a byword
with all? and every Apparator would be ready with a Citation for them. And can
we conceive that Christians at first should find more favor from the Heathen
for their wilfulness which was less excuseable?

2. Most Christians then were either Servants or of the poorer sort of people:
and the Gentiles (most probably) would not give their servants liberty to cease
from working on any other set day constantly, except on their Sunday.

3. Had they changed their seventh day from their Sunday to another day, there
must have followed an unsufferable confusion in the count of the week days
with whom they lived As for example: had Sir Francis Drake, and his company
observed at his return, the weeks which by his exact account fell to them by
course; and not have changed them, and made them the same with our weeks, there
would have followed a miserable confusion even in their own families. The third
day of the week with some must have been the fourth with others of the same
family. And never a day would have been the same with them all. The like would
it have been with the Christians and Gentiles with whom they lived, if they had
changed their seventh standing day for Gods worship (which was Sunday) for
another.

4. Because had they assayed such a change, it would have been a testimony
against them of slighting the glorious resurrection of our Lord and Savior,
the Sun of Righteousness Mal. 4.2.
, who on the Sunday most triumphantly rose from the dead for the justification
of all his people.

5. It would have been but labor in vain for them to have assayed the same,
they could never have brought it to pass. For

1. They had no authoritative specification of any set day either by Jesus
Christ, or by his Apostles on which they ought to keep the Lords day. Had there
so been, Saint Paul would never have pressed the indifferency of days, as he did
Romans 14.1, 2, 3. Col. 2.16.
, nor would he himself have with the believing Jews kept the Saturday Acts
13.14, 42.17, 2, 18, 4.
, and with the Christians (by Christians I mean the Gentiles converted to
Christ,) have kept the Sunday Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.
, neither would the believing Jews have remained so obstinate, but would have
kept that day for their Sabbath, which was so pointed out unto them, if there
had been such: Whereas they for the generality of them, would never be
withdrawn to keep any other then their Saturday for their Sabbath, hundreds of
years after the Apostles days.

2. They had no coercive power to draw refusers to the observation of any other
day for the Lords day, had they been so disposed to have set any other.

3. Christians were not all of one City, or of one country, or of one Nation,
Tongue or Government. It would have been even a miracle to have gotten all
Christians in all parts of the world to have observed one and the same day for
the Lords day with them all, which should be chosen, not by a general meeting, or
by a general consent, but by some of them only, had they chosen any other then
the day of the Sun, which they were generally before their Conversion
accustomed to keep. The People of Israel were but one Nation all of one Tongue,
and severed from all other People, and also had Moses their Captain General:
yet Moses should never have withdrawn them from their old accustomed day, to
the observation of the Saterday-Sabbath, different from the custom of all
other Nations, had not the Lord God miraculously in the fall of Quails and Manna
Exodus 16.12, 16, 22, 23, 26.
, showed that it was his good pleasure so to have it, when he assigned unto
them their six days for their labor, and so pointing out to them the
Saturday, being the seventh from their first gathering Quails and Manna, to be
the day of holy rest unto the Lord. Sylvester the first Pope of that name, when
out of his hatred to the memory of the Heathen-gods, he would have changed but
the names of the week-dayes, decreed them to be called by the names of Feriae
as has been before showed; though he was of great authority and command, and
highly beloved of the people; yet he could not prevail herein but with very few
except Scholars; the vulgar people in their common talk, called their
week-dayes as they did before, by the names of the Planets; and so have they
continued to call them, even to this day. The Jews are now a weak People, yet
there is not a Prince or Power on earth able to withdraw them from their
superstitious custom of keeping the Saturday sacred; yea the believing Jews,
as was showed, in the Apostles time, and in many years after could not be won
by any means that the Christians might use, to give over their
Saterday-Sabbath, and for unities sake to keep the Lords day on the Sunday,
except a very few of them who better knew and acknowledged their liberty by
Christ. How impossible may we then think it to be for any to bring to pass,
that all Christians in all quarters of the world, should leave off their
observing the Sunday sacred, and have another day in stead thereof? In vain
therefore would it have been, for poor Christians at first to have assayed the
same.

These reasons, if there were no more, may suffice to show, that although all
days be in themselves indifferent: yet Christians should not have well done,
had they endeavored to have changed their seventh sacred day, from Sunday to
any other weekday; no not to Thursday, though it was the day of Christ his
glorious Ascension; nor to Friday, though it was the day in which Christ paid
our ransom: but betrer to retain the same day as they did; and which the
Church of Christ has since that kept, even to this present time, and by Gods
grace will so do unto the end.

CHAP. XVI. The Sabbath Day is to be sanctified. Works of Piety, Government,
and of Nature only are to be done on the Sabbath Day, etc. the necessary helps
thereunto.
THere has been before showed, that the Sabbath Day in this law commanded to
be kept holy, is not a part of a day as is the Artificial day, but an whole
day. And that it is not such a kind of day as are the days of the Creation
mentioned in the first of Genesis, but such a kind of day, as is or has been
in use with men. And also that it is not in tale, the fifth, sixth, eighth or
nineth day, but the seventh, not the seventh day of the month, but the seventh
day of the week, the day following the six known days of labor, where men
dwell and inhabit. Which day with Christians is vulgarly called Sunday,
otherwise more fitly, and as indeed it is, The Lords day, even our Sabbath Day
to the Lord.

Now in the next place is to be showed how the Lords day is to be sanctified.
To the sanctification of the Sabbath Day of the Lord, which we call the Lords
day, two things are required.

1. That we keep it a day of rest. 2. That we sanctify that time of rest.
That we are to keep it a day of rest the Scripture fully shows.

On the seventh day thou shall rest, in earing time and in harvest Exodus 34.21.
. The like have we in diverse other places of Scripture, calling it a day of
rest.

All men are to cease from the works of their calling, which on other days
they lawfully may, yea and ought to do for the maintenance of themselves and
theirs. Six days shall work be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
rest, ye shall do no work therein Lev. 23.3.
. So are the words here in this law, Thou shall not do any work.

But whereas we are here forbidden to do any work, we must not so understand
the words, as if on the Sabbath Day we should rest from all kind and manner of
works, and so do no work at all upon that day, the words of the text do not
bear such a sense. These are the words of the Commandment, (...). Thou shall
not do all thy trade, Art or occupation, and such are the words of the text in
diverse other places of Scripture Deuteronomy. 5.14. Exodus 35.2. and 31.15. Lev. 23.3,
7.
. Val. Schindler in his Pentaglot. on the root, (...) tells us thus; The
Rabbines take (...) for Art or vocation, and (...) in the plural, for Arts and
vocations. So Arias Montanus also corrects Pagnines translation of the Bible,
that whereas Pagnine has it, Non facies omne opus, he turns it, Non facies
omnem functionem Deuteronomy. 5.14.
, where Pagnine translateth thus, Omnis quifecerit in eo opus, etc. Montanus
has it, Omnis faciens in eo functionem Exodus 35.2
. Where Pagnine says, Omnis faciens opus in die Sabbati: it is thus to be read
according to Montanus, Omnis faciens opificium in die cessationis Exodus 31.15.
, etc. The like may be seen in diverse other places of Scripture, so translated
by the one, and so corrected by the other. Whence we may gather that the true
meaning of these words commonly read in our translations, Thou shall not do any
work: is not that we should do no manner of work at all; but that we should do
on the Sabbath Day no manner of the works of our trade, function and
occupation. The Smith is not to work at his Anvil, nor the Shoemaker with his
Awle, nor any other about any works that belong to men's trade and profession,
which on the six days of labor they may and should do for getting their
maintenance and livelihood.

There be some other works which on every day may lawfully be done, even on the
Sabbath Day it self without the least breach of this law, and they are of three
sorts.

1. Works of Piety.

2. Works of Government toward the creature subjected to us.

3. Works needful to the preservation of man's life.

These works may be done on every day without any violation to the Law of the
Sabbath. Neither does the law of the Sabbath abridge us from doing them on any
day.

What God ordained before ever the seventh day was in being, was not, and is
not nulled or abridged by the law of the Sabbath, but these works were before
ordained by the Lord.

First, Man was made and had his being to serve God, to honor and worship him,
to perform duties of Piety, in such manner as he should appoint him. The doing
of these duties on the Sabbath Day does no violation to the law of the Sabbath.
Men doing them may be said to break or profane the Sabbath; yet not break the
law of the Sabbath. When we have been diligent on the Sabbath Day in doing
service unto God, and the duties he requires of us for his honor, we may
therein be said not to make the day a day of rest, but to break the rest or
Sabbath; yet not to break the Commandment by doing these works. Thus Christ
told the Pharisees, that the Priests in the Temple did profane the Sabbath and
are blameless Mat. 12.5.
. Sure they could not be said to be blameless, had they by their sacrificing
bullocks or sheep broken the Commandment; they brake the Sabbath, they made it
not a day of rest from these works, and so were said to profane it, that is, in
respect of these labors they made it common with other days; all days being
alike lawful or common for doing works of Piety.

Secondly, works of Government of the Creatures subjected unto man, were
ordained of the Lord before man was made. Let us make man (says God) in our
image after our likeness, and let them have dominion over, etc Genesis 1.26, 28
. and when God had made man, he commanded them to have dominion over the fish
of the sea, over the foul over cattle, and over every living thing upon the
earth. This law and ordinance was not repealed or nulled by any succeding law.
Man is to exercise this his Rule and Government committed unto him on any day.
If fire should threaten to destroy house or houses, corn, or such like on the
Sabbath Day, man is as well bound to use his power in suppressing the same on
the Sabbath Day as on any other. If water endanger drowning of cattle, or if
cattle strive together, whereby some are like to perish, and man do not succor
and seek to preserve what was in danger because it was on the Sabbath Day, he
shows himself to be a bad Governor of the creature; or if he should suffer
sheep or other cattle to perish for want of foddering, folding, or housing
them, as need requires, he is not worthy to have the Government of cattle.

The like Isay, concerning works needful for the preservation of man's life.
When Adam was in the state of innocence, before ever the seventh day was, even
on the day of his Creation, the Lord ordained him food. Behold, I have given
you, said God, every herb bearing seed, (some whereof were Physical) which is
upon the face of all the earth: and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree
yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat Genesis 1.29.
. It was Gods Will and Ordinance then, that man being made a living soul should
use the means for the preservation of his life. And this his ordinance, was
never repealed by any succeeding law. All these three kind of works may be
done on the Sabbath Day as well as on other days; always provided that there
be no irregularity in performing them. We must have regard to necessity
requiring present help; when this gives way, the duties more excellent are
more especially to be regarded. And as these works may be done on the Lords
day, so may the necessary helps thereunto be then done also. A man may on the
Sabbath Day travel on foot to the meeting place, and assembly of Gods people;
and if he cannot well go on foot he may ride. Also as men may feed, fold or
house their Cattle on the Lords day, so may they use the necessary helps
thereto, which could not be done the day before. And so also may they not only
eat, drink, sleep, and take Physic according as need requires, but also may
use needful helps thereunto; as heating their meat, and such like; for all
stomachs cannot feed on cold meat. But let all take heed lest under a pretense
of necessity, he robs God of his due honor, and his conscience of true peace.

Object. But here some will object that this Commandment tied the Jews from
kindling any fire on their Sabbath Day. If then we are bound to keep this law
as strictly as the Jews were, we ought not to kindle fire at all upon the
Sabbath Day for any occasion whatsoever, though for saving ones life.

Answer, To which I answer: that this precept in Exodus the five and thirtieth
Chapter, Exodus 35.3.
and third Verse forbade the Jews not from making any fire at all, whether it
be a help toward the duties of piety, or men's health and safety: But from
making fire, whereby it should be a help toward their trades, occupations or
functions which are expressly forbidden to be done in this commandment on the
Sabbath Day. And that this is the meaning may appear, for that

First, this precept has an eye, and refiecteth on the words immediately going
before in the former verse, in which is a rehearsal of the sum of this fourth
commandment. In these words, according to the Hebrew text Arias Monte.
, Six days shall function (occupation or trade) be done, and in the seventh
day there shall be to you holiness, a rest of cessation to the Lord, every one
doing his function in that day shall die. Then immediately follows, There
shall no fire be kindled in all your habitations in the day of cessation. The
works about men's personal callings, and functions for getting wealth being
forbidden in the former verse; in this is forbidden the means tending thereto,
as the kindling of fire. And happily kindling fire is here mentioned rather then
any other means; for that they being all Brickmakers in Egypt before, they
kindled fire throughout their habitations for the burning their tale of Bricks.
But when works are lawful, and needful to be done on the Sabbath Day, such as
are works of piety, and works of preserving the life of man, the necessary
helps thereunto, as making fire is lawful also.

Secondly, the continued, and never blamed practice of the Jews of making fire
on the Sabbath Day for these duties, proves the same. They were never at any
time blamed for making fire on the Sabbath for these duties, as far as we can
read in sacred Scripture. The man that was put to death for gathering wood
(whether to faggot it, or to add it to his Pile or heap is not expressed) on
the Sabbath Day Number. 15.32
, does make nothing hereto. And that they did make fire on the Sabbath-dayes
for these duties is undeniable. How else should the meat-offrings baken in
ovens and in pannes, and in frying-pannes be made, which they were to bring to
the Priests as obligations Levit. 2.4, 5, 7.
? How else could the Shewbread be baked, which were constantly provided and set
on the pure Table of the Lord every Sabbath day Levit. 24.5, 6 etc.
? And how else should the Paschal lamb be roasted, when the feast of the
Passover fell on the Sabbath Day? Every family was then to eat rostmeat
throughout their habitations; and the remains to be burnt in the fire that
nothing be left until the morning Exodus 12.10.
. Sure these things could not be done without making fire. In like manner did
they make fire on the Sabbath for preservation of their life and health. For
doubtless the Israelites baked and sod their Manna on their Sabbath-dayes, as
they did on the other days of the week. Cold Manna, and unpound would not
agree with many men's stomakes on the Sabbath, who on every of the other days
did eat it hot, either baked or sodden. On every of the other six days they
gathered every man according to his eating, an Omer for every man Exodus 16.16,
18.
. And then ground it, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pannes, and made
Cakes of it Number. 11.8.
. And in that week which was set for the measuring out to them their first
Saterday-Sabbath, which was their seventh day from their first beginning of
gathering Quails and manna; Moses on the sixth day (that is on the day before
their new Sabbath appointed) said unto them, This is that which the Lord has
said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord; bake that which
you will bake to day, and seethe that you will seethe; and that which remains
over, lay up for you to be kept until the morning Exodus 16.23, 24.
. On this sixth day they gathered double to what they did before; whereof Moses
told them that the one part they should bake or sees at their pleasure, but
the remainder, that is the other part, they were not willed either to bake or
to seethe on that day, but to lay it up for the next day; the which they did:
and although it was neither baked nor sodden, yet it stank not, neither did
worms appear therein. Now if the Israelites might not pound the said manna
laid up for their food, nor bake, nor boil the same, and so eat it hot, as on
other days; the Sabbath Day which should be a delight unto them, would breed
them sorrow, and be burdensome unto them: and doubtless then we should read
of their complaints hereof. We read how they complained for want of change, and
wept when they remembered the flesh, Cucumbers, Melons, Leeks, Onions, and
Garlic which they had in Egypt: But now said they, our soul is dried away,
there is nothing beside this Manna, etc Number. 11.6.
. How would they have complained if on the Sabbath-dayes they should have been
driven to have eaten the manna, not pound, nor baked, nor sod? Their silence
herein argues them not to have been driven to such a strait, but that they did
either bake, or boil their Manna, and so eat it hot as they did on the other
days; the which could not be done without their making a fire.

Or otherwise if by this precept the Jews were not to make any fire at all on
their Sabbath Day, neither for the furtherance of their services, and duties
toward God, nor for the preservation of the health, and life of man; then I
say that that precept was particularly given to the Jews, and peculiarly
concerned that Nation and no other Commonwealth whatsoever. And that this
Commandment bound them not thereto, no more then it binds us or any other
people whatsoever. This law bound, and does bind all men to make the seventh
day with them a day of rest, not only from works of slavery, commonly called
servile works, from which the Jews were bound on their feast of the Passover
Lev. 23.7. Nun. 28.18.
: and on certain other of their feast-dayes Lev. 23.8, 21.25, 35, 36. Number.
28.25.26
. But also from all the works of men's trade, occupation, or function
whatsoever: Yea our thoughts, and minds are not to be upon them on the Lords
day; as the one are called our works Exodus 23.12.
; so the other are called our thoughts.

This Law binds all, that they should not only make the seventh day to be a
day of rest, and cessation from all the works of our callings; but also that we
sanctify that rest. Remember (says God) that thou sanctify the Sabbath Day:
that is in English, the day of cessation, or rest, for that it is the Sabbath
of the Lord. We may well call it the Lords day, or the Lords Sabbath; for that
it is a day holy to the Lord: we are not only to cease from the works of our
professions, and callings on that day; but are then to perform also, and do
duties, and works of holiness unto the Lord. On the seventh day is a cessation
to rest, a Convocation of holiness Lev. 23.3.
. Or as it is in our translation; The seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, and
holy convocation. And in Exodus, In the seventh day is the rest of cessation,
holiness to the Lord Exodus 31.15.
. And a little after that: In the seventh day shall be to you holiness, a rest
of cessation unto the Lord Exodus 35.22.
. All which do show that on the Sabbath Day, which is the day following our six
days of labor, we should not only rest from all our functions, and works of
our professions for getting of worldly wealth and maintenance, but we are to
keep this rest, cessation or sabbath holy, to the glory and honor of the most
great God our Creator, and Redeemer.

Quest. If any ask here, whether it be lawful for an Apothecary to let blood in
case of great need; or for a Physician to minister Physic to his sick Patient
on the Sabbathday?

Answ. Doubtless it is lawful: and not only so, but either of them may go, or
ride for that purpose: it being of the duties before spoken of, for the
preservation of the life and health of mankind, which are not forbidden by
this Law; provided, neither of them do the same for his fee, reward and gain;
for then he makes it a work of his Profession, for gaining of worldly wealth
and maintenance, which may be done on other days, but not on the Sabbath,
without making himself a transgressor.

And now I conclude this point with the express words of the Homily for the
time of Prayer. Thus it may plainly appear, that Gods Will and Commandment was
to have a solemn time and standing day in the week, wherein the People should
come together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render
him thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind, and obedient People. And
with that a little before. And therefore by this Commandment we ought to have a
time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and
needful works; for like as it appears by the Commandment, that no man in six
days ought to be slothful or idle: but diligently to labor in that state
wherein God has set him: Even so God has given express charge to all men,
that upon the Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all
weekly and work-day labor, to the intent, that like as God himself wrought six
days and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it
to quietness and rest from labor: even so Gods obedient People should use the
Sunday holily.

As concerning the particular duties to be done on the Sabbath Day, there being
so many learned and godly men who have written so fully of them; and are or may
be in most men's hands or closets; I forbear to speak of them here for brevities
sake, referring the Reader to their plenty; and now in the next place will
speak of the second part of this Commandment.

CHAP. XVII. The great care and provision had by the Lord, for man's keeping and
sanctifying the Sabbath Day.
THe former part of this fourth Commandment, which is, that we should keep holy
the Sabbath Day, has been at large handled before; now it rests, that I
speak somewhat of the second part also; which I will do briefly in this Chapter.

In this second part is set out in many words the great care and provision had
of the Lord, that men should observe this law, and keep holy the Sabbath Day as
God commands. And this provision of the Lord stands not in one, two or
three only, but in many and weighty inducements and reasons, the least of which
should have been sufficient to enforce our obedience, had not our hearts been
hardened, and we most rebellious, wilfully refusing to yield obedience unto the
same.

The several inducements and reasons the Lord used to win us unto obedience to
this law are these.

First, is the Caveat prefixed only to this, and to none other of the
Commandments, Remember. Remember the Sabbathday to sanctify it. This charge of
heedfulnesse would mightily work upon an obedient heart; he would every day of
his six, be thinking how to do and dispatch all his businesses in those days,
that when the seventh day come, he may freely without any encumbrance, betake
himself to the worship and service of his God; and when it comes will be
mindeful of the day, and careful of observing and keeping the same holy as his
God commands.

Secondly, the Lord has here plainly pointed out unto man, what day is the
Sabbath Day which he should sanctify. The Lord has affixed as it were an
Index to this law; that as the true hour of the day is known and pointed out
by the Index or Finger in a Dial, whereby he that can but tell the number of
the hour lines, may easily know what hour of the day it is: so here, he that
can but tell the days of the week, may easily tell what day is the
Sabbath Day. Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, but the seventh
day is the Sabbath. The seventh day is the Sabbath, not the seventh day from
thy birth, nor the seventh day from the first beginning of the Creation, nor
from any set Epoche: for then it would have put the most skilful Mathematicians
to a stand, for the finding out when this seventh day should begin, but it is
the day following the six days of labor. In what country soever a man is,
though he is not well skilled in the language of that place, and does not
understand what the names of the week-dayes signify; yet if he can tell which
be their six work-dayes, he may then tell also which is their seventh day. It
makes not much by what names the days of the week be called, nor what the
signification of either or any of the week-dayes should be. The seventh day of
the week with Christians, has been called by diverse several names, and that
even by Christians themselves, such as these, Sunday: The Lords day: The first
day of the week: and in later times it has been called also the Sabbath Day;
but in the first times Christians would not call it the Sabbath Day, because
all the Gentiles detested the name of Sabbath, as the Jews did the name of
Sunday, as before is showed: neither could they relish this name for a good
while after their Conversion. It is not much matter by which of these names we
call our seventh day; nor whether we understand the signification of the name;
as what Sunday, or The Lords day, or The first day of the week do signify, or
why we do so call our seventh day. Though he do not know it to be called Sunday
from our Heathen Ancestors, who called this day so in honor of the Sun whom
they worshipped: nor know it to be called the Lords day because it is his
Sabbath who sanctified it: nor know it to be called the first day of the week,
for that the Jews called this day the first of the Sabbath, and so was called
by them in sacred Scripture; and for that the latter Translators of the Bible,
would have this name by which the Jews called it, to be in our tongue, called
the first day of the week; So as that now we count it not the day of the Sun,
as our Heathen Ancestors did: nor count it to be the first of our work-dayes,
or first in order and tale of our week-dayes as the Jews did. The name of the
day does neither add nor alter any thing of the nature thereof.

Thirdly, here is set down the equity of this law. It is so reasonable that
none need complain. The Lord allows man six days, and reserveth but one for
himself. Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do, but the
seventh is the Sabbath. How unreasonable are such who are not contented with
the Lords liberal allowance, but incroach on the Lords day also, which he
reserved for his own honor and worship?

Fourthly, in that the Lord did in many words set down so punctually. 1. The
works from which men are restrained. 2. The persons who are restrained.

The works forbidden are all kind of Trades, Professions and Occupations,
which on other days men do or may use for getting their living and
maintenance. There is no word in English, which does so fully express (...),
which here the Lord forbids to be done, as does Function, Art or Occupation,
as I showed before, so that none can excuse himself, saying, that his
Profession requires little or no labor of the body; as do husbandry and
diverse other Handicrafts: for God forbids (...) all Vocations, Functions or
Occupations. Men ought to abstain from all their works, of what Profession or
Vocation soever they be. Yea these works are not only forbidden in respect of
the labor of the hand, but of the tongue and mind also; we should not be
talking of them, neither should our hearts and minds run on them on the Lords
day.

As God for the furtherance of man's true obedience to this law, has fully
showed the works we are forbidden to do, so does he also as fully, and in many
words show who are forbidden to do any of these works; Thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, nor, etc. Whosoever has any authority and command over himself,
must not only be careful that he himself abstain from his labors, but also if
he has authority and command over others, as son, daughter, man or maid, Ox
or Ass, he is to see that they also cease from all work-day-labours on the
seventh day; he is not to employ any of them: he nor any of his may employ
either Ox or Ass, nor lend or, let them to hire for their labor on the
seventh day, or on any part of that day. The Lords expressions are large
herein, that so all pretenses and excuses may be taken away.

Fifthly, the Lord shows here, and would have us to know that we have no
right unto the seventh day, nor to any part thereof, for doing of our own works
thereon, for the seventh day is the Lords day, and not ours, it is The Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, (as it is in this place in our Bibles so translated,) it
is, says God, (...) a Sabbath to the Lord: that is, a Rest or Cessation to the
Lord, as before I have showed See Chap. 8.
. It is a day holy to the Lord, and therefore none other then the Lords. All
the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the
tree, (in the time of the law) was the Lords Levit. 27.30.
, and so was the tithe of the herd or of the flock, even of whatsoever passed
under the rod Verse. 32.
, for the tithe of all these were holy to the Lord Verse 30.32.
, and therefore they were the Lords; they were his seed, his fruit, his Lambs,
etc. One Lamb was no more holy then another when they fell from their Dammes;
and before they were tithed out, the Possessor of them might have mingled them
at his pleasure; he was not tied to begin his tithing at one Lamb rather then
at another; but from what Lamb soever he began, every tenth Lamb that in
order passed under the rod was the Lords: he might not then change it, nor
search whether it was good or bad Verse 33.
; it was then holy to the Lord, it was the Lords Lamb: and of such as detained
the tenth, the Lord complained that they had robbed him Mal. 3.8, 9.
. And so I say, concerning the seventh day in the like sense, That one day of
it self is no more holy then is another. Christians were not tied by any divine
law to begin their week, or sevening from any set particular time: but they
continuing their accustomed week, and so beginning their sevening from the day
of Christ's Resurrection, the seventh from thence in an orderly course is sacred
to the Lord, it is the Lords day; no man upon his particular occasions may
change the same: he may not say, My business is such that I cannot keep this
Sabbath Day, but I will keep another day in the week which will be as good. He
does deceive himself herein, he may not put off the seventh to another day, but
should defer his business rather. When men take the seventh day which is
sacred to the Lord, and employ the same about their own business, either in
whole or in part, they may as truly be said to rob the Lord, as they under the
law were said so to do in not paying their due tithes and offerings Mal. 3 8, 9.
.

Sixthly, the Lord was pleased to set out unto us the ground of this law; why
he would have a day in a week appointed for his worship, rather then a week in
every month, or a month in every year: And why he would have the seventh day
for his service rather then the tenth; the ground hereof the Lord here shows
to be this; In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that
in them is; and rested the seventh day. The same ground for the sanctification
of the seventh day is also declared before in Genesis Genesis 2.3.
.

Seventhly, the Lord declares, and he would have his People hereby to know
that he has annexed a blessing unto this day: God blessed the seventh day.
They who wait on the Lord, and serve him sincerely, during this their day of
attendance, shall find the Lord a bountiful rewarder: their ceasing from
labor for doing him service, shall be for their profit, they shall be gainers
thereby.

Lastly, if there had been none other reason or motive to stir us up unto
obedience in a careful keeping of the seventh day unto the honor of God, yet
this alone which the Lord has given in the close of this Commandment should
suffice; The Lord has sanctified it: God has instituted it. But when the Lord
has given us such a special charge of remembering the Sabbath Day to sanctify
it, and has so plainly pointed out unto us what the day is whith he will have
us to sanctify, that none may plead ignorance about the time, and how many
words the Lord used in prohibiting all works, and in the enumeration of all
degrees prohibited: laying down also the equity hereof, and his own example
together, with his blessing it and his sovereign institution hereof: how can
any without palpable ignorance, or wilful rebellion plead ignorance of the
Sabbath? or knowing it, not yield ready obedience thereto?

Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNAME.

A POSTSCRIPT To the READER.
I Pray thee (before thou read) correct these faults which alter the sense;
the other (though many) amend in reading. And when thou have read this Tract,
consider seriously, whether the day of rest the Seventh day in this law
commanded to be observed do relate to the six days of Gods work, or to the six
days of man's labor. It cannot relate to the six days of Gods work, and so be
the day of Gods rest, unless the day of Gods rest, and the Jews Sabbath Day be
the same, and begin in all places at Sunsetting wherever the Jews did or
ought to observe their Sabbath; which cannot possibly be, except the earth be
plain; as I have showed: Or except the day of Gods rest did at the first, and
does begin sooner in some places then in other, and so first at one particular
place when it was no where else the day of Gods rest, either East or West
thereto. Both which are so against reason, that no understanding man will hold
either.

But if thou find that the seventh day commanded does relate (as truly it
does) to the six days of Labor with men, and so must be the day following
their six week-dayes of labor wherever they live: then consider whether
Sunday, be not as truly the day following the six days of labor with
Christians as Saturday was with the Jews; and as truly the seventh day with
Christians, and by the express words of this law commanded to be kept holy: as
the Saturday was with the Jews? If so; what cause (think thou) have Jews,
Antinomians, Libertines, or any other to scandalize, or say of Christians, that
they do not, nor at any time have observed the true time, and day commanded of
God in this law?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 28. the whole, Read to the whole. p. 6. l. 22. so if, r. if so.
p. 7. l. 6. and the evening, r. and the morning. p. 12. l. 2. this r. his. p.
22. l. 9. thirtieth, r. one and thirtieth. p. 35. l. 10. no^e; thus; their r.
nose, thus. Their. p. 39 l. 33. Hemer, r. Homer. p. 39. l. 34. (...) r. (...).
p. 63. l. 28. Gallimachus. r. Callimachus. p. 69. l. 16. feigned, r. been
feigned. p. 80. l. 1. Sabbathrsacred. r. Sabbath or sacred. p. 86. l. 22.
betrer. r. better.

In the Margin page 41. line 22. Det, read Deuteronomy.


