A CERTIFICATE FROM NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

1. Of the Pluralities. 2. Defect of Maintenance. 3. Of not Preaching. 4. Of
scandalous Ministers.
As there is an Order lately printed and published concerning Ministers, by a
Committee of the high Court of Parliament.

Wherein every Ingenuous person is desired to be very active to improve the
present opportunity, by giving true information of all the Parishes in their
several Counties.

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares. 1641.

A CERTIFICATE from Northamptonshire;
1. Touching Pluralities, 2. Defect of maintenance. 3. Of not Preaching. 4. Of
scandalous Ministers.
For Northamptonshire.
THis is to certify, that for pluralities there is not in the whole Shire
above sixteen or twenty the number of Benefices being 326. as they are
reckoned by Cambden and Speed. And it is conceived by some of good judgment,
that these few pluralities do nothing so much hinder the preaching of the
Gospel, and discharge of their duties in several kinds, as do the poor and
scandalous livings in the Country, which I think in number are about one
half almost one hundred and fifty.

Sir Francis Bacon in his considerations for Pluralities says, that in case
the number of able Ministers were sufficient, and the value of the Benefices
were sufficient, then Pluralities were in no sort tolerable, but take we heed
that we desire not contraries, for to desire that every Parish should be
furnished with a sufficient Preacher, and to desire that pluralities be
forthwith taken away, is to desire things contrary; considering de facto there
are not sufficient Preachers for every parish whereto add that there is not
sufficient maintenance in many parishes to maintain a Preacher which makes the
impossibility so much the greater.

Let me add hereunto one passage of the same Author.

For my own opinion I must confess, let me speak it with reverence, that
all the Parliaments since the 27. and 31. of K. Henry the 8. who gave away
Impropriations from the Church seem to me to stand in some sort obnoxious, and
obliged to God in conscience to do somewhat for the Church to reduce the
patrimony thereof to a competency, for since they have debarred Christ's wife of
a great part of her dowry, it were reason they made her a competent joyncture.

To the second inquiry.

Touching want of maintenance, or little maintenance the particulars are very
many. For one half almost are appropriate Churches, and the Vicarages commonly
left so small and destitute, that there is no sufficient means left to a
Minister to buy Books, nor to keep hospitality, or live like a Minister in
reasonable condition. Besides the Vicarages that are poor, there are many
Parsonagee so abridged and spoiled under pretense of long Leases made before
the Statute, and also rate tithes in lieu of tithes in kind, that the livings
are poor and scandalous. And it is thought by some, that these poor livings
being so many for number, do more hinder the preaching of the Gospel, then
the few Pluralities, because the puralists do preach by themselves, and their
Curates, and do oftentimes write in defense of the truth, but the
Impropriators preach not at all, poor Vicars preach perhaps more seldom then
otherwise they would, and some not at all. Besides pluralities are not held
successively so, which is very considerable, but poor Vicarages are continued
without amendment. As to instance in particulars.

1. The Parsonage of Piddington in the Hundred of Wimmersley distant three
miles from Northampton, is worth almost three hundred pounds yearly, which Sir
John Wake Knight detaines wholly in his hands, enjoying both the Parsonage
house, all the glebe, being three or four yard land, together with all the
tithes whatsoever. And there is not so much as a poor Curate left resident
there to read prayers, or Catechize, or bury the dead, or any such like duty.
Only Sir John keeps a Minister in his house at the Lodge in Saucy Forest,
whom he sends to Piddington at times. There lived lately one Master Cave a very
poor miserable Minister, in a very poor Cottage for the space of some forty
years, and after his death some three or four years ago there was a Curate
one Durham, then one Langley, and now one Setterford, who uncertainly serve the
cure in a very poor manner, being not instituted nor inducted, neither is
there one child or servant in the parish that can say the Lords prayer of their
teaching: though the parish consists of another Village (Hackelton) adjoining
to it, so that the Inhabitants are many in number.

Sir John Wake holds the Parsonage (as is reported) by color of some old Lease
from S John's Hospital in Northampton, which Lease whether it shall expire ever
or never is uncertain to any neighbor. Whatsoever his Lease or title be, it
is very fit he should allow 100. pounds yearly, together with the dwelling
house to a resident Minister, with a convenient portion of the glebe land; it
being no lawful Uicarage, but a Church robbed by strong hand.

2. The Parsonage of Hartnell, not far of, is worth about 100. pounds
yearly, and is held by Sir John Wake, in the same kind; the poor Minister
Master Io: Gittins that does serve the Cure, is so very poor and miserable,
that no marvel, there is no preaching, he has been there some thirty or
forty years.

3. The Parsonage of Horton distant three or four miles from Northampton is
also a poor Church, not presentative of late years, (though not long since it
was) but being enclosed wholly in pastures, and lately come into the hands of a
great Nobleman (the Lord Privy Seal) there is a stipendiary Curate allowed at
some mean rate; but no man dare be bold to call it in question, the neighbors
being but of mean condition that dare not complain, whatsoever their loss or
grievance be.

The Curate is one master Marten, of commendable desert, for ought I know, and
lives there by courtesy in an --

But the Parsonage house, glebe and tithes are all lost and gone, for ought I
can hear.

4. The Vicarage of Preston distant three miles from Northampton, is worth 100.
marks yearly, as is reported, but the dwelling house is long since pulled
down, the glebe lost, and the tithes all detained by the Lords of the Manor,
Sir Robert Hartnell and his Father, allowing some eight pounds stipend to a
poor Vicar. Thus it continued all Queen Elizabeth's time, and King James
reign in a very scandalous manner, insomuch as master Jasper Hartnell, and Sir
Robert Hartnell his son, pulled down the body of the Church, sold the Lead
and the Bells, and employed it to profane uses, the Chancell also for a time
was profaned, being made a Kennell for Greyhounds, and the Steeple a Pigeon
house. As for prayers and preaching, when they were disposed to have any, it
was performed in the Hall or Parlour, the house standing near to the Church,
and sometimes they frequented the Lectures at Northampton. But Sir Robert
Hartnell lately sold the whole estate which he had left remaining to Sir
Clement Edmonds Knight, whose son Mr. Charles Edmond has repaited the
Chancell, and the body of the Church, and destroyed the Pigeons, pulling down
their nests, and has put all things in good order for the Church and Fabric,
only thee poor U^car is destitute of globe or dwelling house, and for these
80. years it has stood in a miserable case, though upon a late suit in
th'E^chequer, the Vicarage tithes are recovered, and upon the next avoydance it
is hoped there will be some amendment.

5. The Vicarage of Thrip, within three miles of Northampton is very poor and
contemptible, having only a beggarly Cottage allowed to the Vicar for his
dwelling house, and some small tithes, to the value of 20 pounds yearly, or
somewhat better if they be well paid, but the Parsonage house, and glebe which
by right, and the old indowment (which lately remained upon Record) does belong
to the Vicar, is detained by Sir Richard Samuel Knight, not by any good title
in law, but some color of an Order (as is reported) in The Exchequer made long
ago, when his Grandfather perhaps was an Auditor in The Exchequer, and so might
procure some favor there in his own behalf, more then a poor miserable
Vicar could ever get reversed or altered. The tithe corn is worth one hundred
pounds yearly, which also Sir Richard Samwell holds an Appropriation.

But by this means the Vicar is very poor, and in part scandalous, being a
man chosen by Sir William Samwell, and there presented, who would be sure to
place one in the Vicarage, that for want of wit and means, should never be
able to make any question of the Parsonage house and glebe. The want of bread
and drink in his own house, does make him too often frequent the Alehouse,
where if he talk foolishly, it is not much to be wondered at.

6 The Parsonage of Lampert, distant four miles from Northampton, is worth
about 400 pounds yearly, but it is held by Sir John Issam Knight by color of
an old long Lease, and the present incumbent has but some stipend upon
agreement, but hee-hath also another Living not far off, where he resideth,
but if this Rectory had the rights restored, it would give entertainment to any
one of the most eminent Divines in either Universities, and there might be
continual preaching in very due manner, with great hospitality and relief of
the poor. The old Curate Master Bunny, who dyed lately, lived very poor and
long, and no marvel if there were little preaching, and it is pity that such a
great Living should be swallowed up under color only of a Lease.

7. Duston a poor Vicarage stipendiary near Northampton Master James the
Vicaris well reputed, but his living is very poor, only 20. pounds yearly,
some 5. pounds more was given lately by the Honorable Earl of Warwick, but
he having sold his estate there, that Exhibition is discontinued.

8. Dallington a poor Vicarage near Northhampton, the Patron is Sir Henry
Wallop.

There are many other poor Vicarages and Livings in this Country, occasioned
sometimes by the Appropriations, sometimes by the mean and small rates which
in many places are given only for tithes, as twenty shillings where twenty
pounds were due, if tithes in kind were paid. I think the Clergy would be
content to forgo their pluralities (being so few for the number) if the poor
Vicarages, and other poor livings might be made competible, or enjoy their
fulltithes, and the small rates taken away throughout the whole Kingdom, which
is but a very reasonable proposal, if pluralities should be taken away, and
till there be a tolerable maintenance provided in every parish, it is
impossible that there should be a constant faithful preaching ministry
throughout the whole kingdom, which has been so often moved and petitioned
for in Parliament.

Cambden does reckon almost the one half of the parishes in the Kingdom to
be Vicarages, there being in the whole nine thousand two hundred, whereof
almost four thousand are Appropriate Churches, which for the most part are
poor, besides also many Parsonages are very destitute, and unfit to give
entertainment to a constant and diligent Preacher, and many also are shamefully
spoiled and robbed most unjustly, though they be not Appropriate.

It has been reported that it was once voted in Parliament in Queen
Elizabeth's time, that an Act might pass to make it lawful for them that would
be willing to restore Impropriations to the Church, (which now is not lawful
in an ordinary way without charge) and that the Religious Earl of Huntington
offered to restore all the Impropiations of his estate, which then was great,
and might have many in it. The motion was in many respects Christian, pious,
and very religious, but it happened to be denied, ne res transiret in exemplum;
Which was detestable, and perhaps one cause why God has given no better
success to many Parliaments since that time. Master Calvin speaking of
Impropriations, says, that the theft is still continued in the Church, only
the thieves are changed, heretofore the Monks and Friars were the thieves, now
many that would be accounted good Protestants. It were much to be wished that
the Parliament would make an Act, whereby it should be freely lawful, and
absolutely clear in Law, without any hinderance to restore or purchase
Impropriations to the Church, wherein of late years many worthy Gentlemen have
given singular good example, as Master Richard Knightly, who dyed lately,
restored Preston and Faustey (as is reported) whiles he lived, blessed be his
name and memory. I have heard a wise man propose a course, how the Restitution
of Impropriations might be made easy; and that was, if the King would be
pleased to publish and grant Letter, Patents, to give leave for restitution of
them, and if this may hold good in law, (as good Lawyers may easily inform and
direct a course, for the drawing of the Letters Patents) it would in time
produce many singular and good effects, for many well disposed Gentlemen are
willing to restore, and many might be named, as Sir william Dorrington, Knight
of Hampshire, restored six out of his own estate, to the value of five hundred
pounds yearly, and more.

Concerning the scarcity of preaching Ministers throughout the whole Kingdom.
In the general it may be objected, that there is no scarcity, for it is
thought, and I take it, may easily be proved, that for number there are more
Preachers, and for worth and desert more excellent within these last 40.
years, then ever was since the Reformation of Religion, or since we were first
Christians. And both the Universities have greatly increased in numbers of
Scholars and Preachers, especially since King James his time because he gave
so pious example, being excellently learned himself, and speaking favorably,
as the good Hezekias did to all the Levites, that taught the good knowledge of
the Lord.

Perhaps the scarcity of preaching Ministers (if it be so) may arise from the
causes alleged in the Conference at Hampton Court. -- Where the King says
that he had consulted with his Bishops about that complaint, whom he found
willing and ready to second him in it, -- but as subita evacutio, was
periculosa, so subita mutatio, therefore this matter was not for a present
resolution, because to appoint to every parish a sufficient Minister, were
impossible, the Universities would not afford them. Again, he had found
already that he had more learned men in his Realm then he had sufficient
maintenance for, so that maintenance must first be provided, and then the other
to be required. What the King says that the Universities will not afford store
of learned Preachers to supply every parish throughout the Kingdom, is true,
if a view and consideration be taken of their numbers; for both Universities
will not afford constantly every year 200. Preachers (though perhaps at this
instant they would afford 100. a piece, because there be many there that would
gladly be gone if they had Benefices) whereas of nine thousand parishes, and
200. in all, there dies five or six hundred Ministers every year, so that
there should be to supply the vacancies that happen by death every year so
many ready Preachers (if the Colleges could afford them) but seeing the
Universities cannot afford so many, the supply of the rest (300. at least
yearly) must come from Curates, Schoolmasters, and such as teach children in
the houses of Knights and Gentlemen, whom they commonly reward with some
Benefice in their gift and donation.

But further in that Conference of Hampton Court, Doctor Bilson then Bishop of
Winchester, made known to the King that then insufficiency of the Clergy, be
it as it was at that time, came not by the Bishops defaults, but partly by
Lay-Patrons, who did present very mean men to their Cures, whereof in himself
he showed an instance, how that since his being Bishop of Winchester, very few
Masters of Art, were presented to good Benefices, partly by the law of the
Land, which admits of very mean and tolerable sufficiency in any Clerks,
so that if the Bishop should not admit them, then presently a Quare impedit is
sent out against him. And certainly it cannot be denied but that man. Patrons
are very much to be blamed, for as the excellent Bishop Jewel complained in
his time, in a Sermon before the Queens Majesty, that if the Patron were no
better then a Gentleman, they seldom suffer a Benefice to pass, but either
for the Lease, or for ready money. I wish it were made by Law to be felony, to
take either Lease of the tithes or ready money for a Living. Mr. George Catesby
Gentleman, that wants neither wit nor learning, and one that will talk
zealously for Religion, yet he sold most shamefully a very good Parsonage, viz.
Acton worth 240 pounds yearly, first to one Master Carjer, then to one Master
Parker, two scandalous Ministers for many disorders, so that Master Catesby was
the true cause of that scandal and mischief that did arise to the Church
thereby, and now the same Living is upon sale again the third time, the old
incumbent being hurt and sickly. But when Benefices are exposed to sale, the
choice of a Minister can never be good, for Chapmen that buy in this kind are
commonly obnoxious men, or none of the best sort.

Master Perkins, that man of God, in his Sermon of the duties and dignity of
the ministry, gives three reasons of the rareness and scarceness of good
Ministers. 1. The contempt and disgrace of their Calling, by wicked and worldly
men. 2. The difficulty of discharging the duties of their Calling. 3. The third
is more peculiar to this age of the New Testament, viz. Want of maintenance and
preferment for men that labor in the Calling, and that in these times under
the Gospel, when it deserves best to be rewarded. Certainly it were a worthy
Christian policy to propound good preferments to this Calling, that thereby men
of the worthiest gifts might be won to it, and the want thereof is the cause
why so many young men, of especial parts and greatest hope, run to other
vocations, and especially to the Law, wherein at this day the greatest part of
the finest wits of the Kingdom are employed. And why? but because they have
all the means to rise, whereas the Ministry for the most part yields
nothing but a plain way to beggary. This is a great blemish in our Church, and
surely I wish the Papists, those children of this world, were not wiser in
their kind, in this point, then the Church of God. The reformation hereof is a
work worthy of the labor of a Prince and people, and special care is to be
had in it, else it will not be reformed, for doubtless had not God himself
in the Old Testament taken such straight order for the Livings of the Levites,
they had been put to no less extremities, then is the Ministry of this Age.
Thus master Perkins, and much more he has touching this and the former
reasons, in the same Treatise, whereto I refer.

It is not to be forgotten, what was the sin of Ierobeam, that made Israel to
sin, he made Priests of the basest of the people; and this he did, 2 Chronicles.
13.9.
because he robbed sacrilegiously the Priests and Levites of all the Cities
which they had in his Kingdom of the ten Tribes, (and those Cities were many
more then there are Bishoprics in England.) And also he freed the people from
the payment of tithes to the Levites (which is the secret thing which our
common Freeholders and Grand-Iury-men do so much aim at, if Bishops and their
Courts were overthrown) so that of necessity he must make base Priests, for
his base gods. And so if tithes were taken away here, then would quickly follow
Ierobeams Priesthood base, contemptible, poor and illiterate, for what man of
good quality or ability, will bring up his son to the Ministry, when he
shall be sure to be nailed fast to one place, and live there only upon a
stipend. -- Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte negabit; A beggars brat taken
from the bridge where he sits a begging, if he knew the inconvenience had cause
to refuse it.

But I greatly hope, and trust that God will so direct and bless the supreme
Court of Justice, that they will be ready to command, double Honor to be given
to the laboring Clergy, as Saint Paul requires, and make the Calling
honorable and respected, according to the true esteem that it ought to have.
God said anciently, Levit. 21.8. Thou shall sanctify the Priest, and he shall
be holy to thee. 1. Thou shall reverently esteem him as an holy person. --
Calvin says upon the place, -- Quo melius commendet sacri officii reverentiam
admonet ad totius populi salutem spectare; Ego, inquit, sum Deus qui ves
sanctifico: Illis autem verbis significat gratiam adoptionis, qua selecti erant
in peculium, in sacerdotio fundatam esse.

And now perhaps you will expect to know from whom this comes, which for the
present, I must request you to excuse; because I fear that upon the knowledge
of my name, so many persons as I have had occasion to tax, will think that I
singled them out of envy and malice, which I utterly deny: whereas I might
have insisted upon many more in the like kind offending: it is indeed too true,
there are many more, but hoping there will be a vigilant eye, and prudent care
carried in examining the truth of all things, and that many others will send in
their Advertisements to the like purpose, I will proceed no further. Only
submitting to censure whatsoever is amiss, and shall be glad if any thing here
mentioned may give the least furtherance to the advancement of Gods glory.

Only let me add one thing as a postscript.
Whereas there is a brute and rumor spread, that the Clergy is over-growne of
late; and as I have heard it was so told unto the King, when he was last at
Barwicke, by Master Henderson, a principal Scottish Minister, and also among
our own selves many do think so, yet I take it under correction to be a
notorious error and fallacy. Sir Francis Bacon says in one of his Essays,
That it is to be foreseen that the population of a Kingdom (especially if it
be not mowne down by Wars) do not exceed the stock of the Kingdom, which
should maintain them, neither is the population to be reckoned only by number,
for a smaller number that spend more, and earne less, do wear out an Estate
sooner, than a greater number, that live lower and gather more, therefore the
multiplying of Nobility, and other degrees of Quality, in an over-proportion to
the common people, does speedily bring a state to necessity. He does hereby
intimate not obscurely, that our Nobility and Gentry is greatly overgrowne, for
whereas there was but some seventeene Earls, and twenty six Barons in Hen. 8.
time, before the dissolution of Religious houses, now there is increased a very
great number more especially since the beginning of King James, who to reward
old servants, and gain new friends, and withal perhaps to weaken the power
and greatness of the Nobility, increased their number exceedingly, especially
both before in the Queens time, and Hen. 8. they did rise upon the Church
lands and possessions, being seated for the most part upon the Abbeys, and such
like houses taken from Bishops and Churches. Whereas if the lands and
possessions of the Abbeyes had been well employed, as was pretended and
projected, they would have made the Crown richer then the Crown of Spain and
both the Indies. For the yearly Revenue of these lands comes to four millions
sterling, according to the improved rents of this Age, whereof if but a third
or fourth part had been annexed to the Crown and fixed, there would have
been little need to grant Subsidies. Whereas being used as it happened, it
enriched the Crown very little, but raised a number of petty foggers, and many
new Gentlemen, as Raleigh speaks. And it is easy to be observed, that
whereas in Queen Elizabeth's time, there was but two or three Knights in the
Shire, now there is sixty, besides many pretended Esquires and Gentlemen,
which as Bacon says, do spend much, and earne little, living for most part
above their quality and degree, which they ought to keep in all their
behavior, expenses, apparel, etc.

But the Clergy for number are not much above the nine thousand and two hundred
Benefices that are in the whole Kingdom, and out of those that are above that
number the vacancies by death yearly must be supplied, as Curates, Lecturers,
Schoolmasters which are besides those in the Universities, which will not
afford constantly and yearly two hundred Ministers, whereas there is about
six hundred vacancies in the year by death; and other casualties. Besides,
the Curates which are under superior Ministers to assist and help them, do
live and are maintained out of the profits of the Incumbent of the place,
without charge to the Commonwealth otherwise, or the Parishes where they live,
and often times they help themselves by teaching school.

But if some severe courses now voiced be put in execution, there will be such
discouragement given to Scholars in the Universities, that few will apply
themselves to the ministry, there may be a si quis set up in Paul's, to accept
Livings, as was done in the beginning of the Queens time, when many popish
Priests did fly the Land, and the Universities afforded no choice and supply.

But if the over-growing of the Clergy be understood of wealth and means, I
take it is easy to disprove it, for it cannot appear upon good inquiry, that
of all the Bishops for these last eighty years since the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, that any almost has left five hundred pounds yearly in land, or
any such considerable estate, except only very few, two or three perhaps, or
that all the Bishops being reckoned together, have not left so much land as one
Lawyer did to his children, viz. Sir Edward Cook, who left twenty thousand
pounds yearly, or little less; Sergeant Gaudy, left five thousand; Sergeant
Crew, left four thousand; and many Lawyers do commonly leave one thousand and
five hundred pounds yearly, that are of ordinary practice, not of the
principal Council to the King, nor great Sergeants or Judges, many of whom
have raised up great Families of Nobility and Gentry, whereas very few of the
Bishops have been able to leave their sons such estates, as to raise them to
Knighthood; one Bishop Sands in Queen Elizabeth's time, left his sons of good
estate, but he was a Gentleman well descended, and what other means and
helps he had I know not, but the Queen did favor his sons being worthy
men. And some other Bishops at this day, and formerly have had rich friends, by
whom they have gained the greatest part of their wealth, and not by their
preferments in the Church.

And for the ordinary Clergy, I do not know any man in the Diocese, that is
able to leave one hundred pounds, nor scarce fifty pounds to his children in
land, excepting Doctor Clerk, who having been the Kings Chaplain twenty
years has perhaps gotten something, and he that cannot leave forty pounds or
fifty pounds in land at his death, is not to be regarded as a rich man,
whereas there are many Attorneyes, besides Lawyers, that have one hundred
pounds yearly. I am sure there dye every year many Ministers very poor, and
leave their children meanly provided for, in regard all the better sort live
and continue long at the Universities before they be preferred and married, and
dye before they can gather any wealth or estate. And of these examples it is
easy to produce an hundred for one, that leaves any thing of moment.

FINIS.

