The Character OF A PURITAN; AND His Gallimaufrey of the Antichristian Clergy;
prepared with D. BRIDGES Sauce for the present time to feed on.

By the worthy Gentleman, D. Martin Mar-Prelat, Doctor in all the Faculties,
Primate and Metropolitan.

Printed in the time of Parliament. 1643.

THE PREFACE. BEING A PRAYER,
O LORD GOD, and most merciful Father, we beseech thee, for the honor of thy
holy Name, to defend us from that Antichrist of Rome, and from all his det
stable enormities, Manners, Laws, Altars, Garments, and Ceremonies. Destroy the
Council of all Papists and Atheists, enemies of thy Gospel, and of thu Realm
of England Disclose their mischiefs and subtle practices: confound their
devices: let them be taken in their own wilinesses: and strenghen all those
that maintain the cause and quarrel of thy Gospel, with invincible force and
power of thy holy Spirit: so that, though they be destitute at any time of
worldly aid and comfort, that yet they fail not to proceed and go forward
toward that true godliness commanded in thy holy Word, with simplicity and
sincerity: to thy honor and glory, the comfort of thine Elect, and the
comfusion of thine enemies; through Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen, Amen.
And say from the heart Amen.

A DIALOGVE, WHEREIN IS PLAINLY LAID OPEN THE TYRANNICAL DEALING OF LORD
BISHOPS, against Gods Children.
The Speakers are these Puritan. Papist. Jack of both sides. Idol Minister.

Puritan. YOU are well overtaken Sir, do you travel far this way I pray you?


Jack. Toward London Sir.


Puritan. I shall willingly bear you company, if it please you?


Jack. With all my heart, I shall be very glad of yours.


Puritan. From whence came you this way?


Jack. I come out of France.


Puritan. Out of what part of France came you I pray you? I came from Rochell
my self, which is a part of France.


Jack. Is it so, but I came not near that place.


Puritan. Out of what part of France came you then?


Jack. I came from Orleans.


Puritan. I pray you what News from thence, is there any likelihood of Peace
there?


Jack. Yes surely, there is some hope of Peace, for where the Kings powers
come, they do commonly yield presently.


Puritan. It is a good hearing.


Jack. What is he that comes after us so fast?


Puritan. He seems to be some Preacher, or dumb Minister, it may be he goes our
way: if he do I hope we shall have his company, whereby we may pass away the
time in some good conference, and also hear what News there is at home here in
England.


Jack. I am content Sir, for I shall be glad to hear some good News, me
thinks I have bin very long absent from hence.


Puritan. Very well, we will go the so softlier, that he may overtake us I but
by the way, I pray you, if you come from Orleans, there they have the Mass,
for they are of the League: and then I suppose you have bin partaker of their
Idolatry?


Jack. No I assure you, I detest all Idolatry, even from my heart.


Puritan. If you do so, I am very glad of it, but I pray you let me hear if
you can give me some proof out of the Word of God, for the confirmation of
this your protestation against Idolatry?


Jack. I am content to give you a taste thereof, whereby it shall appear that
I am far from it: For so dearly as I tender the salvation of my own soul,
so careful am I to shun and fly from all Idolatry. For it is written, Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: And
the Apostle Paul to the Gorinth. 1 Epist. cap. 10. verse. 14. commands us to
Fly from Idolatry, for Idolatry is sin, and the mages of sin is death, etc.


Puritan. It is well applied, and somewhat to the purpose, I am very glad if it
be done in singlenes of heart: For me thinks you could not possibly be in that
place, but you must be forced to be present at their Idolatrous Mass.


Jack. I was never present at it in my life, I thank God: but the Papists
stick not to say that our Service Book in English is (a great part of it) but
a mere translation out of the Masse-Booke.


Puritan. Indeed it is true, that most part of our Book of Common Prayer (as
they say) is a mere translation out of the Masse-Booke: but yet there is no
such Blasphemic and Idolatry tolerated in it, as is daily in the Mass:
although it greatly derogate from the Word, and is full of great and grievous
corruptions. But I pray you how long were you in Orleans Sir?


Jack. I was there about a fortnight.


Puritan. No longer?


Jack. No Sir.


Puritan. Here comes the Minister now, we will hear what News he can tell us,
he seems to be but an Idol Shepherd: we shall have some good conference with
him I hope, to pass away the time?


Minister. You are well overtaken Gentlemen, which way travel you, I pray you?


Puritan. Toward London, and if it please God.


Minist. I shall be glad of your company, and if it please you?


Puritan. We also shall be glad of yours Sir.


Jack. I pray you Mr. Vicar or Parson (for so you seem to be) what good News
is there here at home, in England, for we have been both of us in France, and
we would gladly hear some good News?


Minist. Indeed I am a poor Vicar: truly we have no great good News here Sir:
For our Church is so sore pestered with Sects and Schisms, that the Reverend
Fathers, and especially my Lords Grace of Canterbury) are so sore troubled with
them, that they have no leisure to recreate themselves for those Fellows, they
are so bold and mallepert, that they prefer Petitions to Her Majesty, the
Lords of the Council; yea and in Print to the High Court of Parliament.


Puritan. Why Sir, what be they that do this, what do you call them, are they
Papists?


Minist. No, they are worse then Papists, for they are fant^sticall Puritans
and Brownists, and I cannot tell what.


Puritan. What be the points they hold, that are so schismatic and erroneous?


Minist. Forsooth, they would have no Lord Bishop, but every Minister to be of
equal Authority one with another, and so make a confusion in the whole State:
for they have set down a new platform of (Discipline forsooth, as they call
it) they cannot tell what themselves.


Puritan. I will tell you my opinion, of Lord Bishops, it is but an humane
constitution, and not warrantable by the Word, but utterly forbidden: and as
for the Discipline you speak of, I wish all Gods people would practice it.


Minist. Oh, I perceive you are one of these Fantastical Puritans or
Brownists, I pray you out of what place of France came you?


Puritan. I came from Rochel.


Minist. I thought from Rochel, Geneva or Scotland, you seem to be a Bird of
one of those nests.


Puritan. Sir, whatsoever I am, I do not doubt but to be able to prove by the
Word what I have said, and namely, the unlawfullnesse of Lord Bishops.


Minist. Sir, that point has been handled by your betters, and manifestly
confuted by my Lords grace, in his writings against Cartwright.


Puritan. Indeed he that will be blind, cannot see it, but he that looks in
both their Works, with a single eye, cannot but confess Mr. Cartwright to have
confuted him by unanswerable evidence: or else why would he not have answered
Mr. Cartwrights works, now a dozen years extant and more.


Minist. As you of the Fantastical crew think, but he has done it, and that
so sufficiently already, that there needs no more Answers: and again, his
Grace is now otherwise troubled with matters of State, that he cannot intend
it: or if he could, yet it is not for him so to abase himself, in regard of
his high Calling which he is now placed in.


Puritan. As though the cause of God were to be neglected in respect of his
high place: if he were lawfully called thereunto, as he does very unlawfully
usurp the same, contrary to the Law of God: for is it possible he can be the
true Minister of God, and a Temporal Magistrate, that is, to serve God and
Mammon to; as the Apostle says, Let him that has an office attend upon his
office, and not Offices.


Minist. Why, how dare you presume to say so? Were not Lord Bishops established
by Her Majesty and consent of the whole Parliament?


Puritan. I grant they were, but the Lord has said contrary, in the
Commandment he gave to his Ministers, Luke 22. saying, The Kings of the
Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them are called
gracious Lords: but ye shall not be so: but let the greatest among you be as
the least, and the chiefest as him that serves. And 1 Pet. 5. Feed the Flock
of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: Not as though ye were
Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the Flock. And in
the first session of Parliament,
holden in the First year of her Majesty's reign, there was never a Lord
Bishop in the Land.


Minist. If you will have no Lord Bishop, how should the Church be governed
then?


Puritan. According as our Savior Christ has commanded, and as the Holy Ghost
has set it down, viz. by Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, Rom 12.
Ephesians. 4.1 Cor. 12.


Minist. You are very full of Scripture, as though we have not the same Offices
in effect, though not in the same Titles: as for example, have not we Parsons
for Teachers, Vickers for Pastors, Churchwardens for Elders, and Sidemen for
Deacons, to distribute to the poor.


Puritan. And what for Archbishops, and Lord Bishops?


Jack. I will tell you for him, Archbishops for Popes, and Lord Bishops for
Cardinals. Ha, ha, Mr Vicker, I see you are a good Churchman, do not you use
the Pulpit sometimes?


Minist. No indeed Sir, but I read the Homilies sometimes, and the Queens
Injunctions, and do my duty as other Ministers do.


Puritan. I thought so, by that fit comparison that you have made.


Jack. And have you no more but one Benefice neither, and yet do all that?


Minist. Yes indeed, I say Service at two more, but I have little profit by
them: marie the best is, they are somewhat near, for they are all three within
four miles together.


Puritan. And how can you serve them all upon the Sabbath day?


Minist. Some of them are but small, and I can make quick dispatch with them
betimes, and take my Mare and ride to the other: and can make an end of all by
ten of the clock; and spend an hour with good Fellows at home before Dinner
to.


Puritan. And Master Vicker, do you think herein, that you discharge your duty
to God, and those Congregations, over whom you have taken this charge?


Minist. Why Sir, I discharge my duty better then those that take upon them
four or five.


Puritan. Why? is there any that takes upon them the charge of so many?


Minist. Yea a hundred in England.


Puritan. Well I will tell you, the fearful judgments of God hangs over our
heads, and cannot be long deferred, but fall upon the whole Land (where to such
dumb Idols as you are, is committed the charge of souls) and to your selves
eternal destruction of body and soul: wherefore Mr. Vicker, as you tender your
own salvation, leave this your unlawful Calling of the Ministry, and betake
you to some occupation, or Husbandry.


Minist. I care not what any of you spightfull Puritans say, so long as I can
have the favor of my Lord Bishop.


Jack. I pray you Mr. Vicker let me spur a question unto you, if I may be so
bold, where do you serve?


Minist. I serve in Middlesex Sir.


Jack. Who made you Minister?


Minist. My good Lord of London.


Puritan. Like enough, he has made a great many of blind guides in his time
besides you: for he made the Porter of his Gate, Minister of Paddington, being
blind.


Jack. O monstrous, is this true, did he so indeed?


Puritan. It is most true, for the Bishop of Winchester has recorded it in a
Book of his set forth in Print.


Jack. Why, what will our Bishops grow to in time, if they be suffered? for me
thinks this is a fearful thing, to make such Ministers, as can neither see,
nor speak: for it is like if he were the Porter (no doubt of it) he had not
the gift of Teaching?


Puritan. Very true: but because he could do him no longer service, he was so
good to him, to provide for the poor blind man that he might live.


Jack. Sure I think when they come once to be Lords, they clean forget God
and all Godliness: for I have heard that there was some good things in him
before he was Bishop of London: for he wrote a Book, called, the Harborow of
faithful Subjects, against Bishops: wherein he says, Come down ye Bishops
with your thousands, and betake you to your hundreds, let your fare be
Priestlike, and not Princelike, etc.


Puritan. Indeed he wrote such a Book, and the same words that you repeat, I
have read in the same: but alas, when he was at the best, he was but a corrupt
man; and the best things in it, savor but of earth: for there is many things
handled in it very immodestly, and unchristianly: but one thing especially he
sets down there, which himself practices clean contrary: where he speaks of
the ability that should be in every Minister of the Word, that he should know
his quarter strocks, to be able to convince the adversary, etc.


Minist. Why? will you have none Ministers, but such as can preach? I can tell
you, that the twentieth Minister in the Land cannot preach.


Puritan. The more the worse: for you and the rest, how many soever there be
stand without repentance in a most damnable state: for you are most notorious
murderers of souls, in taking upon you so high a Calling, and being so far
unfit for it; so many as perish for want of teaching in your charge, their
blood the Lord will require at your hands.


Minist. The Bishop knew my ability before he mad me Minister.


Puritan. Well, he stands in the state of damnation as you do, and thus much I
say unto you, and to all Idol Ministers, and to him, and all usurping
Archbishops and Lord Bishops, leave your unlawful Callings, into which you
have intruded your selves; and with speed repent, and humble your selves before
the Majesty of God, confessing your horrible and grievous sins with Peter's
tears, in that you are the caufe, yea and also the very murderers of so many
souls, as perish in your charges: knowing that the Lord will in that great and
terrible day, require their blood at your hands.


Jack. O Lord, my heart quaketh to hear of so great and grievous sins as are
in our Bishops, and in the whole Ministry: but our Bishops are the cause of all.


Puritan. I will tell you Sir, I am persuaded in my very Conscience, that the
Lord has given many of our Bishops over into a reprobate sense, for they do
wilfully oppose themselves against the Lord, and his known truth, yea and
persecute it (and I suppse them to be in the state of the sin against the
Holy Ghost) for they have manifested in their published writings, yea and
pressed forth by Authority, such horrible blasphemous, Heretical, yea damnable
Doctrines, which my very heart trembles to repeat, in sort as they have set,
them down: which if those (whom they call Puritans) should set down or hold the
like errors and dangerous points, I warrant you they should soon be cut off
from the face of the earth, and right well they were worthy.


Jack. Now Sir, I pray you let me hear some of the points they hold, and that
are so dangerous as you say, that I may be able to justify it to our dumb dogs
teeth, at Austins Gate in London, when I come home


Puritan. First you shall understand that the Bishop of London has published
in Print, and that in an Epistle or Preface before Barnardeus de loques Book of
the Church, published in English, that the Puritans may as well deny the Son
of God to be consubstantiall with God the Father, as they may deny the
superiority of Archbishops and Lord Bishops, flat contrary to the saying of our
Savior Christ, Luke 22.


Jack. O monstrous and blasphemous wretch, that to maintain his fleshly
pleasure, will make such an odious comparison.


Puritan. Nay, what say you to a Bishop that has two Wives, and both now
living? Do you not think it is a thing tolerable in a Christian
Commonwealth, where the Gospel is professed?


Jack. No indeed do I not, I hope our Magistrates will not suffer such a
Bishop to live: it were monstious among common Infidels, much more
intolerable, that a Bishop in such a Land as ours is, where the Gospel is
truly taught: But I pray you is there any such now living?


Puritan. Yes indeed is there, and the Bishop of Saint David's in Wales is the
Man, he is now living, and both his Wives, and yet still remains a Bishop.


Jack. Is it possible that a Bishop should commit such an horrible act as
this, how far are our Bishops from obeying the Commandment of the Apostle
Peter, who says, Feed the Flock, and be ensamples to the Flock: what ensample
^s this? And does not the same God which says, Thou shall do no murder,
which is death by our Laws; does he not say, Thou shall not commit adultery:
And yet a Bishop to have two Wives at once, and live in a Church, professing
the sincerity of the Gospel: What say you to this Master Vicker, is not our
Church well governed think you?


Minist. If it be true, it is (I must needs confess) a horrible thing and
worthy of death: but I do not believe it.


Puritan. It is very true, for the cause was brought before the High
Commissioners at Lambeth, and how it is smothered up among the Bishops, and the
rest of the Commissioners, I know not yet: but I could tell you the whole
conclusion, if I were at London but half an hour.


Jack. Why the suffering of this, and other like villainies, to be committed in
our Nation, are causes to stir up the Lord to wrath, against the whole Land,
whereby he may speedily bring his judgments upon us, yea even to our utter
destruction.


Minist. It is so, if it be true: but I will not believe it.


Puritan. Well, for the truth of the matter, I refer you to the High
Commissioners, where it is recorded, with his Wives names, viz. Elizabeth
Gigge, and Alice Prime.


Minist. Indeed I have heard of the like before, that you Puritans have put
forth a Book in Print, under the name of Martin Mar-prelate, wherein many such
things are mentioned.


Puritan. There is nothing set down in it, but there is good proof of the
same, and the Bishop of Winchester, who took upon him to confute it, has
confirmed it for the most part; and that he denies is most true.


Jack. What did he undertake to confute it? Alas he is altogether unlearned
(for I have heard of him in Oxford; and the Papists say, they can make him
believe the Moon is made of green cheese) mary to get him a name (forsooth)
being a Correcter with a Printer in Fleet Street in London, who Printed a
Dictionary, called Sir Thomas Eliots Dictionary, Cooper transsated a piece of
Robert Stephanus his Thesaurus, and joined it to the same, with a few Phrases;
and so bereaved the Famous Knight of his labor, and calls it by the name of
Coopers Dictionary: how say you Master Vicker, was not this a knavish trick,
tell me?


Minist. I say you deal very unreverently with my Lord: for I can say nothing
to the matter else; for I know it not to be true?


Puritan. What say you to this then Master Vicker, did you never hear of your
Lord Bishop of London, who made the Dyars in Thames Street, who were robbed by
Thieves that stole their Cloth, and brought it within his Liberties, which
when the poor Dyars hearing where their Cloth was, and coming to the Bishop
to demand their own goods, he said, if they would hang the Thieves, he would
then say more; which the Dyars did: and at their deaths, confessed that to be
the Dyars Cloth which the Bishop had: but the poor men were never the near
for their Cloth; nor cannot get it, or any part of it to this day: and this is
confessed to be true, by the Bishop of Winchester in his answer to Martin
Mar-prelat, published in Print by Authority: wherein he says, it is the Bishop
of Londons own, by the Laws of the Land, because it was taken within his
Liberties: mark, he speaks nothing of the Law of God, according to
Conscience, in keeping of Thiefe-stollen goods from their right owners, for
Conscience is fled from them (it seems) so soon as they are gotten to be Lord
Bishops once.


Minist. Yes Sir, I know there is such a Book, named Martin Mar-prelate, a most
vile and slanderous Libell: but I do not think my Lord of Winchester does
approve any thing that is set down there in any of those Books, for they have
put forth three or four Books under that Title.


Jack. Why Master Vicker, how do they to get their Books Printed?


Minist. Tush, they do well enough for that, there is a Seditious Fellow, one
Walde-grave, who commonly Prints all such Books (I know him well enough) he did
keep a Shop at the Sgne of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard: at which time he had
his Press and Letters taken away from him, and destroyed for the same cause,
by my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and now he works in corners up and down the
Country like a Vagabond.


Puritan. With a seared Conscience, did the Bishops that violence to him, in
regard both of the Cause, and also for the great charge he has of Wife, and
six small Children; and now to bereave his Poor Family of him, whose labors
was their only comfort and maintenance.


Jack. Master Vicker, how long was it since Walde-graves goods were destroyed,
I have heard of him before now, but I know him not?


Minist. Tush, you know him well enough I am sure, it is since his goods were
destroyed about Easter was a twelve month.


Jack. And has he been all this time absent from his Family?


Minist. I Sir, and if he had bin there, he would easily have been had, for he
has been watched well enough for that?


Puritan. I will tell you Sir how they deal with him, when they have any
suspicion that he is at home, although he durst never come nome, they stick not
in the dead time of the night, to break down the main walls of his house, and
enter in with Constables and Pursuivants; and this a common thing with them.


Jack. I am persuaded, the Bishops had been better to have given him freely 2.
hundred pounds toward the setting up of a new Printing house for himself,
then to have destroyed his as they have done.


Minist. I think so, for it may be he would have followed his Calling some
other way, then to be employed in those things.


Jack. Yonder comes a man plodding a pace after us whatsoever he be.


Minist. It may be our company will increase, and so we shall go the more
cheerful; for it begins to be late, and it is dangerous going here abouts
late, I can tell you.


Puritan. It may be he is one of your coat Master Vicker.


Minist. I cannot tell, but if he be, he shall be welcome to me.


Jack. Surely he comes apace, whatsoever he be.


Minist. It may be he would be glad of company.


Jack. Well let us go on and continue our talk.


Puritan. Master Vicker, I think you be weary of our communication, if you be
let us know?


Minist. No by my Faith sir not I, say what you will a Gods name.


Puritan. Fie, Master Vicker, will you swear? I think you learned that of your
Lord Bishop of London, for he uses it often when he is at Boules.


Jack. What will Bishops swear?


Puritan. Swear Sir, I that they will, and defend it to, when they have done.
For in the first Book of Martin, there is mention made of the Bishop of
Londons Swearing, when he is at Bowls: And the Bishop of Winchester in
answering the same, says thus, in page 62. of his Book, That our Savior
Christ usually swear by his Faith in his Sermon: for he said Amen, Amen, which
is as much to say (says he) as by my Faith, by my Faith.


Jack. Why, is that Bishop of God, that will Swear thus?


Minist. Fo, I have heard my Lords Grace of Canterbury Swear by his Faith an
hundred times; yea and by God too sometimes; and what he does, I take it as a
good president for such as I am to follow.


Puritan. I Will tell: you Master Vicker, I am of Doctor Bridges his mind of our
Bishops: for (says he) page 339, 340. That all our Lord Bishops in England,
are the Bishops of the Devil: And I am sure of it by these two marks, viz. By
their tyrannical dealing against Gods Children. And by their wicked and
unconscionable lives, that they are not of God?


Jack. I pray you has Doctor Bridges written any Book that is published to
this effect?


Puritan. Yes indeed, and the Bishop of Canterbury has confirmed it by his
authorizing of the same; and also by his continual practice against Gods
Children.


Jack. But I pray you Sir, how wickedly has he wrested the Scripture, in
saying, our Savior Christ continually swear in his Sermons, when he said Amen,
Amen?


Puritan. Why, the Bishop of Winchester is most impudent in all his actions:
for he very blasphemously in his Sermon, preached at Mary Overies at London,
said, that a man might as well find fault with the holy Scripture, as with our
corrupt Common Book of Prayer.


Jack. Out upon him blasphemous wretch, he is certainly the Bishop of the
Devil, as Doctor Bridges says.


Puritan Will you hear some more of his Divinity?


Jack. O yes I pray you Sir. And yet my heart trembles to hear of such
odious blasphemies as these.


Puritan. He says in the 49. page of his Book against Martin Mar-prelate, That
the Creed of the Apostles, Athanasius, and the Nicene, etc. contain in them
many palpable lies. Now tell me your opinion of this, is it sound and
subsantiall Doctrine, I pray you tell me?


Jack. Doctrine, yea indeed this may truly be said to be the Doctrine of
Devils. Why, whither will our Bishops run in time trow you, if the Magistrate
suffer them?


Puritan. I will tell you, even to their Father the Devil: For they have at no
time taken in hand to write in defense of their Hierarchy: but it has made
their eyes so to dazzle, that they run into most dangerous and damnable errors,
(as in this Book of the Bishops will be proved near 500. errors) yea in
correcting and controuling the mighty word of God: and also have interlaced
their writings with such contrariety of matter, as one part of their own Books
may serve to confute the other, with infinite absurdities: yea and by your
leave to, even flat Treason?


Jack. Many good men did never judge the Bishop of Winchester, to be but an
Hypocrite?


Puritan. He is a most bittrer man to all those that fear God, and have to
deal with him: for he may well be compared to a Horse with a gald back, that
has bin so rubbed, that he winces, frets, and chafes so, that he is ready to
throw himself to utter destruction, with purpose to hurt him that rubbed him:
Even so, this Bishop takes to himself so much liberty in abusing and profaning
the holy word of God, (against those that write in the Lords Cause, against
their unlawful Callings) and that I fear me, to the indangering both of body
and soul.


Jack. I have heard that when he was at Lincoln he dealt not so hardly with
the Ministers as now he does, and that often in his Sermons at Northampton he
would confess, that the Discipline was used and practiced in the Primitive
Church, a long time after the Apostles.


Puritan. It is very true, and yet he says in his Book against Martin, that
the holy Discipline is a platform devised, he knows not by whom. And in
another place of the same Book, he confestes that it was practiced by the
Apostles, and long time after in the Primitive Church. And upon the words where
he says it is not denied, there is pasted, at the commandment of the Bishop
of Canterbury, It is not yet proved: so that there is some jarre, between
themselves, although these two are most conversant together, and join in one to
persecute sincere and faithful Preachers of the Word, and others of the Lords
Children.


Jack. I had thought they would not have dissented one from another of them.


Puritan. Why Sir, in the 49. page of the same Book, the Bishop of Winchester
says, the Bishop of Canterbury is a giddy head, and to be bridled, because he
authorized Doctor Whitaker his readings against Bellarmine, wherein the
Apocripha is defaced. And Mr. Doctor Some, one of their affinite no we, and a
nonresident, he calls the Archbishop of Canterbury An absurd Heretic, because
he holds Baptism administered by Women, to be the Seal of Gods Covenant: page
3. of his Book, against Master Penri, and many like things I could cite to
you, of their dissenting one from another.


Jack. How like you of these things Master Vicker, be not these good Fathers
of the Church, think you?


Minist. I like never a whit the worse of them for your words, for I know they
are but slanders.


Puritan. Master Vicker, you I know like well of them, although the proofs
that their adversaries do bring be never so manifest and plain against them,
because you are in the same state, or worse (and may be) in that you do
unlawfully usurp your place, and having no fit Gifts to discharge your duty in
any measure: Remember what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.19. Woe to me if I
preach not the Gospel; this is rightly pronounced upon you, and all such Idols
as you are.


Minist. If I read Sermons and Homilies, is it not as much as if I preached:
for Mr. Doctor Bridges says, that reading is preaching.


Puritan. The Lord has promised no such blessing unto reading as preaching:
for the Word preached is the only ordinary means to salvation. But I pray you
for your comfort, hear what the Prophet Jeremy says to you, in the 48 Chap.
Cursed be that man, that does the work of the Lord negligently.

And Mallac. 2.7. says, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the law, at his mouth: but how can you shun this curse Master
Vicker? I pray God humble your heart that you may acknowledge your sin, and
crave pardon at his hands; and leave the Ministry, lest the Lord with a strong
hand throw you out to your everlasting woe.


Jack. Master Vicker, he gives you good council, it were good for you to
follow it, if you do not, it will be the worse for you.


Minist. Well Sir, it is no matter, there be as wise as he will give me other
council.


Jack. Why I see Master Vicker is obstinate, he will not be persuaded by you.


Puritan. Even as he will, I speak my Conscience to him, he may choose if he
will follow it or no.


Jack. I marvel what good hospitality the Bishop of London keeps, I have
heard that he is very covetous.


Minist. Indeed he does keep a good house.


Jack. What does not the dogs run away out of his house with whole
shoulders. I think a man may as soon break his neck, as break his fast at his
house.


Puritan. Surely I can say thus much by report of one that was his Chaplain,
whose name is Haiward Vicker of Saint Martins, by Charing cross, that often
times when he dined at his Palace in London, he has made his Servants, to
take the Fragments, and carry them to Fulham: but if there be any dainty
morsel lest, he will wrap it up in his Handkerchiefe, and carry it in his
bosom, for fear lest his men should beguile him.


Jack. O Master Vicker, you have a most bountiful Lord: he is so liberal,
that he will not suffer the scraps to be bestowed upon the poor, but to be
kept for his Servants Supper.


Minist. It is false: for I have often seen alines given at his Gates, when he
has lien at London.


Puritan. I Will tell you what I have heard him say at Panls Gross my self upon
a time, following his text very well: (your must think) he burst me out with a
great exclamation of himself, in that he was poor and had no money,
protesting what charges he had bin at, and that Paul's Church can bear me
witness (says he) that I have no money. And shortly after; some of his own
Servants being there present, and heard him (belike thought to make their good
Lord a lyar^ very shortly after, robbed him, of certain hundred of pounds: for
which offense, he was so good unto his men, as to hang them up three or four
in number, I although he had the most part of his money again) and some of the
parties executed, protested to their knowledge, he had much more money at
usury, and that his servants lived only upon bribes.


Jack. A Bishop a Liar and a Usurer, nay surely Mr. Vicker, if your Lord have
those two faults, it cannot be but he has more: so that for my own part; I
think him verily to be the Bishop of the Devil.


Puritan. Nay Sir, I can give you proof for the same more, that he is surely
the Bishop of the Devil: for Martin Mar-prelate has set down a pretty thing
in his Epistle to the terrible Priests, that the Bishop of London when he
throws his Bowl, (as he uses it commonly upon the Sabbath day) he runs
after it, and if it be too hard, he cries, rub, rub, rub, and says, the Devil
go with thee, when he goes himself with it: So that by those words, he
names himself the Bishop of the Devil: but by his practice of tyrannical
dealing against the Lords faithful Ministers, not only calls, but proves
himself to be the Bishop of the Devil.


Jack. Ha, ha Master Vicker, you see your Lord Bishop is a Devil by his own
confession: so indeed, you are not the Lords Minister, but the Minister of the
Devil, as your Lord Bishop is the Bishop of the Devil.


Minist You use your speeches at pleasure of my Lord, it may be you will not so
easily answer them when you are called thereunto.


Jack. Yes Master Vicker I warrant you? Send a Pursuivant when you will for
us, and we will answer it, if we cannot make our parts good enough, we will
send the Woman of Hampsteed to him.


Minist. What mean you by that?


Jack. If you will needs have me, I will tell you, you shall understand Master
Vicker, that your good Lord at his first coming to be the Devils Lord at
London, began to play Rex, (as he has lately done at Fulham, in cutting down
the Trees, there, to the great impoverishing of the Town) to cut down the Woods
at Hampsteed and needs he would do it, and began prettily well with it. The
Townes-men became suitors to him that he would not, they could not persuade
him, for he was Lord of it, he said. Well, seeing the men could do no good
with him, the women took the matter in hand; and as the Devils men came, (that
is your Lords) to cut down their Woods, the women fell a swaddling of them, so
that they durst come no more to cut down any Trees there. Thus you see the
Women overcame the Devil, and so feared him, that thereby they preserved their
Woods. For by very nature, these Devils Bishops are given to destroy both
Church and Commonwealth. But if we be not good enough for them, we will
entreat the Women of Hampsteed to take the matter in hand.


Minist. Well, I doubt not but you will for all this lustines, kiss the Clinke
or Gate House for this gear, for my Lords Grace shall know of it, if my Lord
do not.


Jack. Why Vicker of the Devil, let the whole Convocation House of Devils
know of it and you will; for they dare not, no not Beelzebub of Canterbury the
chief of the Devils, come to disputation, thereby to approve their Callings to
be lawful, and other points in controversy against the Discipline of God, as
they have been often challenged, and offered by the Puritans, even to adventure
their lives against their Bishoprics, and yet they durst not. And I pray you
tell me; if they were not the Bishops of the Devil indeed, would they refuse
this offer?


Minist. Why the Puritans have bin often disputed with.


Puritan. Where? In the Bishops Closet? For they are ashamed to have it tried
before any Magistrate. Let them if they dare procure a free disputation,
whereby every man may freely speak, and be indifferently heard, and if the
Bishops and all their partakers be not overthrown, I will loose my life for it.


Minist. Have they not been already by public writing, and otherwise, but
especially by my Lords Grace, his works against Cartwright, sufficiently
confuted I pray you?


Puritan. No indeed, but I will tell you what a Noble man professing the
Gospel said, he demanded of the old Lord Henry Howard (the Earl of Arundels
Uncle now living, being a professed Papist) what he thought of Whitgifts
answer to Cartwright, who answered, There was no comparison to be made between
them: for Whitgift (says he) is not worthy to carry Cartwrights Books after
him for learning. Mark here the opinion of a Papist, you know a deadly
adversary to Master Cartwright: and yet the ambitious wretch will not stick now
he is an Archbishop, to call those that are able to teach him (and which were
in the Gospel before him) Boys, and revile them far beyond all Christian
modesty. And again, if a man apply any new writer his opinion of the reformed
Churches, in defense of the Lords Truth, as Master Calvin, Beza or others, he
will not also stick to brag and tell him, that he is able to teach Calvin
and Beza, or any of them all; But the wretch, nor his associates, dares not
dispute with Master Cartwright, Calvin, or Bezaes inseriours.


Jack. Tush, foe, he sits now upon his cogging stool, which may truly be
called the Chair of Pestilence; little may he do if he cannot Brag, Crack,
and Face it out: For the truth is, he wrote against the Discipline, for no
other end, but to get a Bishopric, for he never wrote since he has caught
one I warrant you. And the pide Faced Fool Doctor Bridges imitating him,
hoping to leap like as he has done, but it will not be.


Puritan. O you are greatly deceived, Dr. Bridges has utterly renounced the
Bishops (as I have heard:) for that the Archbishop has broken his faith with
him.


Jack. How comes tell you, at the beginning of the last Parliament, there were
Bishops to be stalled, and his Grace had promised him very confidently, that he
would not only speak for him, also assure him of a Bishopric. Upon which the
aspiring wretch did only rely, otherwise it may be he would have bribed some
Courtier to have dealt for him, as he did for his Denary: But her Majesty lying
at Richmond, and Mr. Doctor repairing thither, upon the green before Richmond
House, met with Master Thornbie the Master of the Savoy, who told him that he
was suitor for the Bishopric of such a place: Master Doctor Bridges answered
and said, it was true, he had the grant of it at his Grace his hands: says
Master Thornby; I had a promise of it to: but it is certain that his Grace
has got it for another man, and he has finished it, and all is past, I can
assure you of it. With that the Doctor was in his mad mood, and said, Has he
served me so, why then I will say and may speak it truly, there is no Faith in
a Bishop. Have I wrote in their defense, and have gotten the ignomie, shame,
and reproach of it by public writing, and now to be thus vildly dealt with: I
will tell you Master I hornby, I do protest, and alwates will affirm it: That
it is better to have one inch of policy, then all the Divinity in the world.
If Master Thornby will deny this to be true, there be both godly and
worshipful will justify it to his face.


Jack. Nay, it is like enough that the Bishop of Canterbury has served him
so, it is not the first like pranke he has played, for it is his manner, he
will promise much, and perform nothing: but persecute Gods Ministers, and
glory in himself: For if any godly Minister, or any other that fear God, come
before him, he will offer them the Oath, either to accuse themselves, or their
Christian Brethren, or both; yea though no body be able to charge them with any
offense: And if they will not swear, then to the Clinke, Gatehouse, or White
Lion they go roundly: and when suit is made unto him for their Liberty, then
except they will enter into bonds to perform this, or do that: why he will
say they shall lie till they rot, with other bitter words. And he was wont to
use these words often, and had a great pride in speaking them (I cannot tell
whether he has left them now or no) As long as the Queen and I live, it shall
be this or that. Judge you of this man, whether he has a humble spirit, or an
aspiring mind, to join himself with his dread Sovereign the Queens Majesty.
He were best to remember his predecessor Cardinal Wolsey, betimes, least he
have the same end Cardinal Wolsey had.


Minist. I hope for these your taunting speeches to see you trounst, if I meet
you handsomely in place where.


Jack. Why Vicker of the Devil (I think you to be one of the Vickers of Hell,
that Martin speaks of) it is no marvel, though you take the Bishops of the
Devils part. For Winchester when he went his Visitations last, told your
companions the dumb dogs, that if his Grace of Canterbury, and himself had not
kneeled before her Majesty for you, you had been all of you thrust out of the
Ministry.


Puritan. Oh wicked act, it had been better that neither of them had had a
joint to bow, then to work such a villainy to Gods Church.


Jack. Herein they used great policy (you must think) for if we had a
learned Ministry once, they know their Kingdom would soon fall to the ground.
Therefore they take order for that. For they will suspend and thrust all those
out of the Ministry, that have gifts fit for that high Calling: and keep none
in, except nonresidence, such as gape after Bishoprics, or dumb Idol
Ministers.


Papist. You are well overtaken my Masters. Which way travel you I pray?


Jack. Toward London Sir.


Papist. What good News is there abroad, do you hear any?


Puritan. I know none good, for the Land is sore troubled with these
treacherous Papists, and filthy Atheists; and our Church pestered with the
Bishops of the Devil, Non residents, Popish Priests, and dumb dogs, that there
is no place, nor being for a faithful Minister of the Word: For if there be
any in any charge, the Bishops have their John Avales, to fetch them up before
them, and then if they will not subscribe, out of the Ministry he goes roundly.


Papist. It was never merry world since there was so many Puritans, and such
running to Sermons as there is now.


Jack. Why? Do not you love to hear Sermons?


Papist. No, I care for none of these Precise Fellows, I will not come at any
of their Sermons.


Jack I smell you already, I perceive you are a Papist.


Papist Whatsoever I be, you may be sure I am no Puritan, for a Papist is
allwaies better then a Puritan, and more Friends he shall find, both at home
and abroad. And I have head my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Winchester, speak it with mine own ears.


Minist. I can say thus much my self, my Lords Grace is not so much troubled
with Papists as with Puritans.


Jack. And I can say thus much to, the Papists have more Favor of his Grace a
great deal, then the Puritans.


Papist. My Lords Grace you know, had a good Master, and one that kept him
far enough from this Preciseness, I warrant you.


Jack. Who was his Master I pray you?


Papist. Mary Master Doctor Pearne Sir.


Jack. What Doctor Pearne? why he is the notablest turn-coat in all this Land,
there is none comparable to him: Why every Boy has him in his mouth, for it is
a Proverb, both of old and young, that if one have a Coat or Cloak that is
turned, they say it is Pearne.


Puritan. And do you think the Bishop of Canterbury will be as good a Turner,
as his Master Doctor Pearne is?


Jack. Nay, he will exceed his Master, I am persuaded.


Puritan. Me thinks there should be others as expert, and likely to make as
good workmen in that Art, as his Grace, or his Master Doctor Pearne himself is.


Jack. Who should they be?


Puritan. What say you to John of Gloucester, Doctor Kennolde, Doctor Bancroft,
Doctor Goodman, the Abbot that now is of Westminster; Doctor Sprent of Bristow,
and Master Doctor Bridges Deane of Sarum?


Jack. Yea and I may say to you, all the Bishops of the Devil, and
Nonresidence, are likely to say pretty well to the matter to.


Puritan. I had forgotten one that I should have nominated to, that is Doctor
Culpepper of Oxford, who has the name to be a notable hunter.


Jack. What Doctor Culpepper, I Will tell you there is many good things in him
that way: but I will tell you one or two notes of his single gifts. For he is
an Archdeacon, and going in his Visitation, not far from Oxford: It is an
ordinary thing with them, to have a Sermon before they keep Court, and always
the Court is kept in the Church: The Preacher somewhat troubling him (in telling
the spiritual Fathers their duties) did sometimes nod at the Preacher, so as he
did perceive him, to the end he should make an end of his Sermon: The Preacher
notwithstanding went forward with his Text, which troubled Master Doctor sore.
Then he fell a beckoning to the Preacher, the Preacher would not see his
signs, although the audience greatly marvailed at him: then Master Doctor
(being sore galled you must think) spoke to him, and bad him come down: the
Preacher thought it not long (though Master Doctor were ^eary to hear his duty
told him in so plain a manner) and seeing he could use no means to get him out
of the Pulpit, called the Cryar to him, and bad him cry Hoyes, and so he did.
Then went he very reverently about his business, and left the Preacher in the
Pulpit: Now tell me I pray you, whether he had more mind to hear the word
preached, or to be with his kennell of Hounds?


Puritan. Is this Doctor Culpepper of Oxford, I pray you?


Jack. I marry is it Sir, it is the same man, and very well known to love a
Hound, a Hawke, and, etc.


Puritan. I pray you can you tell me, I have heard that Dr. Bond is made Master
of Magdalins in Oxford, contrary to the statutes of the University. Whereas one
Master Smith was first elected, according to the Orders of the house before
him, he being one that stands for Reformation in our corrupt Church government.
Therefore (as I have heard) the Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester, to prevent
him, labored to her Majesty, that she would give commandment, that the house
should accept of Dr. Bond in his stead, which by the Bishops great labor, it
was accomplished.


Jack. It is very true Sir, I can assure you of that, and he may well be
called the Bond of iniquity, for any goodness is in him, he looks I can tell
you to be a Lord Bishop of the Devil shortly, besides he is a good Dancer: I
have heard how he ere now, has come to a house in Oxford, (it shall be
namelesse) where certain Women of the Town, were ready to go dance, (it may
be a match made of him before hand) comes me in the same house very pleasantly
to them, saying, you are well met, and makes him ready for them: First put off
his Cappe, saying, lie thou there Cappe, then his Tippet, lie thou there
Tippet, then his Gown, lie thou there Gown: and last of all his Book, (says
he) lie thou there Divinity and all: Then about the house he goes with the
Women: now tell me I pray you, if he do not draw in the bond of iniquity or no?


Puritan. Surely I see that no good men are left almost in any place, where
they may be a help to increase or comfort those that fear God. For the
Bishops have laid so many plots, that they have prevented all means
whatsoever. Is not this a Divelish policy of the Bishop of Canterbury, to
place such heads in the University, That none shall proceed, or be preferred
but such as will subscribe. Well, though the admonition which the Archbishop of
York, gave him in a letter before his death, do not work that effect in him,
which the Bishop wished: Yet our hope is, that the Lord will soon bring him to
the same end, at the which: he may with the same Bishop confess his sin, in
usurping that unlawful Calling he is now in: That is, a Pope or Pastor of
Pastors, with all other his injurious and Tyrannical dealing with Gods
Ministers, and other his Children. For all the Bishops that ever were in that
place, I mean in the Sea of Canterbury, did never so much hurt unto the Church
of God, as he has done since his coming. No Bishop that ever had such an
aspiring and ambitious a mind as he, no not Cardinal Wolsey: none so proud as
he, no not Stephen Gardener of Winchester: none so Tyrannical as he, no not
Bonner.


Jack. How say you Master Vicker, were it not a good thing if all Bishops, and
such Idol Shepherds as you are were a dying, then you would be in better
minds then all the days of your life before?


Minist. You say your pleasure, but I care not what you say, that is the best of
it.


Papist. Master Vicker, the Gentlemen are disposed to move your patience,
therefore you must bear with them.


Jack. Master Parson thinks I am in good earnest, but he is deceived, for I
assure you I do nothing but to see what this Puritan will say: and the Puritan
thinks I am one of his Fraternity.


Papist. But are you not so indeed?


Jack. No truly, I came from Orleans, where I heard Mass every day: see, see,
how hard the Vicker and he are in talk, let them alone, we will go on.


Papist. I can hardly believe that you heard Mass at Orleans.


Jack. If I had not been present at the Mass I should have been taken for a
Hugonot, and so I should hardly escaped with my life.


Papist. I am the gladder of your company.


Jack. And I of yours, for I perceive you are a Catholic.


Papist. Yea indeed, and I will not deny it: look, I think the Puritan and the
Vicker will go by the ears.


Jack. He shall do the Vicker no wrong for all my speeches to him: and he
will be ruled by me, we will have him before my Lords Grace, for we will give
him the slip, when we come in the City, and one of us will feth a Pursuivant,
and the other two shall dog him.


Papist. Content Sir, if you please, let it be so.


Jack. How now my Masters, can you not agree?


Minist. I will deal well enough with him, if he durst stand to his words.


Puritan. I will jvstifie any thing that I have spoken, if not, let me loose my
life: but to conclude, it is late, and because we must depart, I will tell you
one thing, and I would wish you to make use of it, and hear what the Prophet
Isay says cap. 59. verse 10. Their watchmen are all blind, they have no
knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; they lie and sleep, and
delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have enough, all these
shepherds cannot understand. And Zachary 11.17. O Idol shepherd that leaves
the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkended. And so
fare ye well.


HERE FOLLOWS THE DESCRIPTION OF A PVRITAN, (AS THEY ARE NOW termed) by
profane Papists and Atheists, etc.
LOng has it vexed our Learned age to scan,
who rightly might be termed a PURITAN.
A PURITAN both Layicke and Divine,
I will according to my skill define.
A Puritan, is he, that when he Prays,
his rolling Eyes up to the Heavens does raise.
A Puritan, is he, that cannot fare,
to deck his round Head with a Bonnet square.
Whose Turkey robe, in his fair furred train
above his anckle, turns up again:
That at his Belt a buffe clad Bible bears,
stamped with the true Genevah Characters;
Whose thin beat Volume scorneth to admit,
the bastard monuments of Humane Writ.
Whose Hair, and Ruffes, dare not his Ears exceed:
that on high Saints days wears his working Weed.
That Crosses each does hate, save on his pence,
and loathes the public Rope of Pennitence.
That in his censure each alike gainsayes,
Poets in Pulpits, Holy Writ in Plays.
Roodes in the Windows, and the Marriage Ring:
the Churching, Veil, and Midwives Christening.
A Puritan, is he, that lists not to pray
against Thunder, in the coldest Winter day.
A Puritan, is he, that quite denies
the help of Angels to a Benefice.
That cannot brook a Deputy, to serve
and feed himself, but let his people starve.
That loves alike an Organ in a Quire,
as the Elephant delights a Swine to hear.
That never in his life did kneel before
the gate of a Cathedral Chancell door.
A Puritan, is he, that cannot Dine,
nor Sup, without a double Grace divine.
A Puritan, is he, that through the year,
two Lords day Sermons does either preach or hear.
A Puritan, is he, that will not lend,
againefull Oath, to his distressed Friend.
A Puritan, is he, that for no meed
will serve the time, and great men's humors feed.
That does the selfe-accusing Oath refuse:
that hates the Alehouse, and a Stage, and Stews.
A Puritan, is he, whose austeere life,
will not admit a Mistress and a Wife.
That when his betters swears, does bite the lip:
nor will be drunken for good fellowship.
That wishes for the amendment of the best:
blames the least ill, and does the worst detest.
Reader, if such be termed a Puritan,
God make me wife, and thee an honest man.
FINIS.

