Mr. CHALLENOR HIS CONFESSION AND SPEECH MADE UPON THE LADDER BEfore his
Execution on Wednesday the fifth of July 1643. in Corne-hill just against the
Royal Exchange.

IT is this day Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning printing, that the Confession of RICHARD CHALLENOR be printed by
Peter Cole.

July 5. 1643. JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the Glove and Lyo^ in Cornhil
near the Royal Exchange 1643.

Presently after Mr. TOMKINS was Executed about ten of the clock, Mr.
CHALLENOR was carried from Newgate, accompanied with Mr. PETER'S and some other
Divines, and conducted by two Troops of Horse to Cornhill, where a Gibbet was
erected against the Royal Exchange, about which was a Guard consisting of two
of the Trained Bands, when he came to the place of Execution, being upon the
Ladder (after many Tears of hearty Contrition,) he spoke as follows.
GENTLEMEN,
IT Has pleased God to bring me to this place, God has now returned my prayer
upon me, my prayer was, that if this Design might not be Honorable to him,
that it might be known. God has heard me and it is discovered, that same very
thing has satisfied me, that I was in an error; and that I am confident, I
was in a great deal of fault; And I confess I do now die justly; and I pray
God, that I may now glorify the Lord;

I shall only thus much declare to the world, that they may take off the
aspersion, that was laid upon my partner, and my wife, which neither of them
did know of this Design: I have declared my conscience freely to God and the
world in every particular that concerns the business; thus much I shall say
for my own particular. There were three things laid to my charge which there
was some mistake in; Concerning the Kings Letter, whereas it was thought to be
another way I thank God, it was not that way. Then concerning the Seal, I had
no hand in the procuring of it, nor knew not of it till the Friday.

There is another thing that is concerning the seizing of the Magazines, which
I had no hand in neither. But I die justly, and I deserve this punishment.

But now to you all that are here, let my example be to you, that you never
take your self to any thing but what you have warrant for from the Lord; I had
no warrant I vow to Ged, that has now satisfied me that the Lord I hope will
forgive me, I have heartily repented, and I beseech you all to take this as a
warning.

And whereas there is now a great deal of distraction, and division in the
City; and that we now make difference, between Gods Ministers, and Gods
Ministers despise no means, I acknowledge my fault; I did make foam
difference, and I now acknowledge it; and desire the Lord to forgive me, I have
received more comfort from such men, then ever I had before.

I shall not now have much to say, But I desire heartily that the whole world
would forgive me, I do beg of my God, and of my Christ (who I have not
honored so much as I should have done) that he would have mercy upon me.

And now to you all I speak, I do now as freely forgive you, as I trust my
Savior Jesus Christ, has forgiven me. And so Lord Jesus, into thy hands do I
commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me O Lord God; and so the Lord take
me, and the Lord receive me.

Then his Father tendered him the Kings pardon, Saying
Here is the Kings gracious pardon.

To which Mr. Challenor: replied,

Sir, I beseech you trouble me not with it.

Pray speak to my friends to take care of my corpse, and carry me home.

Whereupon Mr. Peter's said to him, You are now before the Lord of heaven, if
you have any thing about the Lords, you spoke off so often last night, I
beseech you speak your Conscience.

Mr. Challenor answering thus, Gentlemen, It is the happiest day that ever I
had;

I shall now (Gentlemen) declare a little more of the occasion of this, as I am
desired by Mr. Peter's, and to give him, and the world satisfaction.

It came from Mr. Waller under this notion, that if that we could make a
moderate party here in London, to stand betwixt the gappe, and in the gappe, to
unite the King and the Parliament, it would be a very acceptable work, for now
the three Kingdoms lay a bleeding, and unless that were done there was no
hopes to unite them; withal I made this Reply. Sir, if I could assure you of
three parts of London, none of them should stir, unless we had the
countenance of the Lords and Commons; To this he replied, You shall have to
countenance this business the whole House of Lords except three or four you
shall have diverse of the House of Commons, we were promised we should speak
with; these Lords; And in truth except we had spoken with these Lords, nothing
could have been done; for Mr. Abbot, Mr. Blinkehorne, Mr. Luntloe, Mr. King,
and my self agreed that we would not stir, till these Lords had declared
themselves and would be engaged.

And now (Gentlemen I have another thing to declare, which shall be in the
behalf, of those that are condemned; As Mr. Waller was the mouth from the
Lords, as he did declare, so I was the unhappy instrument, from Mr. Waller to
the rest; the sentence is now past, I desire if it might be, that it might be
moved to the House, that no more might suffer in the cause. This is all I have
to say, and desire your hearty prayers to God for me.

Then one Mr. Smart said unto him, Mr. Challenor, If you were to to live
longer, would you ever have done the like again

Mr. Challenor Answered, I am thus far confident, that if it had pleased God
to lend me^ life, I think I should have run another course, and I am confident
of it; I hope this is the happiest day I ever saw, and I hope God is reconciled
to me, in my Savior Jesus Christ; that has given me repentance; and I am
confident he will return my prayer for me.

Then at his request Mr. P^ters prayed very fervently and devoutly with him:
after his prayer was ended, Mr. Challenor spoke these words.

Gentlemen, I do from my heart forgive you and all the world, desiring you and
all the world to forgive me also, and so I commend my soul into the hands of
my God.

IT IS THIS DAY ORDERED BY THE COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT
CONCERNG PRINTING, THAT THE CONFESSIONS OF RICHARD CHALLENOR BE PRINTED BY
PETER COLE.

July 5. 1643. JOHN WHITE.


