crest featuring rope, foliage, an anchor, knight's helmet, and snake

A DIAMOND OR RICH JEWEL, PRESENTED To the Commonwealth of England, for
enriching of the Nation; being necessary for the use of all Merchants and
Tradesmen, and advantageous to the poor: Wherein is declared a way, 1 How all
foreign moneys may pass in England, and gain the Merchants 10 Per Cent. and to
put off our Manufacture without passing our English coin into other Countries.
2 To settle a Bank in London for furnishing all trades with money, and to quit
the Nation of beggars. 3 To supply the Nation with Salt at three half pence the
Gallon. 4 To increase the Trade of fishing without being beholding to others. 5
To make England the richest Nation in Europe, both for Gold and Silver. 6 To
save half the charges of the Officers of Excise and Custom, for the ease of
the freeborn people of the Nation. 7. To free all necessary commodities from
Taxes. 8. To settle an insurance Office cheap, and not to pay above five in the
hundred for insurance from Pirates in all parts of Europe and America.


By Capt. SAMUEL CHAPEL.

Licensed, and entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Clowes, against the Lower-Pump in Grubstreet, 1650.

A PETITION PRESENTED By Capt. Samuel Chapel, To the Right Honorable the
Council for regulating of Trade. Dedicated, To the Lord Whitlock, and the Lords
Keepers of the Great Seal of England, and to the Lord Chief Justice Role, and
to the rest of the Lord Justices of the Common Law; Desiring them to solicit
the effecting of it to the Parliament.
Right Honorable,
YOur servant having waited here in London this two years and three quarters to
have Justice, he having done service, and desires to be paid his arrears, and
his money disbursed for the Parliament of England, which is yet unpaid to this
day.

And whereas he sees damage to many by cheating and couzening by some in
Office, pretending good husbandry to the State, who eat the poor as bread, and
others also act the like contrary to Gods Laws and the Nations, making it
their Trade to deceive and devour one another, counting themselves wise in
their own eyes: So at your servants departure here hence, he thought good to
write these lines, and to leave them in print, as a token of his love to his
Nation; which he hops will prove for the good of all the people our brethren:
hoping also that your honors in his absence, will endeavor the furthering of
the public in it, to have it effected.

So considering the cry of the poor, the great unjustice done unto our
Liberties promised us, the neglect of settling Religion agreeable to Jesus
Christ his Commission, to the Apostles rule in the Primitive Church, we
professing Jesus Christ. Now all is turned from performance to vice and pride,
self ends, and Covetousness, and other crying sins which now reign to much
amongst us; which is much wished and desired by the godly party, that there
might be a reformation of it in this Nation.

And because your Honors are in places of power, to cause justice to be
executed upon all Offenders, and to do justice to the innocent that merit.

Your servant conceives no fitter mon, to Dedicate these lines unto, but to
your Honors, he publicly seeing so many put offs, in Courts of Authority,
hoping that your Honors will become Instruments of settling up ways in this
Nation, that God may be glorified by us; and that our poor Nation may be eased
of yoaks and burdens now laid upon them, against the written word of God; for
never had a Nation more blessings endued them then now England has, both of
temporal and spiritual means, if we could make good use of them, but it is
feared they make bad use of them; for profession draws no man to Heaven, but
by living a pure and undefiled life, for many are wise to do evil.

So referring the consideration hereof, being short till his other lines come
forth, which will be in his due time; Your servant taking leave does commit
your Honors, and his proceedings to Gods blessing, and shall ever rest,

Your Honors humble servant, SAMUEL CHAPEL.
August 20. 1650.
THE PERTICULARS Contained in the following BOOK.
I.
THe Recommendation of it to the Lords Keepers of the great Seal of England,
and to the Lord Chief Justice Role, and Lord Justice of the Common Law.

II.
The Petition shows.

III.
How all Foreign money may pass in England, and gain the Merchants 10 Per
Cent. 20 Per Cent. and gain by Bills of Exchange 10 Per Cent. also, and put off
our English Goods manifactured to strangers, to hinder them for carrying
awayofour English money.

IIII.
Another Proposition declaring a way to supply the Nation with Salt at three
half pence the Gallon, to further the fishing Trade without being beholding to
any other Princes for it.

V.
A way also to settle a Bank in LONDON, to furnish money to all Tradesmen and
others, to put all the Nation upon industry to live without beggars.

VI
Another regulating a way for conference for settling of good Trade.

VII.
Also a way to build great ships, to draw a little water serviceable for war,
and carry Merchants goods cheap, and that no Guns be hindered to make use to
fight, and Seamen may have the benefit for their careful industry, and that
half the charges of the Officers of the Custom House and Excise-Office, may be
saved for the benefit of the Commonwealth; and that strangers pay double
Custom and Excise, that our freeborn people may have the more employment to
gain their livelihood.

VIII.
That Corn and other necessary Commodities, may be freed from Taxes, to ease
our freeborn brethren.

IX.
A reason to make appear that what our Merchants pay for Custom and Excise,
for what Goods they carry out of England, is no damage to them.

X.
A reason that all Goods of fantasy should pay great Customs and excise, by
reason our Nation stands not in need of them; for the rich buy them to nourish
their lust.

XI.
No reason but strangers should pay a duty for fishing upon our Seas.

XII.
A Reason that Harbors, Keys and Navigable Rivers, should not be neglected
but kept in good order, that Vessels may pass safely.

XIII.
That all plantations may be regulated, for the good of the Commonwealth. That
we may trade to the South-Seas, and Indies, to enrich this Nation.

XIV.
That Ships of War, and Commodities; may be provided to supply the Nation, and
daunt all English Enemies, if men of public spirits be employed in it, and for
the charges to defray it, the Petitioner will discover a way to the Parliament,
to supploy all their wants, to make England the richest Nation for Gold and
Silver in Europe.

XV.
Also a way to further fishing, making of linen Cloth, and employ many people
to get their livelihood.

XVI.
That no men be suffered as spirits, to betray their brethren, and sell them
for seven year.

XVII.
That a way may be regulated, that there may be a Court of audience, that all
Petitions may be heard by the Parliament.

Further, a way, to settle a way of an insurance office cheap, and not to pay
above four in the hundred, for insurance from Pirots in all parts of Europe and
America.

TO THE Right Honorable the Council for regulating of TRADE. The humble
Petition of Captain Samuel Chapel of Freminton, in the County of Devon,
Merchant.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner has served the Parliament by land and Sea, from 1641.
and has still proved constant to them, and has seen much of passages in
trading. That he desires, finding no reason opposite, except it be, that we of
this Nation, having been mistaken by undervaluing of foreign Coyns; are by
other Nations disesteemed, which to avoid his desire is, that if is please your
Honors that all foreign Coin in its full weight of good Gold and Silver
Bullion, may pass in England, and Ireland, and other Countries amongst
Merchants and others; for the advance of tradeing to maintain the poor, and
recrute the Nation, to be replenished with money after these sad times.

That in regard the King of Spain does pay his Soldiers with Brass, and
Copper money, as their pieces of eight, Royals, plate for 20. Royals; 18.
Royals, 16. Royals, 14. Royals, and 12. Royals the least, and so passes among
Merchants and others, the Spaniard advancing it 50. per cent. higher in their
own Countries then in reason it should. And in France they pay the pieces of
eight for 6. shillings, and in Portugal for 6. shillings, and in Holland for
48. stuyvers, and some for 5. shillings, and their Gold the like. And in the
East Country and Germany the like, where it passes among Merchants and others.

Your Petitioner desires the premises considered; that all their Gold and
Silver Coin may pass, as viz. That is to say; that all pieces of eight,
Pistols bigger, or smaller pieces of Spanish Coin, may pass for 20. per cent.
higher then in Spain, which will be the piece of eight here for 5. shillings,
which is less then in other parts, and their Gold the like; and that all
French, Holland, Germane, and the Eastern Countries moneys of good Bulloin,
Coined Gold or Silver of its full weight, may pass here for 10. per cent.
higher then in them parts; and that their Coyns be regulated, what of them
shall pass here, and that this may be done in regard that they receive our
Gold and Silver Coin, and pay it in their Countries for above 10. per cent.
higher then we pay it in England, for by their cunning conveying it away, we
must beat them in their own play, that is by raising of their money here, and
permitting it to pass amongst us. So we must still keep their money 10. per
cent. higher here, then they pay it in them Countries, which must be looked
after by the Mr. of the Mint. And still raised upon this report as they raise
it, for this will cause linen Cloth, and commodities in them Countries to be
bought cheaper then now they are, by reason that Merchants will make their
return in money, and it will return profit to them 10. per cent. upon Bills of
Exchange. Also, for example I have money in Holland, and I write to my Factor,
to return me a Bill of Exchange, of 9. pound Sterling, to be paid here in
Fleamish money; so he takes the 9. pound Sterling, and pays it there for 10.
pound Fleamish, and sends me the Bill of Exchange to be paid here 10. pound
Fleamish, so that I am gainer 10. per cent. which is current, being raised as
before expressed here.

And so we may do it for more or less in France, and other parts, taking this
caveat, to (...) what money they shall be paid for their goods, and by this
rule the Merchants shall gain every way by trading or buying their goods
cheaper, or upon return of their money, or upon bills of Exchange.

This will beat them in their own play, for raising our money as above
declared, and draw in money here from all those Countries, for we have no
Articles of peace with any debarring us from it; but only our peace is to
commerce with them so that they cannot except against us, except they deny our
moneys in their Countries and commands, or pass it in payment for no more then
in England, for it is fit for our Nation to have State-policie: for commerce
and Trade, as well as they; which your Honors being chosen to take the
premises into consideration, ought not through weakness to deceive your trust.

Also that all forriegners be ordered to give security to the Custom-houses,
that they shall employ the return of their goods, in English goods manifactured
here, to carry away; which will preserve our money.

Your Petitioners caveat to your Honors is; that it is an Honor to a Nation,
to pay no brass nor copper Coins; but a dishonor to a Nation, that cannot pay
their Debts for want of each sort, nor in Gold, nor Silver Bullion, neither,
when as we may have it for the Coining, and live gallantly by your Petitioners
council if it may be accepted; but now we are contented like the drones, to
live beggarly as now we do in England, having to our shames great means of Gods
blessings, and may live plentiful of money and other things, if we will, and
have it better, if we did employ men of public spirits, that hate
covetousness and pride; but your Petitioner hops that our eyes will be
opened.


Shows,
THat your Petitioner desires for the enriching of this Nation, to supply the
Nations wants with Salt: that is, to get such number of men and Vessels to take
Herrings as the Hollanders do, and to supply new England, Newfound-land, and
the North-Sea, Fishing-trades; which after improvement of 2. or 3. years, there
will come into England, instead of hundred thousands pounds in Coin, many
Millions for which improvement, the best way will be, (in your Petitioners
opinion) to settle a place to be provided for with Salt of our own Nations,
without being beholden to other Nations; for it is more Honor to have of our
own, then to be beholden to other Princes.

Your Petitioner will engage his life with your Honors, that if your Honors
will procure him letters patents, and a Commission from the Parliament, to
raise 150. men, and supply them with all necessaries for war, and livelihood
for one year, and pay the charge of a Ship; and their provisions and men for
six Months, and give to him and his heirs such places where he will adventure
to take them, making the places feasible to 7. of your Honors being now in the
Enemies Countries, that he will sail to them parties and take them, and secure
it and them, under God, to this Nations Command, and this Nation shall have
supplied them (if it want) 20000. Tuns of Salt yearly, at the price of three
half pence per Gallon, which is no more then now they pay excise for foreign
salt, and after the said places are secured, all Merchant Ships that will come
there to fetch any Salt, shall have it at the rate of 5. shillings per ton,
(20. hundred weight to the Tun) brought for them to the water side, which will
be cheaper then they can draw it out of the ponds, in Meat, Drink, and wages,
and Ship-hire; so that in time our Ships will supply the Eastern Countries in
abundance.

And for the benefit your Petitioner shall gain by acting this discovery; he
shall pay a duty to the Commonwealth of England 1000. Tuns of Salt yearly, to
victual the Navy, if the said Commonwealth do send their Ships to load it
where it shall be provided for them. Always provided that all Salt, that
comes from those parts, and employed in fishing, and made use of, for fishing
improvement what way soever it may be done, shall be free from all Custom,
Taxes, and Excise; and the charge of fetching the same Salt, will stand
bringing home, but 30. shillings the Tun more.

And further out of his free will he will; at some convenient time, after that
he is quietly possessed of his said places; pay the Lord or Lords of the said
places there, full value for them, to be held for him and his heirs for ever,
to trade unto, for the Commonwealth of England. All which he will do out of
his good conscience.

Further, your Petitioner hops that after he has performed with the
Parliament, the aforesaid promises. That your Honors will become suitors to
the Honorable house, in your Petitioners behalf, that he may be paid his 4. or
500. pound due to him, from them; and have Justice, for those wrongs he has
sustained: or that your Petitioner may have a grant, and a Commission, to take
those parts mentioned above expressed, for himself and his partners, without
paying the 1000. Tun of Salt by the year to the State, and the Petitioner shall
perform what is mentioned, for the good of the Commonwealth.


Shows,
THat your Petitioner desires, for the improvement of the Trade to this
Nation, and for the encouragement of Trades; that a Bank be regulated, as in
Venus, Naples, Genua, and other parts, which way may be done in this Nation,
for furthering all sorts of people to live without beggary.

That is, that all sorts of men that have money lie by them, that if they will
put it into the Bank; they shall have 5. per Cent. allowed them, and their
heirs for ever; as the now usual purchasing of land is, for to come to their
heirs, notwithstanding any offense committed, whereby now, it is forfeited to
the State. So that the Moneys in Bank to be exempt from all forfiaure, or
Taxes. This will much further the Banks; as also free of all Taxes, payments,
or any charge whatsoever.

That all others shall have 5. per Cent. and their money again, within 14.
days notice, with their 5. per Cent. per annum profit, for the time it lies in
Bank. Provided that it lies 6. Months in the Bank. The Bank lends money to the
King of Spain, and great men, and all Merchants, and others, upon good
security; for 10. per Cent. per annum for less, or more time, as occasion
serves; out of which 10. per Cent. half of one, of the hundred, should be
allowed for officers, and the other half of the one, in the hundred, to be
allowed for the relief, or setting up, of poor decayed men; and the 4. per
Cent. to remain in Bank, with the 5. per Cent. to supply improving of Trade and
finding out of Trades, and new Plantations for Trading.

By this Bank, Commerce and Trading is kept, and all in them parts live rich,
and pay no Interest nor use; for it is not esteemed use, when men pay 10. per
Cent. for their own ends, to get more by it in trading.

For this will employ many wise men in Trade, that are poor; by finding friends
of credit, to be their security: for it is ordered for good uses, though
Idolatours use it, and shows examples, to supply trading, for it sets up many a
poor understanding man.

If the Banks want money, presently they send to those men of quality that have
it by them; and for 5. per Cent. the Banck is furnished, and so lend out still.

If the Banck break, then they return in all their bonds, and security to pay
their Creditours which is still feaseable for it.

By this means, Trade is advanced, and no Beggars.

This is worthy in these times of acceptance, thought it come from a poor man;
for your Petitioner expects such a reward, as he, who delivered a City by his
wisdom, for men are as bad now as then, but he is sure to take the less pains,
in not giving thanks for naught.


Shows,
THat your Petitioner sees no reason, that we gained our Liberty by the sword,
should have any Companies admitted in Trading, Privileged more then others of
our freeborn brethren; but that for the better managing of good Trade, it is
desired, that all Companies that are now, or shall be, empowered in Companies
for advance of Trading, that all, that would adventure their money, upon profit
or loss; should be admitted to put in their money in stock, or Bank; and to
receive profit and loss, equally; which to further many men of Quality, having
plenty of money, will be willing to do the like, for their own advantage, and
the Commonwealths good. Provided, that there may be Master, and Officers of
Companies, for the well-governing of Trades, that one may not hinder another in
Trading, as now they do to their own great damage, and the Commonwealths great
loss, for trading well regulated will advance much, to the trades and
Commonwealth also.

That Masters of Ship-wrights, may be regulated a way to build Ships, of no
less burden then 300 Tuns, and draw not above 12 foot of water, with
sufficient length to serve the State, and carry Guns to preserve the Merchants
goods, who will sail with few men, as cheap as the Hollanders, to ease the
Nation of charges. And that in new England the like be ordered, except for some
small Vessels, to trade in places of safety, without danger of Pirates, when
they must draw but little water, for fear of shelves and rocks.

That a course be taken, that 14. Ships at least 300. Tuns per piece, may be
provided yearly in New England; for service and trades, as occasion serves.

That all Ship-masters, that carry Guns with them, be engaged, to load no goods
that shall hinder their Guns from fight; for many have laden so much goods,
and have stowed the places of the Guns with goods, that when they should have
made use of their Guns, they could not; by which reason they have lost their
Ships, Goods, and all; for not being able to fight, to their utter undoing, and
hindering of the Commonwealth, their Ships after becoming Enemies, and have
taken many of our Ships.

That all Seamen, that navigate in any Vessels; do take their Oaths, what
goods they carry with them, or bring home in their Ships; that the Custom and
Excise may be paid, and and further care and encouragement to fight, and
preserve their Ships and Goods, and every Factour to have 5. l. the Master 4.
l. the Purser 4. l. the Masters mate 3.l. a piece, the Quarter master,
Boatsman, and Gunner 40. shillings a piece, their Mates 30. shill. a piece, the
Common men 20. shill. a piece allowed them.

In Customs and Excise, if it be a Ship of 300. Tuns or more, or less, as the
burden of the Ship is proportionally, to that rate this to be given them for
their furtherance in Customs of goods, that is to say; if other goods be their
own to encourage them, by which means half the Officers now employed, may be
taken off from their charges, that the State pays them now in the
Custom-House, and Excise Office.

That all foreign Nations, that bring goods into England, or Ireland, or carry
goods out of it, pay double Custom and Excise, that trading may be made use of,
by our Freeborn people.

That Corn, Deals, Tar, Hemp, Flax, or any Victualing Materials, nor Timber,
Wares, unmanufactured, and Masts, pay nothing at all; and that Barielia, sallet
Oil, and Potashes, pay but half Custom and Excise, being materials to make
Soap and Glasses.

That goods which go out of England, or Ireland, and come to foreign Nations,
be highly taxed, except Fish, and fish-Oyls; for the strangers pay it, though
our Merchants disburse it here.

That all Tobacco, Wines, Silk, fine Linen, of above 3. shill. an ell, dying
Commodities, Sugars, Spices, Callicoes, Drugs, and Indico; pay duble Excise and
Custom.

That all Ships, or Vessels that are strangers, that fish upon our English
Coast, and under our Command, pay tribute to England, 10 l. per Vessels in fish
or money, for each Voyage.

That Swansey and Aberdawe, in Glamorganshire in Wales, barred Harbors, may be
cleansed, that Ships may safely come in and out to them; and that Clavelley Key
in Devon, and the Mumbles Key, by Swansey, be repaired and made fit for the
Vessels to secure themselves in.

That all Werries in Rivers, may not be suffered to annoy Boats, as now they
do, lying quite overthwart the Rivers.

That all Plantations in foreign Countries, do cause Vines to be planted, for
VVines, Sugar, Canes, Indico, VVood, Hemp, Flax, Cotron, all sorts of Fruit,
Trees, and search for dying VVood, Gold, Silver, Copper, Brass, Iron, Tin,
Lead, or Salt, get Spice-Trees, and Canifisttula-Trees, India Commodities, from
the back side of their Land, in the South Sea, and make a way through the Land
to trade to it; to keep Ships there, and to keep commerce with the Heathens,
till they be converted; which may be easily done, from Virginia with 500. men,
which if the Plantors would do, they should be free from any Taxes, for 14.
years, but if they refuse, your Petitioner will hereafter acquaint more of it.

That if the Parliament will provide money by a way, your Petitioner will show
them, he will put them in a way to provide 70. Sail of great Warlike Ships, and
provide them 100. Ships more which shall be capable with our Ships, we have to
encounter all the Ships in Christendom, to make all Christendom and all
Countries and Nations to tremble at our Nation as well by Sea as by Land, and
furnish the Nation with Deal, Masts-and- Holland Commodities for 7. years, and
also have a free Trade open to the West Indias, and from the back side of the
South Seas, to trade to the East India, where great treasuries would come from
and enrich this Nation, if men of public spirits take it in hand.

Then all may come to the insureing office, and pay 5. per Cent within the
Straits, 3. per Cent, for assurance to be secured from men of War, and Pirates,
according to what they load by their Cockets, if they go into the straits
mouth. And 2. per Cent to the Northward of the Barlings for P^rtingal, and the
other parts of Spain, and 1. per Cent for France, Flanders, Greenland, and the
Eastern Countries, and thereabouts, which assurance be paid for outward, and
the like homeward, and after that rate for other parts.

That for the furthering of fishing, and making of Linen Cloth, and other
industry in Trading, that all those Women in London, or other parts of the
Nation, that keep standings of retail or petty shops, that they be ordered to
spin VVorstead Cotton, Flax, Hem or Wool to the said places, they stand at,
and they to have their turns Wheels, and Distaffes to their girdle to spin, or
knit stockings, or sow upon some saleworks, or make lace or laces, or some
manufactury work. And that all Barbers, Tapestrs, and petty Shopkeepers, be
ordered that they the time of their not being employed in their Trade, that
they knit nets to catch fish, or the like, except it be on Market-dayes, so
that every one may gain a Livelihood to further themselves, and if any one be
not in action or provided with materials for the work, then the said party to
forfeit 5 s. or to set in the flocks, half the money to the Officer that finds
the said party faulty, and the other half to the poor of the said Parish.

1. For the furthering of Trade and securing of Ships, Men, and Merchants
Goods, it is desired as it was some 20. years past, that there might be a light
set upon the Island of Louday, that all Ships that come into the Channel of
Sevoron, might have the benefit of it, to know where they are in the night, and
for the maintenance of it there, there should be paid from Clovelley in Devon,
to St. Dains in Pembrookshire, betwixt which two places all Seavorun runs, so
they might be paid the same payments that are paid here, as they are paid here
in London for lights of the Nese, and other parts which will refray the same,
and the Petitioner will undertake it, if your Honors please; for Ships have
been lost, and Men and Goods, for want of it upon the said Island, and other
parts thereabouts the winter time.

2. Also it is desired, that all ships that carry above 50. men, may have a
Chaplain to be paid his sallary, 6 d. per pound of each Seamans wages, and so
much more, and all they that pay him, should be by the honor of the ship, and
to have his Victuals allowed him with the Captainand Master.

That special regard be had for the preservation of their young fry of fish, to
the furtherance of the Trade of fishing.

That none of those men that are termed spirits, may be suffered to take up any
person upon pretense, and after house them and carry them aboard ships, and
carry them to Plantations and sell them for 7. years against their wills, which
breeds great sorrow to their friends, not knowing what is become of them, which
is a great sin against God and Man, and our Liberty.

Your Petitioners desires for the better regulating of Trade, and easement of
all the Petitioners, that for as much as many Petitions are daily by several
persons desired to be preferred to the Parliament, who for a long space have
seldom admitted of them, or if admitted, sildom taken the Contents into
consideration, in regard of the great and mighty affairs of the public, have
been esteemed and regarded as private to the great discouragement of the
Petitioners, and others of the public spirits, toward the Commonwealth; for
the avoiding of which inconveniences, it might greatly be wished that a
Committee or Court of audience might forthwith be instituted and appointed to
receive de diem in diem, all Petitions whatsoever, and make a true and exact
report of all such Petitions as shall to the said Committee or Court seem
fitting to be presented to the Parliament, and that there be nothing paid by
any Petitioner, or to any of the said Committee, or Court for his dispatch, nor
to any Clark or Officer of the said Committee; but that allowance out of the
public treasury be granted unto them for their pains, and that whosoever of
them or their Officers, that shall be known to take and receive any money
whatsoever, or bribe or gift from any Petition, in regard of his Petition,
shall suffer imprisonment for one whole year, and repay treble the value, and
be disinabled of bearing any Office for 7. years. Provided, that the said
Committee or Court be not required to make report of such things as belong to
the Courts of Judicature and Chancery, but that such things wholly be left to
the Law. Moreover, that the Parliament appoint some certain days, viz. 2. or
4. in a month to hear the Reports of Petitions, and there to return answer.

The Petitioner humbly requesteth, that he with others may be thought worthy to
nominate and propound such men, as to him and others may seem most sincere, and
fit for this employment of audience.

Your Petitioner desires, that if the Parliament please, he will show them a
way to have such great sums of money to be capable to perform all those
undertakings, viz. And to pay all the Nations debt, and take off all Taxes, and
have money in Cash to maintain War against all our Enemies; also to set up an
Office for the advance of Trade, which is to insure all Merchants Goods and
Ships, from the danger of Pirates at Sea in these Wars.

The Petitioner does humbly desire your Honors for the better regulating of
Trade at Sea. And for the safty of Merchants goods, and Ships, that your
Honors do Petition the house that some conveinent ships with goods or, money,
besent to the great Turks Countries and other parts, to redeem all our English
christians there, and that there may be a league made with them, that our ships
and men may safely sail by them parts. And that all Protestants may have
liberty of Conscience in all Nations where they trade to have books freely to
be edisied by them, in making use of them ta serve God in our profession: so
that they may not be liable to Mahomets laws, nor the Popes Inquisition and
Doctrine, nor hindered of our protestant Religion, to live as Christians,
professing Jesus Christ freely, as now we do in England.

Your Petitioner will do the State some further service, if he see that this
take any effect. And your Honors may have oticen of him at Mr. Anthony
Travilions in the Minories.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. And I shall rest a Servant to the
Commonwealth of England, SAMUEL CHAPPLE


Right Honorable,
YOur Petitioners absence has been from your Honors by being in prison these
12. weeks, for not paying 34 s. 2 d. for cost in a suit, he was overthrown in
London, by one false witness, where your petitioner sued an Aposthicary he the
said Aposthicary being bound to pay your petitiotioner one hundred thirty five
half Crowns for a Debenter your Petitioner sold him by a broker in which
Debentor the Honorable Parliament owed your Petitioner 135 l. 3 s. 4 d. where
your Petitioner being in prison, had other actions laid against him, for meat
and drink in attending the Parliaments affairs, so that now your Petitioner may
say, that he is in prison for his good service done the Parliament, which if
they had paid him, your Petitioner had not sold his Debentor, nor suffered this
imprisonment. And for liberty, he with others did petition by Col. Pride, the
11. of November. 1650. these heads, viz: Directed unto the supreme Authority
assembled for the Parliament of England.

That the Petitioner and others, having settled your Honors in the Parliaments
Thrown, to cause justice to be executed in the Nation, are now cast into prison
for debt, waiting in London for our arrears in service and money disbursed, had
not your Honors owed us our money, our creditors would not deal so cruelly
with us, but be favorable and free us upon easy terms, as men that had
nothing.

And whereas for our good service we are become a pray to Goalers, and suffer
for not being paid, (we grieve) being it is much to the dishonor of God, and
our Profession and Liberty.

Your humble Petitioner desires your Honors to order that none of us of the
Jmprisoned Soldiery shall never be paid our Arrears, that our Creditors may
commiserate our causes, or that your Honors do grant forth the Act so long
promised to set us at liberty, or that our Creditors do accept by your Honors
Command of our Debentors, for their debts or to cause Justice to be executed,
that Bread, Beer, and Porvisions may be at the rates in prisons as abroad. And
that some godly men may have the review of the prisons, to examine, settle, and
makegood orders for the prisoners for debt, that we starve not for our good
service, as some have, and others lie starving at present.

I pray accept of your Captains Council, that is, to pay your old faithful
Soldiery lest they by being provoked, fly from your Honors for malice for not
being paid; for when they are gone your Honors will not have them so speedily
again for in these wavering times they will do more for malice, then for love
without money.

Your Honors humble Servant to Command, SAMUEL CHAPEL.


FINIS.

