THE TRVE LAW OF FREE MONARCHY, OR THE RECIPROCAL and mutual duty betwixt a
free KING and His natural Subjects.

By a well affected subject of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by T. P. in Queens-head-Alley in Pater
noster-row, 1642.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
ACcept, I pray you, (my dear Contrymen) as thankfully this Pamphlet that I
offer unto you, as lovingly it is written for your weal. I would be loath both
to be faschious and fectlesse. And therefore, if it be not sententious, at
least it is short. It may be ye miss many thing that ye look for in it. But
for excuse thereof, consider rightly that I only lay down herein the true
grounds, to teach you the right way, without wasting time upon refuting the
adversaries. And yet I trust, if ye will take narrow tent, ye shall find most
of their great guns paid home again, either with contrary conclusions, or
tacit objections, suppose in a dairned form, and indirectly. For my intention
is to instruct, and not irritat, if I may eschew it. The profit I would wish
you to make of, it is, as well so to frame all your actions according to these
grounds, as may confirm you in the course of honest and obedient subjects to
your King, in all times coming, as also, when ye shall fall in purpose with
any that shall praise or excuse the bypast rebellions, that break forth either
in this Country or in any other, ye shall herewith be armed against their
Siren songs, laying their particular examples to the square of these grounds.
Whereby ye shall soundly keep the course of righteous Judgment, discerning
wisely of every action, only according to the quality thereof, and not
according to your prejudged conceits of the committers. So shall ye, by reaping
profit to your selves, turn my pain into pleasure. But least the whole
Pamphlet run out at the gaping mouth of this Preface, if it were any more
enlarged: I end, with committing you to God, and me to your charitable censures.

C. (...).

The true Law of free Monarchies, Or the reciprocke and mutual duty betwixt a
free King and his natural Subjects.
AS there is not a thing so necessary to be known by the people of any Land,
next the knowledge of their God, as the right knowledge of their allegiance,
according to the form of Government established among them, especially in a
Monarchy, (which form of Government, as resembling the Divinity, approaches
nearest to perfection, as all the learned and wise men from the beginning have
agreed upon: Unity being the perfection of all things) So has the ignorance,
and (which is worse) the seduced opinion of the multitude blinded by them, who
think themselves able to teach and instruct the ignorants, procured the wrack
and and overthrow of sundry flourishing Commonwealths; and heaped heavy
calamities, threatening utter destruction upon others. And the smiling success,
that unlawful rebellions have oftentimes had against Princes in ages past
(such has been the misery, and iniquity of the time) has by way of practice
strengthened many in their error: albeit there cannot be a more deceivable
argument; then to judge by the justness of the cause by the event thereof; as
hereafter shall be proved more at length, And among others, no Commonwealth,
that ever has been since the beginning, has had greater need of the true
knowledge of this ground, then this our so long disordered and distracted
Commonwealth has: the misknowledge hereof being the only spring, from whence
have flowed so many endless calamities, miseries, and confusions, as is better
felt by many, than the cause thereof well known, and deeply considered. The
natural zeal therefore, that I bear to this my native Country, with the great
pity I have to see the so-long disturbance thereof, for lack of the true
knowledge of this ground (as I have said before) has compelled me at last to
break silence, to discharge my conscience to you, my dear Countrymen herein,
that knowing the ground from whence these your many endless troubles have
proceeded, as well as ye have already too-long tasted the bitter fruits
thereof, ye may by knowledge, and eschewing of the cause escape, and divert the
lamentable effects that ever necessarily follow thereupon. I have chosen then
only to set down in this short Treatise the true grounds of the mutual duty,
and allegiance betwixt a free and absolute Monarche, and his people; not to
trouble your patience with answering the contrary propositions, which some has
not been ashamed to set down in writ, to the poisoning of infinite number of
simple souls, and their own perpetual, and well deserved infamy. For by
answering them, I could not have eschewed whiles to pick, and bite well saltly
their persons: which would rather have bred contentiousnesse among the readers
(as they had liked or misliked) then sound instruction of the truth. Which I
protest to him that is the searcher of all hearts, is the only mark that I
shoot at herein.

First then, I will set down the true grounds, whereupon I am to build, out of
the Scriptures, since Monarchy is the true pattern of Divinity, as I have
already said: next, from the fundamental Laws of our own Kingdom, which
nearest must concern us: thirdly, from the Law of nature, by diverse
similitudes drawn out of the same: and will conclude sin by answering the
most weighty and appearing incommodities that can be objected.

The Princes duty to his subjects is so clearly set down in many places of the
Scriptures, and so openly confessed by all the good Princes, according to their
oath in their Coronation, as not needing to belong therein, I shall as shortly
as I can run through it.

Kings are called Gods by the Prophetical King David, Psalm 82.6.
because they sit upon God his throne in the earth, and have the count of their
administration to give unto him. Their office is, To minister justice and
judgment to the people, as the same David says, Psalm. 101. 2 King 18. 2 Chro
29. 2 Kin 22. and 23.2.34, and 35. Psalm 72 1 King. 3. Romans 13. 1 Samuel 8. Ier 29.
To advance the good, and punish the evil, as he likewise says: To establish
good laws to his people, and procure obedience to the same, as diverse good
Kings of Judah did: To procure the peace of the people: as the same David
says, To decide all controversies that can arise among them, as Solomon did:
To be the Minister of God for the weal of them that do well, and as the
Minister of God, to take vengeance upon them that do evil, as S. Paul says.
And finally, As a good Pastor, to go out and in before his people, as is said
in the first of Samuel: That through the Princes prosperity the peoples peace
may be procured, as Jeremy says.

And therefore in the Coronation of our own Kings, as well as of every
Christian Monarch, they give their oath, first to maintain the Religion
presently professed within their Country, according to their laws, whereby it
is established, and to punish all those that should press to alter, or
disturb the profession thereof: And next, to maintain all the lowable and good
laws made by their predecessors, to see them put in execution, and the
breakers, and violaters thereof, to be punished, according to the tenor of the
same: And lastly, to maintain the whole Country, and every state therein, in
all their ancient privileges, and liberties, as well against all sorraine
enemies, as among themselves: And shortly to procure the weal and stourishing
of his people, not only in maintaining and purting to execution the old lowable
laws of the Country, and by establishing of new (as necessity and evil
manners will require) but by all other means possible to foresee and prevent
all dangers, that are likely to fall upon them, and to maintain concord,
wealth, and civility among them, as a loving father, and careful watchman,
caring for them more than for himself, knowing himself to be ordained for
them, and they not for him; and therefore countable to that great God, who
placed him as his lieutenant over them, upon the peril of his soul, to
procure the weal of both souls and bodies, as far as in him lies, of all
them that that are committed to his charge. And this Oath in the Coronation is
the clearest, civil and fundamental law, whereby the Kings office is properly
defined.

By the law of nature the King becomes a natural Father to all his Lieges at
his Coronation. And as the father of his fatherly duty is bound to care for the
nourishing, education and virtuous government of his children: even so is the
King bound to care for all his subjects. As all the toil, and pain that the
father can take for his children, will be thought light and well bestowed by
him, so that the effect thereof redound to their profit and weal: So ought the
Prince to do toward his people As the kindly father ought to foresee all
inconvenients and dangers that may arise toward his children, and though with
the hazard of his own person, press to prevent the same: So ought the King
toward his people. As the Fathers wrath and correction upon any of his
children, that offends, ought to be by a fatherly chastizment seasoned with
pity, as long as there is any hope of amendment in them: So ought the King
toward any of his Lieges that-offends in that measure. And shortly as the
fathers chif joy ought to be in procuring his childrens well fare, rejoicing at
their weal, sorrowing and pitying at their evil, to hazard for their safety,
travel for their rest, wake for their sleep; and in a word, to think that his
earthly felicity and life stands and lives more in them, nor in himself: So
ought a good Prince think of his people.

As to the other branch of this mutual, and reciprock band, is the duty and
allegiance, that the Lieges owe to their King. The ground whereof, I take out
of the words of Samuel, dited by Gods spirit, when God had given him
commandment to hear the peoples voice in choosing and anointing them a King.
And because that place of Scripture being well understood, is so pertinent for
our purpose, I have insert herein the very words of the text.

9 Now therefore harken to their voice: howbeit yet testify unto them, and
show them the manner of the King, that shall reign over them.

10 So Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked a King
of him.

11 And he said, this shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over
you; he will take your sons, and appoint them to his Charets, and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his Charet.

12 Also he will make them his Captains over thousands, and Captains over
fifties, and to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make
instruments of war, and the things that serve for his Charets.

13 He will also take your daughters, and make them Apothecaries, and Cooks,
and Bakers.

14 He will take your Fields, and your Vineyardes, and your best Olive Trees,
and give them to his servants.

15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and give it
to his Eunuchs and to his servants:

16 And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and the chief
of your young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

18 And ye shall cry out at that day, because of your King whom ye have
chosen you: and the Lord will not hear you at that day.

19 But the people woull not hear the voice of Samuel but did say: Nay but
there shall be a King over us. 20 And we also will be like all other nations.
and our King shall judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.

20 And we also would be like all other Nations, and our King shall judge us,
and go out before us, and fight our battles.

That these words and discourses of Samuel were dited by Gods spirit, it needs
no further probation, but that it is a place of Scripture, since the whole
Scripture is dited by that inspiration, as Paul says: which ground no good
Christian will, or dare deny. Whereupon it must necessarily follow, that there
speeches proceeded not from any ambition in Samuel, as one loath to quite the
reins that he so long had ruled, and therefore desirous, by making odious the
government of a King, to dissuade the people from their farther importunate
craving of one. For as the Text proves it plainly, he then conveened them to
give them a resolute grant of their demand, as God by his own mouth commanded
him, saying:

Harken to the voice of the people.

And to press to dissuade them from that, which he then came to grant unto
them, were a thing very impertinent in a wise man; much more in the Prophet of
the most high God. And likewise, it well appeared in all the course of his life
after, that his so long refusing of their suit before came not of any ambition
in him: which he well proved in praying, and as it were importuning God for the
weal of Saul. Yea, after God had declared his reprobation unto him, yet he
desisted not, while God himself was wrath at his praying, and discharged his
farther suit in that errant. And that these words of Samuel were not uttered,
as a prophecy of Saul their first Kings defection, it well appears, as well
because we hear no mention made in the Scripture of any his tyranny and
oppression, (which, if it had been, would not have been left unpainted out
therein, as well as his other faults were, as in a true mirror of all the
Kings behaviors, who it describes) as likewise in respect that Saul was
chosen by God for his virtue, and meet qualities to govern his people: whereas
his defection sprung after-hand from the corruption of his own nature, and not
through any default in God, who^ they that think so, would make as a
step-father to his people, inmaking wilfully a choice of the unmeetest for
governing them, since the election of that King lay absolutely and immediately in
Gods hand. But by the contrary it is plain, and evident, that this speech of
Samuel to the people, was to prepare their hearts before the hand to the due
obedience of that King, which God was to give unto them; and therefore opened up
unto them, what might be the intolerable qualities that might fall in some of
their Kings, thereby preparing them to patience, not to resist to Gods
ordinance, but as he would have said. Since God has granted your importunate
suit in giving you a King: as ye have else committed an error in shaking off
Gods yoke, and overhasty seeking of a King: so beware ye fall not into the
next, in casting off also rashly that yoke, which God at your earnest suit has
laid upon you, how hard that ever it seem to be. For as ye could not have
obtained one without the permission and ordinance of God: so may ye no more,
fro he be once set over you, shake him off without the same warrant. And
therefore in time arm your selves with patience and humility, since he, that
has the only power to make him, has the only power to unmake him; and ye only
to obey, bearing with these straits that I now fore-shew you, as with the
finger of God, which lies not in you to take off. And will ye consider the
very words of the Text in order, as they are set down, it shall plainly declare
the obedience that the people owe to their King in all respects.

First, God commanded Samuel to do two things; the one to grant the people
their suit in giving them a King; the other to forwarn them, what some Kings
will do unto them, that they may not thereafter in their grudging and murmuring
say; when they shall feel the snares here forespoken: We would never have had
a King of God, in case, when we craved him, he had let us know how we would
have been used by him, as now we find but over late. And this is meant by these
words. Now therefore kearken unto their voice; howbeit yet testify unto them,
and show them the manner of the King that shall rule over them.

And next, Samuel in execution of this commandment of God, he likewiss does
two things.

First, he declares unto them, what points of Justice and equity their King
will break in his behavior unto them. And next he puts them out of hope,
that, weary as they will, they shall not have leave to shake of that yoke,
which God through their importunity has laid upon them. The points of Equity
that the King shall break unto them are expressed in these words.

11 He will take your sons, and appoint them to his Charets, and to be his
hosemen, and some shall run before his Charet.

12 Also he will make them his Captains over thousands, and Captains over
fifties, and to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make
instruments of war, and the things that serve for his Charets.

13 He will also take your daughters, and make them Apothecaries, and Cooks,
and Bakers.

The points of Justice, that he shall break unto the^, are expressed in these
words.

14 He will take your Fields, and your Vineyardes, and your best Olive Trees,
and give them to his servants.

15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and give it
to his Eunnches and to his servants: And also the tenth of your sheep.

As if he would say, The best and noblest of your blood shall be compelled in
lavish and servile offices to serve him. And not content of his own patrimony
will make up a rent to his own use out of your best lands. vineyards, orchards
and store of cattle. So as inverting the law of nature and office of a King,
your persons and the persons of your posterity, together with your lands, and
all that ye possess shall serve his private use, and inordinate appetit. And
as unto the next point (which is his forewarning them, that, weary as they
will, they shall not have leave to shake off the yoke, which God through their
importunity has laid upon them) it is expressed in these words.

18 And yet shall cry out at that day, because of your King whom ye have
chosen you: and the Lord will not hear you at that day.

As he would say, When ye shall find these things in proof that now I sorewarn
you of, although you shall grudg and murmr, yet it shall not be lawful to
you to cast it off, in respect it is not only the ordinance of God; bur also
your selves have chosen him unto you, thereby renouncing for ever all
priiviledges, by your willing consent, out of your hands, whereby in any time
hereafter ye would claim and call back unto your selves again that power, which
God shall not permit you to do. And for further taking away of al excuse, and
retraction of this their contract, after their consent to underly this yoke
with all the burdens that he has declared unto them, he craves their answer,
and consent to his proposition: which appears by their answer, as it is
expressed in these words.

19 Nay but there shall be a King over us. 20 And we also will be like all
other nations, and our King shall judge us, and go out before us, and fight our
battles.

As if they would have said; All your speechs and hard conditions shall not
skar us, but we will take the good and evil of it upon us, and we will be
content to bear whatsoever but then it shall please our King to lay upon us, as
well as other nations do. And for the good we will get of him in fighting our
battles, we will more patiently bear any burden that shall please him to lay
on us.

Now then, since the erection of this Kingdom and Monarchy among the Jews and
the law thereof may, and ought to be a pattern to all Christian and well founded
Monarchies, as being founded by God himself, who by his Oracle, and out of his
own mouth gave the law thereof: what liberty can broyling spirits, and
rebellious minds claim justly to against any Christian Monarchy: since they can
claim to no greater liberty on their part, nor the people of God might have
done, and no greater tyranny was ever executed by any Prince or Tyrant, whom
they can object, nor was here forewarned to the people of God, (and yet all
rebellion countermanded unto the^) if tyrannizing over men's persons, sons,
daughters and servants; redacting noble houses, and men, and women of noble
blood, to slavish and servile offices; and extortion, and spoil of their lands
and goods to the Princes own private use and commodity, and of his courteours
and servants, may be called a tyranny?

And that this proposition grounded upon the Scripture, may the more clearly
appear to be true by the practice often proved in the same book, we never read,
that ever the Prophets persuaded the people to rebel against the Prince, how
wicked soever he was.

When Samuel by Gods command pronounced to the same King Saul, 1 Samuel 15.
that his Kingdom was rent from him, and given to another (which in effect was
a degrading of him) yet his next action following that was peaceably to turn
home, and with floods of tears to pray to God to have some compassion upon him.

And David notwithstanding he was inaugurate in that same degraded Kings room,
not only (when he was cruelly persecuted for no offense, but good service done
unto him) would not presume, having him in his power, skantly, but with great
reverence, to touch the garment of the anointed of the Lord, and in his words
blessed him: 1 Samuel 2.4 1 Samuel ^.
but likewise, when one came to him vanting himself untruly to have slain Saul,
he without form of process, or trial of his guilt, caused only for guiltiness
of his tongue put him to sudden death.

And although there was never a more monstrous persecutor and tyrant than
Achab was: yet all the rebellion, that Elias ever raised against him, was to
fly to the wilderness: where for fault of sustentation, he was fed with the
Corbies. And I think no man will doubt but Samuel, David and Elias, had as great
power to perswad the people, if they had liked to have employed their credit to
uprores and rebellions against these wicked Kings, as any of our seditious
preachers in these days of whatsoever Religion, either in this Country or in
France, had that busied themselves most to stir up rebellion under cloak of
Religion. This far the only love of verity, I protest, without hatred at their
persons, have moved me to be somewhat satyrique.

And if any will lean to the extraordinary examples of degrading or killing of
Kings in the Scriptures, thereby to cloak the peoples rebellion, as by the deed
of Jehu, and such like extraordinaries: I answer, besides that they want the
like warrant that they had, if extraordinary examples of the Scripture shall be
drawn in daily practice; murder under traist, as in the persons of Ahud and
Iael; theft, as in the persons of the Israelites coming out of Aegipt; lying
to their parents to the hurt of their brother, as in the person of Jacob; shall
all be counted as lawful and allowable virtues, as rebellion against Princes.
And to conclude, the practice through the whole Scripture proves the peoples
obedience given to that sentence in the Law of God: Thou shall not rail upon
the Judges neither speak evell of the Ruler of thy people. To end then the
ground of my proposition taken out of the Scripture, let two special and
notable examples, one under the law, another under the Euangel, Ie: 27.
conclude this part of my alled geance. Under the law, Jeremy threatens the
people of God with utter destruction for rebellion to Nabuchadnezzar the King
of Babel, who although he was an Idolatrous persecutor, a foreign King, a
Tyrant, and usurper of their liberties; yet in respect they had once received
and acknowledged him for their King, Ier. 29.
he not only commands them to obey him, out even to pray for his prosperity,
adjoining the reason to it; because in his prosperity stood their peace. And
under the Euangell that King, whom Paul bids the Romans Obey and serve for
conscience sake, Ie. 13.
was Nero that bloody Tyrant, an infamy to his age, and a monster to the world,
being also an Idolatrous per^^cutor, as the K. of Babel was. If then Idolatry
and defection from God, tyranny over their people, and persecution of the
Saints, for their profession sake, hindered not the spirit of God to command his
people under all highest pain to give them all due and hearty obedience for
conscience sake, giving to Caesar that which was Caesar's, and to God that which
was Gods, as Christ says, and that this practice throughout the book of God
agrees with this law, which he made in the erection of that Monarchy (as is
at length before deduced) what shameless presumption is it to any Christian
people now a days to claim to that unlawful liberty, which God refused to
his own peculiar and chosen people? Shortly then to take up in two or three
sentences, grounded upon all these arguments, out of the Law of God, the duty,
and allegiance of the people to their lawful King, their obedience, I say,
ought to be to him, as to Gods Lieutenant in earth, obeying his commands in
all things, except directly against God, as the commands of Gods Minister,
acknowledging him a Judge set by God over them, having power to judge them, but
to be judged only by God, whom to only he must give count of his judgment;
fearing him as then Judge loving him as their Father; praying for him as their
Protector; for his continuance, he be good, for his amendment, if he be wicked,
following and obeying his lawful commands, eschewing and flying his fury in
his unlawful, without tesistance, but by sons and ears to God, according to
that Sentence used in the Primitive Church in the time of the persecution.

Preces, and Lachrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae.

Now as for the describing the allegiance, that the heges owe to their Native
King, out of the fundamental and Civil Law, especially of this Country, as I
promitted, the ground must first be set down of the first manner of
establishing the Laws and form of government among us: that the ground being
first right laid, we may thereafter build rightly thereupon. Although it be
true (according to the affirmation of those that pride themselves to be the
scourges of Tyrants) that in the first beginning of Kings rising among
Gentiles, in the time of the first age, diverse commonwealths and societies of
men choosed out one among themselves, who for his virtues and valor, being
more eminent then the rest, was chosen out by them, and set up in that room,
to maintain the weakest in their right, to throw down oppressors, and to
foster and continue the society among men; which could not otherwise, but by
virtue of that unity be well done yet these examples are nothing pertinent to
us; because our kingdom and diverse other Monarchies are not in that case, but
had their beginning in a far contrary fashion. For as our Chronicles bear
witness, this, and especially our part of it, being scantly inhabited, but by
very few, and they as barbarous and scant of civility, as number, there comes
our King Fergus, with a great number with him, out of Ireland, which was long
inhabited before us, and making himself master of the Country by his own
friendship, and force, as well of the Ireland-men that came with him, as of the
Countrymen that willingly fell to him, he made himself King and Lord, as well
of the whole lands, as of the whole inhabitants within the same. Thereafter he
and his successors, a long while after their being Kings, made and established
their laws from time to time, and as the occasion required. So the truth is
contrary in our state to the false affirmation of such seditious Writers, as
would persuade us, that the Laws and state of our country were established
before the admitting of a King: whereby the contrary ye see it plainly proved,
that a wise King coming among barbares, first established the estate and form
of government, and thereafter made dawes by himself, and his successors
according thereto.

The Kings therefore in Scotland were before any estates or ranks of men
within the same, before any Parliaments were holden, or Laws made: and by them
was the Land distributed (which at the first was whole theirs) states erected
and decerned, and forms of government devised and established. And so it
follows of necessity, that the Kings were the authors and makers of the laws,
and not the laws of the Kings. And to prove this my assertion more clearly,
it is evident by the Roles of our Chancellery (which contain our eldest and
fundamental laws) that the King is Dominus omnium bonorum, and Dominus
directus totius Dominiy, the whole subjects being but his vassals, and from him
holding all their lands as their Over lord, who according to good services done
unto him, changes their holdings from tacke to few, from lord to blanch,
erecteth new Baronies, and uniteth old, without advise or authority of either
Parliament, or any other subalterin judicial seat. So as if wrong might be
admitted in play (albert I grant wrong should be wrong in all persons) the
King might have a better color for his pleasure, without further reason, to
take the land from his lieges, as over-lord of the whole, and do with it as
pleases him, since all that they hold is of him: then, as foolish writers say
the people might un-make the King, and put an other in his room. But either of
them, as unlawful, and against the ordinance of God, ought to be alike odious
to be thought, much less put in practice. And according to these fundamental
laws already alleged, we daily see that in the Parliament (which is nothing
else but the head Court of the King, and his vassals) the laws are but craved
by his subjects, and only made by him at their rogation, and with their advise.
For albeit the K. make daily statutes and ordinances, injoyning such pains
thereto as he thinks meet, without any advise of Parliament or estates; yet it
lies in the power of no Parliament, to make any kind of law or statute,
without his Scepter be to it, for giving it the force of a law. And although
diverse changes have been in other Countries of the blood Royal, and kingly
house, the Kingdom being refectly conquest from one to another, as in our
neighbor country in England, (which was never in ours) yet the same ground of
the Kings right over all the Land, and subjects thereof remains alike in all
other free Monarchies, as well as in this. For when the Bastard of Normandy
came into England, and made himself King, was it not by force, and with a
mighty army? Where he gave the Law, and took none, changed the laws, inverted
the order of government, see down the strangers his followers in many of the
old possessours rooms, (...) this day well appears a great part of the
Gentlemen in England, being come of the Norman blood, and their old Laws,
which to this day they are tuled by, are written in his language, and not in
theirs. And yet his successors have with great bappinesse enjoyed the Crown to
this day. Whereof the like was also done by all them that conquested them
before.

And for conclusion of this point, that the King is over-lord over the whole
lands, it is likewise daily proved by the Law of our hoords, of want of Heirs
and of Bastardies. For if a ^oord be found under the earth, because it is no
more in the keeping or use of any person, it of the Law pertaines to the King.
If a person, inheritour of any lands or goods, dye without any sort of heirs,
all his lands and goods return to the King. And if a bastard dye unrehabled
without heirs of his body (which rehabling only lies in the Kings hinds) all
that he has likewise returns to the King. And as ye see it manifest, that
the King is Over-Lord of the whole Land: So is he master over every person
that inhabiteth the same, having power over the life and death of every one of
them. For although a just Prince will not take the life of any of his Subjects
without a clear Law: Yet the same Laws, whereby he takes them, are made by
himself, or his predecessors. And so the power flows always from himself:
As by daily experience we see, good and just Princes will from time to time
make new laws and statutes, adjoining the penalties to the breakers thereof:
which before the Law was made, had bin no crime to the subject to have
committed. Not that I deny the old definition of a King, and of a law; which
makes the King to be a speaking Law, and the Law a dumb King: for certainly a
King, that governes not by law, can neither be countable to God for his
administration, nor have a happy and established Reign. For albeit it be
true that I have at length proved, that the King is above the Law, as both the
Author, and giver of strength thereto: yet a good King, will not only delight
to rule his subjects by the Law; but even will conform himself in his own
actions thereunto, always keeping that ground, that the health of the
commonwealth be his chief Law. And where he sees the Law doubt-some or
rigorous, he may interpret or mittigate the same: lest otherwise Summum jus be
summairjuria. And therefore general laws, made publicly in Parliament, may
upon known respects to the King by his authority be mittigated, and suspended
upon causes only known to him. As likewise, although I have said, a good king
will frame all his actions to be according to the Law: yet is he not bound
thereto but of his good will, and for good example giving to his subjects. For
as in the Law of abstaining from eating of flesh in Lenton, the King will for
examples sake, make his own house to observe the Law: yet no man will think he
needs to take a license to eat flesh. And although by our Laws, the bearing
and wearing of hag-buts, and Pistolets be forbidden, yet no man can unde any
fault in the King, for causing his train use them in any raide upon the
Bordourers, or other malefactors or rebellious subjects. So as I have already
said, a good King, although he be above the Law, will subject and frame his
actions thereto, for examples sake to his subjects, and of his own free will,
but not as subject or bound thereto. Since I have so clearly proved then out
of the fundamental laws and practice of this Country, what right and power a
King has over his land and subjects, it is easy to be understood, what
allegiance and obedience his lieges owe unto him I mean always of such free
Monarchies as our King is, and not of elective Kings, and much less of such
sort of governors, as the Dukes of Venice are, whose Aristocraticke, and
limited government is nothing like to free Monarchies: although the malice of
some writers has not been ashamed to mis-know any difference to be betwixt
them. And if it be not lawful to any particular Lords tenants or vassals, upon
whatsoever pretext, to control and displace their master, and Over-lord (^s is
clearer no^ the Sun by all laws of the world) how much less may the subjects
and vassals of the great Over-lord the King control or displace him? And since
in all inferior judgments in the Land, the people may not upon any respects
displace their Magistrates, although but subaltern: for the people of a
borough, cannot displace their provost before the time of their election: nor
in Ecclesiastical policy the flock can upon any pretense displace the pastor,
nor Judge of him yea even the schoolmaster cannot be displaced by his
scholars. If these, cannot be displaced for any occasion or pretext by them
that are ruled by them: much less is it lawful upon any pretext to control or
displace the great Provost, and great Schoole-muster of the whole land: except
by inverting the order of all Law and reason, the commanded may be made to
command their commander, the judged to judge their Judge, and they that are
governed, to govern their time about their Lord and governor. And the
agreement of the Law of nature in this our ground with the Laws and
constitutions of God, and man, already alleged, will by two similitudes easily
appear. The King toward his people is rightly compared to a Father of
children, and to a head of a body composed of diverse members. For as Fathers,
the good Princes, and Magistrates of the people of God acknowledged themselves
to their subjects And for all other well ruled commonwealths, the style of
Pater-Patria was ever, and is commonly used to Kings. And the proper office of
a King toward his subjects agrees very well with the office of the head
toward the body, and all members thereof. For from the head, being the seat
of judgment, proceeds the care and foresight of guiding, and preventing all
evil that may come to the body or any part thereof. The head cares for the
body, so does the King for his people. As the discourse and direction flows
from the head, and the execution according thereunto belongs to the rest of the
members, every one according to their office: so is it betwixt a wise Princes,
and his people. As the judgment coming from the head may not only employ the
members, every one in their own office, as long as they are able for it, but
likewise in case any of them be affected with any infirmity must care and
provide for their remedy, in case it be curable; and if otherwise, (...) cut
them off for fear of infecting of the rest: even so is it betwixt the Prince,
and his people. And as there is ever hope of curing any diseased member by the
direction of the head, as long as it is whole; but by the contrary, if it he
troubled, all the members are partakers of that pain, so is it betwixt the
Prince and his people.

And now first for the fathers part (whose natural love to his children I
described in the first part of this my discourse, speaking of the duty that
Kings owe to their subjects) consider, I pray you what duty his children owe to
him, and whether upon any pretext whatsoever, it will not be thought monstrous
and unnatural to his sons, to rise up against him, to control him at their
appetite, and when they think good, to sley him, or to cut him off, and adopt
to themseves any other they please in his room. Or can any pretense of
wickedness or rigor on his part be a just excuse for his children to put
hand into him? And although we see by the course of nature, that love ever
uses to descend more than to ascend: in case it were true, that the Father
hated and wronged the children never so much, will any man, endued with the
least spark of reason, think it lawful for them to meet him with the line?
Yea, suppose the Father were furiously following his sons with a drawn sword:
is it lawful for them to turn, and strike again, or make any resistance but
by flight? I think surely, if there were no more but the example of bruit
beasts, and unreasonable creatures, it may serve well enough to qualine and
prove this my argument. We read often the piety that the Storkes have to their
old and decayed parents. And generally we know, that there are many sorts of
beasts and fowls, that with violence and many bloody strokes will beat and
banish their young ones from them, how soon they perceive them to be able to
fend themselves. But we never read or heard of any resistance on their part,
except among the Vipers: which proves such persons, as ought to be reasonable
creatures, and yet unnaturally follow this example, to be endued with their
viperous nature. And for the similitude of the head and the body, it may very
well fall out that the head will be forced to gaure cut off some rotten member
(as I have already said) to keep the rest of the body in integrity. But what
state the body can be in, if the head, for any infirmity that can fall to it,
be cut off, I leave it to the readers judgment. So as (to conclude this part)
if the children may upon any pretext that can be imagined, lawfully rise up
against their Father, cut him off, and choose any other in his room; and if the
body for the weal of it, may for any infirmity that can be in the head, strike
it off: then I cannot deny that the people may rebel, control, and displace,
or cut off their King at their pleasure, and upon respects moving them. And
whether these similitudes represent better the office of a King; or the offices
of Masters or Deacons of crafts, or Doctors in Physic (which jolly
comparisons are used by such writers as maintain the contrary proposition) I
leave it also to the Readers discretion. And in ease any doubts might arise in
any part of this treatise, (I will according to my promise) with the solution
of 4. principal and most weighty doubts, that the adverseries may object,
conclude this discourse. And first it is casten up by diverse, that employ
their pens upon Apologists for rebel sons and treasons, that every man is borne
to carry such a natural zeal and duty to his commonwealth, as to his mother;
that seeing it so rent, and deadly wounded, as whiles it will be by wicked and
tyrannous Kings, good Citizans will be forced, for the natural zeal and duty
they owe to their own native Country, to put their hard to work for freeing
their commonwealth from such a pest. Whereunto I give two answers. First, it
is a sure Axiom in Theology, that evil should not be done, that good may come
of it. The wickedness therefore of the King can never make them that are
ordained to be judged by him, to become his Judges. And if it be not lawful to
a private man to revenge his private injury upon his private adversary (since
God has only given the sword to the Magistrate) how much less is it lawful to
the people, or any part of them (who all are but private men, the authority
being always with the Magistrate, as I have already proved) to take upon them
the use of the sword, whom to it belongs not, against the public Magistrate,
whom to only it belongs. Next, in place of relieving the Commonwealth out of
distress (which is their only excuse and color) they shall heap double
distress and desolation upon it: and so their rebellion shall procure the
contrary effects that they pretend it for. For a King cannot be imagined to be
so unruly and tyrannous, but the commonwealth will be kept in better order,
notwithstanding thereof, by him, then it can be by his way-taking For first,
all sudden mutations are perilous in commonwealths, hope being thereby given
to all bare men to set up themselves, and fly with other men's feathers, the
reins being loosed to all the insolences that disordered people can commit by
hope of impanity, because of the looseness of all things.

And next, it is certain that a King can never be so monstrously vicious, but
he will generally favor justice, and maintain some order, except in the
particulars, wherein his inordinate lusts and passions carry him away: where by
the contrary, no King being, nothing is unlawful to none: And so the old
opinion of the Philosophers proves true, that better it is to live in a
Commonwealth, where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful to
all men: the Commonwealth at that time resembling an un-daunted young horse
that has casten his ride. For as the divine Poet Du Bartas says: Better it
were to suffer some disorder in the estate, and some spots in the Common
wealth, then, in pretending to reform, utterly to over th^ow the Republike.

The second objection they ground upon the curse, that hangs over the common
wealth, where a wicked King reigns. And, say they, there cannot be more
acceptable deed in the sight of God, nor more dutiful to their commonweal,
than to free the Country of such a curse, and vindicate to them their liberty,
which is natural to all creatures to crave. Whereunto, for answer, I grant
indeed, that a wicked K. is sent by God for a curse to his people, and a plague
for their sins. But that it is lawful to them to shake off that curse at their
own hand, which God has laid on them, that I deny, and may so do justly.
Will any deny that the King of Babel was a curse to the people of God, as was
plainly fore spoken and threatened unto them in the prophecy of their
Captivity? And what was Nero to the Christian Church in his time? And yet
Jeremy and Paul (as ye have else heard) commanded them not only to obey them,
but heartily to pray for their welfare.

It is certain then (as I have already by the Law of God sufficiently proved)
that pattence, earnest prayers to God, and amendment of their lives, are the
only lawful means to move God to relieve them of that heavy curse. As for
vindicating to themselves their own ^iberty, what lawful power have they to
revoke to themselves again those privileges, which by their own consent before
were so fully put out of their hands? For if a Prince cannot justly bring back
again to himself the Privileges once bestowed by him or his predecessors upon
any state, or rank of his subjects: how much less may the subjects reive out
of the Princes hand that superiority, which he and his Predecessors have so
long brooked over them? But the unhappy uniquity of the time, which has
oftentimes given over good success to their treasonable attempts, furnishes
them the ground of their third objection. For, say they, the fortunate success
that God has so often given to such enterprises, prooveth plainly by the
practice, that God favored the justness of their quarrel. To the which I
answer, that it is true indeed, that all the success of battles, as well as
other worldly things, lies only in Gods hand. And therefore it is that in the
Scripture he takes to himself the God of Hosts. But upon that general to
conclude, that he ever gives victory to the just quarrel, would prove the
Philistims, and diverse other neighbor enemies of the people of GOD, to have
oftimes had the just quarrel against the people of GOD, in respect of the many
Victories they obtained against them. And by that same argument they had just
quarrel against the A^^ke of God. For they wan it in the field, and kept it
long prisoner in the Country. As likewise by all good writers, as well
Theologues, as other the D^^lls and singular combats are disallowed: which are
only made upon pretense that God will kith thereby the justice of the quarrel.
For we must consider that the innocent party is not innocent before God. And
therefore God will make often times them that have the wrong side, revenge justly
his quarrel; and when he has done, cast his scourge on the fire: as he
oftentimes did to his own people stirring up and strengthening their enemies,
while they were humbled in his sight, and then delivered them in their hands.
So God, as the great Judge may justly punish his deputy, and for his rebellion
against him, stir up his rebels to meet him with the like. And when it is
done, the part of the instrument is no better than the devils part is in
tempting and torturing such as God commits to him as his hangman to do.
Therefore as I said in the beginning, it is often times a very deceiveable
argument, to judge of the cause by the event.

And the last objection is grounded upon the mutual paction and adstipulation
(as they call it) betwixt the King and his people, at the time of his
Coronation. For there say they, there is a mutual paction, and contract bound
up, and sworn betwixt the King, and the people. Whereupon it follows, that
if the one part of the contract or the Indent be broken upon the Kings side,
the people are no longer bound to keep their part of it, but are thereby freed
of their oath. For (say they) a contract betwixt two parties of all law frees
the one party if the other break unto him. As to this contract alleged made
at the coronation of a King, although I deny any such contract to be made then,
especially containing such a clause irritant as they allege: yet I confess,
that a King at his coronation, or at the entry to his Kingdom, willingly
promises to his people, to discharge honorably and truly the office given him
by God over them. But presuming that thereafter he break his promise unto
them never so inexcusable, the question is, who should be judge of the break,
giving unto them this contract were made unto them never so sicker, according
to their allegiance. I think no man that has but the smallest entrance in the
civil Law, will doubt that of all law either civil or municipall of any
nation a contract cannot be thought broken by the one party, and so the other
likewise to be freed therefro except that first a lawful trial and cognition
be had by the ordinary Judge of the breakers thereof. Else every man may be
both party and judge in his own cause: which is absurd once to be thought. Now
in this contract (I say) betwixt the King and his people, God is doubtless the
only Judge, both because to him only the King must make count of his
administration (as is often said before) as likewise by the oath in the
Coronation, God is made judge and revenger of the breakers. For in his
presence, as only judge of oaths, all oaths ought to be made. Then since God is
the only judge betwixt the two parties contractors, the cognition and revenge
must only appertain to him. It follows therefore of necessity, that God must
first give sentence upon the King that breaks, before the people can think
themselves freed of their oath What justice then is it, that the party shall be
both judge and party, usurping upon himself the office of God, may by this
argument easily appare: And shall it lie in the hands of headless multitude,
when they please to weary off subjection, to cast off the yoke of government
that God has said upon them; to judge and punish him, by whom they should be
judged and punished; and in that case, wherein by their violence they kithe
themselves to be most passionate parties, to use the office of an ungracious
Judge or Arbiter? Nay, to speak truly of that case, as it stands betwixt the
King and his people, none of them ought to judge of the others break. For
considering rightly the two parties at the time of their mutual promise, the
King is the one party, and the whole people in one body are the other party And
therefore since it is certain, that a King, in case so it should fall out,
that his people in one body had rebelled against him, the should not in that
case, as thinking himself free of his promise and oath become an utter enemy,
and practice the wreak of his whole people and native Country: although he
ought justly to punish the principal authors and bellows of that universal
rebellion: how much less then ought the people that are always subject unto
him, and naked of al authority (on their part) press to judge and overthrow
him? otherwise the people, as the one party contracters, shall no sooner
challenge the King as breaker, but he as soon shall judge them as breakers: so
as, the victors making the tyners the traitors (as our proverb is) the party
shall aye become both judge and party in his own particular, as I have already
said.

And it is here likewise to be noted that the duty and allegiance, which the
people swears to their Prince is not only bound to themselves, but likewise
to their lawful heirs and posterity, the lineall succession of Crowns being
begun among the people of God, and happily continued in diverse Christian
common wealths. So as no objection either of heresy, or whatsoever private
statute or Law may free the people from their oath given to their King. and his
succession, established by the old fundamental Laws of the kingdom. For, as
he is their heritable Over-lord, and so by birth, not by any right in the
coronation, comes to his Crown; it is a like unlawful (the crown ever
standing full) to displace him that succeeds thereto, as to eject the former.
For at the very moment of the expiring of the King reigning, the nearest and
lawful heir enters in his place. And so to refuse him, or intrude another;
is not to hold out uncomming in; but to expel, and put out their righteous
King. And I trust at this time whole France acknowledges the superstitious
rebellion of the liguers; who upon pretense of heresy, by force of arms held
so long out, to the great desolation of their whole Country, their native and
righteous King from possessing of his own crown and natural kingdom. Not that
by all this former discourse of mine, and Apology for Kings, I mean that
whatsoever errors and intolerable abominations a Sovereign Prince commit,
he ought to escape all punishment, as if thereby the world were only ordained
for Kings, and they without controlement to turn it upside down at their
pleasure But by the contrary, by remitting them to God (who is their only
ordinary Judge) I remit them to the forest and sharpest school. Master that
can be devised for them. For the further a King is preferred by God above all
other ranks and degrees of men, and the higher that his feate is above theirs,
the greater is his obligation to his maker. And therefore in case he forget
himself (his unthankfulness being in the same measure of height the sadder
and sharper will his correction be: and according to the greatness of the
height he is in, the weight of his sale will recompense the same. For the
further that any person is obliged to God, his offense become and grows so much
the greates, then it would be in any other. Jove's thunderclaps light oftener,
and sorer upon the high and stately Oaks, then on the low and supple willow
trees. And the highest bench is sliddriest to sit upon. Neither is it ever
heard that any King forgets himself toward God, or in his vocation; but God
with the greatness of the plague revengeth the greatness of his ingratitude
Neither think I by the force and argument of this my discourse so to persuade
the people, that none will hereafter be raised up, and rebel against wicked
Princes. But remitting to the justice and providence of God to stir up such
scourges as pleases him, for unishment of wicked Kings (who made the very
vermin and filthy dust of the earth to bridle the insolency of proud Pharaoh)
my only purpose and it tention in this treatise is to persuade, as far as lies
in me, by these sure and infallible grounds, all such good Christian Readers,
as bear not only the naked name of a Christian, but kith the fruits thereof in
their daily form of life, to keep their hearts and hands free from such
monstrous and unnatural rebellions, whenever the wickedness of a Prince shall
procures the same at Gods hands: that, when it shall please God to cast such
such scourges of Princes, and instruments of his fury in the fire, ye may stand
up with clean hands, and unspotted consciences, having proved your selves in
all your actions true christians toward God, and dutiful subjects toward your
King, having remitted the judgment and punishment of all his wrongs to him,
whom to only of right it appertains. But craving at God, and hoping that God
shall continue his blessing with us, in not sending such fearful desolation,
I heartily wish our Kings behavior so to be, and continue among us, as our God
in earth, and loving Father, endued with such properties as I described a King
in the first part of this Treatise. And that ye (my dear Country men and
charitable readers) may press by all means to procure the prosperity, and
welfare of your King: that, as he must on the one part think a I his earthly
felicity and happiness grounded upon your weal; caring more for himself for
your sake then for his own, thinking himself only ordained for your weal;
such holy and happy emulation may arise betwixt him, and you, as his care for
your quietness, and your care for his honor and preservation, may in all your
actions daily strive together: that the Land may think themselves blessed with
such a King, and the King may think Himself most happy in ruling over so
loving and obedient Sukjects.

FINIS.

