A sad and serious DISCOVRSE, Upon a Terrible LETTER, Sent by the MINISTERS Of
the Province of LONDON, To the Lord General and his Council of War.

By W. Ca. a Member of the Army.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1648.

A sad and serious Discourse upon a terrible Letter, sent by the Ministers of
the Province of London, to the Lord General, and his Council of War.
WHen mouth Granadocs from Sion College fly about with so much sacred
Authority, and the fierce sons of Thunder tell us, they have obtained a
Commission for fire and brimstome from Heaven; and all the Cyclops of the
Province of London are summoned, to give up their stock of thunderbolts, to
make up the indignation of the Judgments of the Ministers of the Gospel: that
this full Viol of Wrath might be poured at once upon the heads of this
presumptuous, Heretical, Sacrilegious Army, by the hands of a new Army of
Martyrs, before their threatened Consecration. It Is high time for all that are
under the influence of this prodigeous meteor, to bespeak a covering, and ship
themselves in the Ark of Innocence; that the deluge of the threatened storm
might not irrecoverably sink them into the bottomless pit of Presbyterian
destruction.

Though I am an inconsiderable piece of their mighty rage, and impar
congressui; and know well, that no skin is so invulnerable, as that which is
anointed with the oil of Clergy, and Classical Authority; and though they are
numeri fruges consumere, yet I shall take the confidence to desire them to give
me the serious Representations of their judgments in this particular; and
possibly the rest, I will debate with them more modestly.

Whether the prudent circumspection of those, was not much to be commended, who
ordered a good quantity of Buckets to be hanged up in every steeple-house
within your Province, knowing the greatest danger, was left a mischievous fire
should break ou^ from such places; and often finding that a little spark
kindles (...) great flame. Sure Cacus was a Presbyter: And some say, even
Gunpowder was invented by a Monk.

But now a little more seriously.

When this horned Ant, this little beast branded with so ma^^ names upon its
buttock, was first offered to my view; I thought in reference to an equal
contest, to have called my company together, and parcelled out to every one a
Reason or two, presented from these judicious Pastors; that after a serious
debate, we might have acquitted our selves from the danger of them, by a just
responsal; or otherwise made an honorable submission, to the equity and truth
of them.

But I found that their Censure and Judgment upon the proceedings of the Army,
is like their Pulpit Confutations of Heresies* Judge them by the lump, damn them
in gross, (as Wholesale, me^ may sell good peny-worths,) take Atheists,
Heretics, Shismaticks, Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents, and bind an huge
Millstone of Condemnation about their necks, and throw them all at once into the
midst of the Sea. When I saw, that most; or all their Bruta fulmina, were
forged upon the Anvile of their own Judgments, Censures, Decrees; and indeed,
these two-handed Divines, lay heavily about them with those Hammers: And when
they had authentickly said us Covenant-breakers, Despisers of lawful Authority,
Rebels against Magistracy and Ministry, Haters of God, Goodness, and all good
men; Patrons of Heres^^^ and Impiety. These Sorbonists had nothing more to do,
th^n open the Quire of their Commonplace Books, and shoot some keen Arrows out
of the Sacred Writ, (with some bolts of their own) and easily destroy those
Sons of Confusion, who indeed deserve to die by no worthier hands. For who
knows not, that such discourses as these, though calculated for the Meridi^^ of
the Province of London, yet may indifferently serve for any society of men,
that can make any lawful improvement of waste Paper: For when Weapons of
Scripture, and sound Reasons were laid down before all the world, and these
Masters of Defense invited to the Combat; what candor or ingenuity was there to
refuse the engagement: And issue forth to judgment, with the confidence of a
Letter, every where magnifying their Magisterial power; but no where their
Integrity or Wisdom, in examining of what they so readily condemn.

For let all men judge what account their Forlorn gives of it ^elf: I
understanding that some of their prime men, that now ^erve only to line the
Hedge, had a dispute with the General and ^ome of his Officers, and had already
crowed over their conquest; ^hey desire to sound a Trumpet to their Victories,
and though ^hey heard not in that skirmish one piece of Reason discharged:
^otwithstanding, they draw up their Assents in rank and file, with their
Brethren, take the Margent into the Text, condemn what ^hey never heard. And
all this, that they might show the people their Transgressions, and the house
of Jacob their sins.

And if for this only end we had desired a Conference, that the ^ddition of so
many lamentable voices, might have made up the Chorus of our condemnation, they
would easily have strung^the acred Harp to their own ditty, and have warned us
to have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them
rather.

The next Paragraph exercises a most Arbitrary and Tyrannical ^ower over our
proceedings (never were Muses condemned before) ^n prejudging our
Remonstrances, Declarations, Restraints of Members, as Things unjust, illegal,
unholy: For of that, the Court takes special cognizance, without the allowance
of any Plea, Reason, and Equity, might advance in their behalf; yea, the
unhappy Agreement, is judged Illegitimate, before it was born, and signed with
the sign of the Cross, before ever it came into the world, Tantane animis
coelestibus irae.


The next is a needless defense of untouched Authority a pressing all the
Friends of Power in genere, to serve under the colors of Tyranny and
Oppression. A Patronage of Personal Privilege against Public Safety, and
Advantage: The Kings, the Parliaments, the Magistrates, the Ministers Interest
so involved and conjoined, as it is not easy to judge who is Heir-apparent to
the dearest affections of these indifferent men.

I shall therefore desire, if one man be not appointed to lay out for the rest)
that a tax might be rated upon the Province of London, and the Parson of
Sepulchers made Collector for other men's Contributions, that satisfaction might
be made in point of Reason, to some few demands. Because in a great part of
what you say, You pretend greater acquaintance with Policy then Religion.

1. Whether there be any such specifial Power, so formed by the Almighty
Architect; that all Nations and People under Heaven, are everlastingly bound to
shape the frame of their Commonwealths, in exact Conformity thereto, as the
Divine Prototipe of Government, as Moses had a pattern for the Tabernacle; from
which, in the least to deviate, was a sin. Or, whether God did so won the
issuings out of Natural Wisdom and Policy, in particular Societies of men,
endevoring after some Representative of Authority, in reference to their good;
as to stamp a ray of majesty upon it: consecrating it as a positive good to
all, living under the jurisdiction of the same. And whether such a Power, for
ends of public advantage, transferred, and accepted, may not through
deficiency, or default, revolve into its root and original, and admit a new
debate, as to the Specification thereof. And whether this be not our present
condition?

2. Whether the supreme Authority in being, acting apparently destructive to
the foundations of the Nations freedom, yet entituling just power to usurped
Tyranny, may not be opposed by the major, or better part of the people? and if
a bloody war ensue, and obstinacy so far contest with resolution, that
nothing under heaven, but the sad arbitrament of the Sword can decide the
unhappy quarrel. Whether it be not consonant to Religion, reason, and sole
policy, that each party should be equally responsable to the issues of so
hotly a disputed war? Whether this be just, that any power, or person should
so incircle it self in the conjuration of privilege or prerogative, that from
thence it might issue out to the destruction of many thousands of people,
equally heirs to the divine Image, and retire again to the City of refuge, as
a sacred thing, not to be touched; But the other party, in case of
non-prevailing, consigned over even in that case, to the courtesy of perpetual
slavery.

3. Whether the Authority of those, by whose Commission we engaged against
oppressive power, being reversed, and revolved into a treacherous compliance
with the vanquished, yet irreconciled enemy, that by the fallacy of a Treaty
they might breath a new life into the carcass of subdued Tyranny, and by an
unworthy condiscention infranchise themselves into outlawed sovereignty?
whether it be not equally righteous to oppose such destructive designs, to
shrink the sinews of any hand, that would attempt the life of the Nations
Liberties? It is all to me, to be drowened at Westminster, or at the Isle of
Wight. If you tell us there can be no revolutions to a higher good for
Commonwealth, till the primum mobile of sovereignty be touched by an heavenly
influence; your good friend Mr. Peter's, a Gentleman of a little better credit,
will tell you, That a loving mother being set upon by Thieves in her chamber,
cries out for help; The elder brother attempting to unlock the door (the Key
having contracted a seven years rust) the younger breaks it open, and comes in
a timely rescue, and leaves it to your wisdoms to judge who best deserved the
birthright.

If these unhappy undertakers had gone forth in the judicial strength of
reason, and sounder Authority then the inartificiall Argument of their own,
to have encountered the minds of men unsatisfied in these particulars; their
sentence of condemnation had been more dreadful; but to come out to defy an
Army with such weak Artillery, as if they had been only sent Balaks errant;
Go and curse them in the name of their God; Sure these men made such haste to
the use, they forget the doctrine; they instruct weakly, reprove sharply, the
lightning is not seen, but the thunder is heard. Observe at what rate these men
of the East discourse.

The King broke the privilege of the Parliament, and was worthily blamed,
therefore the Parliament may destroy the Liberties of the people without
control, Sillogismus in Bocardo.

Another follows of a most sententious signification.

The Parliament, at first intended us no more good then they declared,
therefore they must now do the Nation no more good then they intended.
Profoundly,

We have taken a Covenant, sacred, inviolable, of perpetual Record, to
maintain the Kings Person; Therefore oh King, live for ever, have we sworn him
out of his natural capacity of dying.

It is the constant opinion of grave Divines, that Kings may not be murdered,
therefore Subjects may.

We have desired that all heresies might make their appearance before the
Consistory, where the ministerial Tribunal is erected, therefore we tolerate
them a sad consequence.

God has blessed us in our former undertakings, therefore he will, blast us in
this. A rare experiment.

There is no necessity of these our undertakings, because they judge it a
sin, truly if so, they have rightly judged; But if there be a necessity, it
is visible to us only, not to them; Therefore we must walk, and act according
to their Light, and not our own. Excellent Divinity; but most
supersapientially they judge our endeavors are not righteous, because they
fear our ends are not.

Truly, even as much as I fear; the order of Priesthood should suffer
martyrdom in Hartfordshire, and be burnt at a stake with. Tith sheeves.

Thus the Corporation, reason, and he that proportions not his belief to their
measure of Judgment, must not publicly vend an inch of discretion; For every
Parish Priest must be a Clarke of the Market. I have done; their threatenings
shall hurt only them they fright. And I hope by the pious industry of this
Parliament and Army, to see the Nations, freedoms so settled, in spire of their
priestly rage that it shall be their greatest honor to have their names
forgotten.

Subscribed,
From my Quarters at Worcester House.
FINIS.

