The PREACHER, OR THE Art and Method OF PREACHING: SHOWING The most ample
Directions and Rules for Invention, Method, Expression, and Books whereby a
Minister may be furnished with such helps as may make him a Useful Laborer in
the Lords Vineyard.

By WILLIAM CHAPEL Bishop of Cork, sometime Fellow of Christ's College in
Cambridge.

If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God,

1 Pet. 4.11. London, Printed for Edw. Farnham, and are to be sold at his shop
in Pope's Head Palace near Cornhill, 1656.

Courteous Reader,
THis elaborate piece of the Reverend Author William Chapel, Bishop of Cork,
coming to my hands, and considering the great advantage the Church of God might
reap by it in this Spiritual infatuated age wherein we live; the Lords Vineyard
being great, and the skilful and painful Laborers few, the consideration
whereof moved me to expose it to public view, hoping it may have that desired
effect the reverend Author intended it to, viz. for the well instructing and
fitting of young Proficients, in Divinity, to the work of the Ministry, that
they might by the blessing of the Lord, upon their endeavors, and these
directions, speak in due season, as the Oracles of God, laboring in the
heavenly calling as workmen that need not be ashamed; which that it may have
its desired effect, is the hearty desire and expectation of

Phil. Christianus.

A Catalogue of Books Printed and to be sold by Edw. Farnham at his shop
entering into Pope's Head Palace out of Cornhill.
Britains Triumph, or a History of the Wars and other affairs of Britain, from
the death of the late King to the third year of the Lord Protector. Complete
Doctress, or a Treaty of Women's Diseases, and their Cures. Argalus and
Parthenia, by Fran. Quarls. The New England Psalms. Statue Unbowelled, being a
choice Treatise of Natural Philosophy in English. Divine Blossoms, or the Young
man's Prospective. A Poem. The Works of Mr. John Milton, concerning Divorce,
digested into one Volume. The Conversion of the Indians in New England.
Analysis of the whole Book.
Of the Method of Preaching: the Definition, Chap. 1. the parts of it the
Doctrine, Preparation thereunto the ingress or entrance to the meaning of the
place of Scripture in which it is contained, Chap. 2. the placing thereof,
where what Doctrine is, Chap. 3. How it ought to be laid, Chapter 4. to 11.
inclusively.

Handling of it directly in Explication, Chap. 12. Confirmation showing (...)
(...), (...),
Chap. 13.
by Vindication from objections, Chapter 14.

the Use, which is considered in general, Chap. 15. Specifically concerning the
Mind, as Instruction, Chap. 16. Refutation, Chap. 17.
Heart in its present distemper by Reproof, Comfort.
in respect of the future good, by exhortation, Chap. 20. evil, by
dehortation, Chap. 21.







THE METHOD OF PREACHING.
CHAP. I.
THe Method of Preaching is a discourse upon a Text of Scripture, disposing its
parts according to the order of nature, whereby, the accord of them, one with
the other may be judged of, and contained in memory.

Of the Crypticks, or Occultations of this Method in General.
1. This Method may be hidden two ways: Namely in show only, or really. The
first way is, when there is really a method, and the Preacher has as it were a
clew or line by which he is guided from the beginning to the end of his speech
without any straying; yet this method is concealed from the hearers, partly by
not naming in the beginning those heads he means to insist upon; and partly by
not expressing his transitions from one head to another, and lastly disguising
both the heads and their connexions under other terms and respects.

2. The latter way is, when the method is concealed really; and this may
likewise be done two ways, (for I would not set open a gap for digressions, or
Heterogeneals) First by omitting one or two of the principal parts. Secondly,
by intermixing, or inverting the order. When and which way it must be done,
ought to be the dictate of his own wisdom.

CHAP. II. Of the ingress or entrance into the Text of Scripture which is to be
treated of.
THe sparts of the Method are of Doctrine Use.


In the Doctrine there ought to be considered the Preparation thereunto;
Handling of it.


In the Preparation the Entrance to the place where it is, Laying of the
doctrine it self.


1. Of the Entrance. If the Preacher intends to treat upon some whole Book,
Psalm, or Epistle, he must first briefly show the chief scope of the whole, and
the parts (wherein is the chief use of the distribution of the whole into
parts) in their greatest extent. Then the parts of the first part, if it have
any, and so proceed to the rest.

2. Likewise if he undertake the greatest part of some whole treaty: first let
him show the scope, then set down the parts, and show how that part which he is
to handle, has its coherence with the rest, and tends to that scope: and let
him consisider that part, first in it self, secondly in its relation to the
whole.

3. Lastly, if he takes any particular Text for a subject of a Sermon or two;
if it be in the Context (as many in the Proverbs, etc. are not) let him first
show the connection of it, or the relation to the principal part to which it
belongs: Or if it begins a treaty, let him show first whereto that, whereof
this is a member tends, and how this conduces thereunto. And let that
particular Text be considered first in it self, next in the relation (if any)
to that which precedes. See an example hereof, Chap 4. Sect. 6. and Chapter 6.
Sect. 17. and elsewhere.

CHAP. III. Of the raising of Doctrine.
1. WHat Doctrine is I call Doctrine a divine axiom comprehended in the text.
Of which definition (because it seems to mean some novelty) I must give some
reason for each particular part.

I. Axiome] for I lay this as a ground and foundation, That there is nothing
true or false, unless it be an Axiom. And therefore whatsoever is revealed to
us of Divine Truth (for there can be no falsehood in the Word of God) is
contained in the Axioms of holy Scripture.

II. Divine] For there are many axioms in Scripture, which are not divine, but
enunciated by men, not spoken by the holy Ghost, yea some by the father of Lies
himself, yet this makes a divine axiom, that such have said such things, Mat.
4.6. Says unto him. Cast thy self down, he adds a motive, If thou be the Son
of God; he alleges divine testimony for his indemnity; For it is written,
etc. Which Scripture rightly cited, all the devils of hell cannot make invalid.
Which shall be better treated of in its proper place, for here we will only
observe Satan's fraud in the allegation and application.

There are also in Scripture certain feigned Propositions, which (by the
special privilege of Comparates) do argue real Redditions, and being disposed
with their Redditions, do make divine axioms (as also the parts of them,
which belong to the scope, applied to the parts of the Redditions) and yet the
feigned Propositions, or their parts, considered of themselves without their
Redditions, do not make divine Axioms. As for example, the Parables of the
Sower, and the Tares, etc. in the explaining of which our Savior applies the
feigned Topic to the real. See Chap. 6. Sect. 16.

III. Comprehended in the Text] Not only deduced from it by a consequence. For
axioms that are found in Scriptures may be called Prime truths, and as it were
Principles, in respect of those which are vertually contained in them, and may
be deduced from them by a good consequence: And these principles are they which
I would only have held for Doctrines, yet these are not to be had totidem
verbis, or word by word formally in the text, and therefore peradventure not
obvious to every one, or conspicuous at the first sight, but sometimes are to
be drawn out and reduced into form, the Explication being premised, or a
Collation with other Scriptures, presupposing the common manner of speaking, or
the Wisdom of God who speaks. These I say I would have only to be held for
Doctrines, for by this means, first hearers may grow accustomed to the Text of
holy Scripture, when they are as it were led by the hand through all its
axioms, or express truths, whereas otherwise they may go from the Sermon
almost as ignorant in the Text as they came. Secondly, by this means the hearer
will have the Doctrine as it were before his eyes; so that coming home, having
opened the book, he may say, I have this day heard this part of holy Writ
expounded and applied. Whereas the Doctrine being deduced by consequence
(oftentimes obscurely, sometimes weakly; and sometimes falsely) is soon
forgotten, or deserves to be so, and by this means the foundation of the whole
Sermon falls. Thirdly, by this means the Preacher does necessarily tie himself
to the words of the Text, or at least will not err in the foundation of his
discourse; whereas contrariwise, this curb being taken away, there is is a
great way given to straying, making any thing of what you will, and applying
some few general collections to any text, (sometimes to the connection, before
the Text it self be understood) and so without touching, but merely neglecting
the Text, to the filling of the ears and minds of the hearers with impertinent
(and peradventure dangerous) opinions in stead of Doctrines. Fourthly, by this
means the Reflection of the Use in the immediate virtue of the Principle will be
much more efficacious to convince and subject the hearers minds, and may be
with more confidence and authority urged by the Preacher. And contrariwise when
a Use is inferred out of another Use by long and uncertain consequences, the
further every one is remote from its principle, so much the less thereof it
has in it, and acts so much the less by its virtue. And so easily gives
opportunity of evasion to the hearers, and of saying (as they commonly do,
especially in Reproofs) he strayed far from his Text. Neither can the Preacher
himself with any true confidence urge that which in the present words of his
mandates (namely of the holy Scriptures) has little or no confirmation.

2. Although I should here hardly admit of any Crypsis, yet I believe those
general sayings of holy Scripture (propounded by God unto all, and whereof that
of our Savior may be taken, What I say unto you, I say unto all) which were
written or spoken to some who were then living, so they receive no
specification from them, may also be proposed to our auditors, as directed to
them.

CHAP. IV. How a Doctrine ought to be laid.
SEeing the Axioms of holy Scripture are not framed according to that notion
which God has of himself and others, but of that which he in his will has
conceived to be as a rule to us, that being attemperated to our mind, let it be
enunciated to its Logical directrix. And an Axiom being a disposal of an
argument with an argument, and a Syllogism of two in question with the third,
and as the arguments are affected one with the other, so they actually exhibit
their force in both places, it will be of much concernment here, to know well
and weigh the affections of the Argument.

2. A Text considered in it self is either Axiomatical or, Syllogistical.


If axiomatical, there may be a Topical Analysis premised, showing first the
Thema, or Aliquid, then the Arguments by which it is illustrated, and that in
terms fitted to the Auditors capacity.

3. The Axiom (be it either simple or compounded) is either one alone; or
contains more in it. If one alone, it may without any more ado be presently
treated of. But if it contain more in it, they must particularly be (as one may
say) singled out and placed: this in the first, this in the second, this in the
third place, and so forward according to the order of their nature.

4. This order ought not to be looked upon by the series of the words, (to
which it is oftentimes contrary) but by the natures of the things themselves;
in the estimating of which also one ought to be very cautulous. That Axiom
that every cause by nature is before its effect, though it be true, may here
give an occasion of error, because, as that which is cause, is, before it is a
cause; so that whereof it is a cause, may be considered in an abstract notion,
before it is considered in relation to that cause in a special and distinct
notion: Yea, peradventure the effect may be conceived under the notion of the
subject, and the cause as an adjunct employed about it. As for example, By him
all things are made, 1. All things were made. 2. By him. Yea though (...) be
before the (...), the subject before the adjunct; yet if the adjunct in its
concretion does contain arguments, which of themselves make a complete sense,
and take their specification from the subject, it ought in order first to be
treated of; as for example, To us a child is born: 1. A child is born. 2. To us.

5. But if we consider the axioms in themselves, it will not be difficult to
find the order. Seeing that is first, which is most simple, and most general;
not depending on the rest, but the rest on it. Likewise that in the second
place which immediately depends on the first, and the rest on it, etc. And if
there be any collateral ones, it is all one to the method which is treated of
first; yet it will be the more commodious way to follow the series of the
words, and take that first in hand, which first offers it self to the Readers
view.

6. There may be some absolute thing in the parts of each axiom, that may
contain a Doctrine. That which is absolute in the parts, is to be handled
before the parts be jointly treated of. The absolute is to be considered
according to the rule of its genus. Act. 27.23. For there stood by me this
night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve. 1. The Apostle professes
himself to be Gods. 2. That he serves God. 3. That he is Gods, and serves him.
4. That the Angel of God, whose to be, and whom to serve be professes, stood
by him that night: the three first I call absolutes in the antecedent. So in
the consequent, Matthew. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins. 1. His
people have their sins. 2. He will save his people, etc. The relative condition
in for. Because he shall do this, you shall call his name Jesus.

7. If by the influx of latter arts (namely Grammar, Rhetoric, etc.) into the
Text, Logic cannot be immediately examined: then the words are first to be
stripped of those arts by some general explication, and the sense to be made
plain, and so the way made ready for the Logical Analysis and assignation of
the axioms that they may appear to be therein.

8. If the simple ones come under the species of the comparates (as Eccles.
5.1. Ephesians. 5 11.) or the comparates under the species of the simple, (as Prove.
8.10. Matthew. 9.13.) or of another kind of comparates, then that which the note
sets forth, (as Heb. 12.24.) it is the Logicks part to propound the Axiom,
pronuncing how the thing is. See an example, Chap. 7. Sect. 4. and 9.

9. If in the foresaid arts there be any thing involved concerning any part of
the axiom; it may be joined with that part which it concerns, to make good the
axiom. See an example, Sect. 16. If to the whole, (as in the figures of
sentences) that very same which is added, will make an axiom to be proposed
and treated of after that to which it is annexed, Proverbs 15.23. A word spoken
in due season, how good is it? 1. It is good. 2. Even to the admiration of
Selomon.

10. But if thereby there chance to be any essential thing wanting, that ought
to be supplied out of the use of the phrase and scope of that and the like
places, the consonancy of faith agreeing thereunto, Luke 13.9. And if it bear
fruit, namely, thou shall let it stand; or some such thing.

11. If the explication of some notion, in an axiom already laid, do not
necessarily multiply axioms, and they are to be treated of: that notion is
first to be unfolded, the axioms to be drawn out, and their treaty to be
instituted according to the prescribed method. As for example, 2 Timothy 3.16.
Scripture is profitable, (...), for rectifying. The heart of man may be
irregular, or straying from the right and its rule two ways. Namely, by being
exalted above the rule, or by being dejected beneath it, and therefore in
either way it may want rectifying, in the first by Reprehension or Reproof, in
the latter by Consolation or Comfort. 1. Scripture is good for Reproof. 2. For
Comfort.

12. If in the resolution of one axiom into many, the construction of the
words shall seem to be some obstacle thereunto, it may be lawful to alter it,
so the same sense remain. As for example. This, God created the heavens: In
this, The heavens were created by God.

13. Proverbiall speeches or sayings being oftentimes uttered (...),
antithetically; sometimes, that they may comprehend many things in a few, it is
enough if they express something in the one part thereof, and leave the rest
to be understood in the other by virtue of the antithesis: which when it is so
done, those things which are deficient in the one part, may be supplied out of
the other, that so the whole and complete sense of the whole sentence may be
gathered. But because those things which are so supplied, are not so manifestly
contained in the Text, as those which are expressed, therefore they may either
be brought in as Uses, or if as Doctrines, then must it clearly be shown, how
they proceed from the Text, and they must not be long insisted upon. There are
many frequent examples hereof in Solomon's Proverbs; and many not unlike
thereunto are to be found in diverse parts of Scripture, as Psalm. 1. v. last,
The Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall
perish. 1. The Lord knows (that is to say, approves) the way of the
righteous. 2. (By the opposite member) it shall be preserved or prospered. 3.
God dislikes the way of the ungodly (by first member). 4. It shall perish.

14. In which places (either of the Proverbs or any other part of Scripture)
something in the one member, necessarily includes somewhat which is in the
other, which may both be included and joined into one axiom, and that is to be
treated of before either part of the axiom in which they are to be found. See
an example, Chap. 7. Sect. 4. and Chapter 10. Sect. 2.

15. Those which being indefinitely set down, intend not a general truth, but
(...), as it were for the most part, are likewise to be proposed and explained.

16. Behold set before some of the Lords words, does argue that sentence to
deserve a special attention. And from hence may be raised a doctrine of the
latter consideration, according to the rule, Sect. 9. An example hereof is, 1
Pet. 2.6. (the full treating whereof must be had from the rules of Comparates)
where according to the rule of the said 9. Sect. (the Apostle expressing in the
fourth verse what is wanting) 1. ax. Christ is the stone in the head of the
corner. 2. Elect and precious. 3. God laid it, etc. in Sion. 4. He that
believes, etc. 5. All these things deserve a most special attention. Of the
same nature seems to be that of the Apostle, ((...)) but always in matters of
great moment.

17. The word (...) added to a sentence strongly denies, and does moreover
add the negation, being spoken by God, an abomination of the thing denied; if
spoken by man together with it, sometimes a deprecatiion. The same thing almost
is signified by the Greek ((...), let it not be so) see Chapter 8. Sect. 17.

18. You ought to apply your mind chiefly to that axiom, in which the efficacy
or scope of the Text is placed: Those which are accessory, may for the present
be more slightly handled. For at another time there may fall a more apt place
where they may be found as principals and chief.

19. That which I said before concerning the order of axioms, though it may
seem strange to some, yet none will ask me a reason of it, have he but any
touch, and be never so little versed in the Dialecticks, whose judgment and
memory (I say nothing of the hearers) will desire an order; and who by this
means will have, not only the first part of his discourse complete in it self,
and distinct from the rest; but will also in it, secure his way to those things
which follow, in the fore requisite and generals of them. I will rather advise
you to reserve to each axiom, that which is Homogeneal to it, that the treaty
may agree with the order of the axioms.

20. What shall we then say of that Topical (as I may call it) way of
Preaching, and that oftentimes according to the series of the words, where each
arguments, or Topical places, are proposed as Doctrines, or foundations of the
discourse, especially when each one carries some kind of emphasis with it?

Though I am not so perverse or nice, but that I can easily like of any way or
manner of handling the Divine Word, so it be profitable: yet because my intent
is to enquire into the Method, I shall take leave to say somewhat of so usual a
one.

And this in the first place. If such Preachers did only do that which they
seem to propose, the whole Sermon, how long soever it were, would be but a mere
explication; for those naked and simple terms are not capable of any farther
act, as being not apt to contain (as we said before) any thing of truth or
falsehood. But such a discourse can neither be a foundation in the Text, nor
any way fruitful to the Auditors. For because the Argument, considered in it
self, is only affected to argue, and that there is no act of judgment but
where the argument is disposed with an argument, it is impossible to bring any
proof, or infer any use, of a bare argument.

Secondly, that emphaticall word (if it be so, and not a fallacy (...)) has
the rest of the Text, or some part thereof joined with it, for a foundation of
that part of the discourse; often times that which is by nature first and which
if it should be first treated of, would give a light to it: and always that
without which neither the sense nor sentence is completed. Whence it comes,
that it is neither so efficacious, nor convictive (that namely being not
treated of, which is required for its foundation) nor so perspicuous and
scientifical, that being as yet concealed, which is by nature first, and should
carry a light before it. But as much as necessity forces us to take on both
sides, that this may subsist and beclear, so much tautology and confusion is
brought forth, when the same thing is in the same manner repeated, and made
both prior and posterior to it self. This seems harder when in an axiom
consisting of an adjunct occupated, and a subject (as there be many in
Scripture) the adjunct, which sometime is impiously applicable to other
subjects, is first treated of: though it do receive its specification from the
subject.

21. The remedy of this evil is, to select, and constitute in the first place
that axiom (whether it consist of two, or more arguments) which by nature is
first, and contains in it self the complete, and independent sense: and then
join unto it that argument which may make that axiom that by order of nature
is next, etc. neither need the emphasis to be feared, which may very well be
cared for in treating of the axiom; namely, in such fort that every several
emphasis, may have its due explication and proof, and the uses be so inferred
and disposed, as they shall principally proceed from this or that emphasis.
Which may then timely be done, when the whole foundation is clearly explicated
and proved: For then they may be urged in vigor of the whole, without any
Tautology or confusion.

Crypsis.
22. Before any Doctrine be constituted, there may be premised the Explication
of the whole Text, and (if need require) a vindication from false Expositions:
as, if it be some principal Text, which the adversaries of truth do abuse to
confirm their opinions.

23. Two or three axioms may be joined into one, when either the sterility of
the axioms, or almost the same sense expressed in various words, or the
Preachers festination (either toward his ending or hastening to some principal
point) or some other such like cause require it.

24. One axiom (...), or virtually contained in the Text, may be inferred out
of another, as a Use out of a Doctrine, as 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care
upon him, for he cares for you. 1. Axjome, God cares for you. 2. Use of
Exhortation, Cast all your care upon him. 3. The Relative axiom, ( viz.
Because he cares, therefore east) may be made a motive in that exhortation.
Likewise an axiom in the Text may be converted into a Use of the precedent
axiom, as Psalm. 42.2. Axiom. God is a living God. Exhortation. Let our soul
(with David's) thirst for the living God.

25. If several axioms be joined together, it shall be free either to
consider them summarily, or with a distinct respect to each severally. And the
use of those things which are less essential to the principal scope, may be
compendiously handled. But those which are more chiefly intended must be more
fully followed.

26. In those verses which have [ Thus says the Lord] or the Lord has sworn,
etc. the axioms which are contained in the thing attested may be proposed, and
the witness assevering them, be brought as (...): and he to be so explained,
as there may a force of proof appear thence, as from the name (...) The Lord
says, etc.

27. Those things which have the word behold, sometimes may be propounded as an
axiom, that (...) Ecce, or Behold, should add to the precedent to which it
belongs, and be as it were a bond connexing the uses to the Doctrine, Behold
this for Instruction, for Reproof, etc.

28. If any one (as it is the ordinary custom of Churches beyond the Sea) does
take upon him a long text, he may be Analysis distribute it into parts, and
illustrate them, either severally or jointly, by some explication or
paraphrase, then choose the chief axiom of each part, or reduce the sum of
several of them into one, and according to the first member of the second
general Crypseos accommodate the treating of then to the time, etc.

29. If in framing axioms out of some long sentence, the order of nature
should overmuch disturb the order of words, some slight, distribution may be
premised, whereby that inconvenience may be obviated: and having run over each
part, the sull sense of the whole period may be expressed.

CHAP. V. Of Axioms in Specie.
Afingle Axiom, though it have a large extent in respect of the Arguments
which may be disposed in it, yet (if but the Crypsis, and oblique predications
be declared by an apt explication) it is easy to be judged of, as for the
constitution of the Doctrine, by reason of the direct union of the parts:
whether it be only one axiom, or do contain several ones in it: unless it be
when there is some composition either in the antecedent, or in the consequent.

2. If the antecedent be of copulate parts (so that the consequent be
enunciated only, one of all united together, not of the single ones severally,
for otherwise it is an axiom of a copulate judgment) and that they require a
several tractation, they may be proposed severally in so many axioms, (with a
respect to the consequent, ( viz. in good, as requisite thereunto; in evil, as
tending to it) and afterward the consequent of all taken together may be laid
open. As for example, Blessed are they which hear the Word of God and keep it.
1. For a blessing, it is required that we hear the Word of God. 2. That we keep
it. 3. Those who do both these things are blessed. See the like in a large
composition. Sect. 5.

3. Likewise if there be a copulation in the consequent (so that the copulated
parts may be spoken of the antecedent, not severally, but taken together) the
judgment is the same of it, as was of the other. See an example, Chap. 6.
Sect. 3. out of Mat. 17.

4. Propositions which they call Modal, (if we meet with them in Scripture, in
the same sense as Logicians take them) may be referred to a single axiom. And
in these the modus does constitute the consequent, the substance of the axiom
being contracted into the antecedent. These modi are nothing, but the
affections of the axiom ingenere (which as true, is either contingent, or
necessary; as false, either possible, or impossible) and are to be understood
by the affection, and manner of disposition of the arguments.

5. Although where word the Est is merely Syncategorematical, and both parts,
or the one in respect of the other, implies a negation to the real esse (as i^
feigned, some privative, and contradicing things) there neither part with Est
categorematically taken, will make a divine axiom; and though when by reason
of the nature of the parts, and affection of the one with the other, an axiom
may be constituted; it seems to be there contained rather by deduction, then
expressly. Yet if the thing will so bear it, and the unsolding and treating of
that axiom by way of use be not sufficient, but the respect which that notion
has to some other part in the Text, or some other just cause require, that it
may some way be treated of severally; It may be sometimes proposed, (yet but
seldom) and followed as far as need shall require, either in the whole part, or
in a particle of the part. Psalm. 1. The consequent Blessed is spoken of the
antecedent, which consists of several parts, in either of which parts there is
a copulation, in the first a trebble climax. That axiom may (unless
peradventure the word pius may be suppleted for an Antecedent out of the
Antithesis of the 4. verse) be handled according to the rule laid down in the
second section of this chapter; First, the former part of the Antecedent, then
the latter, and lastly the consequent is to be applied to them, as conjunct.
Every part of the former, and first that which is absolute, and afterward with
the consequent. As for example, The wicked have their counsel: It is required,
for to be blessed, not to walk in their council. The sinners have their way; It
is required for to be blessed, to not stand in their way. The scornful have their
seat: It is required for to be blessed, to not sit in their seat. Then the
Copulation: It is required, if we will be blessed, that we neither walk in the
counsel of the wicked, nor stand, etc. nor sit, etc. Out of this axiom the
climax or gradation may be observed by way of use. And if this way of treaty be
not sufficient, we may proceed further in this manner, There are wicked, there
are sinners, there are scorners. There are both those, and these. And so in the
other two; but abstractly, that solid axioms may not be anteverted.

CHAP. VI. Of a Composite Axiom.
ALthough in a Composite Axiom the unitive force of the parts for the most
part explicate it self in a Grammatical conjunction: yet notwithstanding,
seeing Grammatical conjunctions are taken loosely, and in a various sense, as
well in the Original languages in which Scripture was written, as in those into
which they were translated, we must not stick too much to these symboles or
portions, but we must first look upon the affections of arguments which are
there disposed, and the rule of judging every axiom.

2. If the parts of the Composite do contain somewhat in them which is
absolute, (whereof see Chap. 4. Sect. 6) and they require a distinct treaty
(which a Connex precisely taken, and a Disjunct do not admit) that which is
absolute in the consequent, may sometimes be reserved until we come at it, as
Joh. 8.18. The antecedent. I am one that bear witness of my self. The absolute
in the consequent. The Father sent me. The consequent. The Father that sent me,
bears witness of me. The Conjuncts. Both I and the Father, etc. See chapter 7.
Sect. 1.

3. Exclusive axioms (which we meet with oftentimes in Scripture differ little
or nothing one from the other) although they have the face of single ones, yet
because they do always indeed imply a composition, if they be sully to be
treated of, they must be referred to a composite axiom. But they resolve
themselves into two axioms, whereof one ought to be enunciated affirmatively,
the other negatively. And as the affirmation is before the negation, so that
which is enunciated affirmatively, requires the first place in the treating.
The Exclusive in the antecedent. 2 Timothy 4.11. Alone (or only) Luke is with me,
as if he said; And Luke is with me; and other of the Disciples are not with me.
In the consequent. Matthew. 4.10. Him only shall thou serve, that is to say, and
Him shall thou worship, and another thou shall not. In the same sense might be
said, Thou shall serve none but him. The Exceptive in the antecedent. Act. 8.1.
They were all feattered abroad, etc. Except the Apostles, the rest were
dispersed. The Apostles were not dispersed. In the Consequent. Matthew. 17.21.
This kind goes not out but by prayor and fasting. 1. It goes out by prayer
and fasting. 2. Other ways, It does not go out. The first axiom is to be
treated of according to the rule, Chap. 5. Sect. 3. Prayer is required to have
this go out. 2. Fasting is required. 3. Byboth it goes out. Sometimes for
greater evidences sake the affirmative, and the negative are both expressed: As
in the Exceptive, Deuteronomy. 4.35. The Lord he is God, and there is none else but
him. The same is signified in the Exclusives, by gemination of the subject
(...), etc. (which the Septuagint do often render by (...), only, as 2 Samuel
17.2. 1 King. 8.39, etc.) Sometimes the Exclusive is set together with the
Exceptive, as 2 King. 17,18, etc. so Luke 5.21, etc. In the affirmate
exclusive, the note adds the negate; in the negate, by a double negation the
affirmate. In the exceptive affirmate, the note lays the negate; in the negate
the affirmate.

4. Comparates although they be many times disposed in a single axiom, yet
because they can scarce be treated of sufficiently, unless they may be more
fully distinguished by parts, and so be referred (whereunto full comparations
belong) to the composite axiom, of these we must give some premonition in this
place.

5. Where every comparation is said to be either in the quantity quality.
You must note that these terms are taken at large, and Logically.

6. When the quantity or quality is said to be a conjunction, or to contain the
unitive force of the parts; it is understood notwithstanding to superadde also
its peculiar force of declaring the nature of the comparation.

7. The Note of Comparation which is added to Reddition is chief, as (...)
Aliquid is chief in the Axiom, and for whose sake the argument is added.

8 Also the Grammatical notes of Comparates sometimes do not distinguish one
species or kind from the other. See an example, Chapter 7. Sect. 9. Sometimes they
are not set by it, Chap. 7. Sect. 4. and 7.

9. The Comparative degree does not always argue a positive in either, but a
lesser participation of the opposite, as Ezekiel. 16 52. Lam. 4.9. See an example,
Chap. 7. Sect. 4.

10. In the treaty of Comparates (whither the quantity, or quality be expressed
in the Text, or no) it will be useful sometimes, to premise or add to those
respects wherein they do agree (as in Equals, and Semblables) those wherein
they do not agree. And premise or add those in which they do not agree (as
Unequals, and Dissemblables) to those in which they do agree. Especially in
semblables this is to be observed, that they be not extended beyond their
scope: which is done oftentimes, and dangerously. So both the comparation shall
be illustrated, and the detortion or wresting to an evil sense shall be
avoided.

11. If the comparation be limited, as concerning the respect in which it is
instituted or set, either by the Text, or by the Context (though peradventure
in other places other respects be manifested) let that only be treated of, and
the rest reserved for their proper places, seeing it is sufficient to satisfy
the intention of the present Text.

12. If it be unlimited, and diverse respects and profits of the Homogeneal may
be brought, (because Scripture is to be taken in latitude, if it be not
restrained neither by the Context, nor the Analogy of faith or truth) they may
well be brought.

13. The respect in an illimited comparison (whether it be one, or manifold) it
must be forced with an Explication out of the habitude of an argument to the
(...) Aliquid: and so the Doctrine be constituted, one out of one, more out of
more. Where the respect, as being founded upon an Argument (which is more known
and plain to the hearers) is to be known and plain, as applied to the (...)
Aliquid certain, and of a firm truth, for from hence depend the use and
efficacy of the Doctrine. Genesis 15.1. I am thy shield. Axiom. As a shield
protects a man who makes a right use of it, so God does faithful Abraham. Here
protection is the respect; known by the use of the shield, certain by the
authority of the divine promise, Genesis 12.2,3. For the further Explication of
the axiom, the respects, wherein the comparates differ, may be shown. The
shield is the instrumental cause of the protection; God, at least, the
principal. A shield defends from an enemy which assaults one before; God is a
shield (...) round about his people, Psalm. 125.2. A shield is not always es at
hand: But God round about his people (...) from henceforth even for ever, ibid.
A shield is a defense against a corporal enemy only, not against a spiritual.
God against all.

14. But there is no place of invention, which lies more subject to wresting,
to infer extreme bad senses, then this of Comparates, and especially of
semblables: none does more easily draw the petty people (and I pray God not
many of their leaders also) into the pit, none uses to be more frequently used
either to oppress truth, or establish errors. Therefore here ought to be a
great deal of caution, especially in assigning respects of an illimited
comparation. I could wish this one law might be observed, as that of the Medes
and Persians, that at least the Reddition (in which (...) Aliquid is contained)
should be proved solidly, out of manifest places of holy Scripture. There is
need of the same caution in those places is set down consusedly, and the
Proposition is explicated in several parts: as in many Evangelical Parables:
and also where no reddition is set down. That Proposition, Exodus 12.46. did
seem to want a Reddition, until the event, and the Apostle should declare it,
Joh. 19.36. So that of Hos. 11.1. If Divines would carefully use this caution
also to comparisons which they bring in matters of great moment toward faith,
or manners, we should have more celestial food, and less strife.

15. Comparates in quantity do argue more pressingly and distinctly then those
which are in quality.

16. Feigned Comparates if they be disposed in a Composite which requires the
truth of parts, do not fall under this rule of judgment; see Chapter 3. Sect. 1.
Yet some distinction may be used in feigned ones. For some are merely feigned;
some are taken out of the common use; which though they do not touch any
singular history, neither are they determined to here and now, yet they contain
an indefinite truth in them, and therefore if need be, there may be axioms
made of them, to be proposed with restriction, and briefly run over. Luke 18.
There is sometimes a Judge in a City, which neither fears God, nor regards
man. Sometimes a widow is wronged by her adversary. Being wronged she uses to
complain to, and be importunate with the judge. The unjust judge will sometimes
do justice to the widow, to avoid the trouble o of importunity.

17. If a comparation be met with obiter, or by the way, and not principally in
some sentence; it may be more slightly treated, and subordinately to principal
axioms, as Romans 13.^. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, etc. In this Text
the (...) Aliquid is subjection (whose subject with generality and object of
the person, you must supply out of the first verse of the same chapter) is
disposed with an adjoined necessity, which is argued from two causes comparate
between themselves in an unequal quantity ( not only, but also) axioms to be
treated in the Text. 1. Every soul ought necessarily to be subject to a
supereminent power. 2. For wrath it is necessary to be subject. 3. For
conscience, etc. 4. More for conscience then for wrath. (5. Out of the relative
consideration in the illative or inferring note Wherefore, which joins these
words with the precedent) for a super eminent power, is a revenger of wrath,
and a minister of God, and that for the good of all, therefore to be subject,
etc. is necessary.

CHAP. VII. Of a Copulate Axiom.
SEeing a Copulate Axiom consists as it were of collateral parts, so that one
does not depend of the other, the truth of each one in it self is required, and
by the copulation of them it is so, that if one be false, the whole axiom is
judged to be false. Hence it comes that the parts may be severally proposed as
Doctrines; then as united. See an example of an affirmed copulate, of affirmed
parts, Chapter 6. Sect. 2. Of denied. Mat. 23.13. Ye go not in. 2. You suffer not,
etc. 3. Ye neither go in, nor suffer; of one affirmed, and another denied.
Prove. 10.22. 1. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich. 2. He adds no sorrow
with it. 3. It does both make rich, and does not add, etc.

2. Most comparates ought to be referred to this axiom, so they be taken
declaratively, where the sentence is not suspended, or an illation or inference
of one comparate is intended out of the other. To the comparates in quantity
do also belong the relations of the place, and time, by the same law. An
example of like, or equals, a Cor. 11.22. Are they Hebrews? so am I, etc. And I
no less then they, or as well as they.

3. When out of the Text, and Context appears to be intended a comparation of
peers or equals, though it be expressed under the species of a connex of
impossible parts, yet it will be of a copulate judgment, and the
contradictories of the false parts will constitute the parts of the
comparation, Jer. 31.36,37. God does before, and after these verses, express
the firmness of his Covenant with Abraham's posterity; and does suspend the
contrary by the impossible supposition in these two verses. The Axioms
therefore, verse. 36. are, These Ordinances shall not depart from before me; The
seed of Israel shall not cease, etc. No more this, then that, so verse. 37. The
Antecedent. The heavent cannot be measured above, or the earth searched out
beneath; (namely by men.) In the Consequent. 1. The Absolute They have done
many evils. 2. I will not cast off all the seed of Iscael. 3. Not for all these
things which they have done, (or because a discretion or a division is to be
understood) though they have done many evils, yet will I not cast off all, etc.
Lastly, out of the united parts. No more the one, then the other. Those which
are unequal do likewise belong hereunto, Prove. 17.12. Let a Bear robbed of her
whelps meet a man, etc. 1. It is evil to have a Bear robbed of her whelps to
meet a man. 2. It is evil to have a fool in his folly to meet a man. 3. This
is a greater evil then the other. In the third axiom is to be explained the
excess of evil in this, more then in the other, 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been
better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they
have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment, etc. 1. Gods Commandment is
holy. 2. An holy Commandment is the way of righteousness. 3. To have an holy
Commandment delivered unto him; is to know the way of righteousness. These
three axioms do not belong to the expressing of the comparation: Of the
first, see the rule, Chapter 4. Sect. 6. and of the two latter, Chap. 4. Sect. 14.
But the parts of the comparation are, 1. Not to have known the way of
righteousness, or the holy commandment had been evil for them. 2. To turn
from the known way, or from the commandment given, is evil. 3. The latter is a
lesser evil then the former.

5. Semblables. Where a quantity is intended, but it has not seemed good to
argue it distinctly; sometimes we pass over into a similitude, and the quality
of the quantity is expressed, as Genesis 15.5. The innumerability. And he brought
him forth, and said, Look now toward heaven, etc. Where the Protasis, the
stars are not to be numbered, is proved by the condescent to the manner of
humane witness through experience. Look upon, and number if thou can, that
is to say, when thou have tried thou can not. Apodosis. Thy seed shall be
innumerable. The note of comparation superadding the similitude to the
copulation, So shall, etc. is proved by Divine testimony, The Lord says.
Axioms. 1. Thou can not number the stars. 2. I call to witness thine own
experience. 3. Thy Seed shall not possibly be numbered. 4. As not the stars, so
neither thy seed. (The respect in the quality, So: that is to say, 1. By reason
of the number. 2. Conspicuously. 3. To men that have skill and experience in
numbering it shall be innumerable as the stars are to now thee) 5. The Lord
says it shall be so. 6. God brought forth Abraham. 7. He said, etc. 8. After
he had promised him an heir out of his own bowels, he brought him forth and
said, etc.

6. Mat. 13.45,46. The Kingdom of heaven is like, etc. These words contain a
Reddition, but set down confusedly: the subsequent a Proposition distinctly
explicated, in a Merchant, together with his object and actions. And though the
reddition be joined with one only argument of the Proposition (where it is said
like unto a Merchant) yet it is to be understood, to be referred to the whole
proposition, and vertually to involve the analogal parts, to its parts. So
verse. 24. The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in
his ground. Where by our Saviors own interpretation, He himself is the sower,
and to the rest of the parts are applied those things which are in the Kingdom
(though not all of the Kingdom). Only to the zealous servants he applies
nothing. as if he would not have such Ministers named under the Gospel as study
or endeavor the killing of Heresy. Castellio does rightly warn us upon Matthew.
11.16. The whole matter, not one word only is compared as in other parables.
Out of this Protasis if need were there might axioms be framed. Namely, That
Merchants do attentively seek after things of this world; that their industry
sometimes proves good to them, finding things of great value. For the most part
they are cunning enough, selling all they have for a greater gain, buying that
which will bring them the greatest commodiousnesse, etc. Of these things, see
Chap. 6. Sect. 16. Proper axioms of the Text. As the Merchant which seeks for
pearls, so (...), those who are ordained in the Gospel, do seek for solid good
things. As a Merchant which finds a Pearl of great value, so these by seeking
do find life everlasting. As he sels all that he has to buy that Pearl: so
they deny themselves to obtain this. As he buys that, so they by observing the
conditions of the Evangelical Covenant, to which the promise is annexed ( God
for Christ's sake having compassion) obtain this.

7. Dissemblables also without a note (as there are many in Solomon's Proverbs,
and elsewhere) do seem to belong hereunto. Translators sometimes in these do
render an Hebrew [(...)] by a copulative; ostentimes by [ sed, but] as it were
to show the dissimilitude. But they are well copulated so far as either
Dissemblable is enunciated with its quality; for herein they agree, that either
has its quality disposed with it, Prove. 14.29. He that is slow to wrath, is of
great understanding, but he that is hasty of spirit exalts folly. Where
according to the rule, Chapter 4. Sect. 13. something may be added, out of either
part, unto the other: and so the parts are fully unfolded, He that is slow to
wrath is of great understanding, and exalts it: He that is hasty of spirit is
great in folly, and exalts it. These being treated of, let the Collation of
Dissemblables succeed. To the unfolding of which, may be proposed, in what they
do agree, according to the rule, Chap. 6. Sect. 10. Each one is great in his
quality. Each one has something which he exalts. But the quality is very
diverse, to which also those things add a weight in which they both agree.

8. In an affirmed copulate, and which contains a discretion, or separation of
[ non, and sed] namely [of not and but] there seems to be a full enunciation,
Psalm. 1. And the godly man shall prosper like a tree; And the ungodly man not
so, but is unhappy as the chafe, etc. Where either Dissemblable, is argued
from the Semblable, for the greater illustration of the dissimilitude. See
examples of Dissemblables sully disposed, Joh. 3.36. and 4.13,14. where in the
first part there is a Protasis, in the second an Antapodosis in the Negation of
the like, or Semblable quality. Various position of the quality.


9. Heb. 12.24. [ Better] though it be spoken very largely according to the
manifold reason of the good, yet it seems it cannot be here expounded of
unequal, but dissemblable, [ -- the blood of sprinkling speaks better things
then that of Abel] Better things, that is to say, other or otherwise; Namely,
the blood of sprinkling speaks better things. The blood of Abel not good
things, see Chap. 4. Sect. 8. It may be supplied by the Protasis (for it is an
illimited comparation) out of the History, Genesis 4.

The blood of Abel did speak toward God revenge. to Cain horror


Out of the Antapodosis out of the Apostle the blood of Christ speaks toward
God propitiation. to the hearts of beletvers which are besprinkled with it,
peace.


For the further explication, the respects may be brought, in which they agree
(according to the rule, Chap. 6. Sect. 10.) 1. The Flood of either was unjustly
spilt. 2. The blood of either speaks. The separate treating of the parts, may
be here omitted, as not being expressed in the Text. And where they are
expressed, they may be fully treated: but here sufficiently in the collation or
comparation. The Axioms in the collation. 1. And the blood of Abel of it self
speaks vengeance toward God; and far otherwise the blood of Christ, speaks
propitiation made toward God for all. 2. The blood of Abel speaks horror to
Cain. But that of Christ peace to all those who by faith have their hearts
besprinkled therewith.

Of the Negate Copulate.
10. Those Comparates whose note is the negation of the opposite species or
kind might seem to be disposed in the Negate Copulate. And the note indeed does
show that there are such arguments; yet they are not ^ully and distinctly
enunciated in that axiom. For the Negation that notes best, does terminate it
self in the indication of the gender, and rejection of the opposite species:
whence follows that the other is disposed there, but in a confused
conception. Neither is the note always certain: as a negation of the greater
does not infer a known parity or equality, Joh. 4.12. and 8.53. and 13.16.

11. Dissemblables by negation of similitude (although they be fully
distinguished) cannot be fully comprehended in this denied, or Negate copulate.
Because besides the negation of the proportion between Semblables, is required
a position of a diverse quality.

12. A Copulate is more confusedly denied, as for the parts, when the bond or
connection is absolutely denied, neither seems it (except such as are absolute)
to contain any more axioms then it self: unless we think, they be sometimes
to be pointed at, because of the speakers prudency. As [ you cannot serve both
God and Mammon] you may serve him, and you may serve this, you cannot serve
both together, see Chap. 8. Sect. 9.

13. A Copulate which is false on the one part, is more clearly denied, as to
the parts, by the Discrete; for so it is distinctly expressed which part is
true, and which false.

14. A Copulate of both parts, affirmed and false, is consequently denied,
taking away the parts by the copulate of the denied parts, Act. 25.8. A
Copulate of both parts denied and false, contrary wise: Isa. 47.19.

Crypsis of the Copulate.
Seeing that a Copulate of its own nature does not seem to require a necessary
union of the parts; and does not always intend somewhat (at least of any great
moment) as resulting out of their union; therefore in such, the axiom which
arises out of the copulation may be omitted. Otherwise that axiom is of great
moment, by reason of the authority, by which the parts are united, and the
necessity of it, to that which it directly looks upon in that union.

16. Because in the Copulate there be Collateral parts, if there be little or
no difference between them, unless it be in words, the consequents of the
parts may be joined into one: And likewise the antecedents. Prove. 31.30. Favor
and beauty deceitful and vain. Finally, if such parts be any more illustrated
in such a manner, they may likewise be joined together. Psalm. 51.2. David said,
My sin, mine iniquity. 2. He desires to be washed and cleansed from them. 3. He
desires to be washed thoroughly. 4. All this he desires of God.

17. In a comparation, a several treating of the Proposition may oftentimes be
omitted, or at least be shortly knit up, whether it be feigned to an historical
similitude, or true. 1. Because it often consists of a matter which is but
little Theological. 2. It is not primarily intended in the Text, but the whole
or chief use of it is in the application to the Reddition, and the illustration
of it. 3. It is more known and clear to the hearers, who by it are to be taught
the Reddition. 4. In the reflection of the Doctrine, it comes first to be
inculcated or pressed into the mind or heart of the hearer by uses. And here
the Preacher might take upon him that of our Savior, Hear what the unjust
Judge says, Luke 18.6. And being to exhort to sedulity and care in seeking out
the summum bonum, or chief good, out of the parable of the Merchant; attend
unto his care in worldly things. The careful Merchant runs to the uttermost
parts of the Indies, etc. So the several tractation of the Reddition may
oftentimes be omitted; namely, when it shall be sufficiently treated of, with
the note of comparation, or in the collation it self of the parts. And so very
many Texts of full comparations may be sufficiently exhausted, if the
proposition be applied to the Reddition (or as the reason of it shall require)
the part to the part: and so the Doctrine be constituted.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Connex.
1. HEre the affirmation signifies, that if there be an antecedent, there is
also a consequent. So that though there be no note, or that which is, is alien,
or not pertinent (as oftentime it is usual) yet if the illation of the
consequent from the antecedent be intended, the axiom ought to be thought
belong to this place. The truth thereof consists in the true connection of the
parts, that either out of one, or both false ones, the absolutely true may be;
as also out of the true ones, the false; namely, when the one does not follow
out of the other. Hence, by reason of the form of this axiom precisely looked
upon, the Doctrine cannot be constituted out of either part, though the parts
severally considered were true; because the false ones also may consist with
the truth of the axiom. Yet absolute axioms may be in the parts. In the
Antecedent, Gal. 1.8. the absolute is, Has been preached unto you. In the
consequent, Joh. 8.55. the Absolute, You are liars. An example of a Connex,
where a like is inferred from a like, 2 Samuel 15.21. As the Lord lives, and my
Lord the King lives: But in what place [(...)] my Lord the King shall be, even
there also will thy servant be. It seems to be a prerupt, or hasty speech of a
Soldier hastening to express his faith; as if he did say, I will not return
unto Absalom as thou wishest me, But in what place, etc. The Comparation is
limited to two respects in the Text, which being incompatible are proposed
disjunctly. Whether in death; there also, etc. The place in which, or the
condition David should be in either to life or death, it infers Ittai would in
be the same, or the like* Axioms. 1. Ittai professes the King to be his Lord,
and himself to be his servant. 2. If my Lord the King be in death, there will
his servant be with him. 3. If in life, he will be there with him. 4. In
whether condition soever the King shall be, in the same also shall he be. The
antecedent does infer the consequent, taking its force in that Ittai confirms
it with an oath, that whatsoever the Kings condition should be, the same should
be his: whose efficacy is perceived by the nature of this manner of testimony.

2. Yet this belongs unto the Connex (where there is relation of the
consequence) that it requires the truth of the parts also. And therefore it
offers the axioms to be treated of distinctly in their parts, then that which
results out of their union. But how much the more it declines from the bare
connection, so much the nearer it comes to the nature of a Syllogism, so that
the causal conjunction being taken away, it usually resolves it self into an
Enthymema. And also a whole Syllogism may be comprehended in this axiom.

3. Hereunto belong the causall (also when the cause by accident inferres the
effect, as Eccles. 8.11.) and rational notes, if they do truly note (which
they do not always do, as John 19. ver. 4, 5, 6, 23, etc.) and which soever
have the same force or efficacy: whereof the former belong to the Antecedent,
the latter to the consequent. In both of them the antecedent always contains
the cause of the consequence, and sometimes of the consequent. The Grammatical
Crypsis or transposition of parts is very frequent in this axiom. Si, if, is
oftentimes set down for [ cum, seeing that, or quandoquidem, seeing that] Luke
11.13. Joh. 10.35. and 13.14, etc. Oftentimes the causall note is wanting, as
Psalm. 25.8. Sometimes it is set down for the illative or inferring, as Psalm.
116.10. Sometimes the illative is wanting, as Psalm. 116.1. Sometimes both, as
Psalm. 118.6. Sometimes it is tacitly contained in the antecedent participle,
as 2 Cor. 7.1. Especially where the participle signifies notice: as (...),
Beholding, Acts 4.14. (...), seeing, Col. 4.1. (...), when they heard, Acts
7.54. (...), knowing, Heb. 10.34. (...), remembering, Act. 20.31. Sometimes it
is found with an alien note, as Matthew. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of
thee, and come thou to me? as if he said, Seeing I have need to be baptized
of thee, I do not see why (or some such like thing) thou should come to me.

4. Oftentimes the antecedent of this connex contains that which preceded,
sometimes virtually, and sometimes formally. Therefore if there it have been
treated of by the Preacher, and here it be vertually recollected to infer the
consequent; it ought here to be freely treated of, and only according to what
is superadded by the manner of recollection, 2 Cor. 7.1. (...), etc. Having
therefore, etc. so chap. 4. verse. 1. In both places the demonstrative, (...),
emphatically set down, seems to note an excellency; in the former, of the
foresaid promises, in the latter of the foresaid Ministration. But if formally;
only the consequent, and the inference of it out of the antecedent offer
themselves: for the repetition of the antecedent, as lately treated of, will
suffice. Romans 8.17. And if children (where Si, if, stands for cum, seeing that)
then heirs. 1. True believers (whose description was before) are heirs. 2.
Because children are heirs.

5. An axiom out of a final cause (where the finis, or end, under its note
(...), or finally taken, or its equipollent, is set to infer the medium or
means) may also be referred to this place. Which kind of axiom (because it is
frequently obvious in Scripture) we will here speak somewhat of concerning its
illative, or inferring force. One that acts according to reason, looks upon the
end under the reason of convenience; He wishes, or with a kind of willity
desires. This desire excites him to enquire, whether there be any means, by
which it may be obtained. The possibility found out, and added to the end
somewhat increases this desire. So increased, it excites him again to seek out
the nature of the means. 1. Whether they be possible to be applied by this
agent of himself, or some way else. For want of this condition the desire
vanishes into despair. 2. Whether they be not of such weight, but that the end
may abundantly recompense it. 3. Whether they be necessary, so that the end
cannot be obtained without them: or at least as necessary as others, if there
be several ways to that end. 4. Whether they be certain, so that by the use of
these, the end cannot choose but be attained; or at least probable. For defect
of these three, the desire vanishes into a neglect. The defire occupied about
such an end and the means, and by faith strengthened about them, grows into
hope or efficacious desire of the end. And because the means are first by
nature, as far as to the actual being, as productives of the actual end, or the
fruition; therefore the agent puts the means into an actual esse or being,
making use of them, to attain the end. The end being thus specified, is truly
the beginning in operable things, as obtaining the complete volition or will of
it self, and of the means to it. And all these things are eminently found, as
well in the excellency of the end, as in the habitude of the means unto it in
the Covenant between Christ and the Father. Us, and God in Christ.
Which two Covenants (whereof the first is the foundation of the other) do
afford very many axioms of this kind in the Scripture.

6. In this axiom, for the most part the Medium or means is disposed in the
first place, and then the end. Yet if the end has the reason of the argument
inferring the medium, the Antecedent of the axiom contains the end, and the
consequent the medium, or means. But because the means may absolutely be looked
upon, before it be considered as determinated to this end; it may conveniently
be treated of in that order as it is placed (unless by chance the reason of
some special text be against it) so it be abstractly in this absolute nature,
reserving the respect to the end of the Doctrine, which is to be proposed out
of the united parts, Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost, where the coming of the Son of man is argued from a double
end, copulately disposed: Subordinate, and Principal: Who, from the object.
What, from the adjunct. The parts, the antecedent, to seek and save, (or
because be intended to seek and to save.) The consequent, Therefore he came.
The axiom, (the explication being premised) We were lost. 2. The Son of man
came. 3. He intended to seek. 4. To save that which was lost. 5. To seek and to
save. 6. Because he would seek and save, therefore he came.

7. For there are also many places in Scripture in which under the note, is
contained the event of the final cause: And these axioms do also belong
hereunto, the adjunct to it being connexed, but in a contrary order of parts.
For the event which lies hidden under this note, constitutes the consequent
part of the axiom. Of this kind seem to be those sayings [(...) or (...)]
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, er accomplished. As if he should say,
When these things were done, the Scripture was fulfilled, which had foretold it
should be, or these things were done, to the end that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, (...), that pro (...) to the end. An example, Matthew. 2.15. Because
he was in Egypt, etc. was fulfilled the saying of the Lord by the Prophet,
(namely in the Antitype, or reddition which is to be understood) Hos. 11.1. The
axioms of the antecedent. Herod dyed, Joseph with the child and his Mother was
in Egypt so long, that is to say, till the death of Herod. In the consequent.
As God called his Son, namely, Israel: so he called his only begotten Son out
of Egypt. This was spoken by the Prophet. From the Lord by the Prophet. It is
fulfilled. Because he was in Egypt, etc. (and being warned, be returned)
therefore it was fulfilled. And in this sense seems to be expounded [(...)]
that it might be fulfilled by [(...)] then was fulfilled, v. 17. Because there
was a great cry for the death of the Bethleemitish children, the saying of
Jeremy, (namely in the like) was fulfilled, so Mark. 15.28. And the Scripture
was fulfilled, which says, etc.

8. Sometimes under the species of the final cause, is set down the event
merely by accident also in a contrary order of parts, Matthew. 10.34. I came to
send a sword. Having premised a due explication, the sense will be, that The
coming of Christ is the accidental cause of persecution (namely through men's
malice) or Men would take occasion, from the coming of Christ to stir up
persecutions. Here the coming of Christ is the Antecedent. Persecutions should
arise upon occasion thereof, the Consequent. Because I came, persecutions will
follow.

9. There is another Adjunct to the Connex, or as one should say, joined to it
as it were in affinity, not to be measured out of the precise proportion of the
form alone; but with a respect had, as well to the nature of the matter, as to
the nature of God who is the witness. In such connexes, (whether they have
relation to God or man) though nothing in esse, or in being, is somewhat set
down in posse, or possibility; and somewhat beside, according to the matter on
Gods part, as Deuteronomy. 32.41. if I whet, etc. Here is the posse, or possibility,
and when it pleases him, it is to be understood, he will do it. On our part,
in exhortations, monitions, with promises and threatenings, etc. is set down the
posse, or possibility of the second Covenant, not of the first oeconomically
proposed. See Dr. Prideaux in his Sermon Of Perseverance. According to the
matter also, either necessary, or indifferent: of the necessary, is laid down,
it ought or ought not: of the indifferent, it may, or it may not; or it is
expedient, or it is not expedient. Which may also be observed in other axioms
of the same matter, as Mat. 10.32,33. For seeing the force of Divine testimony
(as these are in an eminent degree) proceeds from Gods infinite Prudence,
virtue, and benevolence: We must look we do not attribute to any Divine
saying, any unworthy or less then worthy thing.

10. This connex, if it contain nothing which is absolute in it, and the parts
be single; the axiom may be proposed (being not very long) as one only
Doctrine, and those things which are involved in it, be deduced from it as
Uses, if any one shall think the sentence to be elliptick, and that these
things which are involved are to be supplied: I will not much contend against
it. Sometimes it will not be amiss to avoid the inconvenience of too prolixe a
sentence. See an example in the last Section. This axiom is laid without any
note, Jam. 5.13. Where in the antecedent posse, may, is included in the
consequent also, debere, it ought.

11. If there be a copulate composition in this axiom (as that Chap. 5. Sect.
2.) it will be so likewise in the treaty, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess
with thy mouth, etc. The axioms (passing over what is absolute in either part)
are 1. To confess with the mouth, etc. is required to salvation. 2. To believe
in the heart, etc. is required to salvation. 3. If thou do both this and that,
thou shall be saved.

12. If a copulate composition be also in the consequent, and that it be large,
it may be summarily contracted into one notion, containing all its parts, that
the Doctrines which are framed out of it applied to the parts of the
antecedent, may be the brieflier proposed. Likewise the antecedent that it may
be the easilier applied to the parts of the consequent. So in the Commination,
where there is such a copulation, the parts may be laid as tending to the evil
denounced, Luke 12.45,46. Where out of the Hypothesis of the Dissemblable
behaviors of the servant, there is foretold a Dissemblable event, If that
servant say, etc. (as he may, but ought not to say.) Axiom. 1. That servant
says in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, it tends to damnation. 2. He
begins to beat the men servants, and the maid servants, it tends, etc. 3. To
eat, drink, and be drunken, tends, etc. 4. If he do both that, and that, and
this, be shall be damned. Out of which last axiom may be observed a Climax, or
gradation of sin, by way of use. And as we contracted the consequent to one
notion, that the Doctrines might be proposed so much the brieflier out of it
applied to the parts of the consequent, so may the antecedent also be
contracted to one, that it may be easilier applied to the parts of the
consequent. Hence the fifth axiom. If this servant be so desperately wicked,
his Lord will come upon him, in a day when he looks not for him, and in an
hour when he is not aware. 6. If he be such a one, he will out him in sunder.
7. He will appoint him his portion with unbelievers. 8. The whole axiom out of
the parts proposed on both sides. Out of this axiom may be observed, 1. A
Climax or gradation in the consequent, or the degrees of punishment threatened
to that servant. 2. The proportion between the sin in the antecedent, and the
punishment in the consequent. Namely, He says, the Lord delayeth his coming:
the Lord will come in a day when he looks not for him, in an hour when he is
not ware. Also he beats, etc. The Lord will cut him in sunder. Likewise, He
gorges, and makes himself drunk with an immoderate portion of food, and wine.
The Lord will appoint him his portion of food, and wine. The Lord will appoint
him his portion with unbeleevers.

Of a negate, or denied Connex.
13. The negate connex (whether it be denied by preposing a negation to the
whole axiom, or by more openly denying the consequence) does no more exhibit
a doctrine in parts then an affirmate.

14. Because there would be no place for a negate connex in Scripture, unless
the Antecedent did not infer the consequent affirmate; but oftentimes it does
not infer it, because the parts are diverse amongst themselves: Thence it
seems to be, such an affirmate is more clearly denied, as for the affection of
the parts, by the discrete or severed of quanquam, or tamen, although, or
nevertheless (which also expresses the diversity of parts) then by the negate
Connex, which only denies the consequent to be inferred. But when it is denied
by an axiom of this or another kind (as vertually it may be) the axiom so
denying, must be referred to it own proper classis.

15. If the first which has affinity with the Connex, be under a stricter
note, or if it does bear a stricter; though the negation does break the bond,
yet the antecedent under such a note, remains as granted. The consequent in the
mean time (whether it be true in it self, or false) by the negation of the
sequel is left in the middle as in a precise connex. A more strict note is [
Cum, though] or [ quandoquidem, for because] Romans 9.7. Not because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all children, the causall conjunction shall here bear
a strict note; not though you be (or although you are) the Seed of Abraham, are
ye his sons, says the Apostle to the Jews, who would infer the Consequent
out of the Antecedent; as if he had said, though ye be the Seed of Abraham, yet
it does not follow, that ye are all sons.

16. And if this axiom, which this in Scripture does contradict be so absurd,
that it lays a falsehood in the antecedent; the antecedent which will not bear
a stricter note, does constitute a Doctrine, 2 Cor. 11. In the antecedent of
the Discrete the Apostle disposes such an axiom. Not (the question being
equivalent to the negation) that I do not love you, have I been (...), or not
burdensome to you. The Apostle seems to obviate a malevolous man's saying.
Because Paul does not love us, therefore will he take nothing of us, to whom
the Apostle opposes this contradictory Not, etc. [ Quia, because] is a more
larger conjunction in the negate, and may be taken either as granting, or
indifferently, as of he said; Whether I love you, or not love you; the not
loving, does not infer the not being burthensom. And truly the conceit of man
is so much larger then the portion of words, that it can hardly be bound and
restrained by words in a sentence; but at some time it may escape into a
various sense, unless the scope of the place and context, etc. be considered.
Yet the antecedent is asserted under a stricter note. But this was not the
sense of the Apostle, but by the interrogation and question equivalent to the
negation, and his appeal to God touching his affection, as it should seem; and
by the subjunction of the true cause in the 12. verse, he does rather insinuate
the contrary to this antecedent, which he does likewise abundantly profess in
another place.

17. The negation here seems sometimes not only to take away the bond, and so
the consequence, but the consequent also, especially the more vehement, Romans
6.15. (...), what then, etc. where (...), as verse. 1. (...), what then shall we
sin, and 2 Cor. 11.11. (...), wherefore, etc. (though elsewhere it be
otherwise, as Romans 9.30,32.) seems to be a preparation to consute the
Prolepsis, or inconsequent inference: as if he should say, You are inclined of
things rightly spoken, to infer things which are not right. We must not sin,
not because we are not under the law. Omitting the Antecedent (which here is
set down in the Discrete) 1. axiom, That we must not sin. 2. Not for this
cause. 3. This ought to be abominated, and prayed against, so Romans 6.1. (where
the antecedent seems to lay down nothing. 1. We ought not to remain in sin. 2.
No (not to this end) that grace may abound. 3. It is abominable, and a thing to
be prayed against, for a man to remain in sin to that end.

18. Because the reason of the final cause is the unitive force of the axiom
out of the end, and the thing which lies under this reason, is not always
produced, but is judged to be under the intention of the agent who is to
produce it: but that which is held to be the medium, or means, uses to be in
the external or real act: hence it seems to be that the negation which takes
away the reason of the end, seldom leaves the Doctrine in the Antecedent, but
rather sometimes leaves the Consequent, in which that is disposed which is
esteemed the means by those whom this axiom contradicts. As; I came not to
judge the world, etc.

Of the Connex.
19. Sometimes the absolute consideration of the end, sometimes of the means,
sometimes of both may be omitted, and the means be joined to the end, to
constitute the Doctrine. As in the example of the 6. Sect. The first axiom
being premised, the second will be, He came to seek us that were lost. 3. He
came to save us. 4. He came to seek and save us. So in the parallel place, Mat.
18.11. It was lost. 2. The Son of man came to save that.

20. Sometimes it may be disposed as a single axiom, and be so treated of,
Joh. 12.47. I came to save the world, that is to say, To save the world is the
end of my coming. 1. I came. 2. To save the world is the lend of this my
coming. Likewise the negate or denied. I came not to judge the world; that is
to say, I came not to this end. In the same manner from the event. To send the
sword will be the event of this my coming. To send peace will not be the event,
etc.

21. 2 Chronicles. 7.13,14. This axiom says somewhat in the parts, as well in
respect of God, as of man. The chief arguments are, The fault (pre supposed,
ver. 13. expressed the 14.) which is illative of the punishment, the punishment
of repentance, and repentance of acceptance. Si, if. If I punish, (or if when
I punish) they repent, then will I accept. This axiom connexed, contains the
connex in the antecedent, and the Copulate in the Consequent. The Connex
involved in the Antecedent, consists of the Antecedent in three members,
proposed under a disjunctive note, but loosely and ^numeratively taken, and of
the consequent in four members, under the copulate: the consequent of the
connex comprehending the whole consists of three members under the copulative
also. The first Doctrine, (according to the rule, Sect. 8. and 9.) God can,
andwhen he thinks it fit, shuts up the heavens (the illustration from the end
or event) that there may be no rain. 2. Likewise he commands the Locusts, etc.
3. God can, and when he pleases, sends pestilence amongst his people. 4.
That, or this, or the other, he can, and when he pleases, he does, to his
sinning people: either all these, or some such like thing, as appears by the
analogy of other places, for here is not intended a complete enumeration. But
this may be observed in the Use. Then in the consequent of the connex involved
in the antecedent of the whole (having abbreviated the antecedent of this, and
the consequent of the whole, according to the rule, Sect. 12.) these Doctrines
are contained, (having premised to these that absolute one in this consequent,
namely, The name of the Lord is called upon his people) The first (according to
the rule, Sect. 11.) It is required to acceptance, that Gods people upon whom,
etc. when he punishes, do humble it self. 2. That it pray. 3. That it seek
his face. 4. That it turn from its wicked ways. Then from either part of the
whole antecedent abbreviated, and applied to the consequent, these Doctrines.
1. If God punishing, his people do all these things, he will hear from heaven.
2. Will forgive their sin. 3. Will heal their land. Lastly, the whole axiom.
If when I have shut up the heaven that there be no rain, or have commanded the
Locust, etc. my people, etc. then will I hear from heaven, etc. Out of which
axiom, the order of Divine Providence toward sinners may be observed.

CHAP. IX. Of the Discrete, or Severed.
1. THe judgment of the Discrete is, that the parts are true, and severed. It
does exhibit, the parts first to be treated of, (unless some absolute be
involved) then the discretion or separation.

2. The Discrete seems sometimes to be as it were composed of two Discretes,
so that the consequent of the first from [ although and notwithstanding]
involve in it the antecedent of the last, from [ not, and but] and another
Diverse be set to it in the Consequent, Luke 4. ver. 27. (as also 25.) Where
[although] is understood, and [(...), and] is read for [ notwithstanding, or
yet] Although many Lepers were in Israel, in the time of Elizeus the Prophet,
yet none of them were cleansed, but Naaman the Syrian. Axioms. 1. There were
many, etc. 2. None of them were cleansed. 3. Though there were many, etc. yet
none, etc. 4. Naaman the Syrian was cleansed. 5. None of them, but, etc.

3. Dissemblables which might have agreed in quality, might be fully enunciated
by such a Discrete, that the Protasis may be under [ although] a negation of
the fimilitude under [ notwithstanding] the diverse quality under [ but].

4. Such a Discrete is often met withal, but so that for brevity sake, the
consequent of the first be omitted, and the Diverse which should be set to that
Consequent, in stead of it, may under [ notwithstanding] bejoyned to the
Antecedent, Prove. 20.17. As if it were more fully expressed. Though the bread
of deceit be sweet to a man, yet [it does not continue so, but] afterward his
mouth shall be filled with gravel. That which is meant to be understood
therein, may well be brought for a fuller explication of the axiom, but be
omitted in the constitution of the doctrines: it absence being abundantly
supplied, being set in its Diverse place, which sounds somewhat that is greater:
Axioms. 1. The bread of deceit is sweet, (namely to a man that is addicted to
it). 2. His mouth shall be filled with gravel. 3. Afterward (that is to say,
after this momentary sweetness) it shall be filled with gravel. 4. Although it
be sweet yet afterward, etc.

5. These notes [ although, and notwithstanding] seem to express the nature
of Discretion, as consifting in a lesser discordance, seeing these notes do
hardly admit of a greater, but do only intimate that things so Discreted or
severed might have convened and come together, and that sometimes they are
severed with a great offense, or virtue. Wherefore in Scripture they are often
set down, as well for aggravation of sin, (as 2 Chr. 36.15,16. Psalm. 55.12,
etc. Amos 4.6, etc.) as for the praise of virtue, (as Job 2.3. Ps. 44.17, etc.
119.52 and 83, etc.)

6. [ Although] is often meant, and the [(...)] is set for [ but] as Prove.
23.7. So [(...)] Matthew. 11.25. and [(...)] Romans 6.17.

7. Because the Discrete (as we have said) oftentimes does more clearly deny
the affirmed Connex, then the negate connex it self; and the negate connex
sometimes proceeds from feigned parts, so the negate connex of feigned parts is
oftentimes proposed under notes, and after the manner of a Discrete. Yea
sometimes, to deny the stronglier, it assumes unto it self a greater feigned
part, then the Author of the affirmate could probably conceive. Wherefore it
obtains its chief use under these notes, in Scriptures also, in amplifications,
etc. It may then be so proposed by the Preacher, as it is found in Scripture,
and more perspicuously then if it were restrained in its own form. In the mean
while we must know that it is not of the Discrete judgment (which requires the
truth of the parts, but of the Connex; and that the Doctrine in parts is no
better, then the formal negate connex it self. But when it assumes a greater
seigned part, then could be supposed by the Author of the affirmate, it may
well be explicated, by adding the Reddition of a greater feigned part, which in
such sentences is either to be understood, meant, or at least does necessarily
follow. To this seems might be referred that of Obad. v. 4. Edom might reason
with it self. If I strengthen my self in high places, (for it was a mountainous
country) I shall not be cast down. To whom the Prophet says, Though thou
exalt thy self as the Eagle, though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence
will I bring thee down [not only out of thine high places] The judgment is Not
if thou did exalt thy self, and not thou should by me be cast down. But the
same sense is more perspicuously enunciated under [ quanquam, and tamen,
although and yet] so Ier. 37.10, etc. If any one will contend that these are
properly discrete sayings: Let him imagine I set down this fection here for his
sake, because I would breed no contention, yet I would not have him think it to
be of the Discrete judgment.

Of the Discrete Negate or denied.
8. We seldom meet with a Discrete negate directly, or formally. If it be
denied by the Copulate or Connex (as it may be) these are to be referred to its
proper Classis.

CHAP. X. Of the Disjunct or Disjoined.
1. THe judgment of the disjunct truly and properly taken is, that one one
only is true.

2. It exhibites no Doctrine (except the absolute, if any do happen) but only
it self true, in the true disjunction of the parts, Luke 16.13. a servant of
two masters (who command contrary things) will either hate the one, and love
the other: or will hold to the one, and despise the other. Here is a Disjunct
with a copulation in each part. (...), the one, and (...), the other, seem to
have the force of a demonstrative: as if he should say, Either he will hate
this, and love the other, or will hold to this, and despise the other. Here are
two absolutes contained according to the rule, Chapter 4. Sect. 14.1. The scrvant
will hold to that Master which he loves. 2. Him which he hates, he will
despise. The copulation in the parts is suspended by the disjunctive note, by
which the truth is indetermined either concerning this or that part. The axiom
it self offers it self to be treated out of these parts. Then the relative
confideration, Because either the one, etc. therefore no servant can serve two
masters. 3. Though complete Disjunct axioms are not frequent in Scripture, yet
the disjunctive notes are often found in other axioms, but for the most part
loosely taken for the enumeration of parts, so far as they consent with the
whole, not for the disjoyning of them between themselves, whereby the truth of
the only one may be expressed. In which sense they seem to be taken rather
copulatively, then disjunctively. Yet this enumeration is somet mes founded on
perfect disjunction, so far as these parts are disjoined in respect of the
singulars under the whole. Phil. 1.20. Christ shall be magnified in my body,
whether it be by life, or by death. The disjunction is complete, [ Every
magnification of Christ in the Apostles body, is either by life, or by death]
by which the parts are voided, and it is signified that no singular
magnification can be in the body both by life, and by death, but by one. But
the Apostle intending another sense, does very fitly apply both parts to the
whole. Both by life he shall be magnified, and by death he shall be magnified.
And therefore the judgment is copulate. See the like example, Chapter 8. Sect. 1.
Sometimes this enumeration is grounded on incomplete Disjunction, as Chap. 8.
Sect. ult. The thing both ways comes to one: and by the manner of the
disposition, the judgment of others also, will be easy.

Of the Negate or denied Disjunct.
4. If we meet with a direct negate, it yields no more axioms then the
affirmate. Indirectly it may be denied by the Copulate affirmed out of negative
parts, which does not admit of one true, out of the affirmate, which does not
admit of an only.

CHAP. XI. Of the Syllogism.
IF the Text be of a Syllogistical judgment, we must frame an Analy sis before
it, showing the conclusion, then the premises, then the Crypsis, if any there
be, So that the Syllogism may appear in its proper form. First the several
axioms must be handled. Lastly, there must be an axiom made out of the
premises, with a conclusion by the illative note, to show the inference of the
conclusion out of the premises. It matters not so much to the order, whether
the conclusion or the premises be first handled, but that the series of the
words in the Text may end the controversy. Seeing that in their absolute
consideration they seem to stand collaterally; and though between them there
be always a necessity, of the consequence, yet there is none such of the
consequent. But if the Antecedent do contain (...), the wherefore, of the
conclusion that is rightlyest treated of in the first place; to the end, that
when you shall be come to treat of the conclusion, we may have (...), the
wherefore, at hand, as a thing known before. Though in such things the
wherefore may be omitted in the treaty of the conclusion, because it offers it
self soon enough in the last axiom, unless according to the Crypsis, Chap. 4.
Sect. 24. it be otherwise disposed.

2. If there shall seem to be no intent of taking away the doubt, and the
analysis shall proceed well, according to the axiomatical judgment (though not
without rational conjunction) and that the full sense of the place may be had
by it; it will not be necessary to resolve the Text into a Syllogistical
consideration, every time as we shall have power so to do. Seeing that, for as
much as belongs to the thing, it is sufficiently contained in that which is
first a kin to the connex, and may be treated out of its rule.

CHAP. XII. Of the Explication of the Axiom, or of the Doctrine.
HItherto of the preparation to the Doctrine. The treating of it follows.

First the terms of the axiom, are to be explicated according as they are
taken in Scripture, atd referring them to their place in the body of Divinity.
That term is always to be explicated first, which makes good the way to the
understanding of the rest, and does not require the explication of the rest
before hand.

2. For the fuller explication, if need be, such questions may be propouuded
and resolved, as shall seem to conduce to the better opening of the sense of
the axiom: as also such illustrations be added, as may, more thoroughly imprint
them in the minds of the hearers.

3. In a single axiom, the consequent part, as for the most part larger, may
be first explained in a Composite one, let the explication of the antecedent
precede, and that of the consequent follow.

4. He that will explain well, ought to be well exercised in Scriptures, and in
the Idiome of those languages wherein they are written, not without respect to
the Oriental notions in the Hebrew, and the conferring of the same with the
Greek, not without respect to the Hebrew in the Greek, as also to the Greek
done by the Septuagint, and to the Targum Judaicum, for the understanding of
both. He must not be carried away by any prejudice, he ought to love the truth
sincerely, and wholly subject himself unto it. For the interpretation of words
or phrases, either single or in Syntaxis, he may make use of Phraseologies and
Concordances. For the finding out of the sense, he must look as well to the
Analogy of faith expressed in manifest places, as to the scope of the place
conferring it with other semblable or dissemblable places, considering the
context, and in it the occasion, end, circumstances of persons, place, time,
and finally the coherency with the Antecedents and Consequents.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Confirmation of the Axiom showing both the (...), the what
and (...), the wherefore.

1. THe Axiom may be confirmed by parallel places of Scripture, and those, if
possible, most evident (except those which are no more Divine testimony,
howsoever they be contained in holy Scripture, but as the Scripture says such
a one or such a one spoke thus) Then by other arguments, a posteriori, from
that which follows, that we shall find in Scriptures.

2. Though no weights of reason can add any thing to the firmness of that
which is grounded upon divine testimony, nevertheless Scripture being, though
above, yet not against good reason, and does not take away, but perfect it, it
will not be much from the purpose sometimes to make use of reasons, and other
things, as drawn from the art of Nature, if they shall be judged fitting, easy
and profitable for the hearers, whereby they may the better relish and retain
Divine truth in (...), the what of it.

3. And though also the authority of the Fathers, and of the whole Church, yea
of all creatures being put all together can add nothing to Divine anthority,
on which the axioms of holy Scripture are grounded: yet it will not be absurd
sometimes to show that this axiom was received, and approved of in this sense
by the Ancient Church, and its Heroes: yea the testimony of those who are
without the Church, and of the enemies to it, may be produced, and in some
cases is more available then that of its own children.

4. Yet these confirmations drawn from humane reason and testimony, ought to be
brought more sparingly, and not without choice, having also regard unto the
genius of the hearers; adding moreover, if need be, some difference to make a
distinction between these, and them that are from Divine testimony.

5. Though to argue the whole, the induction of the severals would be of great
moment: yet because it would be too prolixe to enumerate the singulars, they
might be brought under some certain heads, by one or more perfect
distributions, and so the whole be evinced. If some instances of many be
brought, as they do of themselves illustrate and exemplify the whole; so if
they do potentially contain the rest, or if there be no other thing in the
rest to be seen, they may very well be thought to have the power of
confirmation also.

6. (...), or the wherefore is to be fetched out of the proper cause.

7. The proper demonstration (...), wherefore, though it be but only one, of
one axiom, yet it may consist of many members, as of partial causes, which
therefore are to be gathered together, and in the integrity or wholenesse
applied to the confirmation of the Doctrine.

8. The fact is chiefly demonstrated of the efficient out of its faculty. end.
The fact of the agent by reason, is demonstrated of him by his directing
knowledge (power in lawful things) his decreeing will, in which may be
considered significations, by word, oath, pledge, and the like. motives from
without. from within,

which have a respect to the end, and potentially. The Power sometimes taken at
large, may also comprehend knowledge in it.

9. The occupated adjunct, may be demonstrated of the subject, by the formal
reason of it, etc.

Crypsis.
10. If the confirmation of the the axiom cannot be had in (...), the what, or
(...), wherefore, in such, through the deficiency of matter, the rule fails.

11. The Historical axiom of the fact, where (...), the what is deficient or
wanting, may not unfitly be illustrated from the like example, showing how he
by whom the saying is made, or others in such a business have done the like.
Which though it does not prove this has been done, yet it makes it probable.
Also causes as probable may be brought, which things standing thus, and persons
being thus affected, use to produce such effects.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Vindication of the Axiom from Objections.
SO has the treaty of the Doctrine been directed in the Explication.
Confirmation.


1. Though Objections may sometimes be brought usefully against any part of the
Method, yet it will not be out of purpose to assign a fixed, and definite place
to those things which are brought or alleged, against the Doctrine or
fundamental axiom.

2. Objections may arise either out of some other Text of Scripture, in show
contradicting ours, or out of some reasoning grounded upon the principles
commonly received. The former are answered by reconciling the places of
Scripture one with the other; the latter by discovering the weakness thereof
out of Scripture and true reason.

Crypsis.
3. It will not be advisedly done, to buzze many, especially subtle objections
into the hearers Ears, which peradventure would not otherwise enter into their
thought, and which it is not so easy to root out, and dangerous to leave, in
their minds, so that oftentimes it will not be amiss to leave out all this
place, and proceed directly from the confirmation of the Doctrine to the Use.

4. If the hearers be possessed with a prejudicate opinion against the truth of
the axiom, it will be good first to answer their objections, before we come to
the confirmation of the axiom, that having removed the prejudice, our
Confirmation may gain more belief and and attention.

5. The Objections of the first kind, may, not unfittingly, be sometimes
propounded by way of question, and resolved in the explication of the axiom.

CHAP. XV. Of Uses in General.
HItherto the first part of the Method, of Doctrine. The other of Uses
follows.

1. Seeing the Word of God, is (not the height, much less the mistake of
humane understanding) the power of God to salvation: there ought great care to
be taken in the applying of the same to the mind of man: that this arm of God
may be laid bare, and in the evidence of his Spirit, and the radiation or
bright shining of the Principle, or of the Doctrine, in the use, or in the
consectary it may be accommodated to the hearers, so that the use may be as a
cart, by which a divine axiom is brought to the mind, and as it were a
specification of it upon the same, as in several respects it shall agree
thereunto.

2. As the Arguments or places of invention, representing unto us the various
affections of things amongst themselves do yield foundations of deductions, so
the force of affections the firmness and necessity of the same. That we may
the better judge of these things, it will be worth the while sometimes to make
out of the Doctrine the Antecedent, and out of the use the Consequent of the
affirmed Connex, and so contemplate them in the judgment of that axiom, that
we may see how the Antecedent infers the Consequent. But because the several
disposition and placing of the same thing, does oftentimes give much light for
the clear apprehending of it: we may contradict that connex (either by a Negate
of its own kind, or by a Discrete affirmate out of the contradictory
consequent) that the falsehood of the opposite may appear. We may, if the matter
will give us leave, convert it into a a single axiom, and make it the Major of
the Syllogism, the Antecedent or the Doctrine the Minor, the Consectary or the
use, the Conclusion.

3. The same use of the Axiom, if it be to be had any where expressly in the
Scriptures themselves, does commend a present application. Here if the thing
proposed to the Hearers in the Consectary, be not contained in the Text, nor
the nature of it sufficiently known; it will be needful, as well to inform the
hearers, as also that the deduction may more clearly appear, presently upon the
entry of the same Use, to explicate what is meant by it.

4. It will not be always expedient to deduce all those Uses which by a
Logical consequence may be deduced from the axiom; nor follow prolixely those
which we deduce, nor refer those to several heads which may be referred
(unless peradventure it may seem needful to dilucidate some, under the use of
Instruction, that those which belong to the heart, and affections may in them
be more effectually urged) but when we have deduced as many as we can
conveniently, it shall be lawful to refer them to those heads, be they more or
less, in which they may be handled most usefully.

5. If the same Uses may be deducted from several axioms in the Text, they may
be so distributed, that no axiom may either abound in Uses, or be destitute of
them.

6. In the Uses of the same Classis may some order be conceived, according to
the habitude or relation as they have, as well among themselves as to those
arguments in the axiom, of which they principally arise.

Crypsis.
7. It is not to be expected that all single axioms should afford those kinds
of uses which are expressed in the Method, (although in some peradventure we
may find them all.) Let us therefore be contented with those which spontaneally
do follow out of the axiom: neither let us trouble our selves, or wrest the
Text to extract such things, as cannot be had.

8. When the same use follows out of two or more axioms, it may most
fittingly be put off to the last, but urged in virtue of all. And if those
axioms be to be handled in diverse Sermons, so that some space of time may
intercede, this use may be briefly hinted at in the first, reserving the fuller
treating thereof to the last.

Of the Uses from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, or from the Species to the
Genus.
9. In the hypothesis, or proper axiom, we may consider; First, the matter
whether that be a fact, (under which we also comprehend the omission)
enunciated of its author, Theologically good or evil, or any other arguments
in which is attributed the consentaneum, or what is agreeable, dissentaneum,
what is dissenting, or disagreeable.
Secondly, the propriety or singularity, whether it be in the only or chief
antecedent, sometimes the consequent also; or in some restrictive condition of
time and place, etc. expressed or of necessity to be understood. All the Saints
salute you, that is to say, which were then at Rome, Phil. 4.22.

10. The Argumentation from thence is either Immediate, Mediate, where the
medium or means is in all to posse, or may be, in affirmates, to posse non, or
may not be, in negates.
actions or omissions all to propend or incline to, to propend or incline to
not.
if they be necessary to ought, to ought not.
indifferent then to be lawful. to not be lawful.
then to be expedient, to not be expedient.







11. But the medium or means follows the subject in relation of it to the
attribute, in all in posse, to may be. posse non, to not may be:
In all actions and omissions in propending or inclining to, propending or
inclining to not.
The medium or means follows the kind of the action in the rest. In which the
nature of the action ought to be shown whether of its kind it be necessary or
indifferent.

12. We may argue from several specials in the Hypothesis to several generals
in the Thesis. We may also argue from the Hypothesis to a manifold Thesis,
according to the various respects in the Hypothesis. See an example, Sect. 17.

13. We may argue from the Hypothesis to the Thesis in the like quality, as
from the affirmate to the affirmate; from the negate to the negate: or in a
dissemblable quality, as from the affirmate to the negate, 1 Cor. 10. from the
negate to the affirmate.

14. The argumentation from the species to the genus holds only, according to
that of the genus which is in the species, and so from all of that genus, to
us, as of the same genus. Or if we take it a part, from the equal, the reason
of the consequence is from that community, which intercedes to us with that
species; which community is the cause of that parity or equality, because
essences of things are in the indivisible, and the genus where it communicates,
communicates the whole. And so falls to the same place.

15. A mediate argumentation requires, first that the medium or means do truly
appertain to the Hypothesis. Secondly, that from the Hypothesis, as under that
means, we argue to the Thesis, so far as the means belongs to that genus which
is in the Hypothesis.

16. We may argue from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, by a reduplicative term
added to the genus applied to the Hypothesis, either mediately, or immediately;
because there is an effectual illation or inference, from the quatenus ipsum,
as it is it self, to the de omni, of all. Abraham as he was to be justified
according to the reason of the second Covenant, was justified by faith. Ergo
every one that is so to be justified, is justified by faith.

17. We may also argue from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, in that respect in
which it will not bear the reduplicative term, so that under that respect it
contain that which shall bear that term. David, not as he was a believer, but
being a believer, did commit adultery: Ergo, he could (but not as he was a
believer, or according to that principle; but according to nature, which he
had, common with all believers, hindered by no necessity from commiting such a
sin) Ergo, a believer may commit adultery, or a devouring sin. Ergo a King,
Ergo a Prophet, Ergo one that had more then sufficient help to the contrary,
Ergo one who was abounding in, or cumulated with Gods blessings, may, etc.

18. And these few things I thought good to point at, concerning this head of
Deduction from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, of which there is a frequent
abuse: not that I thought a thing of much latitude could be concluded in this
short compendium, but that I might give others occasion of searching out this
place more diligently.

CHAP. XVI. Of the use of Instruction.
IT remains that we treat of the use in specie which has respect to the mind
or understanding, heart, or the will and affections.


The first head of use is, in the applying of the Doctrine to the mind or
understanding. And here, because the heart or will has a great influx into the
mind (according to that, Those things which we will, we easily believe)
therefore it is lawful (though it is possible and customary to falter
exceedingly in this thing) it is lawful (I say) in a good cause, to insinuate
something either hiddenly or openly, whereby we may possess the hearers
affections, and by them, as by setting scaling ladders invade the fort of the
mind.

2. The first Use, belonging to the mind, is Instruction, informing it with
some Divine truth derived out of the axiom, and contained in it as in a
principle. This use the Apostle seems to signify by his ((...), for
instruction) 2 Timothy 3.16. To this belong all the consectarie speculatives
flowing from the Doctrine. This place may be amplyfied more, or less, so it be
done perspicuously and according to the capacity of the hearers.

Crypsis.
3. If the use of Instruction (as it sometimes happens) may be referred also to
some of those, which have a respect to the heart, it will be more commodious to
leave this place void, then those, especially where the thing or matter of the
heart is rather in agitation then that of the mind, and it is of more
concernment to have the affections moved or settled, then to have the
understanding informed.

CHAP. XVII. Of Refutation.
1. THis use also has a relation to the mind. Its work is to obviate or meet
with errors opposite to the Divine axiom. Either (in manner of an Antidote) to
those things, by which the hearers may any way be endangered. Or (in manner of
a remedy) against those which begin to creep or take head amongst them. To this
seems to have relation that of the Apostle (...), for reproof].

2. But when one makes use of this, he must again and again beware, lest he
refute and condemn those for errors, which are not errors. For if it be woe
unto him (whosoever he be) that calls light darkness; much more woe shall it be
to that Ambassador, who in the place or stead, and name of God, and o^ his
Christ, under the pretense of the holy Spirit, before the holy Angels and the
Church, peradventure to the prejudice of Divine truth, revealed by the Son out
of the bosom of the Father, for the exceeding good of man, shall not fear to
do this in contempt of the faithful and most dear servants of God, on whom he
has conferred exceeding many gifts, for the good of others, and on which many
souls depend.

3. Moreover, if he attribute to any one, an erroneous or heretical opinion,
and makes him guilty in that kind: he must be certain that he whom he so
accuses, does indeed maintain that opinion, and also in that sense, and degree
both real, and mental, as is imputed to him. But of this he cannot be certain
by any bodies testimony who is of the adverse part, although he otherwise be no
way an evil man. Who although he pretend to cite out of the Author himself the
precise words in which the error or heresy is thought to be contained; yet he
ought not rashly to be believed. For peradventure (which is the nature of
prejudice, especially joined with intemperacy) he takes one thing for another,
one Author for another, one word for another, peradventure he utters mutilated
and half sentences, or if whole, ill pointed; peradventure he adds somewhat of
his own; peradventure keeping the words, he seigneth to them another, and alien
sense wide from the Authors mind: the text it self and scope contradicting it.
For all these things may be done not only fraudulently, but sometimes also
through unskilfulnesse or perturbation of mind.

4. If he confute any under the name of some Church, or Congregation, he must
look he do not call in question some private men's assertions, for received
articles of that Church or Congregation. For it will be unjust to burden the
whole with the errors of some, or to require that which some one holds, to be
maintained by all.

5. If he undertake to confute some who hold opinions against our Church: he
must first make that plain, that the article which their opinion contradicts,
is indeed an article of our Church, and not only his, or some other private
spirits, though they be many.

6. If he do not only accuse the opinion which he confutes, and the defenders
of it for the bare crime of error or falsehood, but also pursue them for
blasphemers, profane people, enemies to the Evangelical consort, joined in
affinity with heretics and heresies, which have been heretofore condemned,
etc. he must be so much the more wary, and certain of that which he speaks. For
the grievouser the crime is, which is objected, the grievouser is the injury,
if it be objected falsely.

7. Finally, what error soever he brings upon the stage, let him do it
nervously, solidly, and manifestly; lest the resutation vanish away, and the
error stick fast: but with an affection and speech befitting the cause, and
Christian charity: lest whilst he takes care to free the hearers minds from
error, he fill them with malice and bitterness; and by his example do teach
how to cause Religion to be from one end to the other evil spoken of, and
hated by the brethren: then which things (if we will believe Scripture, rather
then our own malignant nature) there can nothing be more contrary to pure
Religion.

Crypsis.
8. The use of Refutation may for the most part be omitted, unless the error
be such as have found belief with our Auditors, or of which we are afraid in
their behalf, or from which we may hope by their means to have others freed.

9. In some necessary Controversy, we may prosecute the error, (...), and the
opposite truth (...).

CHAP. XVIII. Of Reprehension.
1. NOw follow the uses, which have respect to the heart, or will, and
affections. But these especially do vindicate to themselves all manner of
Rh^torical preparation; but not to be undertaken without the salt of wisdom and
gravity, as is befitting a sacred person and business.

2. And here sometimes may be somewhat mixed with the use which belongs to
another, but obliquely, as they shall seem to conduce for the sharpning or
softning of one another.

3. The uses which belong to the heart, have a respect unto it, either as under
some present distemperature, or disposition, in regard of which it has need of
some correction or rectification; or in relation to some future thing.

Of the first kind are Reprehension, Consolation.
These two seem to be contained in the Apostles [(...), for correction.]

4. If the Doctrine do afford a consectary, which does argue the evil of the
sin to lie upon our hearers, it may be applied to them in the use of
Reprehension.

5. The formal object therefore of this is sin, of which the Author does not
yet repent: The end to excite sorrow or repentance: The medium or means by
which he attains to this end, is by arguing, and urging that evil both as
present and as great.

6. The presence of the evil may be demonstrated from the notes or marks. And
these may be taken chiefly from the proper adjuncts, and opposites without a
medium; because that from these we may always argue, both affirmatively and
negatively. The causes also may sometimes be taken for notes, unless it be
when we had rather make use of them, in the Exhortation, or Dehortation. But in
this thing the proper effects are exceeding useful. For though we cannot argue
from them affirmatively and negatively, because the cause is not always in the
second act, yet the affirmative argumentation is very evident and convictive:
neither is the negative quite null, when the cause, if it were present, had all
things present for to act. We may also make use of other notes as well
affirmatives as negatives.

7. But the man of God, who will with dexterity assign the notes (especially
in some cases) must have senses well exercised in Scriptures, and be well
skilled both in the art of reasoning, the nature of the humane soul, and the
diverse means of Gods operating: also the state of man as well carnal as
spiritual, and the diverse degrees of either, and in what state and degree he
was in Scriptures from whose example he will argue, etc. But away with all vain
dreams of humane brain, private experiments, confused and uncertain
collections, etc. wherewith one making himself as a rule to all men, like a
Praetor, and as it were sitting on a tribunal, gives sentence on another state,
having neither regard nor respect to the nature of things, or Gods own Word:
though every one of us stands or falls to God alone, and his Word be the judge
of all men, and the rule of all states and degrees in order to God, and a
certain and infallible index of all manner of obliquity.

8. Those things we have said here of notes, may be useful in Consolation, and
chiefly in Exhortation.

9. As the presence of the evil is demonstrated by the notes of the offense,
so the greatness by the aggravations. The chief heads of aggravations may be
taken out by the Scheme added to the end of the Chapter; which also has place
in the residue of uses.

10. To this act of Reprehension may also be added the act of Commination or
Denuntiation of punishment, out of one or more manifest places of Scripture,
with which the holy Ghost thunders against that sin.

11. But let this use more then any of the rest, bring with it the force, and
evidence of the Text or Doctrine from whence it is deduced. Here we must also
make use (if there be any necessity to use them) of the most evident notes we
can get; Like unto the bleating of the sheep, etc. 1 Samuel 15. to discover
Readiness disobedience.

12. When subordinate sins, and such as are distinguished by diverse degrees,
are to be reprehended, it will be most commodious to begin with the least, and
so ascend gradatim or by degrees. And so likewise in the aggravation of the
same sin. But here the privative opposition is lesser then the adverse.

13. If it be requisite to insist somewhat longer in reprehending of some sin:
after the notes are given (if there be need of them) we may first argue from
the dishonesty and unprofitablenesse (where also the Comminations) in its
latitude. Then with aggravations, showing the more then vulgar magnitude of
both, or of the first in some cases, following also each degree of the said sin
(if so you think fitting) from the least to the highest, and that by diverse
heads and degrees of aggravations.

14. To this head may be referred the Lamentation sometimes used in Scripture,
by which the Preacher sometimes virtually and obliquely reprehends sinners.
This Lamentation is sometimes actually assumed, foretold that it must be
assumed.
And it is for sin committed, punishment present, future.

That for sin draws nearer to the nature of formal Reprehension, as having the
object clothed with the same formal reason. This for punishment is more
oblique, as not having the same reason in the object, but that does argue it,
as the effect does the proper cause. That principally flows from the Preachers
love to God, toward whom the sin is. This from the love toward the neighbor,
against whom the punishment is.

An example of Lamentation actually assumed for sin, is to be had Isai. 1.21.

For punishment present, Lam. 1. v. 1. to the 12. future, Is. 22.4.


An example of a Lamentation which is foretold must be assumed, for sin, 2 Cor.
12.21. For punishment, Isa. 15.5.

And it may be used and applied to this or that part severally. to both
jointly, so Luke 13. v. 34, 35. And not without tears, c. 19.49.


It may also be amply fied; First by bewayling things or persons, in which they
who are bewailed do sin, or are punished, Jer. 9.10.

Secondly by Apostrophe, Prosopopoeia.
By Apostrophe to the things or persons, Isa. 23.14. or to others, to whom it
belongs to grieve for the sin or punishment of those who are reprehended. By
Profopopoeia bringing in either the sinners themselves, Prove. 5.12. or the
things, or persons, in which they sin or are punished. Secondly, others also,
and those either condoling, Rev. 18.9. or deriding, Lam. 2.15.

The Lamentation which is foretold must be assumed; as for that part which has
a relation to the punishment, it may be added to amplify the Denuntiation.

Crypsis.
15. The notes may here be omitted, unless it be when either the sins are of a
more subtle nature, then that they can be easily discerned; or the sinners so
obstinate and pleasing to themselves, that they will not acknowledge themselves
to be vicious.

16. To more prudent sinners it will be sufficient sometimes briefly to have
glanced at some sin, and in a word have shown how it is adverse to the Text, or
to the Doctrine. So we may altogether spare aggravations, unless we will make
use of some few, which shall seem most fitting.

17. The Commination, or Denuntiation may well be omitted, unless it be when
the sin of its own nature is more grievous, or has taken deep root, or the
hearers are inclined and apt to fall into it.

18. This use may be somewhat mollified and sweetened and be made no less (and
peradventure more) effectual if the Preacher do sacredly profess, that he
does not of his own accord, and willingly descend to those extreme remedies,
but is drawn to it unwillingly, and with much grief. Especially, if he show
himself such, in the rest of his life and speech, with all mansuetude and
lenity, that the hearers may believe he speaks it truly. He may also by
relating those things which he judges to be excellent and praiseworthy in the
hearers, both remove from himself the suspicion of bitterness and tartness,
and also admonish and exhort them not to stain the glory their virtues have
acquired them, by the contagion of such a foul sin, or lose their expected
Crown.

The chief heads of the aggravations of sin.
I. From causes Internal, through the nature or kind of sin, External the
efficient. A. A. From the efficient seen in the Order of operating procreating
preserveing by insisting upon over-adding to
the tracks of others especially notorious wicked ones. heavily punished ones.

Manner of operating either solitary, with others. B. B. With others where from
those which sin in that kind the multitude, the conspiracy.
and those consociates or fellows, unequals principal, and especially the
evil, assistants, which the sinner abuses.





or by it self. C. C. By it self, as very wilful. Here is to be considered The
mind as it presents greater disswasives, lesser motives.
is captivated makes one wise to sin, extends the desire of sinning.

The conscience as it reclaims. D. D. It reclaims as in sin out of malice when
one sins out of deliberate counsel, and destinate purpose of mind, affected
ignorance: knowing in a confuse conceit that the light would discover his evil
work, Joh. 3.
infirmity or weakness, but when one sins out of a certain knowledge and
applied to the fact, frequently and neglects to correct it.



as it is bound. E. E Is bound by habit out, of which sin proceeds with greater
desire, more hard or difficult to be amended.
by a frequent rejection of him that admonishes, obstinacy against him.











the end. F. F. The end Of the Agent, Of the thing, so far as out of the
Hypothesis of sin God has decreed, either to forgive the penitent, through the
death of his only begotten, to make the impenitent pay for it by eternal
punishment.





II. From the effect Positively in The person of the sinner inferring the
guilt, the punishment always by deserving it, sometimes by its crying

disposing him to sins the same, other.

Others. A. A. Others Generally the good the constant ones by grieving, the
weak ones, causing them to fall.
the evil animating them, causing them to blaspheme God, holy profession.
defame his friends, the rest of the same profession.



Specially in the present family, their posterity.




Negatively hindering future goods, taking away present goods.

III. From the subject in which it is received externally, internally.
it is placed holy, common.

about which it is employed. the person Increated according to the various
respects and degrees of its manifestation in our good willing it, effecting it.
aggravateing our sin tolerating it, hating it.

Created. A. A. Created Angels, Men Themselves, Their neighbors and chiefly to
him that is joined To God by virtue, by office.
To himself by nature in consanguinity, affinity,
by friendship, benefits freely bestowed, by covenant to be restored.



to him that is most recommended to him by God, as the aged, the afflicted any
way, especially the stranger, the poor, the widow, the orphan, etc.








The thing. B. B. Of the thing The Law commanding, forbidding, against which we
sin most when we contrary it in the act, object.

The material object, whether it be holy, common.
be apprehended by the sense, as pleasure, by the mind, as wealth, honors.







IV. From the Adjunct as well Of the sinner out of the respect which he bears
in himself particularly, as he is a Christian, having put on the new man.
toward others, in a sociable one Public, Oeconomical.

by which others are affected toward him well as whom many honor, believe, and
trust. from whom much good is expected.
evil, that they may take leave to sin, occasion to hurt by word, by deed.



the circumstance of time. A. A. The cirstance of time, of the age, in which he
sins. of the action, by which he sins in quantity severally so many times,
continually so long.
relation to things then to be done sacred ordinary, extraordinary.
common of our ordinary vocation, upon an extraordinary occasion.






Of sin it self. B. B. Of sin it self with which he is clothed privately,
openly, etc. hardly to be forgiven; the irremissible has also place in the
Dehortation.
which is employed about sin God, the creature rational Angels Good, Bad.
Men of what relation soever.
irrational by howling.





V. From the repugnant; where nothing is more frequent then the aggravation
from the diverse, See Chap. 9. Sect. 5. opposite virtue one directly, the rest
extensively.
the manner of conversing in other things, as if the sin be against the command
forbidding carelessness in the offices of Table first, second.
commanding activity in evil things, unnecessary things.

the same thing at another time.


VI. From compared in quantity equal, unequal, the greater, if great, and
which is not far from, the lesser when it has less vehemently displeased us,
heavily been punished.


quality semblable in evil, dissemblable in good.

VIII. From those things that rise either Nominal, Real, where the parts, the
finition.

VIII. From the Testimony, where who God who also sometimes descends to our
ways of provoking. swearing.
Man by testimony common by the law, by the voice of the people included in a
proverb, a wise man's saying.
spread abroad by public report.

proper.

What.

CHAP. XIX. Of Consolation or Comfort.
1. IF the Doctrine does afford a Consectary, which promises some good to those
who are troubled and vexed in mind; this Consectary must be applied to the
hearers in the use of Consolation.

2. The formal object of this is either the evil of guilt or of punishment,
which presses the hearers either not at all, or not in such a degree or
measure, as they imagine. The end is to stir up joy. The means whereby he
attains to this end, is by propounding to the heart some great and present good.

3. This presence may be shown by Notes taken from any Argument that
necessarily infers the good which is proposed.

4. But because in public Sermons the usual manner of comforting is, in
speaking to men, not plainly, but under that condition to which the Scripture
promises that good: Therefore because those shall not assume this comfort to
whom it does not belong (as not being endowed with that quality which is
required) it will not be out of purpose sometimes to give some notes by which
one may judge of the presence or absence of that quality, and consequently of
the good which is thereunto annexed.

3. The reason of the good is Negative, Positive.
The Negative good is in the absence, of the all, or of so much of some evil
(either of that which is thought to be present, or of some other), which if it
were indeed present, would afflict a man; but the absence of it argues his
affairs to be in a better condition, then he thinks. The Positive good tends
to that, that if it cannot remove the evil of punishment (as sometimes it
cannot) yet it may lenifie it and make it tolerable. But shows that the evil
of sin or guilt (because that with it the good, and consequently the comfort
cannot consist) may at least be removed, and so far he may be comforted. But if
it be demonstrated that either the evil never was present, or that it is
already removed, there seems no more to be required for comfort.

6. The rejoicing is by so much made the greater, by how much the good in it
self is greater, and the presence of it is more strict and apt for
participation, and its perpetuity more firm.

7. The good may be amplified according to its nature. If it be a good of
virtue, the arguments may be fetched (according to the rule of opposites) out
of the Scheme of the aggravations of sin. And this amplification may be
extended either more or less, as his affliction, whom we intend to comfort,
shall require. And the good is most of all to be amplified in that, wherein it
is opposite to that evil which presses the patient, either diminishing or
removing, or preponderating of it.

8. As grief may arise out of an evil present, not only actually, but also in
the certainty of the causes, so may joy out of a good. If therefore the object
of fear does urge vehemently, especially according to a difficulty of avoiding,
so that it either quite take away, or too much weakens, that parcel of hope
which is in the fear, and so causes a grief and dejection of mind; The
Consolation may be either Negative, to the object of fear in that excess,
showing that either there is no evil at all, or that it is not so great, or so
unavoidable: or positive, by some good which is present, either actual, or in
an equal or greater certitude of causes.

9. To this act may be added the act of Benediction, or promise of good.

Crypsis.
The notes may also here be sometimes omitted, especially when they are taken
from that condition or quality to which the good which is propounded is
annexed, and the Preacher intends instantly to exhort the Auditors unto it, for
then in that exhortation (if so be it be absolute in all its parts) there will
be occasion to make use of those notes.

11. The pronouncing of the blessing (as in the first use the Denuncitation of
the cu^se) being the exercise of the Keys, or seeming to make show of some
such thing, does therefore very well belong to the greatest and weightiest
causes.

12. He that comforts, doing it as Gods Minister, and in his Name, and out of
some place of Scripture, peradventure out of the History of some Heroic person
therein mentioned: and seeing those who are to be excited do more then seldom
sin through pusillanimity, grieving extremely, and letting their minds faint
upon slight occasions, to which the comfort is obvious, lying as it were before
their feet: It may sometimes be permitted to entermix Reproof, producing the
examples of Christ, or Saints in Scriptures, who with alacrity and boldness of
Spirit did undergo far greater afflictions. Which, if he think fitting, he may
by a decent Prosopopoeia bring in saying; they had causes of grief, equal to,
if not greater then theirs, and laying forth by what means they hold out,
rejoiced and sang praises in their tribulations, looking upon the excellency
and greatness of the annexed good. And so at last conferring theirs, and his
Auditors condition, he may close up this whole place, either upbraiding his
hearers (if need be) with their softness and imbecility of mind, or exhorting
them to imitate the fortitude of those excellent men.

CHAP. XX. Of Exhortation.
1. HItherto have been those Uses which have a relation to the heart, as being
under a present distemper: now follow those which look upon it as in relation
to some future thing. These the Apostle seems to comprehend under the notion of
those words [(...), for instruction in righteousness, and they are
Exhortation, Dehortation.
Exhortation looks upon some future good, which belongs to the hearers, spuring
on the heart to pursue it. The scope of this is to excite hope, or an effectual
desire: and propounds that which it exhorts unto, under the formal reason of
the object of hope, which is, a future, sublime or difficult, possible good.

2. The Motives are grounded upon the good of the thing to which they are
exhorted. Which being considered in the degrees of subordination, which it has
to the summum bonum, or supreme good, as more or less necessary for the
attaining unto it; has so much the more force, as the necessity is the
greater: and most of all, if it be absolutely necessary, by the necessity of
the last end.

3. The good is honest and seemly, useful and pleasing.
To which may be added the absence of the evil, which may be taken for a good.

4. The good may be urged from the examples of God and Christ, and the examples
of holy Angels and men, from the good which is found in the irrational creature
(as diligence or care in the Ant or Emmit, etc.) from the good of men which are
not good; and from the good also in the sins of wicked, prudent, laborious men,
etc. in their generation, in doing evil; and that out of motions which are
slight and weak (at least comparatively) if not quite null, but only in show,
and really disswasive; Finally, from the examples of the Devils themselves, of
which if a legion could agree in one man, much more is it just and fitting for
two men to be persuaded to live in concord in one house. To this part of
Exhortation the Scheme may conduce.

5. To this act may be added a Commination, or Denunciation of evil, as also a
Lamentation, (Jer. 13.17.) but Hypothetically, if when they are pricked forward
to some great good, they neglect to obey. In the same manner a blessing may be
pronounced upon those who studiously seek after some great good.

6. If the hearers falsely persuade themselves, that the good to which they are
incited by the Exhortation, is not future, but that they are already possessed
of it (the occasion of suspecting whereof in most of them may be the self love
which is bred in all men) some Notes may be given, whereby the absence thereof
may be argued. Neither will they be unuseful, although it be truly present; for
so the motives will incite to the cherishing of that good, and persevering in
it. But here the notes must not be taken from the causes, if that head of
direct means must be treated of.

7. If the hearers have too confidently promised to themselves they shall ever
have in their power the thing it self, or time to acquire it, so that
whenever they will, without any trouble they may possess themselves of it,
and so neglect the present then that which is hard must be expounded.

8. To obviate the first confidence, which is of the facility of the thing it
self, we may consider; First, on Gods behalf the order which he has fixed in
things, according to which he would have every good thing, to not be acquired
without labor and difficulty. Then on our part, how averse our depraved nature
is from the study of excellent things. Finally, how careful and assiduously
Satan and his instruments endeavor, to deter us from entering into the right
way, or lead us another. As concerning the other which is of the time or space
of gaining the thing; may be considered the contingency and incertitude of the
future, as well concerning life, as capacity. Add also the danger, either from
Gods act, substracting his grace, and sending forth his decree: or from the
efficacy of an evil custom, which comes creeping in by degrees, and
encompasseth the mind with an hardness, causing it no longer to obey wholesome
counsels and admonitions.

9. If the hearers shall judge the thing impossible, or too hard for them,
Means may be added whereby that may be obtained whereunto we exhort them. In
the treating of which, we may also obviate such objections (if any there be) by
which men may seem to be deterred from seeking after that, which they believe
they cannot attain to.

10. Means are of two kinds prohibiting by way of removing, direct,
which (in the beginning of the action excited by the motives) do inform (if
need be) and teach the way of acting, and do afford strength to attain to, or
effect that which we will. To all, each, or some of these (as it shall be
convenient) may be added God's promises in Scriptures by which he promises to
those who are willing, ^ power to use the means, (...) success to those who
make (...) of them.

11. Sometimes before the particular assignation of the means, the general
prae-requisite ought to be premised, without which it is in vain to deliberate
of the means; and which being laid both kinds of means may usefully be
prescribed.

Crypsis.
12. When the chief Motives are contained in (...), the wherefore, they may
here be omitted, and either others be applied, or none at all: and the hearers
be referred to (...), the wherefore. Yet if the exhortation were of great
moment, which was there proposed to the mind (...), by way of teaching, and
expound^ way of reasons, they may (...) be usefully resumed, and being taken as
for granted, urged to ^ve affections.

13. If the Auditors shall seem to be too great self-pleasers, so that the
motives seem to be but little regarded by them, as seeming to them, to not be
very necessary: The Notes may be delivered in the first place, then the Motives
be added.

14. That which is difficult, may here for the most part be omitted; as well
because it seems but accidentally to enter into the object of hope; as also
because sloathful men use of their own accords to pretend difficulties, when
they are incited to perform their duties; and finally because the means do in
a manner presuppose some hardness. Yea oftentimes, in the Motives to urge a
good, the argument must be drawn from the easiness: namely, when the means are
omitted, or this argument is so handled, that it does not fall in with them.
But when it shall be necessary to touch it: the means may be so handled, as
they may show how these Difficulties may be overcome.

15. Because man's heart is more prepared to the prosecution of good, by the
apprehension of evil: The Preacher may sometimes mix Reprehension, and
sometimes Consolation with the Exhortation, either in the beginning, or
elsewhere, insinuating how unseemly it is for them now to need to have him
exhort them to that, which they should long since have performed of themselves,
etc. Or that seeing such an affliction lies upon them, there is now an
occasion proffered to exhort them to that which may countervail it abundantly,
etc.

CHAP. XXI. Of Dehortation.
1. DEhortation has a relation to some future evil, to which the hearers are
obnoxious, or subject: instigating the heart to avoid and fly it. The scope of
this is to excite fear; and therefore it represents that, from which it does
dehort, under the formal reason of the objected fear, that it is a great evil,
imminent, avoidable.

2. The grounds of Dehortation or Disswasives ought to be taken from the evil
of that thing, from which we do dehort? The Evil considered according to its
degrees and kinds, may be estimated by the opposite good, in the dishonest and
unseemly; or the unuseful, and displeasing.

3. The Evil may be urged here oppositely to the Good in the first act. There
may also be added (if it be thought fitting) the difficulty or impossibility of
satisfying the desire in that matter. Though this seems to hinder the external
act, rather then the root of fin which is in the heart: and tend more to
proving the folly of man, then the iniquity of the thing.

4. To this may also be added (hypothetically) a Denunciation, or likewise a
Lamentation, as also a Benediction, of which before: the Denuntiation against
those who follow, or do not shun the evil which we dehort them from. The
Benediction upon them which do fly from it.

5. The imminency notes it to be future, and difficult. But here it is
needless to argue the future out of notes. For we use not easily (which is our
presumption) to imagine an evil to be present, when indeed it is present; much
less when it is future. For if it were present; then there would not be so
much need of Dehortation, as of Reprehension, or Consolation. Yet sometimes
there may be shown (if it be thought expedient) out of the Notes, that the
evil is yet absent from the hearers, that they may be the better encouraged to
avoid it as much as possibly as they can.

6. The Difficult seems here to be essential to the object of fear, and
therefore necessarily to be expounded; showing the propinquity of the evil
which hangs over us, and presses us, and the difficulty of shunning it. The
difficulty may be considered as well in respect of God, who does so govern
things by his Providence, that occasions of sinning being offered us, our
obedience may thereby be seen; and appear, as also in respect of us, who as of
our selves, are inclined to sin and evil, so we are also allured and driven on
thereunto by Satan and his instruments.

7. But on the otherside the avoicablensse of the evil will appear, having
laid open the means of avoiding it; and likewise Gods promises, by which he
promises us, both the power of using means, and a success.

8. The means here, are either by removing the Illatives, or by avoiding those
things which may infer the evil, that is to say, the causes of evil: or
inferring Prohibitives, or applying such things as can drive away the evil,
that is to say, the causes of the contrary, or the contraries of the causes.
Here also sometimes there will be occasion of premising the general
fore-requisite, to avoid the Illatives, and bring in the Preservatives.

Crypsis.
9. When (...), the wherefore does contain the chief Disswasives, we must do
as before in the Exhortation.

10. Here also may somewhat be intermixed out of the rest of the Uses that may
conduce hereunto: as Consolation from the absence of the evil, which may be
argued from the the dissemblable condition of other Congregations, etc.

FINIS.
A Nomenclator of sundry Tracts, Sermons, and Commentaries, as may in some
measure tend to make a skilful Laborer in the Lords Vineyard.
COmmentary on the whole Bible. English Annotation. Diodate Annotation. Roberts
Key of the whole Bible. On Pentateuch, Henry Aynsworth, Mr. Trap, Arthur
Jackson. On Genesis, Willet, Shutt, and Wheatly. Willet on Exodus and
Leviticus. Atersol on Numbers. On Joshua, Arthur Jackson, John Mayr. On Judges,
John Mayr, Rich. Rogers. On Ruth, John Mayr, Thomas Fuller. On Samuel, John
Mayr, An. Willet. Mayr on Kings, Chronicles, and Ezra. On Nehemiah, John Mayr,
Mr. Pilkington. Mayr on Esther. On Job, Jos Caryl, Calvin. On Psalms, Hen.
Ainsworth, John Mayr, David Dixon. On Proverbs, Jo. Dod. Dr. Jermin, Dr. Mayr,
Fr. Tailor. On Ecclesiastes, Hugh Broughton, Tho. Granger, Will. Pemble, Jo.
Cotton. On Canticles, Hen. Ainsworth, Thomas Brightman, John Cotton, Mr.
Robotham, Dr. Sibbs. On Lamentations of Jeremiah, John Vdal, Broughton. On
Ezekiel, Will. Greenhill. On Daniel, Broughton, And. Willet, Mr. Huet, Parker.
On the twelve minor Prophets, Dr. Mayr, Mr. Trapp, Mr. Hutchinson. On Hosea,
Dr. Sibbs, Mr. Buroughs. On Obadiah, Mr. Marbury. On Jonah, Bishop King,
Bishop Abbot. On Habakkuk, Edw. Marbury. On Zachariah, Will. Pemble. On
Malachi, Rich. Stork, Dr. Slater. On the New Testament, Thomas Cartwright, Dr.
Hamond, Master Leigh, Mr. Fulk. Mr. Trap. Upon the four Gospels, Cartwright,
Dr. Lightfoot, Dr. Mayr, Jo. Trap. On Matthew, David Dixon, Master Ward. On S.
John's Gospel, Arth. Hildersham. On Acts, Joh. Mayr, Joh. Trap, Calvin. Upon the
Epistles, Joh. Mayr, Joh. Trap. On the Romans, Eliath. Parr, Mr. Wilson, And.
Willet, Elton. On the Epistles to the Corinth. Dr. Day, Will. Slater, T.
Stapleton, Luther, Dr. Sibbs. To the Galatians, Will. Perkins. To the
Ephesians, Paul Bain. To the Collossians, Nich. Bifield, Edw. Elton. To the
Thessalonians, W. Sclater. To Timothy, Barlow. To Titus, Tho. Tailor. To
Philemon, Arthur Sol. Dan. Dike. On the Hebrews, Da. Dixon, Lushington, Dr.
Gouge, Bishop Jones, Mr. Buroughs. On the seven Canonical Epistles, Joh. Trap,
John Mayr. On the Epistle of James, Mr. Manton. On the Epistles of Peter, Nich.
Bifield, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Adams, Will. Aims. On the first Ep. of John, J.
Cotton. On the Epistle Jude, Sam. Oats, Will. Perkins, Will. Jenkins. On the
Revelation, Brightman, Dent, Will. Cooper, Forbi, Perkins, Meed, Napier,
Stevens. Elaborate Sermons, B. Andrews, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Carrill. D. Featly,
Mr. Gataker, Mr. Greenham, B Hall, Mr. Harris, Doctor Jackson, B. Lake, Mr.
Perkins, Dr. Preston, Dr. Raynolds, D. Sanderson, Dr. Sibbs, M. Smith, Dr.
Jeremy Tailor, Mr. Wheatly, Mr. Clark, Dr. Donn, Dr. Hen. Hamond. Excent
Catechisms of the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, Vescim, Mr. Ball, Master
Crook, and B. Andrews Catechistical Doctrine, B. Usher, etc. On the Lords
Prayer, B Andrews, Mr Dod, Dr. Gouge, Dr. Haywood, Dr. Hen. King, M. Hooker. On
the Creed, W. Bifield, Dr. Gill, Dr. Jackson, Perkins. On the Decalogue, B.
Andrews, Joh. Dod, Edw. Elton, W. Perkins. On the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, Jer. Dyke. W. Pemble, Mr. Bradshaw, Dr. Preston, D. Jer. Tailor. R.
Vines Sacramental Sermons. On Baptism, R. Baxter, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Cobbet, Mr.
Cotton, Dr. Featly, Tho. Fuller, Mr. Balley. Of the Scripture and its Divine
Authority, John Goodwin, John Weemes, Edw. Leigh, Sa. Heison, Mr Chapel. N.
Bifields Drection for reading Scripture. Jer Whites Way to the Tree of Life. Of
God and his Attributes. Dr. Jacksons Treatise of the Divine Essence. Dr.
Prestons Treatise of the Divine Essence. Ric. Stork, on the Attributes. Mr.
Larkham on the Attributes. On Gods Providence. Tho. Jackson, Dr. Gouge, The
Extent of Providence. Jo. Wilkins the Beauty of Providence. On living and dying
well. D. Jer. Tailor. Dr. Readings guide to the holy City. N. Bifields Cure of
fear of death. S. Crook, Death Subdued. On Conscience, M. Perkins, B. Hal, Jer.
Dike, W. Fever, Dr. Hamond, Dr. Jer. Tailor. Of Sin, Mr. Bifield. Dr. Tho.
Goodwins Aggra. of Sin. Perks Great danger of little Sins. Mr. Buroughs
Sinfulness of Sin. Dr. Preston, The Saints Infirmity. Of the Punishment of
Sin. Dr. Gouges Three Arrows. Tho. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. Mr.
Clarks Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners. On the Covenant of Grace, Dr.
Preston, John Cotton. P. Burhley, the Gospel Covenant. B Downham on the
Covenant of Grace. Growth in Grace, Dr. Tailor. Ob. Sedgwicks Christ's Counsel
to his Church. Mortification of Sin. Dr. Prestons Sins overthrow. Mr. Wolfall,
of Mortification. Of Justification, Will. Pemble, Bishop Downham, Jo. Goodwin.
Mr. Baxters Aphorisms of Justification Of Sanctification. Dr. Prestons Saints
Qualification. Joh. Downhams Spiritual Warfare. Mr. Buroughs G. Worship. Of
the four last things things, Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell, Rob. Bolton.
Baxters Saints Rest. Mr. Shepherd. On the General Judgment, Greenwood. S.
Smiths Great Assize. Will. Fever, the Judgment of the World passed by Saints.
On Perseverance. Ob. Sedgwick, on Rev. 3.2. and 3. Arth. Burgess Spiritual
Refinings. Dr Owen in answer to J. Goodwin. Dr. Kendall, Mr. Brooks Heaven on
Earth. On Prayer, R. Harris. Peter's Enlargement. Dr. Prestons Saints daily
exercise. Mr. Cobbet, Jo. Wilkins, B. Prideux Legacy to his Daughters. Return
of Prayer, Tho, Goodwin. Hearing and reading the Word, Mr. Mason, Jer. Dyke. B.
Andrews on James 1.22. On the Love and Fear of God. Dr. Preston of Love. Will.
Pemble, the Christians Love. Pincks, trial of a Christian Love. Mr. Harris,
David comfort at Ziklag. Mr. Greenham, of Gods Fear. Will. Case, the Nature and
necessity of godly fear. On the Sabbath, Dr. Twist, Phil. Goodwin. The Sabbath
enlivened, M. Sheppard, Primress, Mr. Caudy and Palmer in four parts. Of
Sacrilege and Tithes, B. Andrews, B. Carlton, Mr. Seldom, Sir Henry Spelman.
On Political and Oeconomical Duties. B. Halls Politics. B. Bilson on
Subjection. Mr. Perkins of the right manner of Governing a Family. Mr. Dods
Household Government. Dr. Gouges Domestical Duties. Mr. Cobbet. Government of
the Tongue, Master Reyner. Mr. Boltons Direction. M. Perkins government of
tongue. Of our Thoughts. Tho. Graper, Govern. of Thoughts. Tho. Goodwin, Vanity
of thoughts. W. Fever, the Araignment of Vain thoughts. Of Contentation, Dr.
Tailor, B. Hall, Mr. Watson, Mr. Buroughs. Of Faith, Dr. Preston, Tho. Ball,
Jer. Culverwell, Dr. Jackson. T. Goodwins Encourag. of Faith. M. Perk. Grain of
Mustard Seed. On Repentance, Dr. Tho. Tailor, Dr. Jer. Tailor, Dan. Dyke. Dr.
Prestons Judas Repentance. Dr. Hamond of Late Repentance. W. Fever, Danger of
defering Repentance. On True Conversion. Mr. Shepards Sincere Convert. Mr.
Shepards Sound Believer. Mr. Hookers Soul Preparation, -- Humiliation, --
Vocation, -- Exaltation, -- Implantation. Mr. Cottons Way of Life.
FINIS.

