A Postscript.
OUt of this brief Narration may be extracted somewhat for KING, and Commons.

For the KING.

First, for preventing Seditions and Rebellions; then for settling a Kingdom
after the Rebellion suppressed.

For the first; That he beware how he entrust the Government of His Kingdom to
others. How He suffer His Favorites, and great Officers of State, to suck him
into necessities, and inthrall Him by indigency, and be thereby drawn, by
extraordinary illegal Impositions and Taxes, to vex and alienate the hearts
and affections of His Subjects, and then (as he must) be constrained to fly to
them for relief and counsel in Parliament; where (he may then be sure) he
must be Subject to his Subjects, and they will be kings over their King: where
he must be content to be less then he should be, and the Subject will be more:
where (he may be sure) they will make advantage of his necessity, and he must
undergo many hard censures, and be vexed with undutifull demands, before they
will relieve him. But whether they part with their money or not, let the King
take heed of ever parting with his Power.

Then after the heat and heart of a Rebellion be broken, not to be severe
against any, lest the rest grow desperate. Severity may blow up, never blow
out, the flames of Rebellion.

Yet to show some acts of Justice and power as well as grace and mercy; not to
use the extremity of Justice, least he thereby renew the present Rebellion; yet
to show ^ome Justice to prevent a future.

By a sweet mixture of mercy and justice, the King shall at once b^th humble
and oblige his delinquent Subjects. By mercy, in not taking the rigor of the
Law; by Justice, in taking a part of the Law: by this, ^he shall humble them in
taking so much; by that he shall oblige them in taking no more.

Next, to take special care in rewarding, and cherishing, and countenancing,
and remembering (before others) all those that stuck close unto him, that by
their persons, or their purses, showed themselves really for him, and, without
all fallacy, loyal.

After this to prepare speedily for some Foreign Expedition, wherein to
employ all the late Active Spirits, and working heads, who will quickly make
work again at home, if they have not work abroad.

Lastly, to place some one (as a Scavenger) in every County, to carry away the
dreggs that are left behind. Such as will not beyond Sea, cannot work, and are
ashamed to beg.

For the People this.

First, that they suffer not themselves to be abused and misled into
disloyalty, by any ambitious, unquiet, cunning Spirits, upon what pretenses
soever, and when Liberty, Religion, or any public good is pretended, then
most of all to suspect their private ends.

Next, that the People never get by this course, but often loose their former
ancient Liberties and Privileges, according to that observable (though not
observed) Maxim, EVERY REBELLION SUPPRESSED MAKES THE KING MORE KING, AND THE
SUBJECT MORE SUBJECT.

Lastly, that taking Arms without Sovereign authority, upon what pretenses
soever (be they never so fair, as for Religion, or Liberty; never so foolish,
as that it is not against the King, but for the King) is most abominable in the
eyes of God, and though it seem to prosper for a time, yet most surely and
severely is it punish^d in the end, ending commonly in a general
impoverishment (if not in the end) of the people, and some dreadful Judgment
upon the Contrivers.

My Son fear thou the LORD, and the King, Prove. 24. ver. 21.22.
and meddle not with them that are given to change:

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

FINIS.

