They must needs go, that the Devil drives: OR, A WHIP FOR TRAITORS:
Comprising, The Charge, and Articles of Impeachment, against all those
Commissioners, Treasurers, Exoize-men, Clerks, Overseers, and Surveyors, who
have collected great Sums of Money, cheated the Commonwealth of many
Thousands, oppressed the poor, favored the Rich; and heaped up Chests of Gold
and Silver for themselves.

Also, a Declaration to the People, for the taking off all Taxes and
Assesments; and gallant Propositions for the increase of Trading, relieving the
poor, and ^eting the Bondmen free (throughout City and Country) from rich and
cunning Assessors, and crafty Catch-poles and Collectors.

Sent in a Letter to the Parliament of England; and published (...) special
Authority.

LONDON, Printed for G. Hor^on, 1652.

They must needs go, whom the Devil drives: OR, Articles of Impeachment against
many hundred of those Committee Men, Treasurers, and others, who have cheated
the Commonwealth of many Thousands of pounds.
Sent in a Letter to the Parliament of England.
Ye choice men of England,
I Cannot but honor, whom the Lord has been pleased to honor. I am commanded
to love you: give me then leave to be jealous of you. Love lies not in
flattery; for the Law says, Thou shall not hate thy brother, but freely tell
him of his faults. Ye are many, and there was one Judas amongst the Apostles. I
know him not; but he that bears the bag will certainly betray you. He that
persuades you to sell that precious ointment, which cost so much blood, whose
Odor might perfume all the Nation with the sweet savor of charity, does he do
it that he loves you, or because he has the bag? Such you have declared have
been amongst you. If any yet remain, give him this fop, and discover him. Note
the man that dippeth with you in the Dish, whose lips are still ready for the
guilty sop of new Assesments, or saue't with Birdlime G^lly of Delay, kisse^h
you with the seeming ^enderness of Bull-begger ca^^i^^, and blinds your ways
with a prudential Forehead of politic diversion. ^^o^fess you are all above
me, and see over (...); but I am under you, and see under you: yea, I see you
are supplanted and blown up, if you prevent it not. Taxes will eat up the grass
under your feet: How came the Son of Sol^mon to lose his Kingdom? None more
fo^d of a King then the English; yet they departed from him to ease their
purses, and their consciences. If they forsook their King (I speak it to some
of your House in the beginning of this Session) will they not forsake their
fellow subjects for the same causes? Few honest men will engage to be Taxers,
and knaves will tax none (willingly) but your friends: nor will Collectors
gather from others, unless compelled: nor Clerks discharge any but your bribing
Enemies. So you still spur the free horse, and necessitate your friends against
you. Will your Enemies then be for you? I write this feelingly, as not only
cloyed with Taxes, but overcome with the infinite abuses in them. Now when no
more Taxes are to be had, must not the soldier fall upon his masters? Be
pleased to remember the first occasions for money. It is high time you should
find a remedy; and this it is, Keep whole the public stock; provide for the
poor, and they will provide for you: destroy the poor, and they will destroy
you: And if you provide not for the poor, they will provide for themselves.

Though you would pardon all, and take the debts upon you, proclaiming (with
the Apostles) Let him that stole, steal no more. Set but 200000 poor at work,
and if they clear but 20 l. a head, (as that is the least the meanest Hine can
do that pays his Rent) The year will bring about 4000000^. to the public
Treasury, beside all other profits herein mentioned.

Hasten this work of God, and establish the Honor of your memories in the
hearts of all men. They are not weary of you, but of your Taxes and Delays.
And with this joyful Work proclaim a Jubilee of Conscience, but let it not
usher in a babel of sin.

How much blood and expenses had been saved, had honest men distinguished
between Liberty of Sin, and Liberty of Conscience, between punishment of sin,
and punishment of Conscience? Tie up sin, leave Conscience free. Let no man
here presume above his senses, God only judges the heart. He that breaks
the Law, is judged by the Law, and there the senses are sufficient. He that
despises the Gospel is judged by the Gospel; but that is discerned by the
spirit: God loves not linsey-wolsey. He appoints no Gospel censures for legal
Transgressions, nor legal censures for Gospel sins: The Magistrate for the Law,
the Church for the Gospel.

Herein if we are guided by the supreme Authority and Power of all the World:
and the fundamental Laws of Nature written to Moses by God, we may all agree
concerning the Authority, Power, and Laws of England, unless we must ever
continue pen^^us toto divis^, ab orb, out of the World. Verbum sapien^i. I am
not tedious, unless displeasing; And can there be displeasure in love? the
Christian love of him that is,

Your Honors In all humble Christian Duty, P. Chambers.

A Declaration to the People.
WHereas the enemies of the republic in Parliament, and elsewhere, seeing the
cure mistaken, pressed forward the mistake (to bleed instead of purging) and were
ever hastening the Parliament to new necessities, to invent new Engagements and
so new Loanes; wherein, they confederated with the wary Money-masters, and they
with their subtle Crafts-masters, till they were incorporated with their own
common guilt. And they that were but half wicked at first, were insensibly
drawn on, to share with each other in all adventures, having the temptations of
gold before them, and the Idoll-covetous^ness within them. They must needs go
whom the Devil drives.

These, having gotten the precious Jewel of Public Faith in pawn into their
custody, by being trusted with the stock that should discharge it; Undervalue
it at what rates they please, so as to be sometimes worth half, sometimes worth
but a quarter, and even at that rate swallow up the Free-Loanes of the first
lenders; who are forced to remember, that, half a loaf is better then no bread.
Sometimes making it worth nothing at all: and therefore cry to their
confederates in Parliament for new pawns; which rather then they shall be
wanting, they themselves will occasion, by withholding the due from the
Soldier, maintenance from the poor, setting of many inventions on work for the
decay of Trade, causing divisions in the House, the City, and the whole
Kingdom; raising up parties, countenancing incendiaries, withholding all
succor from Ireland, provoking and inviting foreign Nations. Yea,
withdrawing all comfort from Seamen, and evermore distasting what is last in
design, or action. That thus they might fish in troubled waters, and yet keep
fair with all parties.

It were well therefore, if our present Patriots, who have born the heat of the
day, and are but scarce yet arrived to the discovery of these invisible
mysteries of iniquity, would in time keep off from these Rocks, least when they
are in the Gulf, they either suffer a wrack, or tide with the torrent without
power of recovering the Rudder.

Obj. But many of the Parliament and Army, who have deserved nobly of the
Commonwealth, have received great sums, of which they can give no account.

Answ. 1. God forbid but the Members of Parl. and Army, who have deserved well,
may have whatsoever they can demand, and whatsoever is fitting for a gratuity
over and above. No Commonwealth was ever a base play master to their public
Servants.

2. Great sums were never so inconsiderable to any, as to be either received or
parted from, without notice of account.

3. This is certainly the desire also of all the honest Members of Pa^l. and
Army, that by the clearing hereof (according to their Declarations) they might
be justified in their dealings both concerning themselves, and toward others
whom they have accused for this very fault. For if they have their due (as none
can grudge it to so great desert) it can be no contemptible sum. And then what
needs a rich man be a Thief? Yet it is most certain, that some must be in
fault, as has been declared by the Army, or else the public could never have
bin so indebted as they are for the Army only. And for a few inconsiderable
gratuities to others.

All men expected ease by the Parl: and many in Parl: did as cordially intend
it. But what? The Monkey put in the Cats Claw, and the Trade which was formerly
invaded, was now altogether prohibited, Taxes multiplied, and increased from
the Finger to the Loins. Moneys which then were robbed from the Mint, were now
ravished from the private Coffers. And all the burdens, which by both parties
in Parl. were packt up, and which the honest party did simply intend for their
enemies, were cunningly cast out by the other parties Agents on themselves or
their friends.

Since that time, Parliaments have been vomitted, purged and repurged. Armies
have been formed, modellized and refined. In all which variations (as the sick
turn for ease) men rolled and relied on every change, till now the Fabric
being wholly altered, the peevish consumed Nation can no longer endure with
patience, to wait the benefit of Long-ro'b Counsels: Hold, here we tack about
from this Atlantic Ocean to our narrow Seas, where the Mariners turn Pirates
abroad, because they could not live honestly, nor comfortably at home, nor
having as yet found the benign influence of amendment by change of Government.
Let this new Government indulge them a new pardon, take off, or stint all
Taxes, provide them pay, encourage their Merchants in Trade, and no doubt they
will know on which side their bread is buttered.

Quest. But how may this be done?

Answ. It is the glory of the Parliament, to be able to pardon: which they may
either sweeten with Amnestie of the faults upon a speedy return, promise of
amendment, and security of future fidelity; or make the contempt of it
terrible, by postscript on, and giving up their lives to the next violence they
meet with, and such further prohibition of all correspondencies with them, etc.
as may be advised.

Qu^ry. If all Delinquents Lands must be sold: How shall the money be disposed
off? To grease the fat Sow: Must it always be Habenti dabitur, and non habent^
a^cipietu^? Shall the Rich be paid, and the Poor Taxed? When shall ^^e
Mountains be made low, and the Valleys exalted? The poor is a Creditor as well
as the rich. If any precedence, Is there not more reason it should be to the
Soldier, and poor Handi^rafts-man, who freely have adventured both life and
fortunes, then to the Rich, who (through the poor man's hazard) have remained in
safety and plenty. 2 The Rich may stay, the Poor cannot. 3 Many Poor are paid
at the rate of one rich man. 4 The very occasion of increasing the poor, is the
great increase of riches to the Rich, by their becoming so rich, as to be able
to live, without employing of the poor as formerly.

FINIS.

