CHAOS: OR, A DISCOURSE, WHEREIN Is presented to the view of the Magistrate,
and all others who shall peruse the same, a Frame of Government by way of a
Republique, wherein is little or no danger of miscarriage, if prudently
attempted, and thoroughly prosecuted by Authority.

Wherein is no difficulty in the Practice, nor obscurity in the Method; But all
things plain and easy to the meanest capacity.

Here Is no hard or strange Names, nor unknown Titles (to amaze the hearers)
used, and yet here is a full and absolute Power derivative insensibly from the
whole, and yet practically conveyed to the best men: wherein if any shall
endeavor a breach, he shall break himself: and if it must be so, that Cats
shall provide Supper, here they shall do it suitable to the best Palats, and
easy to digest.

By a well-willer to the Public Weal.

LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1659.

THis Volume is not great nor large,
Therefore it is bought with little charge:
Here Cooks Reports and Bridgmans are
Useless; our Laws are shorter far:
Here we permit no long delays,
Which alter Cases sundry ways:
Here Is Magna Charta full in view:
Here every freeman has his due:
Here Is no encouragement for knaves,
Whom fittest it is to use as slaves.
In this Discourse here is supply
For every ones necessity;
Here dainties are for Palats fine,
Here Gold and Pearl do both combine
To beautify the Diadem
Of Europes darling, and the Queen
Of Islands, Britain, which commands,
A midst the surging waves and sands,
Those Nations, which if once made one,
Will beautify a glorious Throne,
To entertain the mighty King
T'w om Angels Haleluia's sing.
Which that we all endeavor may,
With heart and voice let us truly pray.
PREFACE. CHAOS
SOme days ago taking into consideration the lacerate and torn condition of her
ruinous Fabric, and casting about which way to provide for her self, either to
prevent the sudden fall thereof, or else to erect another Mansion suitable to
her condition, purposing to reserve so much of the old as is fit for necessary
Offices, till better furniture may be had; has in these few following pages
attempted to put to view some things in order thereto, not doubting but good
will come thereof. It Is an unworn Path which she has trodden, so that he that
travels it, may perhaps meet with some seeming Rubs by the way; but there is no
danger in any; the hardest step may be trodden without danger (which is only
some trouble to the Roots in the first nine months of their work) but that
being past, she brings her Passenger to quiet and pleasant Mansions. If Aeneas
and his followers had the confidence ( Troy being turned to ashes) to refuse
the pleasures of the Carthaginian Court, and pass Hercules Pillars (where they
met with nothing but dangers) in hopes of a new Kingdom afterward to arise,
what shall we do, who though in some want of present Money, have all things
accommodable to furnish a well-being to our selves and our posterity, a rich
and Potent People, more ready to obey, then the Magistrate to command,
disobeying no Edict promulged by Authority, offering hands and estates to carry
on the work beyond all difficulties, for an unbiassed Republique? let not
monitions be slighted, though proceeding from an unknown hand. Never any Law
yet had its full force, whereof the Contriver was perfectly known: and though
the weight of corrupt Laws commonly fall on the Contrivers heads; as he that
made it treason to come armed into the Council, little thought he should have
been so caught first himself; neither dreamed Perillus, that his Bulls throat
should first bellow his own note; which may deter biassed men from selfish
designs: yet here is nothing strange, new, or unpracticable; nothing repugnant
to the great Law given in the Mount, nothing savouring of self-respect, more
then as a member of the Commonwealth, hoping (under the same, if it shall be
put in practice) to Reap the fruits of what is here propounded, viz. peace,
plenty, and the blessing of God. The Magistracy can never want money to do
their work, if peace be preserved: there is nothing more dangerous and
destructive to our peace, then erecting of particular interests, as our present
Governors may well observe in their own School: how many have in their times
since this Play begun, been eminently active upon the same stage, (where yet
our present Governors are) who are all gone before the Play be half done?
Chaos wishes the Tragical falls of those bypast, who have miscarried in the
view of the present Actors, may show them how to prevent the like dangers
hereafter: to which purpose she has assayed to show, that a way may be found
to a Republique; yea, and such a away, as if it be once put in practice, will
not easily, nay can hardly be laid aside; and so easy a way to be practiced,
as there is more facility by far in it, then in the rude and tumultuous ways we
now are in: nothing we do savours of safety, or relishes like a Republique. In
the way here propounded for elections, the meanest and rudest shall show more
gravity and respect to Magistracy, then the Magistrates themselves (in the
usual tumultuary elections now in use) can do: here all things shall be done
decently and in order, according to the Apostles advice in another case. But
will some say, Here the vulgar shall have too great a liberty. That Is answered,
They can have no less, then to elect others fit to be elected; and whoever he
is, though never so great, rich or potent, if he merit it not, there is no
reason he should Rule others with whom he has nothing to do. If it be said,
The Agrarian has here too much power: It Is answered, Salus patriae suprema
lex: the Agrarian pays the greatest Assesses, therefore it is reason he have
some hand in disposing thereof. The Merchant cannot be so well confided in, who
perceiving a storm arise from any foraign quarter, or inbred commotion, can
easily transport himself and his into the safety of another Prince or
Republiques Harbor. The Tradesman hereby is capable of his due proportion,
and each Corporation of his own Privilege. No Lord suffers loss, nor any
diligent undertaker discouraged: no Orphant unrelieved, nor any wanderer
encouraged: and indeed, Chaos (as a public Parent) endeavors here to
propound nothing which shall more relish of self, then to discover the
self-interests of the opposers or slighters of her proposals. But she is so
confident in her assertions, as if any one shall undertake to question any of
them, she doubts not but to make them more transcendently apparent and
demonstrable to any ingenious capacity. It Is true, here are many things left
short, which might be required to a perfect Platform of Government, which can
only receive life and growth by time; yet as it is, she says, It Is better then
this we have, which has been so many ages in contriving; yea, and more
practicable, with less charge and more profit. But next comes London and
Westminster, with their imperious daughters the Suburbs, and they will bid
high, saying, Shall we sit in desolation whilst our glory is transferred into
the Country? It may be supposed there is more safety and confidence in many
well-governed and orderly servants, then in one imperious and domineering dame,
who makes all the Cities in England like the late Queen-Mothers train marching
up Holborn in Carts. It Is too much to be lamented, that all our Nation is
depopulated, our Cities laid wast, our houses uninhabited, and our riches all
consumed in vanity, (whilst the whole riches of the Country is here rifled away
in riot:) were this City a provident Mother, she would endeavor to promote the
interests of her daughters, and rejoice in their well-doing, being all their
riches are for her supplies; insomuch as if they be rich, she cannot be poor;
it is their plenty that furnishes her store, which the body of the City well
knows, and will gain no small wealth by the practice hereof. The Soldier may
be supposed not to be pleased. But that cannot be suspected; he shall enjoy far
better terms then now he does: when he shall be resiant in his own Country,
with his own enjoyments, he will profit more by half pay, then now (as an
Itinerary and Mercenary man, lying constantly upon penny expenses (and a
stranger every where) he can do. But the Parliament (say some) will be most
displeased, and never hereto agree, because they are rich, and so in love with
Command, as rather then they will lose it, they will venture hard: having once
adventured to grapple with a settled Monarch, they know their strength, and it
will (if they shall voluntarily shut themselves out) be too long before they
shall come in again. But Chaos presumes there is no one member in all the House,
who will own such an assertion: besides, they know very well they were never
either appointed by God or man to be perpetual Lords, and all the Country
(besides themselves) their vassals: they may see upon what a tilt trip they
were again set in the saddle; and now if they will endeavor to secure the
reins, the best security they can use, is, by making the Weal Public their
chief design: for it is a thousand to one whosoever goes about to establish his
own Republique in the first place, shall be like him who having the convenience
of traveling by Sea in a Man of War, every way furnished with the best Tackle
and Furniture for all occasions; shall slight that, and take himself to a lame
Vessel of his own making, where he has no other help, save his own hands, to
prevent danger; in which (though he toil himself to death) he shall be
overturned in the first storm, and perishes alone, sine solatio Amicorum, but,
cum certo Risu Inimicorum. Chaos is not for all this so confident in her own
Proposals, as that she thinks they cannot be mended: yet unless some other
will furnish a better Frame, she wishes this may be polished, made fit for use,
and put in practice; and so puts her self to the pains to prepare meat for
other Palats, clothing for others backs, and houses, safe mansions and
harbors for others repose, in the ensuing Discourse.

The first days Work.
ANte mare and terras -- as the wanton Poet sings, rudis erat molis quem dixere
Chaos. It might be well wished the sober heads of these times could use the
Poers words, erat ante: but as if Fortunes Wheel were turned pside down we may
seem to be in the first condition of things again, ubi mollia pugnant duris.
The Tail commands the Head, and all things are out of course; insomuch as a
Solon was never any where more needful. And the childrens burdens are grown so
great, as if a Moses appear not in time, it may be feared deliverance will come
too late. After Nebuchadnezzar knew that the most high bears rule, his Kingdom
was restored. England no doubt wishes their Rulers had learned the same lesson;
and if they have, that the practice thereof may appear in public: for though
the Sword seems satiated with blood, yet the Elements threaten Vengeance if we
return not: And though for Rulers offenses the People suffer, yet they seldom
escape Scot-free. It were to be wished, examples hereof were not so obvious in
this Generation as they have been. Oh that Englands Rulers may see the work of
the day! that Pride, Tyranny and Oppression may receive their reward: which,
whilst men accused of greatest crimes sit as Judges in their own cause, cannot
be expected; nor whilst any of those who have voices in making Laws, shall be
admitted the Sanctuary of a Prison, to shelter themselves from the penalty
thereof, of, can be hoped for. O horrenda and impudica rabies! And that the
People follow their Guides, is sadly witnessed by this days Verdict of a
Devonshire-Jury at the Upper Bench Bar, who (in despite of the Judges honest,
honorable and wary Advertisements) betrayed the Innocent to the Fury of her
over-potent Adversary, and set the guilty free; whereby they have used their
utmost endeavors to prostitute their maids, daughters and wives to the lustful
abusion of the wicked at their wills.

It were happy if every day spoke not the same or worse language, so much
resembling that of Babel or Sodom, as nothing ever appeared so like the Poets
old Chaos as this present Age. These few particulars, amongst the innumerary
numbers of Babylons brats daily dispersed to the abusion of all that has any
resemblance of Goodness, compels that hand which never intended any such thing,
to command the Press, which now has liberty beyond measure, to measure even
Immensity it self; not purposing to accuse any for robbing the Public, to
erect a Private interest; nor for pretended relieving the Public, to strain
the strings of their Inventions, to contrive new Impositions; nor yet for
pretended Frugality to the Commonwealth, to destroy thousands of the Commons,
by denying justice, thereby cherishing all villainy and wickedness in the
highest measure.

But when the Public Faith of a Nation turns Bankrupt, who shall be accused?
the Borrowers, or the Lenders? Sure if the Borrowers had not promised fair, the
Lenders had not been. O unhappy hand, that ever drew Sword to countenance such
things, as the Paper blushes to bear the news of! Yet O happy age, that
affordest Hands to effect what Heads cannot do! Yea, O happy people, who live
in such an Age where God commands the meanest of things to be means of
Deliverance! Surely he has Mercies yet in store for such a people, if
embraced: if not, let Moses and the Prophets declare the issue; or rather, the
Savior of the worlds weeping over Jerusalem, admonish, to beware of what that
rebellious City shortly after suffered.

And if any shall say these Lines fell from Rabshakeh's Pen; let them consider,
their origin, their birth and growth, is from Chaos. But the Poets word ante
gives hopes, that as his ante was the forerunner of better composures, where
was mare, coelum and terras; so this present time elapsing, this Generation may
hope to see mare and terras in their proper places, and coelum supervolutans,
illuminans, and recreans. For never had Nation a Magistracy better schooled and
discipled, nor did ever Magistrate govern a people so generally capable of the
best Rule of Government, as this is. But if, with Miles the Frier's man in the
Fable, we flout and abuse this coy Mistress TIME, and improve not the advantage
and opportunity thereof, she will be gone, and then repentance may come too
late.

Now that Chaos-like, out of which Order was produced, matter be administered
for the framing of such a structure of Laws and Regiment, or at least some
Instruments brought to search for some Foundation, or to discover some Quarries
or other materials fit for so great a Fabric, which is not to be expected to
be done all at once, and all in one day, by any one private hand, nor yet from
all the heads of our Governors at present, whose cares for speedy remedy to
prevent imminent dangers, takes away much of their time from these other
contrivances. And though no one piece of what shall here be offered, shall be
found fit stuff to build withal, yet may other more dextrous Artists be hereby
invited to furnish the proper materials for the very work it self.

Chaos never traveled; or if she did, it was when she was in the womb of
Nothing. So she brings no customs from other Countries, nor Laws from other
Lands: only as the birth is produced in its proper dimensions, not respecting
any other feature or proportion in the whole frame of Nature, who lest any part
or member thereof should steal another right, has framed all creatures,
Animate, and Inanimate (if such a conjecture may be imagined) in a convenient
disparity each to other: yet so, as there is still an harmonious parity in the
whole. So Chaos neither doats upon her neighbour-customs more then is
convenable, nor is she affected with strange novelties fetched from far
Countries, so ardently as to surfeit thereon: she is neither bewitched with the
beauty and riches of the Grand Seignior's Seraglio, neither is she enamoured
with the Cantonian formalities. All the Mitres in the Conclave of Rome, cannot
invite her to fetch her Laws from Italy, nor all the Decency and Liberty of
Amsterdam furnish her with more then some miss-shapen pieces, which she
purposes to polish for her own purpose. She purposes not to pry too deep into
the Spaniards Sunburnt Inquisition, nor yet to roave too far in the frigid Zone
of the Tartarian Territories; but out of her own store, Chaos-like, is her
furniture; only the deck and dress may seem to be sometimes borrowed from one,
sometimes from another. Yet unless she be new built, so as to suit with the
temper of her own climate, she will be unserviceable, and her fruit abortive.

Chaos considering that in six days a Creation of excellent beauty and
proportion, suiting to the magnitude thereof, in number, weight and measure,
was by an allpowerful hand produced, has propounded to her self six days work
for perfecting of her intended Creation. ( Creation she calls it, because she
finding all the Rafters of her old Building rotten, and the Mortices and Tenons
full of rubbish, all the Pins either broken or pulled from their places, all
the Beams battered and bruised, and indeed the whole Fabric ready to fall
about her ears.) As Light was the first thing in the Creation, and so properly
called the work of the first day; so for her first days work she propounds for
the Balancing of Interests, and reducing each piece to its proper place, (the
praecognita being first allowed of, viz. a time prefixed (as already in great
wisdom the present Rulers have done) for the Parliaments sitting; within which
time if they be idle, their work will be left undone; and what will be their
Reward, if so?) So as if any one piece seem to be wrested out of its place, the
weight and frame of the whole prevents it.

It is proponed, that one Common Interest be erected, whereof each member shall
share, as well in receiving protection from, as giving contribution to; and to
be so incorporated, as no variant opinion, either in Religion or Policy, shall
be able to weaken the whole: (but if any shall endeavor it, it shall by
weakening and destroying it self, add still to the whole.)

And as a light to the ensuing Intendment, Chaos propounds, That in this Island
of Great Britain (heretofore consisting of many, but of late days of three
distinct Principalities; heretofore divided into many, but now either all
speaking, or all understanding one and the same language, and also incorporated
into one Commonwealth) be one Law, and one Registery, dispersed into several
parts thereof; and so disposed, as each part shall be subservient to other, and
each communicative to other, and all to the whole; not purposing to deprive the
Head of his due respect, neither the Body, or any member thereof, of their
proper dues, according to each ones particular propriety and proportion,
without destruction or diminution of any Right, Franchise or Privilege due to
any Lord of Manor, or other Proprietor whatsoever, or detraction from the just
freedom of any Englishmen: wherein is proposed to the Magistrate, Honor and
respect; to the Lawyer, Profit; to the People, enjoyment of Magna Charta; and
to the Republic, the enjoyment of all. The distribution whereof, Chaos
propounds to be, National, Provincial, Sub-Provincial, and Parochial; each
Registry to have his Court and Officers. To which Courts and Registeries all
matters of Civil concernment shall be reduced: and this to be erected within
eight months, so that the present Magistracy may have the honor to lay the
foundation thereof, and to reap the benefit also, when others shall come in
their places, to ease their shoulders of the burden of Government, which none
or few in the Nation are or can be enabled to go through so dexterously as they
now are, who are at present entrusted therewith. In the intervall of which
time, Chaos propounds (as that light may appear to be the fruit of this first
days work) that all Suits in Law or Equity may be determined within six Months;
and to that end, that sufficient time be allotted to the Judges Itinerant in the
several Circuits, for hearing and determining of all matters which shall be
brought before them: and that within one month after the Circuit, another Term
be kept in Westminster, where all further Issues may be joined; and another
Circuit a month after that, for finishing the whole business as to matter of
Law.

And for all Actions depending in Equity, let Judges in Chancery sit de die in
diem, and cause speedy examinations of all things needful to be made, and
bring all to hearing in Michaelmas Term next, or shortly after, upon pain of
great Fines to be imposed upon the Judge or Judges who shall be remiss herein,
and absolute loss of the Cause to the Clyent, whether Plaintiff or Defendant,
that shall endeavor further delays; and let Judges enough be appointed for that
purpose at the Commonwealths charge. The like course to be used by all
Committees: and that no new Suits be in the Interim commenced, That public
notice hereof be given to the whole Nation, at or before the next Assizes; and
this to suffice for the first days work: only to show what is intended for
further light to the whole Creation, which is to receive Life and Perfection in
the following days, within the time allotted, is promised Rules for the five
days work to come, viz. For the

2. Rules for Registers, which shall but be one to all purposes, but
distributed into its several parts.

3. For the Law and Jurisdiction of each several Registerial Court.

4. For future Elections and Transactions of Parliament.

5. For Assesments, Customs, Excise, and Provision for the Poor. And

6. For Trade and Husbandry; under which the Militia shall be comprehended, as
also Provision made for the Ministry and Schools of Learning, as the perfection
of the work: upon each of which, if this be approved of by Authority, and a
Fiat put to the first days work already proposed, a several Discourse is
intended for each succeeding days work, in their proper times.

The Second Days Work.
The first days work to view has brought
The Laws in Nature Chaos taught:
The second days separation make
Old senceless Chaos fabric quake.
1. LEt a National Registery be appointed at Westminster, National Register.
to consist of a Register and six Clerks assistant or deputies, each of which
to have so many writing and examining Clerks under them as the work shall
require; which may be increased at pleasure for dispatch, and discharged again,
when the crowd of business shall be over: let certain Rules be given, and
competent Fees allowed.

2. Provinces.
Let each County in England be one entire Province, and those again allotted to
the jurisdiction of the said several six Clerks or Deputies, viz. so many
Counties, Towns and Cities, as are comprised within the riding of every
respective Circuit of the Judges, and no more, to be within the Cognizance or
Registry of one Clerk, Assistant or Deputy; and so the six several Circuits to
be respectively apportioned to the six Clerks, (that is to say) to each Clerk
one Circuit; with whom entries to be made of all particular Estates lying in
several Counties in the same Circuit.

3. Provincial Register.
In each Shire-Town, within each several and respective Province, let a
Provincial Register be appointed; each Provincial Register to have two Clerks,
Assistants or Deputies; between whom each County or Province shall be equally
divided, half the Sub-provinces, Hundreds, Wapentakes to one, the other half to
the other, save the County and Province of York; and there to be three Clerks,
Assistants or Deputies, viz. for each riding one; each Assistant or Deputy to
have so many writing Clerks and Examiners under every of them apart, as the
work shall require.

4. Sub-Provincial Register.
Each several Wapentake, Hundred, Lath or Rape, to have a particular Register,
by the name of Sub provincial Register; and be reputed a Sub-province, to have
dependence on, and respect to the Provincial Register, within whose Province or
County the same is, and not otherways (save as hereafter is directed) each
Sub-provincial Register to have one Clerk, Assistant or Deputy, and so many
writing and examining Clerks under him again as the work shall require.

5. Parish Register.
Each several Parish shall be one Registry, and have a distinct Register; and
where the Parishes shall be too little, let two or more be joined together into
one Parish, and have one Parochial Register; each several and respective
Parochial Register to have under him a Clerk, Assistant or Deputy, and
under-Clerks also as need shall require.

6. Entries with the six Clerks.
All and every person and persons, bodies Politic and Corporate, who shall
have any Estates in two or more several Circuits, shall enter the same
distinctly with the several and respective Clerks; that is to say, with every
Clerk or Deputy in the National Registry respectively, so much as lies within
his Circuit or Clerkship, and no more; and when the entries of the whole shall
be perfected, the total of the Annual values in each respective Circuit, shall
be transmitted from every several Clerk, with whom entry of any parcel of such
Estate shall be made, to that Clerk with whom the Entry of the largest
proportion of such Estate shall lie; or where the chief residence, or most
ancient seat or title of Honor to the present Owners thereof, is or shall be.

7. All and every person and persons, Entries in the National Registry.
bodies Politic and Corporate, who have or claim any Right, Title or
Interest, either in Possession or Reversion to any Manor of Inheritance of the
annual or yearly value of 1000 li. or upwards; and also such who have Estates
of Inheritance in several Counties or Provinces, though of less value, shall
enter the same in the National Registry, with the proper Clerk or Clerks,
according to former direction, and not elsewhere.

8. All person and persons, Provincial Entries.
bodies Politic and Corporate, who shall have, or claim to have any Right,
Title or Interest, either in Possession or Reversion, to any Manor of
Inheritance within any one Province, above the yearly value of 100 li. and not
exceeding 1000 li. per an. and shall have no Estate elsewhere, shall enter the
same in the Provincial Registry within which it lies (that is to say) with each
respective Clerk, Assistant or Deputy, such part thereof as shall lie within
the limits of his part of the Registry, for the County, Shire or Province, and
not elsewhere; and (when the Entries thereof shall be perfected) Returns shall
be made by the other Clerk or Clerks, Assistant, Deputy or Deputies (where the
meaner or lesser part or parts of the same shall lie, to the Clerk, Assistant
or Deputy, with whom Entry shall be made of the Mansion House, ancient seat, or
chief Inheritance) of the whole yearly value or values, with him or them
entered; which shall be added to the other Entry, remaining with that Clerk or
Deputy, by whom the chief Entry shall be made as aforesaid.

9. Entries Subprovincial.
All such person and persons having Estates as aforesaid, above the clear
yearly value of 10 li. and not exceeding 100 li. per annum, lying within any
one Hundred, Wapentake, Lath; Rape or Province, and shall have no Estate
elsewhere, shall enter the same with the Sub-provincial Register within whose
Registry the same lies, and not elsewhere.

10. Parochial Entries.
And all such person or persons having Estates as aforesaid, in any one Parish
or Parochial Registry not exceeding 10 li. per annum, and shall have no Estate
of Inheritance elsewhere, shall enter the same with the Register of that Parish
where it lies, and not elsewhere; and also all Inhabitants, Tenants, Owners and
Occupants of all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, shall enter the same with
the Parochial Register where the same lie, and under what Title, Condition,
Rent or Service the same are held, and of whom, and to whom the said Rents or
services are payable.

11. Entries of Debts.
In like manner Entries shall be made of all Debts and Specialties exceeding
1000 li. with the National Register; of all Debts above 100 li. and not
exceeding 1000 li. with the Provincial Register; of all Debts above 10 li. and
not exceeding 100 li. with the Sub-provincial Register; and of all other
smaller Debts not exceeding 10 li. with the Parochial Register, where the party
and parties indebted shall severally and respectively live, or the Estate lie
whereon the same shall be charged: each such respective Entry to be made with
that Clerk Assistant, Deputy, Inferior Register, or his Deputy, within whose
respective limits the party indebted shall then live, or the Estate therewith
charged lie; according to the direction for Entries as abovesaid.

12. National Registers Certificate.
After all such Entries shall ^e made and perfected as aforesaid, the National
Register shall (within 14. days) certify the name, nature, and value of every
several and respective Estate with him entered, and by whom the same is claimed,
and by what Title, and in whose tenure or occupation the same is, to the
several and respective Provincial Registers within whose limits the same shall
lie; that is to say, To each Provincial Register so much as lies within his
Province or Registry, and no more.

13. Provincial Certificate.
Each several Provincial Register shall within eight days after receipt of
such Certificate as aforesaid from the National Register, make the like
Certificate to each Sub-provincial Register within his jurisdiction, of the
name, nature and value of every several and respective Estate with him entered,
or to him certified; and by whom the same is claimed, and by what Title, and in
whose occupation the same is; that is to lay, To each several and respective
Sub-provincial Register of so much as lies within his Sub-province, and no more.

14. Sub-provincial Certificate.
Each several Sub-provincial Register shall within six days after receipt of
such Certificate as aforesaid, from his Provincial Register, make the like
Certificate to each Parochial Register within his jurisdiction, of the name,
nature and value of every several and respective Estate with him entered, or to
him certified; and by whom and by what Title the same is claimed, and in whose
occupation the same is; that is to say, To each distinct Parochial Register of
so much as lies within his Parish only, and no more.

15. Double claims to be certified.
Each several and respective Parochial Register (forthwith upon receipt of the
several Certificates aforesaid) shall examine all the Entries made in his
respective Registry; and where several claims shall be made by several persons,
under several Titles to one and the same thing, the Register shall give notice
thereof to the present Inhabitants, Tenants or Occupiers thereof, and also to
his Sub-provincial Register, within six days; and if it exceed the Cognizance
of the Sub-provincial Register, he shall certify the same to the Provincial
Register, who if it exceed his Cognizance, shall certify the same to the
National Register; each to certify to other within six days after the date of
the Certificate to him directed.

16. Parochial Registers Certificate.
Each Parochial Register shall likewise certify to the Sub-provincial Register
under whose jurisdion he is, the names and values of all Estates of Inheritance
lying within the same Parish, and of all Fee-farme-rents, Quit-rents, Rents of
Assize, Copyhold-rents, or other dry-rents whatsoever, issuing out of the same
Parish; also the names, qualities and habitations of the several and respective
Owners and Proprietors thereof, whether resiant in the same Parish, or
elsewhere, within ten days after the first Entries thereof in his Parochial
Registry shall be perfected. And also the total Annual value of all Estates of
Inheritance within his Parish or Registry, in one entire sum at the foot
thereof.

17. Sub-province Certificates.
Each Sub-provincial Register shall likewise certify to his Provincial
Register within whose jurisdiction he shall respectively be, the several and
respective names and values of all Estates lying and being in his Sub-province;
and the names, qualities and habitations of all persons whatsoever Owners
thereof; and also the whole clear yearly value of all such, cast up in one sum
at the foot thereof, within ten days after his receipt of all the several
Parochial Certificates aforesaid, within his Sub-province.

18. Province Certificate.
Each Provincial Register shall likewise certify to the National Register
(within twenty days after his receipt of all the several Certificates from the
several Registers within his Province) the names, qualities and habitations of
all person and persons whatsoever not residing in his Province, who claim any
Estate in the same Province; and the whole yearly values of all Estates, so by
them respectively claimed, and also the whole and clear yearly value of the
whole Province, in one entire sum by its self.

19. Three years Certificates.
The like Certificates shall be made and renewed every three years by several
Registers aforesaid, as follows: each Parochial Register shall on or before
the 10. day of January triennially certify to the Sub-provincial, and each
Sub-provincial on or before the 30. of the same Month, and the Provincial to
the National on or before the 20. of February in the same year, upon penalty of
the forfeiture of 20 li. by each respective Parochial Register, 40 li. by each
Sub-provincial Register, and 100 li. by each Provincial Register, to the use of
the Republique, to be levied by order of the next Superintendent Registerial
Court; and also removal from their several Registerial places of all Registers,
Clerks or Deputies, who shall neglect the same.

20. Entries within six Months.
The first Entries to be made and perfected in all and every the respective
Registries aforesaid, by the several Owners, Occupants, Proprietors and
Claimants aforesaid, within six Months after erection of the Registry
aforesaid; and the Certificates to be all made and returned, and entries
perfected thereof, by every several and respective Register, within two Months
after the end of the said six Months, upon penalties to the Registers as
aforesaid, and upon double the penalty (to each several and respective Clerk,
Assistant or Deputy, who shall neglect the same) to what is imposed on any
Provincial Registers, and upon penalty of 500 li. to the National Register
himself.

21. National Registers Seal.
The Seal of the Nation Registry shall be the great Seal of England; and the
National Register and his six Assistants, to be the Keepers thereof: the same
not to be made use of to any purpose whatsoever, save in presence of the
National Register and two Assistants for the time being.

22. Each several Province shall have a peculiar Seal, Provincal Seals,
whereupon shall be the Arms or Cognizance of the same Province, City or
Corporation, where the Registry for that Province shall be kept; and the name
of the Province engraven in plain legible English letters about the same; and
shall be in the custody of the Register and his Assistants of each several and
respective Province; not to be used in any case whatsoever, save in presence of
the Register, and one Assistant or Deputy of the same Registry.

23. Sub-provincial Seals.
Each Sub-provincial Registry shall have a particular Seal, with the Arms or
Cognizance of the Register for the time being; and also the name of the
Sub-province and Province, for which it shall be used, engraven in plain
legible characters about the same; to be in the keeping of the Register and his
Clerk, Assistant or Deputy; and not to be used in any case, where they shall
not be both of them personally present.

24. Parochial Seals.
Each several Parish shall have a particular Registerial Seal: whereupon shall
be engraven in plain legible English letters, the name of the Parish,
Sub-province, and Province, for which the same shall be used; and also in the
middle thereof, the name and surname of the Register, without any other
Cognizance or Coat of Arms: to be in the custody of the Register, Minister and
Churchwardens of the same Parish for the time being; and not to be used but in
presence of the Register and Minister (or one of the Churchwardens then in
being, with the Register) in the Ministers absence.

25. Entries certified.
After the perfecting of all Entries and Certificates as aforesaid, the several
Registers in the whole Nation (each in their several and respective limits and
jurisdiction) shall give Certificates to all Owners and Proprietors of all
Estates whereto no double claims shall be made, and affix the Registerial Seal
of the particular Registry thereto, (when and to whom they shall be desired:)
and where several Estates to the same thing shall be claimed, entered, and
certified as aforesaid, as the present Possession to one or more, the reversion
or remainder to another or others, a Jointure or Dower, Lease or any other
legal title and warrantable claim, to any other person or persons, etc.
whatsoever; the same several titles shall be severally certified to the several
Claimants and Proprietors thereof, and the Seal affixed to the same several
Certificates: which shall be a good and warrantable Estate, to whom the same
shall be given as aforesaid, against all other claimants whatsoever.

26. Manner of Certificates.
In giving out the several Certificates by the several Registers under their
respective Registerial Seals, respect shall be had to the several values of the
respective Estates to be by them certified, and to the Situtation thereof: For
no Parochial Registers Seal shall be put to any Certificate exceeding the value
of 10 li. by the year, all lying within his Parochial Registry; no
Sub-provincial shall put his Seal to any Certificate exceeding 100 li. per
annum, lying within his own limits; neither any Provincial Seal shall be put to
any Estate exceeding the yearly value of 1000 li.

27. All person and persons, bodies Politic and Corporate, Entries not made
within 6. months void.
having or claiming any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, either in Possession,
Reversion, either by Lease, Jointure or Mortgage, not entering their claims
thereto, within the times aforesaid, with the several Registers with whom they
shall respectively lie; and not taking the respective Registers Seal for
warranty thereof, within three Months after the Entry thereof as aforesaid,
(unless in case of Infancy, or being beyond the Seas, or where the party who
entered the same shall die before the perfecting thereof,) shall be for ever
after debarred from making any claim to the same, or any part thereof.

28. Manner of entering Debts.
Entries shall be made within three Months after the settling of the Registry,
of all manner of Debts, whether upon Specialty or not, viz. of all Debts
exceeding 1000 li. in the National Registry; of all above 100 li. and not
exceeding 1000 li. in the respective Provincial Registry, where the Debtor or
Debtors shall live, or the Estate or Estates shall lie, whereon the same shall
be respectively charged; of all the Debts above 10 li. and not exceeding 100
li. in the respective Sub-provincial Registry, where the Debtor lives, or the
Estate lies charged therewith; and of all small Debts not exceeding 10 li.
principal, in the respective Parochial Registry where the parties live who
shall owe the same, or the Estate lies whereon the same shall be charged. In
all Entries of Debts aforesaid, respect is to be had to the principal, for the
several Entries to be made as aforesaid; as, if 10 li. have been owing two
years, whereby so much interest shall be due therefore, the same shall
notwithstanding that be entered in the Parochial Registry; and so of other.

29. Certificates of Debts.
Upon the Debtors acknowledging any Debt to any Register wherewith the same
shall be so entered, the respective and several Registers shall give a
Certificate thereof to the Creditor or Creditors desiring the same, under the
Seal of their respective Registries; which shall be sufficient warranty for
recovery thereof, when the same shall become due, without any farther trouble
to the Creditor then a claim to be made thereof, to be entered with the Register
any time after the time shall be elapsed, when the same should have been paid.

30. Entries of Bargains and Contracts.
All manner of Bargains and Contracts, whereby any Estate of Inheritance,
Mortgage or Lease shall be made, or any Right transferred from one hand to
another, and where any Debt shall be contracted by any person or persons to any
others whatsoever, and all Covenants, Conditions, Considerations, and times of
payment, in presence of the several parties between whom the several Contracts
shall be made; and thereupon the respective Registers (with whom every or any
such Entries shall be made and acknowledged) shall give Certificates to the
several parties desiring the same, of so much as concerns the party to whom it
is given, under the Seal of the respective Registries, and copies thereof to
the other parties desiring the same, under their hands only; that is to say, He
to whom moneys is to be paid, shall have the Seal for the money; and he who is
to have the thing bargained for, the seal therefore, and the counter-parts to
the other party under the Registers hand: And Entries of all payments and
discharges of bargains shall be made.

31. In all Entries of any Bargains, The manner of entering bargains.
the parties shall personally acknowledge the same to the Register, in presence
of two known persons inhabiting within the Registry, who shall attest their
knowledge of the persons attesting the Bargain, and to be the same persons
whose names shall be then entered upon oath; and not otherways, save where both
the persons bargaining shall be sufficiently known to the Register or his
Deputy, to be the same persons they speak themselves to be.

32. In all Entries, the name, surname, quality, Method of Entries.
and habitation of every person and persons shall be entered; and also the name,
situation, content, and value of all Estates, the day and year of the entry,
with all other conditions, Covenants, and agreements, and conditions requisite,
and all other circumstances requisite for declaration of the whole truth, in as
few words as may explain the same.

33. Infants and Travelers.
All Infants having any Estates either in Possession or Reversion, whereof
Entry shall not be made on their behalfs within the times aforesaid, or where
any false Entries shall be for them made, by any their Guardians, ends or
Attorneys, shall have license to make or rectify their Entries, within six
Months after they shall accomplish the respective ages of 21. years; and also
all persons, who shall be absent in other Countries, shall have the like time
after their respective Returns to do the like.

34. Entries of Marriages.
All Marriages shall be entered in the respective Parochial Registries, where
the same shall be solemnized, the same day that the same shall be solemnized,
the married couple acknowledging the same, in presence of the Minister and two
other Inhabitants of the same Parish, who shall attest their knowledges of both
the man and woman married together on their oaths, unless they shall be known
to the Register or his Deputy, who shall enter the same; and the Covenants and
Conditions of the Marriage shall be entered also; and the Register of every
Parish, who shall enter the same, shall give Certificates to one or both the
parties thereof, under the Seal of his REgistry, if the same shall be desired.

35. Entries of Births.
The birth of every child shall be entered in the Parochial Registry, where it
shall be born, within one day after its birth, whether male or female: and the
names of the father, if it be born legitimate; if not, of the mother, her
quality and condition, and of the father named by her in time of her Travel, by
the Oath of the Midwife and one witness more, who shall be present at the time
of the Delivery.

36. Christnings.
All Christnings to be entered likewise in common form, as has been accustomed.

All Deaths and Burials shall be likewise entered in the several repective
Parochial Registries, Deaths and Burials.
where the same shall happen to be, by attestation of two known persons
resiants within the same Parish, upon oath, if it be required.

37. Wills and Testaments.
All Wills and Testaments shall be entered in the respective Registries within
whose Jurisdiction and Cognizance the Estate of the deceased shall lie, within
one Month after the several and respective death and deaths of every person and
persons, of what rank, quality or condition soever; and all gifts and bequests
made, whether verbal or in writing, by the attestation of two credible persons
on oath; the persons attesting the same, being either known to the Register to
be of honest repute, or so attested to be by others to him known, as in other
Cases: all which circumstances shall be particularly entered.

38. Hiring of Servants.
All and singular retainer or hiring all and every several and respective
servants, whether Apprentices or hired servants, shall by the several and
respective Masters or Mistresses hiring or retaining the same, be severally and
respectively entered, or caused to be entered in the respective Parochial
Registries where their residence shall then be, together with the time for
which such retainer is to be; and the consideration or wages to be given to the
several and respective servant and servants, by the attestation of the
respective servants also subscribing his, her or their names or marks in the
Registry: whereupon the Register shall give Certificate or Certificates, to
Master or Mistress, and servant or servants desiring the same, under his hand;
which shall be sufficient warranty, to compel service and respect from the
servant, and wages and other conditions from the Master or Mistress.

39. Fees for Entries with the National Register.
The Fees for all Entries of any Estate of Inheritance in the National
Registry, to be for any Estate in Feesimple 20 s. per page for the two first
pages of the Entry, and 40 s. the page for every page more; for all Leases,
Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers or Debts, 10 s. for the first page, and 20 s. for
every other following page, including the Fees of the Certificates also under
hand.

40. Provincial Fees.
The Fees for all Entries of Inheritances in Fee in every Provincial Registry,
to be 10 s. per page for the two first pages, and 20 s. per page for every page
more; and for all Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers or Debts, 7 s. 6 d. for
the first page, and 15 s. for every following page of every particular Entry;
the Certificates under hand to be given for the same Fees, being included.

41. Sub-provincial Fees.
The Fees for all Entries of Inheritances in Fee in every Sub-provincial
Registry to be 7 s. 6 d. for the first page, and 10 s. per page for every page
more; and for all Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers or Debts, 5 s. for the
first page, and 7 s. 6 d. for every following page.

42. Parochial Fees.
The Fees for all Entries of Inheritances in Fee in every Parochial Registry,
to be 5 s. for the first page, and 7 s. 6 d. for every page more; and for all
Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers or Debts, 2 s. 6 d. for the first page,
and 5 s. for every following page: but in case any Entries of Debts, Leases,
Mortgages, Joyntures or Dowries, shall not exceed six l^nes Registerially writ
in the Parochial Registry, the Fee of the Entry thereof shall but be 1 s. the
several Fees for the several Certificates, to be made of any Entries, to be
equal to the Registers Fees only for Entries as aforesaid, out of which no part
shall be accounted to the Commonwealth.

43. Fees for small Entries.
The Fees for Entry and Certificate of every respective Birth, Christning,
Death, and Burial, if it exceed not six lines in the Registerial Parochial
Entry, the Fee thereof shall be 6 d. only, as also the Entry of the retainer
of any Servant or Apprentice, if one Entry exceed not six lines; but if any
Entry shall exceed six lines, then the Fees to be the same as are allotted per
page.

44. Bargains not entered void.
No Money shall be recoverable upon any Bargain or Contract whatsoever, nor any
Estate secured, unless the same be respectively entered in due form, in the
several and respective Registries, within whose limits and jurisdictions the
same shall be, within the respective times afore-specified.

45. Fee of the National Registers Seal.
The Fee of the Seal of the National Registry, in all Cases of settlement of
any Estate, Lease, Mortgage, Jointure or Dower, shall be 5 li. in all cases of
Debt not exceeding 2000 li. 50 s. But if the Debt exceed 2000 li. the Fee of
the Seal shall be 5 li.

46. Of the Provincial Seal
The Fee of each Provincial Seal, in all cases of settlement of Estates as
aforesaid, shall be 50 s. in all cases of Debt, 25 s.

47. Of the Subprovincial.
The Fee of each Sub-provincial Seal, in all cases of settlement of any Estates
as aforesaid, shall be 25 s. and in all Cases of Debt, Mortgage, etc. 12 s. 6
d.

48. Of the Parochial.
The Fee of each Parochial Seal for settlement of any Estate, to be 10 s. 6 d.
and of Debt, to be 5 s.

49. Fees to the Commonwealth for the National Seal.
In the National Registry three fourth parts of the Fees for the Seal shall be
to the Commonwealth, and a fourth part to the Register his Assistants and
Clerks; for all Entries of each two first pages of every particular Entry, and
for all the following pages, an eighth part only for Entries.

50. For the Provincial Seal.
In each Provincial Registry, three fourth parts of the Fees for the Entries,
and for Seals also, shall be to the Commonwealth, and the fourth to the
Register his Assistants and Clerks.

51. For the Sub-provincial Seal.
In each Sub-provincial Registry two parts of three of the Fees of Entries and
Seal shall be to the Commonwealth, the third to the Register.

52. In each Parochial Registry, For the Parochial Seal
two parts of three of the Fees of the Seal to the Commonwealth, the third and
all the Fees of Entries to be to the Register his Deputy and Clerks.

53. National Atturneys.
Every Clerk Assistant or Deputy to the National Register, shall have six sworn
Atturneys or Messengers, whose care shall be to transmit the several
Certificates by him made, to the several Registers of the Provinces, to whom
the same shall be directed within the times limited, and shall likewise
Solicit the Causes of all Suitors in the Registerial Court hereafter to be
mentioned, and shall have for every Cause for every Court-day to be kept in the
same business, for Fee, besides all charges, 7 s. 6 d. and no more.

54. Provincial Atturneys Fees.
Every Clerk assistant in each respective Provincial Registry shall have three
Atturneys or Messengers, who shall carefully transmit all Certificates to be
made, to the several Registers, to whom they shall be directed, within the
times limited; and shall also Solicit the Causes of Suitors; and for every
Court-day any Cause is depending, shall have for every Cause any of them is
employed in, 5 s. for Fee, and no more; besides all charges and expenses.

55. Sub-provincial Atturneys Fees.
Each Sub-Provincial Registry shall have two Atturneys, who shall do the same
work, and for every Court-day shall have Fee in every Cause 4 s. besides all
charges and expenses.

56. Each Parochial Register shall have two Atturneys, Parochial Atturneys Fees.
whose Fee shall be for every Court-day 3 s. besides charges; they also shall
do the like work as the other forementioned Atturneys shall do.

57. Punishment of Atturneys neglect.
If any Attorney (through fraud or neglect) shall prejudice any Client for want
of care in prosecuting his business, either in the Registry or Court, he shall
satisfy for all damage accruing to the party thereby; which if he shall not be
able to do, he shall be dismissed from his Place and Practice, and another
chosen in his room, and the party grieved restored to the condition he was in
before the neglect or fraud was committed.

58. Election of Deouty Registers.
The several Clerks assistant in every Registry shall be chosen by the
respective Registers under whom they are to officiate, who shall take security
from them, give directions to them, and be responsible for them.

59. Election of Atturneys.
Each Clerk assistant shall make choice of one Attorney, and the Register two
in the Provincial Registries: that one chosen by the Clerk assistants shall be
approved by the Register: each Clerk Assistant in the National Registry to
choose two Atturneys, to be approved by the Register, and the Register to choose
and appoint all the rest; the other Atturneys in the Sub-provincial and
Parochial Registries, to be appointed by the respective Registers of the
several Sub-provinces and Parishes where they are to officiate.

60. Atturneys to give security.
Each several Register shall respectively take security from every Attorney
elected or admitted by him to practice within his Registry, truly and
diligently to behave himself, according to such Rules and Directions as he
shall from time to time receive: And to the end none may be ignorant of his
Office, each Register shall have a Table of Directions and Fees hung up in his
Registry, to the view of all who shall have any occasion there; wherein shall
be particularized every thing each Officer under him is to do, and what his
Fees for the same shall be; that none may plead Ignorance for excuse, and that
every party wronged may know where to find redress.

61. Each several Register, Clerk Assistant and Attorney in the National
Registry, and each several and respective Provincial Registry, shall be allowed
and authorized by Parliament to their several and respective Offices; and for
the due execution of their places severally and respectively, shall take such
oath as the Parliament shall appoint.

62. Each Sub-provincial and Parochial Rgister shall be allowed and authorized
by Parliament; and each Clerk, Assistant or Deputy and Attorney under them
respectively to be employed, shall be allowed of and authorized by the several
Provincial Registers, under whose respective jurisdictions they shall be
respectively, and to take such oath as shall be appointed by Parliament.

63. In all Markets and Fairs, Tolls.
the Toll shall be kept by the Town-Register, where distinct Entries shall be
made of all Cattle sold (at the peril of the Buyer) with known Vouchers who
shall attest the sale, who in case of question to be made after, shall be
responsible for the same, or the value thereof double, to be employed as
aforesaid; to which end, entry shall be made of the names, qualities and
habitations of all Sellers and their Vouchers, and the Cattle and marks, with
the names of the Buyers, and the Prices paid.

Due care being of all the Premises had, all persons Estates, whether in annual
Revenue, or Money, shall be known, whereby all public Assesments and Taxes
may be equally born, and all persons known who shall have responsible Estates
fit to undergo any Employment for the Republique: no danger shall be, or very
little (if care be taken) of any person being defrauded or abused by any false
Titles, nor any dormant Titles prejudice any future Purchaser or Purchasers. No
person having his Estate so well known to the Republique, shall attempt any
alteration, Insurrection or Rebellion, but shall presently be discovered; and
thereby his Estate, if not his person, shall respond for the offense. With many
other conveniences not particularized, much tending to the Public Weal.

For the doing of all which, little trouble extraordinary, nor any considerable
charge can be to any particular party or Interest in the Nation, neither can
the same be valuable in respect of the settlement thereby to be obtained, out
of which yet there will arise a considerable Revenue to the Republique; and the
extraordinary expenses of Travels and Lawyers Fees shall be taken off, whereby
the Country is at present much damnified for the benefit only of a few, and
those of no considerable interest in the Nation, seldom at any time helpful,
bur frequently both to Prince and People bur then some, who shall
notwithstanding be hereafter better provided for then now they are, and at an
easier charge to the Country by far. Whereby several shall be encouraged to
enable themselves to be fitted therefore.

The Third Days Work.
The third brings unknown births to life,
By giving Laws for ending strife.
Let Registers their work attend,
Whilst we endeavor Laws to mend.
1. Law.
ALL former precedent Customs notwithstanding, let one Law be through the whole
Nation, whereby the Public Interest may be best supported, and each private
moderately provided for; and that one Prodigal Riotous person may not consume
the Patrimony of a whole Family, neither any one lord it over his brethern, who
not being educated in provident ways, many times (to supply themselves
according to their Chimerical. Gentilities, consisting of nothing but Idlness)
turn Hectors, Highwaymen, Trapanners, and what not? to support themselves in
that looseness they have been by their improvident Parents or Ancestors trained
up in: but that each may be in some measure participant of his Ancestors
industry, let all Estates not exceeding 100 li. per annum (where a personal
Estate shall not be left answerable thereto) be distributed amongst the
children as follows; that is to say, to each son two parts, or twice as much as
shall be to any daughter, and to each daughter 1/3, or half as much as shall be
to any son; only the eldest son, or he whom the father shall think most worthy,
when such division shall be made, to have the first choice, and the youngest
the second: and so likewise the daughters.

2. Settlement of Estates.
But where the Estate personal shall equalize the Inheritance of 100 li. per
annum, there the eldest son, or the most worthy in the fathers apprehension,
shall have the 100 li. Inheritance, and the rest be divided as aforesaid; and
so of all greater Estates, not more then one half descending to the eldest:
only if there shall be but two sons, and no daughter, there the elder to have
two parts, and the younger a third: if two sons and one daughter, the eldest
son to have half; the other half to be two parts to the son, and a third to the
daughter: if two sons and two daughters, half to the eldest, and the remaining
half to be half thereof to the younger son, and the other remaining half
between the two daughters, equally to be divided. These divisions to be, where
at least 200 li. per annum, or 100 li. per annum, and 2000 li. in money or
personal Estate shall be left by the Ancestor. The like proportion to be still
held in all greater Estates. The wives Estate to be as now, either a third
during life only, or such proportion as shall be agreed upon before Marriage:
which agreement entered in the proper Registry, shall be valid, and good to all
ends and purposes.

3. In all Cases of descent, Wives Joyntures.
the elder to be preferred before the younger, and the son before the daughter;
the next Uncle or Cozen by the whole blood, before any other by the half blood,
according to the descents now in use.

4. Copie-hold made Freehold.
All Copyhold Estates to be made free by reasonable Compositions with the
Lords; as where Fines are certain, payable upon every change, there the value
of two Fines and an half to redeem the servitude; and where Compositions have
not been formerly made, according to the same proportion, considering the Lords
Interest equivalent to what it is; and likewise all Reliefs and Hariots to be
compounded for, and for ever after to cease.

5. All Lords of Manors keeping constant Courts, Baron and Courts Leet, or
either of them, shall discontinue the same; and shall have the value of the
profits of their Courts responded out of the immediate profits of the Registry,
within whose limits the same Manor shall wholly lie and be comprehended,
according as shall have been made thereof for ten years last past; and all
Hundred-Courts to cease, and be for ever hereafter discontinued.

All ancient services to any Lords of Manors to cease, Service to be
compounded for.
but the Rents to continue; and upon Entries thereof in the respective
Registries, to be ascertained and secured by the Law of the Registry only; and
all other Laws, and Bylaws for recovery thereof, to cease, and be of no use
for ever hereafter: but where any services are valuable in money, the value
thereof at ten years purchase to be paid for Composition: all Compositions to
be entered in the respective Registries whereon the same are dependant, or
within whose respective limits the same lie.

In all Cases, the Testimony of any Register under Seal of the Registry, to be
preferred before any other, the same being taken and certified according to the
rules aforesaid.

6. Married women enabled to dispose.
It shall be lawful for any married woman, of what degree, rank or quality
soever (who shall have any Estate of Inheritance in her own disposal, by
acknowledging her consent thereto before the Register under whose immediate
Cognizance the Estate shall lie, or before the Parochial Register where she
shall live (he being thereto by the proper Register authorized) and to whom the
same shall be again certified and proceeded in as in other Cases) to give,
grant, and at her will dispose of all or any such Bstate; which shall be good
in Law to all intents and purposes.

7. All Wills shall be proved, Probate of Wills.
and administration granted by the Registerial Court, within whose jurisdiction
the party deceased lived at the time of death; and by the Register of the same
Court certified under Seal, which shall be entered with the several and
respective Registers, with whom any Estate granted by such disposal shall lie,
within one month after the burial of all, every or any person or, persons
whatsoever; and in no case to be deferred past the fourth Court-day, and then
confirmation thereof to pass under the Seal of the Registry where the same
shall be done: in this Case the value to be considered as in other Cases
relating to the jurisdiction of Courts.

8. Appeal before judgment.
No Appeal shall in any case be brought before Judgment given; but after
Judgment, either party that is wronged may bring a Writ of Appeal from the
next superintendent Court, and Execution shall be stayed till the matter
thereof shall be heard in the same Court, to which the Appeal shall be made,
which shall be the third Courtday after return of the first Writ, which shall
be executed by summons of some Court-Officer in person, at least fourteen days
before the day of appearance; where the business shall be determined without
any further Appeal by either party: and execution shall be awarded upon the
Decree or Order of that Court, not to be Repealed. This Case of Appeal not to
extend to any contemner of Summons, as aforesaid.

9. Sheriffs.
In every County or Province a Sheriff shall be annually elected by Parliament,
who shall within one month after his appointment, substitute in each
Sub-province in his County or Province, a Deputy, which shall be approved by
the next Provincial Registerial Court, in which the Sheriffs election shall be
subordinate to the Court; and no one person to continue in that place more then
one year; the old Officers for the precedent year, to officiate till the new
ones for the next year shall be approved on, and thereto Authorized by the
Provincial Registry.

10. Constable.
In each Parochial Registry shall be likewise every year elected an Officer, by
the name of Constable, who shall have chief care of preserving the Peace; and
shall have the execution of all Writs issued from the Parochial Register, other
then such Summons as are elsewhere directed to be done by the Atturneys. For
choice of this Officer, shall be presented three names by the precedent
Constable to the Sub-provincial Registry, who shall choose and Authorize one of
them Constable for the next year.

11. Manner of Elections.
That no person shall be elected to the same Office, either of Sheriff,
Sheriffs Deputy or Constable for the same liberty, before seven years shall be
elapsed after his serving thereof, before he shall be new elected, but that
several persons be employed therein from time to time; and that no persons
shall be elected to serve any such Office, who shall not have Estate
responsible to the Public for what shall be entrusted with them.

12. Collections.
That all Collections which shall be from time to time made and imposed on the
Country, shall be collected by the Constables, and by them entered in their
respective Parochial Registries; and then paid to the Sheriffs Sub-provincial
Deputy, and by him and every of them entered in their respective Registries; and
then paid to the Sheriff; and by the several Sheriffs, to the Treasury of the
Revenue to be appointed by Parliament for receipt thereof.

13. Justices of Peace.
That one or more persons of quality in every Subprovince be and execute the
place of Justices of the Peace, and keep general Quarter Sessions as is
accustomed, and also private monthly Sessions as often as need shall require;
and at each general Quarter Sessions, the Sheriff or Undersheriff for that
Province shall be present, and also the several Constables or their sufficient
deputies for the several Parishes, and also one or more of the Churchwardens
for every Parish, to present what shall be amiss within their several and
respective Liberties, which shall not be taken care of or duly executed by the
respective Registerial Courts: and the said Justices shall have power to
convent before them all Offenders, and also all Registers, Clerks Assistants or
Deputies, Atturneys and other inferior Officers within the same Riding or
Liberty for which the Sessions shall be kept, and all other Misdemeanors and
breaches of the Peace whatsoever, and punish the Offenders, and regulate the
same, as well as any superior Court shall have power to do.

Each Constable shall annually elect under him a substitute in each Village,
Hamlet and Township within the Parish, who shall be approved of and authorized
by the Parochial Registerial Court, whereby they shall be sworn truly to
execute all Summons, and other precepts to them sent, and to endeavor to
preserve the Peace, and keep good Order; and if any shall refuse so to do
within their limits, to return their names and offenses to the Constable, who
shall for his year use the power of a Magistrate for punishment of all
Offenders contrary to Law.

14. Churchwardens.
Each Parish shall yearly elect so many Churchwardens as have been accustomed,
who shall be sworn (by the Registerial Court) to take care for the repairing
and beautifying of the Church and Churchyard wall, Gates and Styles, and to
provide for convenient and decent furniture for the Church, viz. for Books,
Cushions for the Pulpit, Carpet for the Table, Chalices or Cups for the
Communion, Candlesticks and Candles for celebration of Prayers. Evening and
Morning in Winter; Bells, Belstrings, and Clock, with the Appurtenances; and
shall see that all seats be conveniently placed, and control all
irregularities in the Church: they shall also take care for amendment of all
Highways in their Parish, and for providing for such poor as shall not be able
to help themselves; for there shall be no beggars permitted, but if any so do,
they shall be sent by the next Officer to the Constable, and by him sent to the
common Workhouse, unless security be given to offend no more. For doing of all
which, they shall impose such Assesments as shall be convenient to be collected
and disbursed to and for several uses, by the Constable, who at his going out
of Office shall account before the Registerial Court for all receipts and
payments, and shall within six days pay all Moneys remaining in his hands, to
the succeeding Constable for the next year: which if he shall refuse, distress
or seizure of his Estate real or personal shall be made by the succeeding
Constable, by Warrant under the Registers Seal: and if any Constable shall
disburse more for any the uses aforesaid then he shall collect, he shall (upon
clearing his accounts, and allowance thereof by the Registerial Court, and
entry thereof with the Register) be re-imbursed the same by the next Constable
within one month; which shall be allowed in his Accounts. And if any succeeding
Constable shall refuse to make payment of any such disbursements to the
preceding Constable (the same being allowed and entered in the Registry) an
Action of Debt shall lie, to be recovered by way of distress by the Sheriffs
deputy in the Sub-province, and no allowance shall be made in his accounts of
any charges expended therein. All Assesments to be imposed by the
Churchwardens aforesaid, shall be entered in the Registry, and by the Registers
ordered to be collected, signifying for what use or uses the same are imposed,
and not otherways.

15. Actions of Trespass and Slander
All Actions of Trespass and Slander shall be heard in the Parochial Court
first, where the same shall be committed; and, if the same shall be of greater
concernment then the Court has Cognizance, be transmitted to the next superior
Judicature; but if it shall not be of greater value in the estimation of the
Court, then the Court has power to judge of, judgment shall be therein given,
and execution done thereupon, as in other cases.

16. In all cases where Murder, Murder, Manslaughter and Rape.
Manslaughter or Rape shall be committed, the offenders shall be examined
before the Parochial Magistrate where the parties shall be apprehended, or the
fault committed; and so many as shall be found guilty, shall be sent by the
Constable to the Sheriffs Deputy, and by him to the Provincial Goal, there to
be kept in work as shall be directed, till their legal delivery thence: and in
none of these cases Bail shall be admitted, but to be tried by Juries as has
been accustomed; and to suffer death, if found guilty, without benefit of
pardon or Reprieve.

17. In all manner of ^heft, Robbery, Theft, Robbery, Cousenage and Fraud.
Cousenage and Fraud. the Offenders shall be examined before the Parochial
Magistrates; and if found guilty, threefold restitution shall be made, to be
disposed one part to satisfy the party wronged, one part to the common stock
of the Town, and one other part to the Constable, for reparation of Highways;
which if the party refuse, and no distress shall be found to satisfy the Law,
the body of the offender shall be committed to the custody of the Master of the
Workhouse, or else sent to the place from whence they came, if aliens, with
Certificate of their offense, and there to be employed, and to have two parts
only of their gets allowed for their maintenance, and a third to be to the use
of the common stock. The detainer or sending away, to be at the election of the
Parochial Magistracy, where such offender or offenders shall be apprehended and
tried as aforesaid.

18. Defamation
All false accusations on purpose to defame any person, shall be heavily
punished by the immediate Magistracy, where the offense shall be committed; and
in this case no Appeal to lie or be admitted: and where the offense shall
deserve greater punishment then the Parochial Magistrate may inflict, (who may
not exceed 10 li. in any case) the same shall be certified to the
Sub-provincial Magistrate; and if it require, thence to the Provincial, but not
further. All ambiguous cases shall be transmitted with the evidences to the
next superior Magistracy, and so on to the Parliament, if no inferior Court
shall be free to give judgment therein.

19. Fighting, quarrelling and breaking the Peace.
All fighting, quarrelling, and breaking of the Peace, shall be examined and
punished by the Parochial Magistracy, where the same shall be committed, and
satisfaction made to the party wronged without delay; whereto the offenders
shall be compelled according to the order of the Court; and for all bruisings
and beatings, satisfaction shall be made as the Laws in being direct.

If any Master or Mistress shall immoderately correct any child or servant,
Masters and servants
the Court Parochial shall punish the offender.

20. If any child or servant shall refuse to do their duties, or shall strike
or quarrel with their Parents, Masters or Mistresses, the Court shall heavily
punish such offenses; and if any Apprentices shall so do, they shall serve a
double term, and any other servant a double year for the same wages. No son or
daughter vilifying or slighting their Parents, or either of them, shall be
capable of inheriting any thing from either father or mother after their
respective deaths.

21. Let so many Registerial Courts be erected as there are Registries, viz. to
every Registry it is Court, with Officers Fees, and Rules to walk by, for the
ease and profit of each particular interest.

22. National Judges.
Let twelve Judges learned in the Laws be appointed by Parliament to attend the
National Registerial Court, to which let all great causes be reduced, any three
whereof, with the Register or one Assistant, shall have power to hear and
determine all matters of controversy; and let the three Bars in
Westminster Hall be the places of Judicature; and the several rooms adjacent,
Offices for the Registers, viz. each two Circuits their proper Court, for trial
of all grand Causes arising within their limits; and in other mixed cases where
one party shall live in one Courts jurisdiction, and one in another, there the
Cause to be heard in the third Court, where neither parties interest is more
concerned then the other.

23. Let only two Vacations be in the whole year, viz. Vacations.
one from the first of December, to the tenth of February, the other from the
last day of May till the first day of September, yearly; in which
Summer-Vacations the Judges to ride the several Circuits as now, to visit the
several Registries, calling before them all the Registers of every Province,
and hearing all complaints against any Register, Clerk, Attorney or other
Officer, and punishing all offenders; and also for determining all grand and
difficult Causes, and Causes of Appeals, where any such shall be depending.

24. Terms and proceedings.
Let all the rest of the year be two continued Terms, wherein the Judges shall
sit as often as cause shall require; the first day of every Term being a
Return-day, and the third day day of Appearance; before which third day, the
Plaintiff in every Action shall enter his Declaration with the Register,
whereto the Defendant shall plead within ten days, and enter his Plea with the
same Clerk; whereupon order shall be given for examining Witnesses, and
depositions sent into the several Countries to the respective Parochial
Registers within whose limits the several Witnesses shall live, whose
Examination shall be taken, and returned within one month after the Pleading
aforesaid; and entry made thereof also with the same Registerial Clerk by whom
the first Summons was awarded, with whom all the entries in the same Cause
shall be made. The fourth day after return of the examinations aforesaid, the
Cause shall be heard, (if it be not the Lords day, if so, Judgment.
the day next following) and Judgment shall be given and entered the same day
with the same Clerk: and the sixth day after Judgment, Execution shall be
awarded, not to recalled, unless the parties agree in the mean time, and enter
their Agreement with the same Clerk. In case of any Witnesses absence on the
Defendants behalf, upon warrantable occasions made appear upon oath to any
Parochial Register, by whom the Witness or Witnesses were to be examined, a
second day to be given, upon the Defendants payment of costs for examination,
not to defer the hearing above one month longer then it was to have been.

25. Provincial Judges.
Let two Judges be appointed by Parliament to attend every Provincial
Registerial Court; that one Judge with the Register, and one Clerk assistant at
least, shall be present when all matters shall be heard; and in all difficult
matters, one Judge at least shall be called out of the next Province, who shall
have notice sent to him by the Register, at least six days before the day of
hearing shall be: his whole expenses of his journey and tarriance to be
defrayed by the Registers by whom he shall be sent for, and to be allowed him
in his accounts to the Public: And to hold Pleas of all Debts not exceeding
1000 li. and Estates under 1000 li. per annum, lying within the same Province.

26. Courts and proceedings.
Every Month shall be a Court Provincial kept in every respective Province, in
the Middle of the week, viz. upon Tuesday in every month; and if occasion shall
require, to be continued the Wednesday also, and no longer: during which time
only, Summons shall be given, which within ten days at fanthest shall be
executed, and appearance given the next Court-day; at which time a Declaration
shall be entered by the Plaintiff; within three days after, which the Defendant
shall plead, and thereupon orders be sent for examination of Witnesses, and
return of their depositions before the next Court-day, and then the Cause shall
be heard, Judgment.
and Judgment given and entered; and unless the parties agree, and enter their
agreement before the next Court-day, execution shall be awarded, not to be
deferred or reversed.

27. Sub-provincial Judges.
The Judges in every Sub-province, shall be the Register and his Assistant; the
Minister of the Parish where the Registers Court shall be kept, and the
Sheriffs deputy; and in all Causes of difficulty, one or more Justice of Peace
shall be called to assist, who shall have at least six days notice. Whereof
always some two, with the Register or Assistant, shall be present at all
Trials and hearings of all matters in variance between party and party.

28. Courts.
The Sub-provincial Courts shall be kept every Friday three weeks; the Proceeds
as in the Provincial, and the hearing the third Court-day, and execution the
fourth, except as before; and to hold pleas of all Debts not exceeding 100 li.
principal, and all Estates under 100 li. per annum, lying within the same
Sub-province.

29. Parochial Judges, Courts, etc.
The Judges in the several Parish-Courts shall be the Register, the Minister,
the Constable and Churchwardens for the time being; whereof in all hearings two
to be present with the Register or his Deputy: the several Courts to be kept
every Thursday fourtnight, and all matters to be brought to be hearing the
third Court-day as before; to hold pleas of all Debts not exceeding 10 li.
principal, and all Estates under 10 li. per annum, lying in the same Parish.

30. All Summons shall be granted (upon motion of the party or his Attorney,
Summons.
giving security to defray the charges of the party to be summoned, if his
Action be not good, and cause just) by the respective Registers their Clerks
Assistant or Deputies, in writing under their hands: to which if appearance
shall be given either in person or by Attorney, proceedings shall be made as
before: if no appearance shall be given, a second Summons shall be granted
under the Seal of the Registry; to which if no appearance shall be given,
Judgment shall be given the second day of Appearance respectively, and entered
in the Court-Registry: and if agreement intervene not before the next
Court-day, and be entered with the Register, execution shall be granted, and the
Registers Seal put thereto; Not to be reversed, nor any Appeal admitted.

31. Execution of Summons
Execution of Summons shall be done by the several Parochial Officers, within
whose Parishes the parties to be summoned shall reside or inhabit, as follows:
each Officer to whom any Summons shall be directed, shall the next day at
furthest, if it be not the Lords day, if so, the next day after (if it may not
be done the day of his receipt thereof) take two next Neighhours to the parties
to be summoned with him, and shall go to the house or houses where the party or
parties shall live; and if the party or parties there be to be met with, he
shall give him, her or them a Copy thereof in writing; if not, he shall leave
the same with some body in the house to give him, her or them, at his, her or
their return; or acquaint him, her or them with it: and if no body be found
about the house, he shall leave the Summons with the next Neighbor, and shall
make return to the Registry of what he has done, upon his own and the other
persons oaths who were with him.

32. Contempts.
All Summons shall be given in the daytime, between the hours of eight
aforenoon, and four afternoon, in all Cases whatsoever; and if any party to be
summoned, shall threaten, affront, offer abuse to, or hide or conceal him or
her self from any Officer so sent with any Summons as aforesaid, the Witnesses
shall upon their oaths make entry thereof with the Register; which entry shall
be made by the Register gratis; and upon complaint thereof to the Court by the
Officer, the delinquents shall be severely punished according to the quality of
the offender; and till satisfaction be made according to the Censure of the
Court, appearance shall not be accepted: to the end all persons may give
obedience to the Magistracy. And if appearance be not given, proceeding shall
pass by default, as before.

33. Manner of granting Summons, and to whom.
All Summons granted by the National or any Provincial Register, shall by the
party who desires the same, or his Attorney, be sent to the Register of the
Parish, where every party to be summoned shall live, within six days after the
date thereof; who shall the next day at furthest give notice thereof to one of
the Atturneys, who shall constantly attend that Court, who shall execute the
same as aforesaid, and earefully transmit what the Register shall direct to the
Register or Attorney National or Provincial from whom the same was received,
who (upon receipt thereof) shall with care and speed, enter the return and
execution thereof: which being under the Parochial Registers Seal, shall be
sufficient and warrantable to all intents and purposes.

34. In all Cases where need shall require, Examination of witnesses.
Interrogatories shall be sent from the National or Provincial Register, before
whom any Cause shall depend, to the Register of the Parish where the party
lives, or parties to be examined, with direction to examine and return the
Depositions, within such time as shall be limited: all interrogatories to be
sent away within two days after the pleadings ended, and to be executed by
every Parochial Register within six days after receipt thereof, if the parties
to be examined be to be found in his Registry; if not, to make return thereof,
or examine so many as shall be found, and return the depositions thereof, and
absence of the rest, and upon what occasion; and within two days after
examination, return the same to the Register from whom he first received them,
by the care of one of his Atturneys: and in all cases where Witnesses live in
the same Parish or Town, they shall be examined viva voce, in open Court, if
able to appear there; if not, the Register, his Clerk Assistant or Deputy shall
attend them, and take their examinations at least two days before the day of
return.

35. Execution of Summons
Execution of all Summons in the Sub-provincial and Parochial Courts for
appearance at their own Courts, shall be by the Sheriffs substitute, and the
Constable for their respective Liberties to whom the same shall be directed, or
by their respective deputies inhabiting in the same Villages or Hamlets where
the party to be summoned lives; whereof return shall be made the next
Courtday, upon the oath of the party employed, and one Witness more inhabiting
within the same Village: for in all cases, upon the oaths of two Witnesses
shall every truth be established; to which end, care shall be taken that
persons of quality be taken for witnesses, who in case false testimony shall be
proved to be given by them, shall make satisfaction to the party by such false
testimony wronged, according to the Judgment of the Court in that behalf.

36. Execution of Judgments and Decrees.
Execution of all Judgments, Decrees and Orders of the National, Provincial
and Sub-provincial Courts, shall be done by the Sheriff, his deputy or
substitute, within six days after his receipt thereof; and within six days
more, return shall be made thereof, to the respective Register who sent the
same.

37. Of Parochial Judgments.
Execution of all Parochial Judgments, Decrees and Orders shall be done by the
Constable for the time being, or his substitute living within the same Village
or Hamlet where execution is to be done; for which the Constable shall be
responsible.

The Fourth Days Work.
A Parliament well chosen, Parliament
ties
The hands of all exormities.
It best provides in public case:
So here it comes the next in place.
1. LEt annually a Parliament be elected, and each person whose whole Estate
shall be entered in the Registry as aforesaid, to be capable of electing or
being elected, but none others: The Electors to have Estates of 5 li. per
annum, or 100 li. in money or upwards, Entered and certified as aforesaid.

2. Parochial elections.
Each first Court-day to be held in every Parochial Registry, in January
yearly, all the Inhabitants, Electors, shall each personally present his Paper
sealed up to the Register, wherein shall be written the names of two such
persons only of that Parish, as he shall think most worthy to be Representees
at the public election, without subscription of his own name: all which
Papers shall be put into a Box or Chest with a hole in the top, locked or
sealed with three several Locks or Seals; one Key or Seal whereof shall be kept
by the Constable, one by the Minister, and a third by the Churchwardens of the
same Parish, or some of them; and when all such Papers shall be received and
put therein as aforesaid, the Box to be opened, and the Papers also in presence
and open view of the Court; and five persons who shall have most nominations in
the Papers aforesaid, shall be the Representees of that Parish, in all public
elections and transactions for that year.

3. Sub-provincial elections.
The several Repesentees of the several Parishes within each Sub-province,
shall meet at the next Sub-provincial Court for that Hundred, and shall there
give their Papers sealed, to the Box, to be kept under the seals several of the
Register, the Sheriffs deputy, and the next Justice of Peace for the time
being, with each two names written therein: and when all the Papers shall be
received, the Box and Papers shall be opened and examined in open Court; and
those two persons within that Subprovince, who shall have most names, or be
oftenest named in the Papers, shall be the Representees of that Sub-province
for that year.

4. Provincial elections.
The several Sub provincial Representees shall the next Court-day to be held
for that Province, meet at the Provincial Court, and there each shall give his
Paper sealed up, with two names only writ therein, to the like Box there to be
kept by the Register, the Sheriff, the Major of the Corporation where the
Office shall be kept, and two Justices of the Peace, under their several locks
or seals, till all the papers shall be received thereinto: and when all the
Papers shall be received, the Box and Papers shall be opened, and four chosen
who have most voices for the Representees for that Province for that year. And
for York six, viz. each Riding two.

5. Persons elected, to be Resiants in the Country for which they are to be
elected.
It is to be observed, that in each County or Province, twice so many
Representees shall be elected, as are Clerks assistant to the Provincial
Register in that County; and so in the Province of York six. Representees shall
be chosen, viz. for each Riding one, who shall be Residents within the same
Riding; and so in the respective Provinces where four are only to be, they
shall be for each Clerk assistants jurisdiction two, who shall be resident
within the same; and no person shall serve for any other place, then where his
constant residence shall be Neitheir shall any person be elected who shall be
solicited for, either by Letter, Message or otherways, from any Gentlemen,
Governors, or Commanders, of what rank, quality or condition soever; but that
upon appearance thereof to the Court, all such shall be rejected as unworthy,
and not to be admitted of two years to be elected: To the end all elections may
be free. Neither shall any person or persons, by whom any Letters shall be
sent, or invitations made on any others behalf, be elected for three years
after: whereby color shall be prevented.

6. Corporations elections.
Each Corporation who shall be at the charge, may after the same manner chuve
particular Representees, or may involve themselves into the Sub-provincial
elections, and there share with their Neighbors: for each Representee shall
have quarterly paid him during his time of service for the Public, twenty
Marks: for none shall serve the Public at his own charges, nor none shall
have so much allowance, as merely for salary to invite him to the work.

7. Number of Presentatives.
For each County shall be chosen four, and for York six as aforesaid, which
shall be the Representees for the whole County or Province for which they shall
be chosen; that is to say, for each respective Jurisdiction two: and each
Sub-province shall elect two likewise, who shall serve by turns; that is to
say, one the one half the year, and the other the other half: he that has the
pre-eminence in election, to proceed in service; and where equal numbers shall
be electors, the decision to be by lot.

9. None to be elected who shall have any suits in Law depending.
NO person who has any Suit or Cause depending in Law shall be elected, nor be
an Elector; for in all such cases, each acts his own Play: neither shall any
member of Parliament for or during that year for which his service is or shall
be, receive any reward or compensation for loss, salary or service, other then
his salary which shall quarterly be allowed him as aforesaid, to be paid by the
respective Officer for the Liberty for which he shall serve.

10. That the Parliament shall have power to make and after Laws, to treat of
and conclude Peace and War.

11. Committee for Petitions and Grievances to be dispatched within a month.
That within one week after the sitting of each respective Parlaiemnt, a
Committee shall be appointed, to receive all Petitions and Grievances, and to
read and consider thereof; and such as are fit to present to the house, to
offer the same, so as answer may within one month be given thereof; for it ill
becomes a free State to shut the doors, eyes or ears of Justice, to any
Suppliant: by which means some hundreds have perished of late years, whose
blood it may be feared is not yet pacified.

12. He that refuses to serve in Parliament, to pay 20 li.
That none though elected shall be forced to serve in Parliament: but if any
shall refuse, he shall contribute 20 li. toward the charge of the next
election, unless in case of sickness or any bodily infirmity, in which case
(none shall be compelled beyond his strength) he is freely to be excused, and
the next in order to supply his place: and where two or more shall be equally
elected (that is to say) by equal numbers of electors, decision shall be made
by lot, and not otherways.

13. None of the two last to be in any the nextsucceeding Parliament.
None shall be elected a member of any succeeding Parliament, who served as
member of either of the two last preceding Parliaments, the same rule annually
to be observed; but that freedom of all the Nation be further admitted, and in
all other Officers of inferior rank in the whole Commonwealth, (the Registries
excepted, which are not to be altered, unless in case of corruption, neglect or
abuse of Trust) so that it shall be free for each person, who shall carry
himself worthy thereof, to be elected; neither shall any man's meanness of
estate hinder his election, if his parts be such as the Neighborhood may
confide therein: but all persons whose estates are entrable in the
Sub-provincial Registry, are capable, if they be accordingly qualified, of
electing or being elected; for they are terms convertible; the elected is an
elector, and the elector may be elected; each has his single voice by his
paper in the box, Provincial Representees to have double voices to the
Sub-provincial. Representees to serve only for six months.
and no more.

14. Each Provincial Reprosentee convened in Parliament shall have a double
voice to each Sub-provincial; all voices to be given by balls, wherein each
Provincial shall have two balls, and each Sub-provincial one ball: but in the
Council of State they shall have equal voices.

15. The persons elected shall serve by turns as aforesaid; that is to say, one
half for six months, and the other half for other six-months; and for each six
months, one for each Provincial Riding, and one for each Sub-provincial
Registry shall meet at Westminster the first day of March annually, if it fall
not on the Lords day; if so, the day following; and there entering the House of
Parliament, shall choose their Speaker, and take upon them the Government of the
Nation for their time allotted; and at the end thereof, leave the same to their
successors, whereof sixty to make a House, and not under.

16. Council of State.
The first work they shall do after their meeting in March next, shall be to
elect forty persons out of their whole number elected for that year, to be a
Council of State; twenty whereof shall be out of the number of the persons then
convened, and twenty more out of the persons to convene in September followinge
these forty persons for the first year so elected, to serve as members of the
Council for a whole year, from the time of their respective conventions; and
that twenty of the persons which shall be continued in Council till the first
of March next, shall continue there till the tenth of September next; the
members yearly to be chosen for the Council, to meet in Council annually the
tenth of March, and tenth of September, as their turns come: and all who shall
be elected to serve in Council, shall there serve one whole year and no longer:
whereby engrossing of power and destroying of bodies shall be avoided. Any
fifteen to be a Council, and not under.

17. Each member shall forfeit 2 li. Forfeitures for not attending in Parliament
which shall not meet in Parliament the first day whereon his service is to
commence; and for every day after which he shall be absent (during the time of
his appointed sitting either in Parliament or Council) without license, 20 s.
unless in case of bodily distemper, or weakness not dissembled, but real. The
several forfeitures to be collected by the Sergeants at Arms attending the
House and Council for the time being, and accounted for and paid to the
Churchwardens of Margaret Westminster, monthly, for relief of the poor in
Westminster.

18. The Affairs of the Army, Admiralty and Navy, Committee for the Army,
Admirally and Navy.
co be provided for by a Committee chosen by the Council, out of their own
members, viz. out of each particular Consular election six, their whole number
to be twelve, whereof five to be a quorum, and not less, to be approved by
Parliament; the Council, and also the said Committee, to act in all things
subordinate to the Parliament, and to observe their orders, and yearly to be
changed as to the one half, every tenth of March twenty, and the other half
each tenth of September twenty, to sit for twelve months only year after year.

19. Six persons shall be yearly elected by the Council, Public Revenue.
and approved by the House of Parliament, for managing the receipts and
disbursements of all pubsike moneys, who shall twice every year pass their
Accounts, to a Committee to be chosen part out of the House, and part out of
the council, viz. at the end of six months after their commencement, and the
last month of their respective services.

20. Places of keeping Registries and Courts.
Let the Provincial Registerial Courts be kept in the chief Town of every
Privince, and each Sub-provincial Court and Registry in some Market Town within
the same Hundred; and where no Market Town shall be in any Hundred, let a
Market be appointed to be kept at some one Town conveniently seated, near the
middle of the same Hundred, and Authority given by Parliament for the same; and
each Parochial Registry in the same Town where the Parish Church, or public
meeting place of the same Parish is or shall be.

21. Honors to be conferred by Parliament.
All persons who shall have Estate entered in the National Registry, to the
clear yearly value of 10000 li. per annum, and shall pay Assesments for so much
to the Republique, shall be capable of the honor of Lordship, conferred on him
only by the Parliament; each person of 1000 li. per annum, of Knighthood; and
each other person having 300 li. per annum, and upwards, be reputed an Esquire;
and shall each of them give Coats of Arms, to be allowed by the King of Heralds
for the time being. That no person who shall nor have 1000 li. per annum, shall
be elected as a Provincial Representee.

The Fifth Days Work.
Its Public aids must bear the charge,
Our Privileges to enlarge.
Wherefore let Contributions be
In exigencies frank and free.
1. LEt Assesments be imposed by Parliament yearly, Assesments.
according to the requisition of the time, on each particular real and personal
Estate, Assesments to be imposed by Parment.
according to the annual values thereof, and Rents received; each paying for
his stock in Husbandry or Trade, and each Usurer for his Money lent at a
certain rate, as rent of Land or interest of Money at the same rate, and stock
in Trade or Husbandry at half the rate; the Land-Assess to be paid by the
Landlord, and the Money-Assess by the Lender, to be defalked out of Rent or
Interest, according to the proportions, by the Tenant or Borrower, who shall
deposite the same, as occasion shall require, to the monthly Collectors thereof.

2. Great Assesment for the poor.
Let one great Assesment be forthwith made for relief of all the Poor in the
Nation; and let a stock be erected in every Parochial Town, and a Trade set up
for employing and providing for all the poorer sort of men, women and children:
let a Master or Governor thereof, be appointed by the Registerial Court in
every Parish, and such a one as his Estate may be responsible for the stock
with him entrusted, for which (together with the profits thereof, to be
employed according to the Rules to be given therefore) he shall give security;
and this to be yearly taken care for, chiefly by the Churchwardens of each
respective Parish. Let all charitable Contributions be employed to the same
purpose: Whereby if vigilance and industry be used, a small stock will in short
time increase to a great inheritance, whereby the poor shall be equally
provided for, to the best and richest in every Parish: so there shall be no
crying out, nor complaining in our streets.

3. Customs, Excise and Assesments.
Let the Customs be annually regulated by the Parliament at the time of
changing of Representees; only let the Representees for the first six months,
continue their sittings so long after their time, together with the
Representees for the latter six months, as to settle that, and the Excise and
Assesments for the next succeeding year; and to be done within twelve days. Let
the Customs be collected by such Commissioners as have responsible Estates; and
where any fraud or covin shall be discovered, let care be taken therein for the
prevention for the future.

4. Public Collectors.
Let the Excise be collected by the Constables, and responded for to the
Sheriff, as other Assesments, and also all other Rents and Revenues payable to
the Commonwealth, for which no salary shall be allowed.

In all Enclosures of Wastes, Enclosures of Wastes.
and Commons not stinted, one fourth part shall be allotted for provision for
the Poor of the Parish where the same shall lie, to be committed to the care of
the Master of the Workhouse for the time being, and by him employed to the
best advantage according to his trusts. One other fourth to the Lord for his
Segniory, and half to the Commons: this rule in all cases to be the same.

5. Enclosures of stinted Wastes and Towns-fields.
Where the Lords and Tenants, Owners and Proprietors of two full third parts of
the Enclosures, Field-Land and stinted Commons in any Manor, Town or Lordship,
shall agree to enclose all or any part of the open Wastes or Common grounds of
the same Town, no third party opposing shall hinder the same, so as provision
be made for the poor to one half the alotment as aforesaid; and the proportions
allotted for the refusers according to their several estates, quantity and
quality to be considered: but if any shall endeavor to hinder a common good,
he shall be severely punished therefore, either by the Judges in the next
superior Court, or by the Justices of Peace at the next Quarter Sessions to be
held for that Liberty, or by the Judges Itinerant in their Circuits.

6. In all provisions for the Poor, Parochial provisions for the poor.
each whole Parish to be one entire Corporation, and take care to dispose of
all Wanderers and Vagabonds, according to the directions of the Statutes in
use, or else employ them in work as aforesaid. Public Workhouses
Let a large house be provided in each Parish-Town for a public Workhouse,
where in some Manual occupation all the poor of the same Parish may be set on
work, and provided for necessaries by the Master thereof, to be appointed as
aforesaid; to which purpose, let some Trade, whereof the Master of the
Workhouse to be a Freeman, be used in every Parish; and the children of all
such as shall not by their Parents be better provided for, to be employed in
the same after seven years old, as in all Towns where is convenience of water
for building Mills, and have Cole, let several sorts of Smiths be, as for
making of Knives, Swords, Scymiters; Guns, Sythes, Shears, Scissers; also for
all manner of Work-tools and harness; and all such who shall have use for
wheels for grinding: also, Lock-smiths, Naylors and such others, where no water
is, nor wheels shall not be requisite; and where convenience is, let Clothyers
be: and to the end the Trade of Clothing may be the better managed, and with
less confusion, let those Towns where much growth of Wool shall be, and want
the convenience of fire and water, be employed to the sorting, breaking, mixing
and spinning of Wool, in one Town for making of Jerseys, Serges, and other
Stuffs of the like nature, in other Towns in spinning Wool for making cloth
according to the several sorts thereof, the finest by its self, and the
coursest by its self, and the middle sort by it self; and a certain rate
allowed to each person for the work they shall do, not exceeding four parts of
five of the real value of the work; one fifth being still to be allowed to the
common stock.

7. Husbandmen to have the help of laborers in the common Workhouse.
That in all cases where any persons employed at work upon the common stock,
shall be desired to assist the Husbandman, at any out-work in the Fields,
there shall a fourth part of the wages be employed to the common stock; which
wages shall be paid to the Master of the Workhouse, who shall have the command
of all under the age of twenty one as Apprentices, and all above as
Journey-men; without whose license none shall go to work abroad: which shall
not be denied in Seed-time, Hay-time or Harvest, upon reasonable rates.

8. Trades to be erected in Flax and Hemp.
In those Towns where shall be store of Hemp or Flax, let some Towns be
employed in dressing and fitting the same for spinning, according to the
several sorts thereof; another in spinning fine Linen, another the middle, and
another the courser sort, and another weaving the same; others also in making
Cordage and Ropes.

9. In Wood.
In Towns where wood shall be plentiful, let one be employed by Coopers,
another by Carpenters, another by Tanners, another by makers of Waines,
Wagons, Carts, Plows, Sledges, and other Utensils for Husbandry; and in every
Parochial-Town let there be in the common Workhouse, a Smith, a Shoemaker
and a Tailor, with their several servants subservient to the public Master:
and in those Towns which shall be employed in making of wire Pins, Needles or
Bonelace, the Master of the work shall once a week pay off all the Workers of
the same Trade, and shall furnish them with stuff for making thereof; and when
they are made, sell them for the advantage of the common stock: and so in all
other Trades.

10. Proviston in the common Workhouses
In the common Workhouses provision shall be made for all persons of all ages,
sexes and conditions, whether young or old, which are not able to help
themselves, and be therein employed in such works as their strengths, genius's
and abilities are fittest to manage and undergo; and let the females be
employed in several works by themselves, and have Mistresses for their
Tutresses and Gardians; where they may be employed in spinning, carding,
sowing, weaving lace, ribband, tape, and other things; in setting of Cushions,
Carpets, Hangings, and other things fit for the work of women.

By which means the poor of the Nation shall not only be provided for, but the
Nation shall be thereby enriched; and for every penyworth of stuff that the
Nation now affords of vendible Commodity in other Countries, it shall in few
years afford three, four, five or six times the quantity; which shall much
enrich the Merchants thereof also.

11. Justices elected.
Let the Representees annually chosen for members in Parliament, be the
Justices of Peace for the same year; and those which shall be resident in the
Country to undergo that service, and in all things observe the directions of
Parliament, for levying of Soldiers, regulating of Assesments, and all other
things whatsoever.

12. Every person or persons, Planting.
who shall at any time make any new Enclosures upon any Wastes, Commons,
Town-fields or commonable grounds, shall within every Pole set or plant at
least one plant or set of Ash, Ok, Elm or Beech, and preserve the same for
growth; and in those Countries where fruit trees will grow and bear fruit, the
like may be enjoined also, upon forfeiture of 2 s. for every defect, to be
collected by the Constable by warrant from the Register, upon information to be
made thereof to the Court by the Churchwardens, or any one or more of them in
any Parish for the time being: which forfeitures the one half to be employed to
the common stock of the same Town, the other half to the Informer or Informers.

The Sixth Days Work.
It Is mutual Commerce that brings
Beggars unto the state of Kings. Trade.

And if we view the fruits of Trade,
It is a tree of pleasant shade.
1. Customs.
LEt certain Taxes, Customs and Impositions, be imposed upon all Manufactures
which the Merchant shall bring from other Countries: but let all the
Manufactures of this Nation be sold and exported free from the same for seven
years, whereby the Country may be encouraged to Trade.

2. Corporations of Trades.
Let all the Tradesmen in every Riding or distinct half Provincial Liberty,
(...) well of the common Workhouses as others of every distinct Trade, be a
particular Society and Corporation, and have power to elect Officers and make
Laws amongst themselves, for the advantage and benefit of the whole; and also
authority to put those Laws in execution, and to meet once a Month at a place
certain within each division, or to appoint any other time or place within
their limits (whereof public notice shall be given at the last precedent
meeting) for the doing of any thing requisite for the benefit and advantage of
the same Trade.

3. Youth to be brought up in Trades.
That all persons within the Commonwealth of England, shall bring up their sons
to some Trade or other, after the age of fourteen till the age of twenty one at
least; under which notion, the Husbandman is reputed a Tradesman, which Trade
none shall follow who with his own Team shall not Till every year twenty Acres
of Land or upwards, as a Master-Husbandman.

4. Every Parochial Town shall have a Schoolmaster, Parochial Schools and
Writing-master.
who shall teach all children in the same Parish, to write and read English,
and cast Accounts, from the age of seven till the age of fourteen, at which age
they shall be either employed in their Trades, or sent to other Schools; and
all children brought up in the common Workhouse shall spend two hours every
day in the same School, one in the forenoon and one in the after; and at ten
years old and after, the afternoons hours shall be spent in writing and casting
accounts, for which every Schoolmaster where no provision is already made,
shall have 10 li. per annum quarterly paid by the Constable for the time being,
besides the gratuities of the richer sort of people.

5. Sub-provincial grand School.
In every Sub-provincial or Market Town shall be a free Grammar School erected,
where shall be a Master who shall have allowance of 40 li. and an Usher of 20
li. per annum, paid quarterly by the Sheriffs substitute for the time being;
whither all the youths of that sub-Province (whom their Parents or Friends
shall intend for Scholars) shall be sent at the age of ten, and there continue
till they shall be respectively fit for the University; whither none shall be
admitted under the age of sixteen.

In every Sub-provincial Market Town, Scrivener.
shall be a Scrivener or writing Master, who shall teach to write and cast
accounts; with whom every Scholar in the Grammar School shall spend at least
one half day every week, or one hour a day for three days in the week: which
said Master shall have the yearly allowance of 10 li. paid by the parties
aforesaid, besides gratuities.

6. There shall also be a Musick-master, Music Master.
who shall have the yearly allowance of 10 li. besides gratuities, with whom
every Scholar shall spend one half day every week, or an hour a day for three
days in the week.

7. Time of stay at the grand School.
All such as shall be sent to the Grammar School at ten, shall be continued
there till fourteen; whereby the youth of the Country shall be fitted (by that
time (they shall attain twenty one) for the service of Princes; and all who
shall be employed in Trades, shall be able to live thereon, and be helpful to
their friends.

8. Army and Militia.
The present Armies now in being, to be disposed amongst the Militia's of the
several Counties and Provinces of the Nation, each Commander to have the
convenience of residing in his own Country, or the next adjacent; and let the
Soldiers retire to the commands in their own Countries, and to have half pay
for the time of their residences there, and to Muster once a month, and be in
readiness on all occasions, when the Parliament shall command; and so many as
shall be commanded to the Guard, either to this Town, or elsewhere, for all the
time of their service, to have pay according to the present establishment: and
let the Militia be completed together with the present Army, to the ancient
number of the Trained-bands.

9. Disaffected disarmed.
Let all disaffected persons be disarmed, and their Arms kept and secured, in
the hands of the several Commanders of the Militia, to be disposed of from time
to time as the Parliament shall appoint: and let no Officer of the Army or
Militia be elected for a Member of Parliament; or if any such be, that during
his attendance in Parliament his Command shall be transferred to another, who
shall personally attend the same, as well when they shall be upon service, as
when resident in the Countries: to the end no disorder appear, but the same may
be timely prevented.

10. Universities purged.
Let the several Universities of this Nation be purged from all dregs and
relics of Popish superstition; and let all Oaths formerly taken by any
graduates there, be abolished; and in lieu thereof, let the same Oath that the
Judges and Justices are to take, be administered by persons thereto Authorized;
and such as shall refuse the same, be removed: and let all graduates upon their
admission into order from time to time, take the same Oath, and no other; and
let all Rights and Privileges as to their Civil Rights, be secured; and such
orders instituted, as may best prepare the youth thither sent, for the service
of God and their Country: to which end, let the heads of the several Colleges
meet and consider of such propositions by a joint consent, as may be fit for
the Parliament to ratify and establish, as well for the study of Divinity, as
Physic, Astronomy, or other Arts there fit to be read and studied.

11. Graduates
Let none take any degree in any University before the full age of twenty one,
nor any be admitted publicly to Preach before the age of twenty six years at
the least.

12. Cathedrals.
Let in every Province the Cathedral or chief Church in the same Province be
repaired and endowed with 400 li. per annum, at the least; whereof 300 li. to
be to two Ministers to officiate there, and the other 100 li. for the
Underofficers in the same Church, viz. 50 li. to an Assistant, and 50. more to
the Clerk, Sextons, etc.

13. Sub-provincial Churches, and Parochial.
Let the Sub-provincial Church in each Markettown have allowance of 200 li. per
annum, for two Ministers constantly to attend the service of God there; and let
each Parochial Minister have at least 60 li. per annum: and where any Parochial
Minister by Tithes or otherways shall have above 150 li. per annum, let the
surplusage go to the augmentation of his next Neighbor incumbants, to make
each of them the annual value of 60 li. or upwards; but no augmentation to be
granted to any Church which shall have 100 li. per annum, in present being, for
the Ministry there.

14. Let no quarrellers, Persons to be beneficed.
railers or State-Incendiaries be admitted to any Benefice; but let such be
appointed, as in sobriety and meekness be have themselves, teaching the Gospel
of Christ as the same is delivered in the holy Bible, without nice Inventions
to entangle the hearers of the word; and let every Province be a Classis, and
constitute Orders and Decrees for the well governing of the several people of
that Province: but none to be put in execution, till the same shall be
confirmed by Authority of Parliament.

15. Let the Lords day be carefully observed; Lords day observed.
and if any shall disturb any public Minister, whether in his Parochial
Ministry, or elsewhere in his exercise of the day, let a fine of 10 s. be
imposed, and collected from every offender; the offenders of what rank soever
to be imprisoned in the common Stocks of the Town till the fine shall be paid,
by any Parochial Officers or other person or persons whatsoever, at the command
of the Minister who shall be disturbed, whether he be beneficed or no.

16. Seditious persons punished.
That all seditious and scandalous persons, who shall pretend as Ministers to
teach the people, and shall sow or foment any seditious, scandalous or
blasphemous opinions to the disquiet of the people, shall be taken and employed
in the common Workhouse, where he shall be so found, in such manual occupation
as his body may bear; and to have only two parts of his gettings for his
allowance; and not to depart thence till by the Magistracy of the same place he
shall be released, which shall not be of one full week for the first offense,
one month for the second, and a quarter of a year for the third.

17. Let public Banks be erected, and Fishing in our own Seas not neglected;
which with Customs shall defray the Maritime charge. But this is supposed must
be the work of another Representative; for the Public credit is at too low an
ebb to expect it now at present.

Now the Lord prosper the work in the hands of the Magistracy for the good of
the Nation in general, and themselves and their posterities in particular, who
shall doubtless be the greatest sharers of the fruit of their own labors, be
they good or bad.

When Work is done in season fit,
The God of grace will prosper it.
APPENDIX.
LEt none mistake the Authors purpose in the precedent discourse to be, that
every word and sentence should pass for a Law: No, if so, it had not seen light
in so careless a dress, as it is. But considering the present condition we are
in, the Juncture of affairs we are under, and the opportunity is now in our
hands, the Author has sent abroad-this Model of a settlement, as a rough
draught, to be viewed corrected, amended, and (so far as our Governors shall
see meet) made use of: which if they will, may in less then seventy days be
perfected; thereby showing the facility of doing, what is by all men so much
desired; Wherein, as is said before, there is nothing new or strange: for the
chief (viz the Registerial) part thereof is as ancient as any inheritance we
have, as well witnesses the Inrolm^nts in Chancery, and Court-rolls of the
several Copiehold Manors, which are no other thing save Registries ill kept;
and yet as they are, there is more safety, and less trouble in settling Estates
there, then in other cases. And if our Ancestors so long ago were so wise and
provident, it may be no ill course for us to imitate them in what is good; and
where they were defective, to furnish supplies requisite. Besides, it affords
more Convenience and regularity in elections, and more certainty of electing
the best and sit men for Governors, then any other way yet propounded to
public view has done. Whereupon the great wheel of Government is as easily
convertible, and with as much security as may be imagined, or can be desired;
wherein all interests wi^^ find security and profit: And to the Public
(above the charges of carrying it on) will arise a considerable Revenue. Now
that a settlement is requisite, our present Governors in their Declaration of
the 7. of May, have not only acknowledged, but promised, as men and as
Christians vigorously to endeavor. The Army in their humble Petition and
Address of the ^2. of May, did unanimously represent to them, as in the 1, 7,
9, 11, and 13. Articles is very very apparent, and in the close thereof, do beg
the blessing and presence of the Lord with them in the prosecution and bringing
sorth thereof. Many well affected in sundry Counties of England have already
Petitioned for it: The eyes of all the Nation are upon our Governors expecting
it; our intestine divisions advise it; the consederacies of Europe require it,
and our own safety commands it, to be speedily undertaken, and vigorously
prosecuted: which if private interests belaid aside (by the doers) will be
easily perfected; And the more durable it shall be, the more honor it shall be
to the doers, whose honors shall grow with the Government they shall
establish, and whilst the same endures they shall continue to all posterity.
But some suspect the words (constant to this Commonwealth) in the oath
appointed to be taken by the Judges, Justices and other Officers and Ministers,
intend no other settlement to be expected, then what we now are under: which if
so, sad doubtless will be the effects: for clearing of which suspicion (which
if fomented may be cause of contraction of ill humors) a speedy manifestation
of the contrary, by actions rather then words, may be wished, and is by many
desired.

Some other things the Author intended to have spoke of; as the Spaniards
present growth, who by subjection of Portugal, Alliance with France,
confederacy with the Emperor, the Pole, the Dane, and the rest of the German
Princes, (in whose quarrel our brethren the Dutch are endeavored to be
engaged) his late acquisition of Treasure from the West, together with the
specious pretense of re-enthroning again the Stuarts, (which title if once set
on soot, what Partisans it will find amongst us, is worth consideration) by all
which we may be invited to a speedy care and endeavor so to s^tile our selves
at home, and provide for alliance abroad (especially with our brethren the
Dutch, whereby our Fleets may be recalled from their expensive attendances on
other Princes occasions, to more profitable employments for their respective
Countries, for both whose Trades the Seas and the World is wide enough) whereof
we are now deftitute and naked, A general contribution from the poorer sort
will be dangerous, and the rich have most reason to give, thereby to secure
their Estates from dangers of insurrections to be made by discontented parties.
as may encourage our Countrymen to contribute present supplies of money for
the doing of all that shall be requisite: to which purpose it would be no
difficulty to such as have plentiful Estates, full Stocks, and Money in their
Purses, to give a years Rent of all their Revenues; nay to enjoy an unbiassed
settlement, none such would deny it, or repine thereat (thereby to secure the
rest) though upon such slippery foundations as we now stand, few or none will
be free to contribute any thing at all; As also of the several divisions, rents
and schisms in the Church, whereby that interest of Spain is no little
advanced, Our fifth Monarchists ignorantly endeavoring to introduce the
Inquisition, as a Scourge to their own backs; And of the selfendedness,
covetousness; and other eminent signs of Antichristianity, predominant in and
amongst many Congregational societies, which of their own particular purses
provide maintenance from their own Ministers, little or nothing differing in
Doctrine from the Parochial Ministry, though they clash in words as if they
would set on fire the whole frame of Nature, each judging and condemning all
that are not of their own opinions: which from what root the same springs, or
to what end they aim, the Author is not quick enough sighted to discern, though
he has observed many such to clime to places of profit more then other men:
Things ill becoming Saints, if we believe Christ, who says, His Kingdom is not
of this world; and called his Apostles from their worldly callings, to be
Preachers of the Gospel: so that the Author sees not why the Magistrate may
not, Query how consistent it is to the Weal Public to permit any feadators
to any unknown interests, and what the consequents thereof may be, since all
have liberty to preach the Word of God in public, and lead their lives
according thereto without restraint.
nay ought not, to bring all such to civil obedience and conformity, according
to the Rule of Christ, who commanded his Apostles to take what should be set
before them; which may import, that the Ministers of the Gospel may freely
participate of such allowance as the Magistrate shall alot for their
maintenance (whether by Tithes or otherways) without asking any question for
Conscience sake: and is more properly their duty s^ to do, then (Pope or
Antichrist like) to make themselves every one head and Lord over the flock he
superintends, thereby dividing the Church into Factions; which how dangerous it
is, the whole current of Scriptures declare. But the length of this Discourse
exceeding its purposed limits, the Author commends the Premises to the
consideration of our present Governors, and all others in the Nation which
wish well to our English Sion, And them to the good and gracious direction and
protection of the Almighty, in hopes of an happy issue, which God grant, Amen,

FINIS.

