THE CHARGE Against The King discharged: OR, The King cleared by the people of
England, from the several Accusations in the Charge, delivered in against him
at Westminster Hall Saturday last, Jan. 20. by that high Court of Justice
erected by the Army-Parliament; which is here fully answered in every
particular thereof. VIZ. The Parliaments Propositions to the King. The Kings to
the Parliament. The Kings Condescentions to the Parliaments Propositions. The
Overture of a Treaty at Windsor. The Massacre in London by virtue of the Kings
Commission. The Coronation Oath. The private Articles, Match with Spain, and
the Match of France., King James death, Rochel. The German Horse, Loanes, and
Conduct Money, Privy Seals, Monopolies. Torturing our bodies, and slitting
noses. The long Intermission of Parliaments. The new Liturgy sent to Scotland,
calling and dissolving the short Parliament. The summoning this present
Parliament. The Queens pious Design, Commissions to Popish Agents. The bringing
up the Northern Army. The Kings offer to the Scots of the Plunder of the City.
The Kings journey into Scotland. The business of Ireland solely cleared. The
clothes seized by his Majesty's Soldiers. The Kings Letter to the Pope. The
Kings charging the Members with his coming to the House. The List of Arms and
Ammunition taken in his Papers. Cockerains Negotiation to the King of Denmark.
The Queens going to Holland with the Jewels of the Crown. The Kings solemn
Protestation. The King proclaiming the Parliament Traitors. The King setting up
his Standard. The calling the Parliament at Oxford. The Cessation in Ireland.
The Peace made there. The Kings Protestation against Popery. The Letters to
Marquess Ormond.


Printed in the first Year of Englands Thraledome.

THE CHARGE AGAINST The King discharged.
WE, unto whom, for our Number, Capacities and Interests, the received and
known Laws, and Constitutions of this Kingdom, more justly convey the Rights
of a Representative body of the Kingdom and people of England, then unto any
power whatsoever now (through the wrath of God) reigning; do hereby freely and
from our consciences declare before God, and his holy Angels, unto the whole
world, That we are so far from bringing his sacred Majesty unto a Trial for
any other, or the Accusations in the Charge given in upon Saturday last against
him, that we stand fully assured (admitting all and every of them true) that by
the clear and revealed Will of God in his Word, and the Laws of this Realm,
he remains liable unto that supreme Judicature of Almighty God only, who has
passed an irreversible Act of Humane Indemnity unto him, and his lawful
Successors: And further, (whereby the whole world may take notice of the sense
that we have of the impious insolence, and unparaleld injustice of the present
proceedings of the elected high Court of Justice against his Majesty;) We do
from the whole evidence of our Consciences, so berly informed hereby, fully and
absolutely acquit his sacred Majesty, from all and every of the Crimes charged
against him; which, as upon diligent enquiry it has furnished us with matter
abundantly to justify his Majesty's Innocence, and satisfy our selves, so we
offer it (on his behalf) for full satisfaction unto the world; not knowing
otherwise how to acquit our selves from the great guilt of the Approbation of
the growing impieties of these times.

The certainty and sufficiency of which satisfaction, as what only is here
proposed, (we will without recriminating unto the party now in power, acting
against his Majesty,) perspicuously, and clearly demonstrate from the whole
process of matters betwixt his Majesty and the Parliament, and the several
Overtures betwixt them, since the commencement of these unhappy differences.

The Parliaments Propositions to the King.
1 THat the two Houses shall nominate the Lords of the Privy Counsel, and all
the great Officers and Ministers of State and the Judges of the Land. 2. That
the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. be abolished; and
the Government to be set up, shall be such as the two Houses of Parliament
shall agree upon. 3. That the Militia both by Sea and Land, shall be disposed,
and executed by the two Houses of Parliament. 4. That the custody and Command
of the Forts and Castles shall be committed to such as shall be approved by the
two Houses of Parliament. 5. That all Peers lately made or to be made
hereafter, shall not sit or Vote in Parliament, but by the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament.
These Propositions we find amongst the 19. which you tendered to his Majesty,
June 2. 1642. and we have premised them and placed them all by themselves, that
the world may see the true ground of the Quarrel, wherein so much Blood has
been shed, the Blood of Fathers, Brothers, and Children, etc. and that the
world may judge, who is guilty of all the Bloodshed.

Your Propositions concerning Papists we have omitted, because his Majesty
consented to them.

The Propositions which follow, were added, upon the Conjunction with the
Scots, and upon occasion of the Wars in England and Ireland; and were treated
upon at Uxbridge, and tendered to his Majesty, at Newcastle, Hampton Court, and
the Isle of Wight.

6. That all the Kings Declarations, Proclamations, etc. against the
proceedings of the two Houses be made null. 7. That the King, and all the
Subjects of the three Kingdoms, do take the Covenant. 8. That there be a
Reformation of, and a unity, and uniformity in Religion, according to the
Covenant, in the Kingdoms of England, and Scotland. 9. That the Court of
Wards, and all Wardships, be taken away. 10. That the Treaties between the two
Kingdoms be confirmed by act of Parliament. 11. That the joint Declaration of
both Kingdoms, of Jan 30. 1643. concerning those that adhere to the King in
this War, be confirmed by Act of Parliament. 12. That an Act be passed for
paying the public debts of the Kingdom. 13. That the Cessation in Ireland be
made void; and that the Prosecution of the war be settled in the two Houses of
Parliament. 14. That Religion be reformed in Ireland, according to the
Covenant, and as the two Houses of Parliament shall think fit: 15. That the
Deputy, or chief Governor, or other Governors of Ireland, and the Presidents
of the several Provinces there, and the Secretaries of State, Mr. of the
Rolls, Judges of both Benches, Barrons of the Exchequer, the Vice-Treasurer,
and Treasurers of Wars of that Kingdom, be nominated by both Houses of
Parliament of England. 16. That the Militia of London shall be governed by the
two Houses of Parliament.

That the Tower of London be in the Government of the City; and the chief
Governor to be nominated, and removeable by the Common Counsel.

17. That all that has passed under the great Seal of England in the custody
of the Parliament-Commissioners, be valid; And that whatsoever has passed the
Kings great Seal, since the 22. of May 1642. be made void; As likewise,
whatsoever grants of Offices, Lands, tenements, and heriditaments have passed
the great Seal of Ireland, since the cessation 15. Sept. 1643. And whatsoever
Honors have been conferd by that Seal, since that time.
And now let the world judge also, whether it be fit for Subjects to offer such
Propositions to their Sovereign, whereby you take away from the King, and from
the Crown t,he chief Power and Government of the two Kingdoms of England,
and Ireland, and would settle it in the two Houses of Parliament. And we
appeal to your own Consciences, whether ever any Protestant Parliament made
the like assaults upon the King? And whether ever any Popish Parliament
attempted the like against the Crown?

Also let the world judge, whether the King did not offer Propositions fit for
you to receive at the Treaties, both of Oxford and Uxbridge.

The Kings Propositions.
Exact. Col. p. 912.
1. THat his Majesty's own Revenue, Magazine, Towns, Forts and Ships, which
have bin taken or kept from him, by force, be forthwith restored unto him. 2.
That whatsoever has bin done, or published contrary to the Laws of the Land,
or derogatory to his Majesty's Legal and known Power and Rights, be renounced,
and recalled; that no seed may remain for the like to spring out for the
future. 3. That whatsoever illegal Power has been claimed, or exercised, by
or over his Subjects, as imprisoning their persons without Law, stopping their
Habeas Corpusses, and imposing upon their Estates without Act of Parliament,
etc. either by both, or either House, or any Committee of both, or either; or
by any persons appointed by any of them, be disclaimed, and all such persons so
committed forthwith descharged. 4. That as his Majesty will readily consent
(having done so heretofore) to the execution of all Laws already made, and to
any good Acts to be made for the suppressing of Popery, and for the firm
settling the Protestant Religion now established by Law; so he desires, that a
good Bill may be framed for the better preserving the Book of Common Prayer
from the scorn and violence of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries,
with such clauses for the ease of tender Consciences as his Majesty has
formerly offered. 5. That all such Persons as upon the Treaty, shall be
excepted out of the general Pardon, shall be tried per Pares, according to the
usual course, and known Laws of the Land; and that it be left to that, either
to acquit or condemn them.
And now we appeal to your own Consciences, whether it were not fit for you to
have received and acquiesced in these his Majesty's Propositions (for
conserving the rights of the Crown, the Law of the Land, the Liberty of the
Subject, the established Religion, and the Fundamental Justice of the Kingdom)
who, when you published your Propositions for bringing in Money and Plate, June
10. 1642. declared, Exac. Col. 342.
that whatsoever is brought in shall not at all be employed upon any other
occasion, then to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and
his Person in his Royal dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the
Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and Privileges of Parliament.

But if his Majesty's Propositions were not, yet his Condescentions to your
Propositions, tendered, and published before this your Declaration, were
doubtless not unfit for you to accept.

The Kings Condescentions to the Parliaments Propositions.
1. Concerning the great Officers of State, etc. See the Book called the Kings
most gracious Messages for peace. p. 86.
That their Patents and Commissions being taken from his Majesty, they should
be nominated by the two Honses of Parliament during his Majesty's Reign, and
afterward to return to the Crown. 2. Touching the Church Government, See the
Book called the Kings most gracious Messages for peace. p. 85.
That the Presbyteriall Government be legally permitted to stand for 3. years;
provided his Majesty or any others who cannot in Conscience submit thereunto
may have free practice of their own Profession; And a free debate be had with
the Divines at Westminster (20. of his Majesty's Nomination being added unto
them) whereby it may be determined by his Majesty, and the two Houses, how
Church Government after the same time shall be settled, as is most agreeable to
the Word of God. 3. Touching the Militia; p. 86.
That the whole power of the Militia both by Sea, and Land, shall be ordered by
the two Houses of Parliament during his Majesty's Reign: yet so, as all
Commissions and other Acts concerning the Militia, be made and acted, as
formerly; and after his Majesty's Reign, all the Power of the Militia shall
return entirely to the Crown, as it was in the times of Q. Elizabeth, and King
James of happy memory. 4. Touching his Majesty's Proclamations and Declarations
against the two Houses and their Proceedings: p. 88.
That he will consent to an Act of Parliament for making them null; And he
further proposes (as the best expedient to take away all seeds of future
differences) that there be an Act of Oblivion to extend to all his Subjects.

5. Touching the taking of the Covenant, etc; p. 66.
That though his Majesty be not therein satisfied, yet he will make clearly
appear, both his Zeal to the Protestant Profession, and the union of these
two Kingdoms, which he conceives to be the main drift of the Covenant. 6.
Touching the Treaties between the two Kingdoms; p. 68.
That he would agree to all things that are propounded touching the confirming
of the Peace of the two Kingdoms. 7. Touching the Payments of the Public
debts; p. 87.
That he would consent to such Acts as the two Houses shall agree upon. 8.
Touching the Court of Wards: p. 87.
That his Majesty would consent to an Act for taking it away, so as a full
recompense be settled upon his Majesty, and his Successors for ever hereafter.
9. Touching Ireland, p. 88.
that the Cessation there is long since determined; And for the future, that
his Majesty would give you full satisfaction concerning that Kingdom. 10.
Touching the City of London; p. 69.
That his Majesty consented to all the Propositsons concerning it. 11. Touching
the Acts passed under the great Seals; p. 88.
his Majesty promised, after perusal of particulars, to give you satisfaction
to what may reasonably be desired by you.
And now indeed has his Majesty offered such Tenders to you as were not fit for
him to make, nor for you to receive, but in order to an Accommodation, and
peace: And we cannot but be sensible of his Majesty's grace and goodness to
us, who was pleased to condescend even to the dethroning of himself, for our
Peace and quiet; and we cannot enough blame you, who would not accommodate upon
these Condescentions, but rather renew the War again. And being, as you were
pre-ingaged against Monarchy, you could not deem any thing fit for you to
offer, or accept, that came short of your design; And to it have you sacrificed
our Peace also.

You go on, with the same confidence, and declare; Exact. Col. p. 630.
That his Majesty sometimes denied to receive your humble Petitions for Peace:
We conceive you meant the Petition which you sent to the Earl of Essex at
Worcester, about the end of Sept. 1642. to be presented to his Majesty, then at
Shrewsbury; upon notice whereof, his Majesty declared, that he was ready to
receive any Petition from you; only he required that none of those persons whom
he had particularly accused of High Treason, should by Color of that Petition
be employed to his Majesty: And so we account this charge amongst the
insufficiencies of your Declaration.

Concerning the Overture of a Treaty at Windsor, and his Majesty's advance to
Brainford,
We find, that when you sent your Messenger about this overture to the King at
Colebrook, the Earl of Essex being returned to London: drew a great part of
his forces, and the London Trained Bands, toward his Majesty; sending others
by the way of Acton on the one side, and of Kingston on the other; Wind for
also being then Garrisoned by you; so that if his Majesty had remained at
Colebrook, he would have been environed by your forces; Whereupon he resolved
suddenly to fall upon the body at Brainford; and having defeated them he made
his way over Kingston, and so retreated to Reading; Nor was there any Cessation
mentioned by your Messenger who brought that Overture to his Majesty.

And 'twas not your fear for London, or the slaughter at Brainford, but the
Kings escape, that so much troubled you.

Concerning the bloody Massacre in London by virtue of the Kings Commission,
We find, that to be no other then a Commission of Array in English, which
was to have been made use of upon the Kings Motion with his Army toward the
City; As you had your Ordinances for the Militia ready upon all occasions to be
executed in the Kings Quarters.

Concerning the Kings Coronation Oath,
We find it to be this, and to be administered, and taken thus: Exact Col. 290.


At the Coronation, the Sermon being done, the Archbishop goes to the King,
and asks his willingness to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors.

The King shows himself willing, arises, and goes to the Altar; The
Archbishop administreth these Questions, and the King answers them severally.

The Bishop. Sir, will you grant, and keep, and by your Oath confirm, to the
People of England the Laws, and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful, and religious Predecessors; and namely the Laws, Customs
and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious King S. Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm?

The King. I grant and promise to keep them.

Bishop. Sir, Will you keep Peace, and godly Agreement entirely (according to
your Power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy and the People?

King. I will keep it.

Bishop. Sir, Will you (to your Power) cause Law, Justice, and discretion in
Mercy, and Truth, to be executed in all your Judgments?

King. I will.

Bishop. Sir, Will you grant to hold, and keep the Laws and rightful Customs
which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have; and will you defend and uphold
them to the Honor of God, so much as in you lies?

King. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this admonition to the King before the People
with a loud voice.

Our Lord, and King, we, beseech you to pardon and to grant, and to preserve
unto us, and to the Churches committed to our Charge, all Canonical
Privileges, and due Law, and Justice, and that you would protect and defend
us, as every good King in his Kingdoms ought to be Protector, and Defender of
the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government.

The King answers.

With a willing and devout Heart I promise, and grant my Pardon; And that I
will preserve, and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your charge
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law, and Justice; and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my Power, by the Assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom in right ought to protect and defend the Bishops, and
Churches under their Government.

Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table: where he makes a
solemn Oath in the sight of all the People, to observe the Premises: And laying
his hand upon the Book, says:

The Oath

The things which I have before Promised I shall perform, and keep: So help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.

So, the defense, and maintenance of the Laws, Customs, and Franchises of the
People, and Clergy; and of peace, and godly agreement amongst them; And of Law,
Justice, and Mercy; and of the Laws and Rightful Customs of the Commonalty;
and the Preservation, and Protection of the Bishops, their Churches, and
Privileges, is the sum of the Kings Coronation Oath; And is not this also the
ground of his late Quarrel?

For why did he at first refuse to grant you the Militia, but in order to his
Oath; Exact. Col. 290.
because without that Power he could not, as he was bound, defend the Laws,
the People, and the Church. And why does he refuse to pass your Bill for
abolishing Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. but because he is bound by his
Coronation Oath to protect them: And were not these the particulars first
controverted between you? And were there not first Bills brought into your
House about them, and the Bills being rejected, were they not afterward revived
by Tumults? And these two things, are they not principally insisted on in all
your Propositions and Treaties?

And (in truth) you are offended with his Majesty, not because he has broke
his Oath, but because he will not break it.

And would God you were as religious observers of your Oaths, so often renewed
before God, and the whole World; 8. Ecclesias. 2.17. Ezekiel. 16.18.19.
and especially of the Oath of Supremacy, wherein you protest and declare,
that King Charles is the only Supreme Governor in this Realm. And you
promise, (from henceforth) to bear faith, and true allegiance to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to your power, to assist,
and defend all Jurisdiction, Privileges, Pre-eminence, and Authority, granted
or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, and united,
and annexed to the Imperial Crown.

And for our parts we are resolved, to adhere to our Oath of Allegiance;
wherein we promise, that from henceforth we will bear faith, and true
allegiance, to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful Successors; and him,
and them will defend, to the utmost of our Power, against all conspiracies, and
attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their
Crown, and Dignity.

Of other his Majesty's Vows and Protestations, and of the pacification with
the Scots, etc. we shall speak more conveniently hereafter.

In the next place you charge his Majesty with a continued track of breach of
trust ever since he wore the Crown. To this we demur, doubting, whether you
are competent Judges of the Kings trust, of his breach of trust, and of the
King himself for breaking his trust; for that is the drift and scope of your
Declaration.

We believe, that the Kings power is Fiduciary, and that the Kingly Office is a
great trust: but that he is entrusted as he is empowered by God, and only by
God: And this Doctrine we learned long since from the two Prayers for the King
immediately following the Commandments in the Book of Common Prayer; but (it
should seem) you have damned them both together.

And whether there has been a continued breach of trust by the King, we shall
see upon the examination of the particulars in your Declaration; in the mean
time we account this as one of your uncertainties.

Of his Majesty's two Maxims or Principles, wherein he has laid a fit
foundation for all Tyranny, we shall speak more hereafter.

Concerning the private Articles agreed in order to the Match with Spain; and
those other private Articles upon the French Marriage,
We find, that they were transacted by K. James, and therefore are not to be
imputed to K. Charles; so we account them amongst the insufficiencies of your
Declaration: and because they are private, we cannot judge of the nature of
them; and so refer them amongst your uncertainties.

Concerning the death of King James.
We find, that the Kings sickness was an Ague, that the plasters applied to
his breast and wrists, were only of London Treacle and Mithridate: and that the
drink or potion you speak of, was only Posset-drinke, wherein Harts-horne was
boiled, and which was sweetened with the syrop of Gilleflowers.

That M. Rinnington Physician of Donmow in Essex yet living, prescribed these
Medicines, first to the E. of Warwick, being sick of an Ague; and that the
Duke of Buckingham afterward falling ill of an Ague at the E. of Warwicks in
Essex, his Lordship advised the Duke to make use of them: Lastly, that both
these Lords found a good effect wrought in them by that Physic, and thereupon
the Duke proposed it to His Majesty; nor do we perceive, that you except
against the Physic, but only against the Dukes application of it, without the
direction or privity of His Majesty's Physicians: But the Duke in his Answer
(which you have by you) declares that there was nothing administered to the
King, without the privity of the Physicians, and his own importunate desire and
command: And we have reason to believe, that you did acquiesce in the Dukes
answer, as true, and satisfactory, because there was no farther Prosecution of
him, in the next Parliament holden the year following. viz. 3. Caroli. See the
Petition of Right, tertio Caroli.
And we appeal to your Journall Books, whether there be any mention of the
business in either of your Remonstrances of that Parliament (for then you
began first to remonstrate.) And so (if there be any guilt) we leave the world
to judge where the guilt remains, that this business was not farther
prosecuted.

Concerning Rochell,
We find that his Majesty lent not diverse of the Navy Royal, but the Vantguard
only.

And that he did not lend other Merchants Ships, but permitted them only to be
hired of the Merchants: And that they were not lent to be employed against the
Protestants in France, but upon a precise promise, that they should not be
employed against those of the Religion.

And because the King of France had employed them contrary to his promise,
therefore did his Majesty enter into hostility with France, as appears by the
Duke of Buckinghams Commission, under whom he sent an Army into the Isle of
Rhea.

Besides, his Majesty recalled those Ships, and they were all returned, 2.
years before Rochell was lost.

Concerning the German Horse, Loanes, Privy Seals, Coat and Conduct-Money,
Monopolies, etc.
Because you have thrust all these into one charge, we will speak of them,
first together, and then of each particular.

Concerning them together, we find that in your Remonstrance of the 15. of Dec.
1641. Exact Col. p 3.
you declared them to be the effects of evil Counselors only.

And in your Petition accompanying it, that you protested, the Remonstrance was
made Exact Col. p. 1.
without the least intention to lay a blemish upon his Majesty's Royal Person,
but only to represent how his Royal Authority and trust had been abused.

And in your Declaration of 19. May 1642. That you tell us, Exact Col. p. 198.
If you should say that all the ill things done of late in his Majesty's Name,
have been done by himself, you should neither follow the direction of the
Laws, nor the affection of your own hearts.

And in the same Declaration, Exac. Col. page 199.
that it is a maxim in the Law, the King can do no wrong; but if any ill be
committed in matter of State, the Counsel; If in matters of Justice, the
Judges must answer for it.

And how then, contrary to your Petition, Protestation, affection, and to the
direction of the Law, are these, and the like things now imputed to his Majesty?

Much more may be said, on behalf of his Majesty in each particular.

1. Concerning the German Horse: That if there were any design in bringing over
those Horse, it was by others; and amongst them your Balfore, and Dalbier were
principal: But so soon as the Proposition was made to the King, he rejected
it, and never consented to the practice of it. 2. Concerning Loanes, and Privy
Seals: That they have been in all times practiced, upon reason, and necessity
of State: And that they have not been so frequent in K. Charles's time, as in
Q. Elizabeth's, whereof no sober man has ever complained. 3. Concerning Coat,
and Conduct money: See the Pell Office.
That it was repaid to the Collectors of Subsidies, and by them, to the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the several Counties, to be distributed amongst the
Inhabitants; And for want of such destribution in Dorsetshire, was there a
presentment thereof made to the Judge of Assizes. 4. Concerning the Enclosing
of Commons: That his Majesty paid a dear rate for those that himself enclosed;
as for making the new Parks at Richmond, and Wimbleton. 5. Concerning
Monopolies: 21. Jac. 3.
That the Law allows them, for the encouragement of new Inventions, so that
they be not contrary to the Law, nor inconvenient to the State, etc. And when
any Petitions in this kind were brought to his Majesty, he ever referd them to
his Attorney, or Solicitor, and he passed them, upon their Certificate, that
the Monopolies petitioned for were not contrary to Law, nor inconvenient to the
People, and not otherwise. 6. Concerning Ship Money: That his Majesty had a
Judgment in a Court of Law for it before all the Judges of England.
Besides, all these pressures were remedied by several Acts in the beginning
of the Parliament: and we remember, that (by your Order) the Judges of Assize
gave us notice thereof, At Summer Assizes, 1641.
and highly extolled his Majesty's goodness in passing so many gracious Acts
for us: And must these grievances now after seven years redress, be objected
to us against him? And must the King, who by your own Law can do no wrong in
these cases, be prosecuted, and those vile Monopolists, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Sir
John Wollaston, and M. Lawrence Whitaker, and also White the Sope-boiler at
Lambeth, be protected and cherished by you?

7. Concerning the Spanish Fleet, That it was bound to Flanders, with new
levied Soldiers to recruit their Army there; which soldiers were without
Arms, and without Officers, as we remember the Fleet was without Powder; and
therefore they intended no invasion, being not provided for it.
Concerning the torturing of our bodies by whippings, slitting of noses,
cutting off ears, etc. and the Lording over our souls, by Oaths,
Excommunications, etc.
We find, that these judgments and proceedings (upon our bodies) passed in due
form of Law, in Courts of Justice: and that the Oaths, Excommunications,
Ceremonies, and Canons were no other, and no otherwise exercised, then was
agreeable to the Laws and Government established.

But we cannot but be sensible, that our sufferings in every kind have been
much more during your reign, then they were in his Majesty's reign; for how
have you devoured our estates, by Taxes, Free Quarter, and that Compendium of
all slavery, the Excize? how have you destroyed our bodies by strict
imprisonment, and cruel starving? and how have you endeavored to damn our
souls, and to send us to hell by wholesale, by your illegal, anti-legall,
disloyal Vows, Covenants, and Engagements?

Concerning the long intermission of Parliaments, and the two Principles of
Tyranny,
We find, that the Parliament begun 3. Caroli, was dissolved upon your
Remonstrances, See the Petition of Right, 3. Carol.
and we believe, that thereupon followed the long intermission of Parliaments
for twelve years after.

And that it was in the Parliament aforesaid, the King avowed those Maxims or
Principles, that he owes an account of his actions to none but God alone: See
the Petition of Right, 3. Carol.
And that the Houses of Parliament, joint or separate, have no power either to
make, or declare any Law; which induces us to believe, that even then there
was some assault made by the two Houses upon the Royal Authority; which made
the King to avow those principles:

The anti-monarchicall spirit beginning to work in that Parliament, and so
making the King averse from Parliaments. Nor do we see how these principles are
introductive of Tyranny, but sure we are the contrary are destructive of
Monarchy.

And touching the first, we learn from Romans 13.4. That the King is the Minister
of God, and who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master
he stands or falls, To. 14.4. The Law also averreth, that the Crown of
England is in no earthly subjection, but immediately Subject to God, in all
things touching the regality of the same Crown, and to no other, 16. R. 2. c.
5. And, touching the second Principle, the Law also tells us, That it is of the
Kings Regality, to grant or deny such of their Petitions (for that was then the
usual form of presenting their desires) as pleases himself. 2. H. 5. And
that 1. Jacob. 1. the two Houses, craving the Royal assent to that Act,
confess, without it the Act cannot be complete or perfect, etc. Sir Edward
Cook also in the fourth Part of his Institutes (a Book printed this Parliament
by your Order) pa. 25. says, That there is no Act of Parliament but must have
the consent of the Lords and Commons, and the Royal assent of the King.

The same also is true concerning the declaring of Law; as appears by the 25.
Edward 3. The words whereof are: And, because many other like cases of Treason
(which are not expressed in that Statute) may happen in time to come, it is
accorded, That if any other case supposed Treason, which is not above
specified, does happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without
any going to Judgment of the Treason till the cause be showed and declared
before the King and his Parliament, whether it be judged Treason or other
Felony: Which Declaration ought to be by the whole Parliament, and not by the
King and Lords, or King and Commons, or Lords and Commons. Cook Instit. 3. part
fol. 22.

Now Innovations, and Novelties in Parliamentary proceedings are most
dangerous, and to be refused. Cook 4. part Instit. p. 11.

Concerning Scotland, the new Liturgy, and Canons, and the cancelling and
burning the articles of Pacification,
We find, that the Liturgy and Canons were framed and sent thither with the
advice or approbation of the Lords of the Council of that Kingdom; and if
they were pursued with more vehemence then ought, it must be imputed to the
Ministers of that Kingdom that were trusted with it.

And that the Articles of Pacification were cancelled and burnt by the
unanimous advice of the Privy Council here, after they had been first broken
by the Scots.

And we cannot but wonder, how you should take cognizance of transactions
between his Majesty and his Subjects of Scotland, especially after an Act of
Oblivion.

Concerning the calling, and dissolving the short Parliament.
We find, that this was part of the Charge against the Earl of Strafford, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury, though declined in the prosecution of them both;
and the reason hereof we conceive to be, that Sir Hen. Vane Senior might not be
questioned, by whose false information and instigation, that Parliament was
unhappily dissolved: that the Parliament being dissolved, his Majesty took
from his Subjects by power, what he could not otherwise obtain, is one of the
uncertainties in your Declaration that we except against.

Concerning the summoning this present Parliament, and his Majesty's
expectation of supply against the Scots, and his protecting of wicked
Counselors.
We find, that the King had little reason to hope for any assistance against
the Scots, knowing, as he did, who called them in; and that from the Scots
themselves whilst he was at York: a Secretary of the Scots Lords at Newcastle,
telling some English taken prisoners at Newburne, That their coming in had not
been, but by the invitation of the English.

And that the King excepted no man of what quality or neernesse soever unto
him, from a legal trial; leaving unto you the Earl of Strafford, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, all the Judges, and whomsoever you would accuse; in
so much that you examined and committed the Queens Confessor, and examined the
Ladies of her Bedchamber; and your Sergeant at Arms presumed so far, as to
come into the Kings withdrawing Room next unto his Bedchamber, to cite and
summon persons of greatest quality, and neernesse unto himself.

Concerning the Queens pious Design, etc.
We find that the Queens Design (if any were) was most industriously examined
by you; and that you had Sir Kenelme Digby, Mr. Mountague, and diverse others
before you in the House of Commons; and that when you had most narrowly sifted
the business, you proceeded no farther in it, nor against them for it.

And for Secretary Windebank; That he was in the House of Commons after the
report made; and so you might have proceeded against him.

Concerning Commissions given to Popish Agents for private Levies, etc.
We find, that not the Papists only, but the Lords of the Privy Counsel, and
diverse Protestants of the best quality in the Kingdom, contributed toward his
Majesty's Expedition into the North: and if by private Levies you understand
other Sums collected for his Majesty's use, we desire to know what they are;
and until then we must account this, and the other particulars annexed unto it,
amongst the uncertainties of your Declaration.

Concerning the bringing up of the Northern Army; We find, that whereas 50000.
l. were ordered for the payment of that Army, and 10000. l. were taken by an
after Order out of that sum, to satisfy a new motion and importunity of the
Scot, some of the Officers of the Kings Army took offense and dislike thereat,
and in discourse said, that they were disobliged by the Parliament, and not by
the King; and thereupon concluded to serve his Majesty in all things that were
honorable, and agreeable to the Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom.

And that afterward their discontent being heightened, mention was made by some
of the bringing up the Army to London, and making sure the Tower; but that was
earnestly opposed and suddenly deserted by the Army it self; as would have
appeared by the second examination of Mr. Goring, purposely suppressed by you;
Wherein also are many contradictions to what you have published concerning this
business (as we find) in his Majesty's Declanation of the 12. Aug. 1642. Exact
Col. page 514.
which you have not answered to this day. And as concerning his Majesty
himself, we find in one of the depositions taken and published by you, that
when he was made acquainted with it, he said those ways are vain and foolish,
and that they should think of them no more.

Nor can we find in any thing by you published, though we have again and again
read over the depositions printed together with your Declaration of May 19.
1642. Exact. Col p 215
and more particularly those of Sir Jac. Ashley, Sir John Conyers, and Col.
Leg, in your present Declaration mentioned, we say we cannot find, that there
was any real transaction between his Majesty and that Army, other then the
signing of Capt. Legs Petition: Wherein the Army offered their service to the
King and Parliament, Exact Col. p. 563
for securing them against the violence of Tumults then frequent in London. For
which reason did not you also call up the Army in Aug. 1647.

And we must needs say, considering those depositions, all other the
particulars recited by you, as incident to this business, are to be reckoned
amongst the uncertainties and insufficiencies of your Declaration.

But we have been informed that others have endeavored to seduce that Army
from the Kings service, and from the Earl of Strafford their General, and
that the said E. would have impeached them of high Treason for so doing, had
they not prevented it by impeaching him a day or two before his impeachment
against them was ready.

Concerning the Kings offer to the Scots of the Plunder of London, etc.
We find indeed in one of Sir Jacob Ashleys examinations, that Oneal put the
question to him, Exact Col. p. 229.
What if the Scots would be made newtrall? And that Sir Jac. answered him, that
the Scots would lay him by the heels, if he should come to move such a thing,
for that they would never break with the Parliament.

But we find not, in ought you have published, any positive proof of this
charge against his Majesty; And therefore we must refer this, with what
follows, concerning Propositions made by Oneal, Sir John Henderson and others
with Letters of credence from the King, to the uncertainties and
insufficiencies in your Declaration.

Concerning the Kings Journey into Scotland, etc. We find that after his
Majesty had promised his Scottish Subjects to go into Scotland, for settling the
unhappy differences there, at your entreaty he was persuaded to defer his
Journey, Exact Col. p. 525
to a day agreed on by your selves, and that he took his Journey accordingly.
And that he left such a Commission behind him as was agreeable to Law, and
which might be sufficient to prevent any inconveniences that might arise in
his absence; though he refused to pass it, with that extent, which was
desired, viz. for the Commissioners to consent to all Acts you should pass
before he returned from Scotland.

Nor does it appear that the Commissions issued out by Secretary Windebank,
were other then according to the Law of the Land.

Concerning the business of Ireland.
Concerning the Kings Letters sent into Ireland by the Lord Dillon, seeing you
have not published them, we must reckon them amongst the insufficiencies and
uncertainties in your Declaration; As we must that Commission sealed at
Edinburgh to the Irish Rebels, and the Oaths and depositions of those who have
seen it, and the promise of it to the Committee of London, for the reason
aforesaid; Though it were an easy matter for the Rebels to take off a great
Seal, affixed to their Patents, and fasten it to Commissions of this kind; as
we are credibly informed they did, to gain credit to their action amongst the
People.

Concerning the Irish Committee, we find that they were chosen according to the
constitution of that Parliament, more Papists then Protestants; 7. of the one,
and 6. of the other Religion, sent under the notion of a Committee from the
Parliament for redress of grievances (Sir John Temple pa. 13.) and under that
notion they complain, that the Earl of Strafford had taken a fourth part of
the 5. Counties from the owners thereof, and intiled the King to it; and this
is a particular Article of the impeachment against the Earl of Stafford.

Now the King only released that fourth part to the owners, which was equally
beneficial to the English, and Irish, Protestants, and Papists; and how can
you justly charge, both the King for releasing it, and Strafford for seizing it.

Concerning the not disbanding the Irish Army, we find that that Army was
raised to oppose the Scots invading England; and that his Majesty resolved to
disband the one, so soon as he was affured of the return of the other; but
wisely considering, that it might not be safe for the peace of Ireland, if such
a Body were disbanded, as if it were transported, his Majesty gave leave to
the Spanish Ambassador to transport 3. or 4000. of them for his Masters
service, which you opposed, giving reasons to the contrary, at the instance of
the aforesaid Irish Committee, then at London; having otherwise designed the
service of those men (And this we conceive to have been the sense of Mac Cart
and Macquires confession by you cited.) And so his Majesty consented to the
disbanding and sending back of that Army into Ireland; which doubtless gave a
great rise, and contributed much to the Irish Rebellion.

But that his Majesty knew nothing of any such design, does appear by the
confession of Macquire at his Execution; who (to use his own words) did acquit
the King upon his death, and any other man in England except one (and he but a
private Gentleman, who came by chance to the knowledge thereof) from being
guilty so much as of knowing it.

Concerning the first Clause of their Oath to bear true faith and Allegiance
to King Charles.
We know that in all Rebellions the chief Authors, and contrivers of them,
make fair pretenses and specious Oaths, to seduce the People to join with them
in their undertakings.

And whereas they style themselves the Kings or Queens Army, that was merely
to countenance the Rebellion; if not also to raise farther jealousies between
the King and you, and to set you at farther odds, that so upon your divisions
in England, they might with more ease carry on the Rebellion in Ireland.

Concerning the 40. Proclamations sent into Ireland. Exact Col. p. 247
We find not that you ever so much as moved for any Proclamation against the
Rebels; but the first motion came from the Lords Justices of that Kingdom;
who also sent a draught of such a Proclamation as they conceived best for the
suppressing of the Rebellion: And whereas ordinarily, the King never signs
more then the first draught of a Proclamation, fairly engrossed in Parchment,
and by it Copies are printed, and dispersed in Ireland, as in England, the
Lords Justices and Counsel, taking notice of the rumor spread amongst the
Rebels, that they had the Kings Authority for what they did, desired that they
might have 20. Proclamations sent over signed by the Kings Sign Manual; to the
end, that besides the Printed Copies which they would disperse according to
custom, they might be able to send an Origin all, with the Kings hand to it,
to those considerable persons, whom they might suspoct to be misled by that
false rumor; and who when they saw the Kings very hand, would be without
excuse, if they persisted; Whereupon the King signed double the number; and for
expedition of the service, commanded them to be printed, as is well known to
some Lords now sitting in Parliament, and then sitting with his Majesty in
Counsel.

Concerning the Letters written to the Lord Muskery from Court. We find not how
it reflects upon his Majesty; but that rather it is to be referred to the
insufficiencies and uncertainties in your Declaration.

And concerning the Kings Letter to the Marq. of Ormond, for giving particular
thanks to Muskery and Plunket, we find it to be, for the Professions of their
endeavors to bring their Countrymen to moderation and obedience, at that time
when they were at Oxford, employed by the Irish to his Majesty, during the
Cessation.

Of the delaying and detaining of the Earl of Leicester. We find that the King
often pressed you that he might be dispatched, and sent away to Ireland; and
that in his Answer to your Petition of the 28. Ap. 1642. Exact Col. p. 144
it is one of the reasons of his resolution to go in person into Ireland,
because the Lord Lieftenant did not repair to his command there; Nor came he
to his Majesty at York, till three months after; and when he had received his
Majesty's instructions there, and took his leave, with profession to go to
Chester; he went not according to promise, but returned to the two Houses at
London. Two months after you commanded him to Chester; where he stayed 3.
weeks in Expectation of Ships to transport him; and his Majesty hearing that
he had neither Provision of Money, nor any force to be sent with him, but his
own retinue, (the Regiments of Foot and Troops of horse which had been raised
for that service, having been employed against his Majesty at Edg-Hill; and
being still kept as a part of the Earl of Essex his Army*) considering that
the Protestants there would have been much disheartened, and the Rebels equally
encouraged, if the Lord Lieutenant had arrived in so private a manner,
therefore his Majesty sent for him to Oxford, till he could receive better
satisfaction from the two Houses concerning the preparations for that Kingdom.

Concerning the Commission for the Lord Brook and the Lord Wharton.
We find that the Commission desired was to have been Independent upon his
Majesty's Lieftenant of that Kingdom; and therefore his Majesty refused it.

Concerning Papists and others passed by the Kings special Warrant into
Ireland named by you,
We find, that Mr. Pym, at a Conference with the Lords, about the beginning of
Feb. 1641. declared, Exact Col. p. 69, 71. 117, 118.
that after the Ports were shut by both Houses of Parliament, diverse Papists
passed from hence by his Majesty's especial Warrant, and headed the Rebels in
Ireland: whereof his Majesty having notice, required him, and you again and
again, to name any one person so passed by his Majesty, and now in the head of
the Rebels; and you have not named any one to this day: and so we must refer
this to the uncertainties and unsufficiencies in your Declaration, as also what
follows concerning the Commanders and Officers called off from their trust
against the Rebels; and the supplies which the Rebels had by the E. of
Antrim, L. Aboine, and others from the Queen. And lastly concerning the pieces
of battery from hence desired by the Counsel of Ireland; of all which no
evidence or instance has been offered unto us; save only that the King
commanded the two Ships under Capt. Kettleby, and Capt. Stradling, to attend
him at Newcastle, having before given you notice thereof, to take care for the
guarding of that Coast; all other his Majesty's Ships, besides those two, being
at that time at your disposal.

But we cannot but remember, how the Earl of Leven sent General of the Scots
into Ireland against the Rebels, was called from thence to lead an Army into
England against his Majesty.

And how many Officers, both Scots, and English, left the service in Ireland,
and were employed by you here in England, being necessitated thereto, for the
recovery of their Arreares, which they could not obtain otherwise; as Sir.
Richard Greenvile, etc.

Concerning the Clothes seized by his Majesty's Soldiers. We find that it was
done about Coventry, when that City stood out against his Majesty; and we
conceive you should have sent for a safe conduct for passing them through his
Majesty's Quarters. Also we find that when his Majesty had taken Chester, he
sent over into Ireland, 3000. suites of clothes, provided by you for that
service; although his own soldiers were in great want of them.

And now let all the world judge, how much reason you had to believe the
Rebels when they did so often swear they did nothing without good Authority
and Commission from the King, etc.

The information given to the Archbishop of a design amongst the Papists, for
a general Massacre of all the Protestants, we conceive to be no objection
against the King, nor can we account otherwise of it, then as one of the
uncertainties and unsufficiencies of your Declaration.

Concerning the Kings Letter to the Pope when he was in Spain.
An we know that his Majesty was sent into Spain by the Command of his Father,
to conclude a Marriage with a daughter of that Crown, so we find in the
transaction of that business, that the King of Spain sent a Letter to the Pope
for a dispensation; and thereupon the Pope writ a Letter to the Prince, which
his Highness answered. And we desire to know, whether you have a Copy of the
very Letter sent to the Pope; for we are informed, some having prepared and
brought a draught of a Letter to his Highness, he perused it, and struck out
such passages as reflected upon our Religion; and with that alteration caused
it to be sent to the Pope: But that you follow a Copy of the first draught, as
we find it in the Franch Mercury.

The Kings Letter to the Pope, in behalf of the Duke of Loraigne and his Agent
at Rome, are of your uncertainties etc. And so is the Confession of the Queen
Mothers servant, and whatsoever else follows in that Paragrave; besides that
it no ways reflecteth upon his Majesty.

Concerning the unusual preparation of Ammunition and Arms, with new Guards
within and about Whitehall, when the King came from Scotland, etc.
We find that upon his Majesty's return from Scotland you gave him an Alarm,
presenting to him a Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, laying before
him (to use his Majesty's own words in his Declaration of the 12. Aug.) Exact
Col. p. 528
and publishing to the world, all the mistakes and all the misfortunes, which
happened since his first coming to the Crown, and before, to that hour;
forgetting the blessed condition all his Subjects had enjoyed in the benefit of
plenty and peace under his Majesty, to the envy of Christendom. We find also
in the same Declaration, Exact Col. p. 533.
that after the King came to Whitehall, great multitudes of mutinous People
resorted daily to Westminster, threatening and assaulting the Bishops, and
misusing sever all Members of either House, which did not favor their
designs; and proclaiming the Names of many of the Peers, as evil and rotten
hearted Lords. Besides they made a stand at Whitehall Gate, and said they would
have no more Porters lodge, but would speak with the King when they pleased;
Whereupon his Majesty provided a Guard to defend himself against the violence
and insolence of those Tumults, and Ammunition and Arms were brought thither
for the same purpose.

Fireworks in Papists houses we refer to the uncertainties of your Declaration;
as we do also what follows concerning the Guards, Canoneeres, Grenades etc.
in the Tower. Sir W. Balfore, we find, was removed, not without his own
consent, and upon an ample Compensation in Money.

And concerning the City Petitions, we conceive you framed and infused them, as
you had done the like, to your knowledge, in the Countries.

Concerning the charge of Treason against some of both Houses, and the Kings
coming so attended to the House of Commons.
We find it a Maxim in Law, Exact Col. p. 535
that in case of Treason, Felony, and breach of the Peace, there is no
privilege of Parliament; so the Members may be prosecuted in these cases, as
if they were not Members. We find also, that the King had reason to accuse
those Members of high Treason, since (as he alleges in his unanswered
Declaration of the 12. of Aug.) Exact Col. p. 534
he could make particular Proof against them of a solemn Combination entered
into by them, for altering the Government of the Church and State, and of their
treating with foreign Power to assist them, in case they should fail in their
enterprise; of the soliciting and drawing down the Tumults to Westminster, and
of their bidding the People in the height of their fury to go to Whitehall.

Concerning the Kings coming to the House.
We find, that first the King sent his Attorney to the House of Lords with a
charge against the Lord Kimbolton, now Earl of Manchester, as the Attorney
General did accuse the Earl of Bristoll in the first year of his Majesty's
Reign; and that he sent the Sergeant at Arms to the House of Commons, to
acquaint them that he did accuse and intended to prosecute their 5. Members for
high Treason; and did require that their persons might be in safe custody;
Whereupon you made an order and the same night published it in Print, Exact
Col. p. 35.
that if any person whatsoever should offer to arrest the person of any Member
of that House, without first acquainting that House therewith, and receiving
farther order of that House, that it shall be lawful for such Members or any
person to assist them, and to stand upon his or their Guard of defense; and to
make Resistance according to the Protestation taken to defend the privileges
of Parliament. And hence we conceive the King was necessitated to go in person
unto you for the farther prosecution of that charge; and for his attendance, we
find that he took with him only his servants, and such Gentlemen as were then
in the Court; And that being come to the upper end of Westminster Hall, before
he went up the stairs to the House of Commons he charged all those that
accompanied him (except some few ordinary servants) not so much as to come up
the stairs, nor to offer violence or injury to any person, upon pain of their
lives; as Captain Bernard Ashly testified before your Committee at Grocers
Hall; which testimony you have suppressed, as you did the second Examination of
Col. Goring concerning the Northern Army: Nor do we see, why (in Justice) his
Majesty might not have come in a forcible manner indeed to your House, and
against it, after you had protected those Traitorous Members, as the Army
threatened to do when you would not give up your Members whom they had accused
of high Treason. And this is strange to us, that you should be so sollicitous
for the 5. Members, and so careless of, and injurious to the King, the head of
the Parliament, and grant the Army what you denied the King. And your undue
protection of these Members against the King, what was it but (to use your own
words) the prologue to the bloody Tragedy that has bin acted amongst us.
Besides in your Petition presented to his Majesty at Tibballs primo Mar. 1641.
you besought kis Majesty to believe, that the dangerous and desperate design
upon the House was not inserted into the preface of your Ordinance for the
Militia to cast the least aspertion upon him; but therein they reflected upon
the Malignant Party, etc.

What you mean by the good affections of the City, we know not; but we find,
(in his Majesty's Declaration of the 12. of August) Exact Col. page 538.
that on January 11. 1641. the Trained-Bands of London guarded the accused
Members from the City to the Parliament House by Land, and that there were 100.
long Boats, and Lighters laden with Sacres, Murdering Pieces, and Ammunition,
which passed by White Hall, and attended by water; and that there was a design
to have seized his Majesty's Person (as is confessed under the hand of one who
has been very active in your service, and should have been a principal actor
in it) had not His Majesty removed from White Hall the day before; but what
you could not then effect by tumults, you have since done by force of Arms.

Concerning the List of Arms and Ammunition, taken amongst His Majesty's Papers.
We find, that you had first seized the Kings Magazines in the Tower, and at
Hull, by Major Skippon, and by Sir John Hotham, the former besieging the Tower
by Land, and by Water, the 12. of Jan. 1641. the latter possessing himself of
Hull not many days after; no marvel then that the King took order for Arms,
and Ammunition beyond the Sea.

What else you say concerning the Lord Digby, cannot reflect upon the King, and
must be referred to your Insufficiencies.

The Commissions to the E. of Newcastle and Col Leg, we find to be none other
then according to Law, and that they were not granted, until his Majesty was
assured, that some of your leading Members had a design to procure an Order
for seizing those Towns.

The Vessel that arrived with Arms and Ammunition near Hull, was not till
about six months after that you had put a Garrison into that town, and about
three months after Sir John Hotham had shut the gates of it against the King.

The Invasion of the King of Denmarks Dominion by the Swedes, we find, was two
years after your seizing of Hull, and after the removing of the Magazine from
Hull to London: and therefore is it one of your insufficiencies; as also what
precedes, Concerning your Intelligence from the Low-Countreyes of fornaign
Forces from Denmark, and what follows, concerning your notice of a Fleet
preparing in Denmark, and that one of the Lord Digbyes servants had solicited
a Mariner (or Pilot) to conduct it into Hull, and concerning the Letter to
Secretary Nicholas from the Hague, that there were coming from Denmark Ships
with 10000. Arms for Foot, etc. are all to be reckoned amongst your
uncertainties and insussiciencies, since experience has made it evident, that
there was not the least color for it.

Concerning Cockrans Negotiation in Denmark.
We find from your own Declaration, that it was after you were beginning to
make head against the King, and were levying Forces, or rather, when the E. of
Essex was marching with his Army against His Majesty, and the principal
Instruction given to him was to press that King, to assist His Majesty with
Money, Arms, and Ammunition, (you having seized all which belonged to his
Majesty) and that the same might be sent in some ships of that Crown, because
all the Kings own were taken from him, and lay in wait to intercept any
provision that should be sent to him. And whereas in your Declaration of 22.
October. 1642. you said, Exact Col. p. 670.
that Cockran was sent into Denmark to bring Forces thence into England, His
Majesty in his Answer disavowes that, saying, that he had never greater cause
to be confident of security in his own Subjects; and therefore he could not
believe so vile a scandal could make any impression in sober men. And if he
had not been confident of security in his own Subjects, why might he not move
for foreign aids against the great design of extirpating the Royal Blood
and Monarchy of England, declared long since by M. Martin openly in your House,
without any reproof at all. What is written concerning your endeavor to lay a
blemish upon his Majesty's mother, may happily not be known to your whole
House, businesses of that nature being secretly laid and carried on by a few:
but we are informed, that there are some at Westminster, that know what passed
in that business, and by whose loyalty the motion of it was quashed in the bud.

What else you cite out of Cockrans Instructions, we find to be misrepresented
by you, for that his Majesty mentioned the Holland Fleet only as allowed by
the States to give her Majesty a Convoy into England, and concerning other his
neighbor Princes and Allies, he says, We expect and hope that they will not
look upon so dangerous a precedent to their own Crowns and Monarchies,
without contributing to suppress so pernicious a design, begun in this
Kingdom.

Concerning the Queens going into Holland, and carrying over, and pawning the
Jewels of the Crown, etc.
We desire, first to know, whether those Jewels were not his Majesty's own,
bought with his own money, or with the moneys of his Ancestors, and not with
the moneys of the Crown? and whether you can produce any intail of them upon
the Crown? and if so (we conceive) they were not unduly employed by the King
for the defense of the Crown. Concerning what follows, we find that her
Majesty took her journey into Holland, Feb. 23. and that her journey was not
resolved on till the beginning of that month, but you petitioned for the
Militia, Jan. 26. and Sir Arthur Hasterigg brought in a Bill to that purpose in
October. before. We find also that Major Skippon besieged the Tower Jan. 12.
(which is to levv War against the King by the 25. Ed. 3.) so you had both
petitioned for the Militia, and took up Arms, before her Majesty's journey
into Holland. We have also seen your Reasons, of the 15. of July, presented to
his Majesty, for the stay of her Majesty's former journey intended beyond the
Seas; and we find no mention of the Jewels and Plate of the Crown in them, and
we appeal to your Journall Books in this point.

Concerning the Kings solemn Protestations, etc.
We find that you wilfully misunderstand and misrepresent them unto us.

You are jealous, that the Exact Col. p. 125.
King intended to bring in foreign Forces, to invade the Kingdom: his Majesty
protests the contrary, but intimates that he would make use of foreign force
(if he shall need them) to keep himself from oppression.

You charge the Exact Col. p. 563.
King that he had a design of bringing up the Northern Army against the City,
and the Parliament, his Majesty protests the contrary; but denies not, he
consented the Army should come up to secure his Royal person and his
Parliament against Tumults.

May 20. 1642. Exact Col. p. 357.
you voted that the King intended to levy war against the Parliament. He
protests the contrary to the Lords at York June 15. as he has declared June.
13. Exact Col. p. 349.
that he would not engage in a War against the Parliament, except it be for his
own necessary defense and safety against such as do insolently invade and
attempt against him, or such as shall adhere unto him: After that you had
declared all those Delinquents, who had withdrawn themselves to York, and
should persist to serve the King. And so his Majesty did nothing contrary to
his Protestations, in protecting Berkwich, whom you had sent for as a
Delinquent, for his endeavor to regain Hull to his Majesty's obedience: June
10. 1642. Exact Col. p. 339.
you published Propositions and orders for bringing money or plate, to raise an
Army for the defense of the Parliament; Whereupon his Majesty set forth a
Declaration June 16. Exact Col. p. 351.
disavowing any intention to levy War against his Parliament, unless he should
be driven to it, for the security of his Person, for the defense of Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the just Rights and Privileges of
Parliament. And for those ends he excites his Subjects to bring in Money,
Plate, Arms, Horse, and Horsemen in the close of that Declaration. And he
sends to Sir John Heydon Lieutenant of the Ordnance, for Ordnance, Powder,
Shot, and Ammunition, June 20. The Commission of array we find to be legal, by
Sir Edward Cook Instit. par. 4. 124. a book printed by your own Order; and by
Just. Huttons argument in the case of Mr. Hampden, fol. 39. 40. The Guard
raised by his Majesty at York, we find to have been one Regiment of Trained
Bands, commanded by their proper Col. and one Troop of Horse consisting of
near one hundred, for the most part (if not all of them) of the Gentlemen of
that Shire; And the occasion of those Guards we find to be this; you sent
several Committees to Hull, Lincolnshire, and York, to persuade the People to
approve of what Sir John Hotham had done at Hull, and to assist him if there
were occasion, whereupon his Majesty raised this Guard for his own defense;
least Sir John Hotham should shut him up at York, as he had before shut him out
of Hull.

Concerning the Kings abusing your Committee by the Guard about him, we have
perused their Letters printed with your Remonstrances, and find no such
complaint in them. The Posse Comitatus we find was never raised; the high
Sheriff waiting daily on his Majesty.

Concerning the Kings proclaiming the Parliament Traitors. Exact Col. p. 185.
We find that the King proclaimed none, but such as the Law declares guilty in
the Statute of 25. E. 3. as Sir John Hotham for shutting the Gates of Hul
against him; and the Earl of Essex for leading an Army against him; and he
never declared the Parliament Traitors, Exact Col. p 376.
unless in your sense; that whatsoever violence should be used either against
those who exercise the Militia, or against Hull, you could not but believe it
as done against the Parliament.

And concerning the Kings setting up his Standard, etc.

We find it was not done till the 22. of Aug. at which time the Earl of Essex
was marching in Battle arrray against him; and if this be, so is your
proceeding without president; Eaact Col. p. 298.
your design being against Monarchy it self, which is more then ever was
attempted before; for though the Person of the King has sometimes been
unjustly deposed, yet the Regal Power was never before this time stricken at,
as his Majesty has declared upon your nineteen Propositions presented to him
June 2.

Concerning the Parliament at Oxford. We find that there was neither real nor
mock-Parliament set up there, but that the King by his Proclamation invited the
Members of both Houses, driven away from Westminster, to attend him at Oxford,
that all his good Subjects should see how willing he was to receive advice, for
the Religion, Laws, and safety of the Kingdom, from those whom they had
trusted, though he could not receive it in the peace where he had appointed. We
remember also that that body of Lords and Commons published a Declaration to
the Kingdom, at large setting forth the particular acts of Violence, by which
they had been driven from Westminster, and by which the Freedom of Parliament
had been taken away; which you have not answered to this day. And if want of
Liberty, or Felony and Treason supersede all privileges of Parliament (as we
have been informed) we doubt, for all the Act of Continuation, whether you be
not a mock Parliament or no: and whether you also may not be called a mungrell
Parliament consisting of so many kinds of factions, as you do.

And here we cannot but freely declare, what we have observed from the
beginning of the Parliament. That there was in both Houses a party that
intended the overthrow of the Government of Church, and States which when they
could not effect in a Parliamentary way, and by free Voting, they raised and
called down Tumults from London, to drive away those Members of both Houses
that opposed them; that done, the aforesaid party remaining at Westminster,
call themselves the Parliament of England, and under pretense of serving and
securing the Kingdom, they enter upon the Militia and take up Arms, and will
never lay them down, till they have wholly altered the ancient, and
Fundamental Government of the Kingdom. And this is our opinion of your
constitution and proceedings.

Concerning the Cessation in Ireland; We find by the Letters of the Lords
Justices, and the Counsel of Ireland, to you as well as to his Majesty; That
the Army was in such extreme want there, that it could no longer subsist, but
must either disband or depart the Kingdom; and his Majesty being not able to
assist them, and you who undertook to carry on that war, wholly neglecting them
(the Enemy still increasing in strength and power,) with the full advice and
approbation of the Lords Justices and Gounsell there, and concurrence of all
the chief Officers of that Army, that Cessation was made; by which only the
Protestants of that Kingdom and his Majesty's interest there could be preserved

Concerning the Peace made in Ireland.
We find that the Marq. of Ormond only, had power to make Peace there, and that
he refused to make it, upon those unworthy conditions, proposed by the Rebels;
and concerning the Earl of Glamorgan, we find that his Commission was not to
make peace, but to give him credit in his Negotiations there for Soldiers.

Concerning the Kings Protestations against Popery, and his Letters to the
Queen, and the Lord of Ormond, for taking away all penal Laws against the
Papists.
We find by the Treaties of the Lord of Ormond with the Irish Rebels, that if
his Majesty would have granted their demands in point of Religion, that whole
Kingdom would unanimously have declared for him, and served him, but such was
his constancy to his Religion, that he would rather hazard himself and his
affairs in England, then accept of assistance upon those terms from Ireland.
We find also that this would have been evidenced by some other of the Kings
Letters to the Queen, taken by you at Nasby; which you have purposely
concealed, least they should too plainly discover the Kings detestation of that
Rebellion, and his rigid firmness to the Protestant Religion.

And from his Majesty's avowed firmness to the Protestant Religion, it was,
that the Sectaries at first joined in arms against him, and that the Popish
Princes have not succored him: yea, we are informed, that great store of
Priests and Jesuits are in your Army, intruding and concealing themselves
under the general Liberty now practiced in matters of Religion, and combined
with the Sectaries against the King, as equal enemy to them both; and if God
does not prevent it, they are likely to destroy both the King, and our Religion
together.

We have heard, that M. Henderson lying on his deathbed, told his friends
about him, if they would preserve Religion, they must preserve the King: the
admonition will serve as well for England, as for Scotland.

The sum of your Declaration.
ANd now have we run through the several particulars of your Declaration, and
we find that 1. You charge his Majesty with what you cannot take cognizance of,
as his Transactions with his Scottish Subjects, and after an act of Oblivion. 2.
That touching the Occurrences and Transactions in England and Ireland, you
charge his Majesty falsely, maliciously, illegally, unreasonably.


1. Falslly, that the King never made any proposal fit for you to receive.
That he has not kept his Coronation Oath. That he betrayed Rochell. That by
his two Maxims he has laid a foundation of Tyranny. That he protected evil
Counselors. That after you had shut the Ports, he gave Passes to Papists, to
go over into Ireland, who were afterward in the head of the Rebels. That by
his Guard he abused your Committee at York, and protected Berwicke against the
Posse Comitatus. And that he set up a mock-Parliament at Oxford, etc. yea you
charge his Majesty with things rejected by him when they were proposed to him;
as the bringing over the German Horse. The bringing up the Northern Army to the
City, and to secure the Tower; not forgetting that you suppressed Col. Gorings
second examination about that business. There are also other falsities in your
Declaration: as that a storm from Denmark had fallen upon Hull and the
Magazine there, had not the Sweds about that time invaded the King of Denmarks
Dominions, etc.

2. Maliciously, by misrepresenting his Majesty's actions.

That the King sometimes denied to receive your humble Petitions, for peace.
Concerning the Kings advance to Brainford. Concerning his Commission and the
bloody Massacre at London. Concerning his giving the 5. Counties to the Irish
Committee. Concerning the 40. Proclamations sent into Ireland. Concerning the
Kings Letter to the Earl of Ormond to thank Muskerie and Plunket. Concerning
his Letter to the Pope. Concerning the Kings going to your House; when by the
way we cannot forget your suppressing Captain Ashleys examination at Grocers
Hall. Concerning Cockrans Negotiation in Denmark, concerning the Holland Fleet,
concerning his Majesty's Protestations against bringing over Foreign Forces,
against bringing up the Northern Army, and against making war against this
Parliament, concerning his Commission to the E. of Glamorgan, etc.

3. Illegally, that is, for what the King did according to Law, as the charging
the five Members with Treason, the Commission of Array, his proclaiming some
Traitors.

Also we find, that he had a Judgment in Law for the Ship Money, the Canons,
Ceremonies, etc. were also according to Law. Nor can you by your own Law
charge him with what he did upon the Certificate of his Attorney and Solicitor
in case of Monopolies, nor with what he did by the advice of the Privy
Council, concerning Scotland, dissolving the Parliament, and the Cessation in
Ireland.

4. Unreasonably.

1. With the grievances of the Kingdom after they were remedied by several
Acts of Parliament, as Ship Money, Monopolies, etc. 2. With what his Majesty
justly had satisfied, as Coat and conduct money and enclosing Commons. 3. With
what was done by Courts of Justice; as the Whipping, etc. 4. With what was done
by King James; as the Articles with Spain, and France. 5. With what the Queen
did; as her design, if there were any. 6. With what the Irish Rebels say,
calling themselves the Kings, or the Queens Army, etc. 7. With what your
selves are guilty of, as the not prosecuting the Duke of Buckingham. The long
intermission of Parliaments caused by your Remonstrances. The rise of the Irish
Rebellion by your not suffering the Army to be transported, the delaying the
Earl of Leicester, etc. 8. For refusing your unreasonable desires; concerning
the Commission when he went into Scotland; And the Commissions to the Lord
Brook and the Lord Wharton. 9. For what the King did in Order to his necessary
defense, as the Guards and preparation of Arms and Ammunition at Whitehall.
The List of Arms and Ammunition found amongst his Majesty's Papers. The
Vessel that arrived near Hull with Arms, and Ammunition, Cockrans Negotiation
in Denmark. The pawning the Jewels of the Crown; his Letter to Sir John Heydon
for Ordnance, etc. His Declaration to bring in Money, Plate, etc. His Guard at
York, and setting up his Standard.
And from these your false, malicious, illegal, and unreasonable allegations
and charge, how can you conclude that his Majesty has broken his trust with
the Protestants in France, Scotland, Ireland, and this Kingdom? And that he
has endeavored to inslave us by German, Spanish, French, Lorraign, Irish,
Danish, and other Foreign Forces? And that he has wholly forgotten not only
his duty to the Kingdom, but also the care and respect he owes to himself,
and his own family, and that you will repose no more trust in him, but settle
the present Government without him. Let our strength be the Law of Justice. 2
Wisd. 11


And because you iterate, and reiterate his Majesty's Breach of trust, and your
resolutions thereupon, we also reiterate our faith of that point, We believe
the Kings Power to be fiduciary, and the Kingly Office a great trust, but that
he is entrusted as he is empowered by God, and only by God. 2 Wisd. 2, 3.


S. Paul tells us ( To. 13.) That there is no power but of God; And that the
Powers that are, are ordained of God; and that the chief Magistrate) is the
Minister of God; Armed by God with the sword, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.

And when you can out of the holy Scriptures, show us as clear a Derivation of
Political Power, and trust from the People, we will assent to your opinions
and submit to your resolutions.

Besides when S. Paul writ this Epistle to the Romans, Nero was their Emperor;
And so he that resists (Nero) resists the Ordinance of God; And they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

Now if that bloody Tyrant and Persecutor Nero, might not be resisted, nor may
any Emperor or Sovereign whosoever, be invaded, imprisoned, deposed, murdered,
and the way for security, prescribed to Subjects by the Apostle, is not to
wrest the sword from the King, but to submit and obey him; Will thou not be
afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same, v. 3.

Wherefore (whatsoever befalls us, though we live under a Nero) we must needs
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. v. 5. 2 Chro. 9.8
And we know no medium between subjection and Rebellion, so that when we cease
to be Subjects, we necessarily become Rebels.

And in truth, when of Gods Lieftenant, you would make the King only the
Peoples chief Officer, your quarrel is not with the King only, and the Crown,
but with God himself also, the Author of political order, Power and
Government. And whilst you intend to depose the King, what do you but usurp
upon God himself? For he removes Kings, and sets up Kings, Dan 2.21.

And do you provoke God to Jealousy, are ye stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22.
And the manner whereby God promotes Kings with us is by natural Generation;
and the means whereby he removes them, is natural Death; Nor can the Reign
of a King of England duly be determined otherwise.

We shall conclude (as you do) with a word or two concerning the Kings Family:
and shall cite some passages of the two Houses of Parliament, 1. Jac. 1.

We do upon the knees of our hearts agnize our most constant faith, obedience,
and loyalty to your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny, as in this high Court of
Parliament, where all the whole body of the Realm, and every particular Member
thereof, either in person, or by representation, (upon their own free Election)
are by the Laws of this Realm deemed to be personally present.

Again, We (being bounden thereunto both by the Laws of God and Man) do
recognize and acknowledge, and thereby express our unspeakable joys, that
immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth, late Queen of
England, the imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms
Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent birthright, and
lawful and undoubted succession, descend and come to your most excellent
Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the
Blood Royal of this Kealme, and that by the goodness of God Almighty, and
lawful right of descent.

Lastly, And we most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige our selves, our
heirs, and posterities for ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent,
and do beseech your Majesty to accept the same, as the first fruits in this
high Court of Parliament of our loyalty and faith to your Majesty, and your
Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever.

O the baseness and vileness of the English Nation, thus to protest to the
Father, yet to depose the Son, and to destroy the Posterity! read the 17. Ezekiel.
16,18,19.

But that is come to pass which was foretold by S. Paul, In the last days
perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankefull,
unholy.

Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers
of pleasure more then lovers of God.

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn
away, 2 Timothy 3.1. etc.

Finally, Hos. 8.2. 10.2.
whereas you intend to settle the present Government without more ado, we
shall rather hearken to Solomon's admonition, then comply with your resolutions,

My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change; for their calamities shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both? Prove. 24.21,22.

FINIS.

