THE LATE WAR PARALLELED.

OR, A Brief Relation of the five years Civil Wars of HENRY the Third, King
of England, with the event and issue of that unnatural War, and by what
course the Kingdom was then settled again.

Extracted out of the most Authentic Historians and Records, by Edward
Chamberlain Gentleman, in the time of the late Civil Wars in England.

Ut prospicias futura, respicias praeterita.

The most probable way to know what will be, is to observe what has been.

Qui respicit quae fuerunt, and inspicit quae sunt, prospicit etiam quae futura
sunt.

The Historian by running back to Ages past, and then forward to present
Affairs, comparing one with the other, can give a verdict of the State, well
near Prophetic.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet, between the
middle Temple-Gate and Temple-Barre. 1660.

THE LATE WAR PARALLELED. OR, A Brief Relation of the five years Civil Wars
of HENRY the Third, King of England, with the event and issue of that unnatural
War, and by what course the Kingdom was then settled again.
HEnry the Third of that Name, (a man more pious, than prudent; a better man
then a King) swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom fifty years. The former part of
his Reign was very calm, the latter as Tempestuous.

The main Tempest was thus raised. The King for many years, during that high
calm, had sequestered himself wholly to his harmless sports and recreations,
and entrusted the whole managery of the State to his Officers and Ministers.
These taking advantage of his Majesty's carelessness (the main fault of this
King) insensibly sucked and drayned the Revenues of Crown and Kingdom; till the
King awakened by extreme necessity, began to enquire, not how he came in (for
his necessities would not permit that) but how he might get out.

The best way that his evil Counselors could find to relieve their Master, and
save themselves, was (the ordinary way of supply in Parliament declined) to
have recourse to Monopolies, Patents, and extraordinary and illegal Taxations.
But (praeter-natural courses are never long-lived) the freeborn English would
not long endure such slavery.

When the King saw there was no other remedy, he throws himself into the
bosom of his people for relief, and advice in Anciently called the wood, or
mad Parliament, ordinarily in History styled, Insanum Parliamentum, Fabian.
Parliament, Chron. Norwic.
where they undutifully taking advantage of his Majesty's extremities, instead
of relief, out brave him publicly, with a Like the Remonst. of December. 15.
1641. Matthew. Westminster. and Math. Paris.
Catalogue of all the mistakes, and all the misfortunes of his former
government; which coming to the people's ears soon stole away their hearts,
alienated their affections from their Sovereign, and left him wholly to the
mercy and will of his Parliament. They sensible hereof, and that the rains of
Government were now cast upon their necks, (like Apollo's Horses, when Phaeton
had the driving of them) ran violent by courses, till they set the whole
Kingdom on fire.

So far they went as to make an Ordinance, That whereas there was present want
of a through reformation in the State, the Government thereof should be put
into the hands of four and twenty, Qui Regia potestare suffulti, who being
Armed with Sovereign power, should take upon them the whole care and Government
of the Kingdom, should nominate and appoint the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief
Justices, Governors of Forts, Castles, and Navy, and all other great Officers,
and Ministers of State for all times to come.

Natth. Westminster.
To this Traitorous Ordinance, the King, Metu incarcerationis perpetuae
compulsus est consentire, for fear of perpetual imprisonment, was enforced to
give his Royal assent: And for further security, to be content to give it under
the great Seal, and upon Oath, that whenever he attempted to assume unto him
his Regal power, Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, Chron.
Orig. sub sigillo.
and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur,
It should be lawful for all his Subjects to rise against him and oppose him,
as if they owed no Allegiance to him.

Nil nisi pro umbra nominis habebatur. Math. Westminster.
Strange it is that he should be content to be a mere Cipher, that so lately was
the only Figure of the whole Kingdom, that he should be content to part at
once with every tittle of Sovereignty, but the bare title! But prodigious, that
so many choice Senators, so many Fathers and Judges of Law and Conscience,
should so forget God and themselves as to give their assent for the total
subverting of the Regal Authority, when as they had all taken their corporal
Oaths, Matthew. Westminster.
De terreno honor dicto Regi and haeredibus ejus servando. Which Oath was well
kept (says mine Author) Ordinindo ne unquam regerent, sed semper ab aliis
regerentur: by making an Ordinance that they should never rule again, but
always be ruled by others.

These four and twenty thus settled, continue the Parliament during their
pleasure, put the Kingdom in a posture of defense, Regist. Roffen.
place Governors of their own choosing, such as they could conside in, in the
chief Forts; nominate and appoint Judges of Assise, Sheriffs of Counties,
Coroners, Bailiffs, (discharging those that were made by the King); took an
Oath of them all respectively.

And here they would make the people believe they should never be troubled with
licencious Sovereignty again; (but never more, as it proved:) for now every one
of them began to value his own worth, and to hammer his head on every design
that might enlarge his own power and command. In brief, of so many subjects,
they became totidem Tyranni, (as the book of St. Albanes speaks) so many
Tyrants, and for one bad King before, they have four and twenty worse.

But England (like old Rome) cannot long endure more Kings then one: great
faction and deadly feud arose between the chiefest of them; which the rest
taking into consideration, and perceiving that by so many heads, not only
Monarchy was dissolved, but faction and debate every day increased upon them,
so wrought that all, but five, agreed that the foresaid Ordinance should be
repealed, and the King restored to his pristine power.

Those five Members stiffly oppose this Agreement, Matthew. Westminster. preaching, that
Religion could never be thoroughly reformed, or the differences fully composed,
sine gladio materiali, and that all that should lose their lives in this cause
were Martyrs. Rishanger. Chron. Dunst.
and for the maintenance of their cause, trahunt multos pseudo prophetas,
lupos, in ovium vestimentis, qui contra Christi Vicarios, and Christum Domini
Regem ips^m murmurant: non ut Spirit^s Sanctus, eloqui; sed ut superioris
potestatis contemptores, obloqui dabant: they drew to their side many lying
Ministers, (Wolves in Sheeps clothing) who murmr and speak evil against the
Lord's Anointed, not as the Holy Spirit gave them utterance, but as the
despisers of Dignities gave them their lessons.

These Incendiaries by their sheeps clothing (a fair conversation) drew the
people every where to side with them against the King, and against those that
wished the King his former power. Which the King perceiving, and how the
multitude grew every day more and more tumultuous, (for all things were now
carried by tumults) was advised by his Privy Council, As in 1641. and 1642.
to withdraw himself (lest His person might be endangered) from the Parliament
(then held at Westminster) to His Castle at Windsor.

After some comestation at this distance, it was agreed upon by the King and
his adherents, and the five Members and their adherents, that the difference
should be referred to the French Kings arbitrament. Rishanger.
The King of France upon the day of hearing, gave sentence that the said
Ordinance, whereby the King was deprived of his regal power, should be made
Null.

The five Members and their accomplices seeing this, (notwithstanding they had
bound themselves by Oath to stand to his award) flew often, and resolving to have
their own wills, drew into Arms, made choice of the Earl of Leicester for
their General, and, for their own private interest, (pretending the public
good) drew the greatest part of the Kingdom after them, ( Cotton.
so easy it is to draw the sickle multitude to the wrong side) crying every
where at first, Liberty and Religion, though toward the end of the War not a
word of either.

Hollinsh.
By their fair pretenses, they gained so far upon the Londoners, that they
generally enter into a Covenant to assist the Earl: For which purpose (besides
a new Mayor or Bailiff) they chose two Commanders, Thomas Pywelsden and Stephen
Buckirell, at whose command, by the tolling of St. Paul's great Bell, they were
to be in Arms upon any occasion. Their first exploit was a march to Isleworth
in a tumultuous manner, where they plundered and fired the Kings brother's
Mannour-house.

The Earls Army, by this time on their march, plundered all that were
disaffected to their cause and proceedings, and imprisoned them: Rishanger.
Especially those that stood any way affected to the Queen: for they all (but
most of all the Londoners) were most maliciously bent against her; For
dissuading the King to stand to the foresaid Ordinance of Parliament.
in so much that as she was passing the Thames near the Bridge, a rude rabble
of the City got together on the Bridge, and with confused yellings cried,
Drown the Witch, etc. and by throwing dirt and stones at her, drove her back:
which impious affront was punctually remembered in the first fight; as you shall
hear anon.

Rishanger.
Besides this main Army under the Earl of Le^cester, they had another Army
under the command of the Lord Ferrers (of whom descended the late Lord of
Essex) who behaved himself insolently toward the King, in destroying his Parks
as he marched, etc. which in the conclusion cost him dear: yet, to delude the
people, the main A^^y bore before then the Kings Arms: And, to show they were
for the King, when they had displaced the old Governors of the Kings Castles
and Forts, and placed in such as they could confide in, they gave them an Oath
to be true to the King, and to keep those holds to the use and benefit of the
King and State: yet when the King demanded entrance at Dover. Chron. Dunstan.
one of his Forts, wherein they had placed a Governor, he was kept out. As at
Hall.


At Sea, the Barons of the Cinque Ports seized the Kings Ships, took great
Prizes, but they that sat at Stern upon Land shared in those Prizes, as the
fame then went.

By this time the King began to rouse himself, and finding nothing now left
him, but a good Cause and the hearts of his wiset Subjects, yet by that, and
these, and the assistance of his brother Richard, King of the Romans, in a
short space he had raised a considerable Army. (A King can never be so down,
but he will rise again). With these he marched, and (like a snow ball increased
by motion) plundered the Rebels Lands as he went to Northampon, which was
fortified against him by some of the chiefest of the Rebels; yet by a furious
assault he soon gained it.

Thence continuing his march into Sussex near Jews, he received a Message from
the Earl, the tenor whereof was, That as for his Majesty they intended no
harm against him, but only desired that he would remove his evil Counselors
that did advise his Majesty against them, against the honor of the King, and
welfare of the Kingdom. The King in his Answer charges them with Rebellion and
disloyalty, and commands them to lay down their Arms and to return to their
obedience, that they might be received to mercy: but the Earl rejecting the
offer ( Cambdens observation in the case of Robert Earl of Essex.
when Subjects have once broken their fealty and trust to their Sovereign, they
never dare trust their Sovereign again) resolves to give the King battle.

Near Jews both Armies meet: One Wing of the Earl's Army was made up of Lond^^
Troops, which the Prince being then General of the Kings horse, observing,
Equites, hac, hac seditionum scelerumque omnium capita sunt, nunc nunc fortiter
adjicite tela.
and remembering (not without indignation) the abuse offered by the Londo^ers to
the Queen his Mother, he clapped spurs to his horse, and an his Cavalry after
him, crying, [ Here, here, (my brave Cavaliers) are the main contrivers of all
rebellions and mischief; Now, now, f^^ ever charge home,] and so fell on with
that fury, that they presently fly: the Prince in an eager and hot pursuit does
great ^^ecution upon them for four miles. But this prosperous beginning of the
fight on ^^e King's side was the utter overthrow of the King's Forces: for when
the Earl perceived that the Prince (a young fiery spirit) with all the Kings
horse was gone so far in pursuit of the Londoners, Prince Robert at Edgewill.
he fell violently on the Kings foot, and soon routed them; took the King, (his
horse being slain under him) prisoner. The Prince at length retreating (when he
saw all lost) surrendered himself. There were taken in this fight (besides
those royal prisoners, the King, the Prince, the Kings brother and his eldest
Son) above twenty Noblemen that were for the King; and slain, about Southwell.
Rishanger.
3400.

The Earl having thus gotten a complete victory, forthwith endeavors to seize
all the Militia, and power of the Kingdom, for which end he carries the King
about with him to countenance his actions; but the rest of the royal Prisoners
he disposes in several Garrisons.

And now the Earl believes all his own, and the people dream of nothing put
Peace, but alas the War was not begun till now: For when the torn remainder of
the Loyal Army that escaped at Jews, now keeping Garrison in Bristow, and
other noble spirits, saw how insolently the Earl dealt with his, and their,
Sovereign in barring him of his liberty, etc. They soon raised a considerable
power under the command of Roger Mortimer Earl of March: unto whom many flockt
out of Shropshire, Cheshire, Herefordshire, and Worcester, that were well
affected to the King.

Moreover, the Queen (who was a French woman) got over beyond Sea, to try her
friends for their assistance to restore her Husband to his former liberty and
authority, Quod ad landem and magnificentiam Aelianora Anglorum Reginae libet
intexere (says one of that Age) quod Domino suo, and Edwardo filio, tam
strenne and tam viriliter, tanquam virago potentissima, succurrendis fortiter
insudaverit.

But before these forces were well united, the Rebels forces were as well
divided: for debate arising (as is usual in all confederations, where all
parties must be pleased, or else the knot will dissolve) between his Excellency
the Earl of Leicester, and the Earl of Gloucester, because his Excellency,
minding his own private, more than the public good of his fellow Rebels
(without any respect had to his adjutants) ingrosses all to himself, disposes
of the Royal prisoners at his own pleasure, seized on the revenues of the
Crowr, and composition of Delinquents for his own use, (whereas they had
privately agreed before, Ex omnia aqua sort in er eos d^vid^nda fore) In
brief, he shared all places of power and profit between himself, his sons, and
his allies. Whereat Gloucester (as good a man as he) stomackt and fell off with
his followers to the Prince, who by this time ( disponente domino clavigero ca
cerum, every thing working for the King) had made his escape out of prison at
Hereford: (for being allowed by his keepers to air himself sometimes on horse
back in the Town meadow, after he had tired two or three, at length he mounts a
special fleet Nag, and putting spurs custodibus valedixit) and came safe to
Wigmo e Castle, where the Lord Mortimer lay with his forces raised for the
King, so marched on with a great power, taking in (as they went) some strong
garrisons of the rebels, plundered their houses, drove their cattle, etc.

Here the War grew hot, each side fortifying Towns and Houses, plundring and
driving all round about to store the garrisons: Men's houses (which were wont
to be their own Castles) were now made Castles, but the owners were least
Masters; all left to the mercy of the rude Soldier, the poor Country-man's
dwelling house pillaged every where and searched, Rishanger.
usque ad lectorum stramentum, to the very bed straw: not only Men's Houses,
but even Gods Houses, the very Churches were not free from the profane hands
of plunderers; the highways lay unoccupied, no passing from Town to Town
without danger of robbing.

When the Prince, the Earl of Gloucester, the Earl of March, with the relics
of the royal Army were united and well ordered, they resolved to give his
Excellency (the Earl of Licester) battle: At Evesham in Worcestershire, by a
speedy and unexpected march, they came upon him. The Earl seeing himself
engaged to fight, gave order that his own coat armor should be put upon the
King, who was then a prisoner in the Army, and that the King, (for the safety
of his person forsooth) should be placed in the front of the battle, that so
if the battle went against him, the King might be aimed at as general, and
his excellency thereby make his escape. But the King at first charge called out
to the loyal Army, that he was their King, and so was preserved; yet not
without the loss of some of his own, (being wounded by a javelin) as well as
his Subjects blood: the battle was very violent, and went sore against the
Rebels; at length the Earl himself (the head of this Rebellion) was cut off;
at the instant of whose death, their happened such extraordinary lightning,
thunder, and thick darkness, that it struk a general horror and amazement
into the hearts of the Rebels, as if the King of Kings would now at last
visibly revenge the Kings quarrel, or as if they had seen Gods immediate hand
against them; as once against Corah, and the 250. Assembly-men, Numb. 16. v.
35. for the like rebellious practices.

In this signal Battle were slain, (besides the Earl and his son) sixteen
Lords and Knights, and about ten thousand more of the Rebels part.

The Earl's Corpse was strangely (though not undeservedly) handled by the
people, who were so enraged against him, the chief actour and author of their
so much mischief and misery, that (in despite of him) they lopt off his head,
hands, feet, and privy members, and sent them (in scorn) for tokens to
several places; his body was buried in Evesham Church. Notwitghanding this,
there were many ignorant people (who had been by specious pretenses abused, and
seduced to that side) that were of opinion for a long time after, that he dyed
a Martyr, because it was in defense of their holy (as they thought, but indeed
impious) Covenant and Oath.

Two of the Earl's sons were at the same fight taken Prisoners: not long after
they made an escape out of Prison, but could not escape Gods vengeance on
Rebels; for in France, in miseras dies suos finiverunt.

The Countess, being banished, died a Nun in France. All the Earl's Honors and
Possessions were conferred upon Edmond Earl of Lancaster, the King's second
son, And thus ended this great fiery Meteor in a stench. Thus fell our English
Cataline, (as M. Cambden styles him) a man in show fair and honest, but in
deed, Vir pravo ingenio and profunda perfidia: of a perverse disposition, and
treacherous beyond any man's suspicion. After his Sovereign had heaped upon him
many high favors, as the Earldom of ^eicester, and that high and honorable
Office of Lord high Steward, and (to endeare him the more) had given him his
own Sister in marriage: In token of thankfulness, he does his utmost endeavor
to diminish the Kings known authority, to subject him to the wills of his
Subjects, to pull down Monarchical Government, and set up a factious
Oligarchy, and all under the fair common pretense of restoring Religion to it is
Purity, and the people to their Liberty.

The King thus happily preserved, and almost miraculously (all things
considered) set at liberty; about a month after, calls a Parliament at
Winchester, (no more at London, until it was more loyal, Fabian.
and less tumultuous) where by a full Convention it was enacted, That all
Statutes and Ordinances made by the former Parliament, (called the wood or mad
Parliament) should be repealed, and all writings and bonds then sealed by the
King for observing the same, should be cancelled and made void. That the City
of London, ob suam Rebellionem, for this her Rebellion, Rishanger.
should be deprived of all her ancient Privileges and Liberties, and the
Ringleaders of them, juxta voluntatem ipsius Regis plecti, to suffer such
punishment as his Majesty was pleased to inflict: Et ditiores Civitatis in
carcerem truderentur ( says Matthew. Westminster.) pro eo quod Simoni, in Regis
contemptum, and etiam damnum Regni, fortiter adhaeserint; that the wealthier
Citizens should be cast in prison, because they had in contempt of his Majesty,
and great damage and mischief of the Realm, assisted the Earl. Furthermore, it
was there enacted, that all such as had favored the Rebels, (were they now in
prison, or at large) should forfeit all their estates.

Afterward the King marched with a great power to Windesore, resolving (as the
fame then went) to destroy the whole City of London: Many of the Rabble and
wild Commoners (says Fabian) were as resolved to defend the City against him:
but the wiser sort thought better to become humble petitioners for their pardon
of what was past, than to incense his Majesty any farther; and to that end,
drew up an humble Petition, and presented it to the King: but their late
rebellious carriage had so far p^ovoked his M^jesties patience, that he would
not so much as admit of their Petition, or hearken to any that endeavored to
mediate for them.

Hereupon, they were advised to draw up an Instrument or w^iting, whereby they
should yield themselves wholly, both bodies and goods to the Kings mercy, which
was done accordingly, and seized with the Common Seal of the City.

His Majesty upon earnest suit unto him, accepted hereof, giving present
express command, that all the Chains and Posts which they had placed at every
street and lanes end, should be forthwith carried to the Tower, and that the
Mayor and Forty of the chief Citizens should repair unto him the next day,
and confirm their said writing: this was done, and they all came accordingly;
but (contrary to their expectation, though not deserts) were all delivered into
the custody, of the Constable of Windesore Castle, and shut up there in a lage
Tower, where they had small cheer, and worse lodging. The next day toward
night, all (but five, whereof the Mayor was one) had their enlargement. Those
five, their bodies and goods, were as a boon bestowed on the Prince, the rest
were commanded to attend at W^ndesore for a long time after.

Sixty or seventy wealthy Cicizens with all their Lands, Goods, and Cattles,
did the King dispose to his household-servants.

For the Government of this unruly City, the King appointed one Othon a
forreiner, or stranger, first Constable of the Tower, and then Custos, or
Warden of the City, to pull down their haughty rebellious spirits, and that his
peace for the future might be surely kept, he required the best men's sons in
the City for Hostages. These he clapped up in the Tower, and caused them to be
there kept at the cost and charges of their Parents.

Daily suit was made unto his Majesty, for his Pardon and Favor, but in vain:
then they petition the King to know his gracious pleasure, what Fine he would
demand of the whole City, for their offenses against him. The King at length
signified unto them, that the sum of Fifty thousand Marks should be their
Fine. Whereunto the Londoners return this humble answer. They had been of late,
by this unhappy War, Long before the discovery of the West-Indyes.
so exceedingly impoverished, that a sum so great (as it was in those times)
could not possibly be raised amongst them; wherefore they humbly beseeched his
Princely compassion might be so far extended toward them, as to require, and
accept according to their abilities. At length, after much suit and submission,
and a Fine of twenty thousand Marks, the King received them to mercy, and sent
them under his Great Seal a general Pardon (those only excepted, whose
estates were already bestowed) granting and allowing that their former Charter,
and ancient Privileges should be restored unto them, notwithstanding all the
transgressions (they are the words of the Pardon) and trespasses done to Us, to
our Queen, to our noble brother, Richard King of Almaine, and the Prince, our
first begotten son.

And here was the first pacification betwixt the King and the Londoners, for
whom we may say thus much, That their foul Rebellion againg their Sovereign
was not more detestable, then their humble submission to their Soverain was
commendable. And therefore in the Ordinance, called Dictum de Kene^worth, made
for the settling of the Kingdom, we find them (notwithstanding, all their
disloyalty) commended, as shall be seen in the ensuing Story.

After the proud stomach of this City was brought down, and all tumultuous
spirits quelled, the King calls his Parliament (in festo Sancti Edvardi Regis)
to Westminster, wherein those that aided and assisted the Earl were all
(excepting the Londoners) attainted, and that all theit Lands and Goods were
forfeited.

But this Sentence (though it was less than they deserved) yet was more than
they would endure, and therefore the fire (that was not yet quenched, but
smothered) breaks forth again. Some fly into the Isle Ely, and fortify that.
Some into the Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire. Another party possess
themselves of Killingworth Castle. Another, under the command of the Lord
Ferrers, in the Northern parts. And amongst others, one Adam Gurdon lived as an
Outlaw in Hampsh^re; Rishanger.
tum rarus aut nullus locus in Anglia fuit tutus, eo quod terra erat
vespilionibus plena: Now scarce any place in England was free from plunderers.

To reduce these to obedience, the King undertakes K^llingworth Castle. The
Prince was sent against Adam Gurdon. Lord Edmond the Prince's brother against
those in Axholme; And Lord Henry the King of Almaines son, against the Lord
This Lord Henry, the Kings Nephew, was a valiant Soldier, and having found out
the Lord Ferrers at Chesterfield, gave him battle, and over threw him, and
because he had been pardoned once before, it was decreed that he should be
degraded, and depived of his Earldom for ever, and fined fifty thousand pounds.
Ferreres.

To the Rebels in K^llingworth Castle, the King sent first a gracious message,
willing them to desist, and return to their obedience. But they, contrary to
all Law of Arms, contrary to natural civility, cur off the Messengers hand,
and sent him back with an uncilil answer. Then the King marched to Killingworth,
and sat down before it upon Midsummer Eve. During the Siege (which lasted six
Months) Clerus and populus convocantur, and duodecim eliguntur de
potentioribus Procerum, and prudentioribus Praelatonum, quibus datur potestas
ordinandi super Statutum exhaerendatorum, etc. The Clergy and Laity are
assembled, and out of the chiefest of the Peerage, and wisest of the Prelates,
were chosen twelve, to whom power was given to pronounce sentence against the
Rebels, and to settle the peace of the Kingdom; they, first taking an Oath, de
utilibus ordinandis, to decree nothing, but what should be for the good of the
Common weal.

Then the people take a solemn oath, Quod dictum ipsorum inviolabiliter
observarent; that they would stand to their Decree, which to this day, by our
Lawyers is called, Dictum de Kenelwor^h; a severe, yet a good and wholesome
course (without effusion of blood) to punish Rebellious Subjects.

The Decree as follows.

Dictum de Kenelworth.
In nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Amen. Ad honorem and gloriam
Omnipotentis Dei Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, etc. Et ad honorem and
bonum prosperum and pacificum statum Christian ssimi Principis Domini Henrici
Regis Angliae Illustris, and totius Angliae Ecclesiae, Nos Willihelmus, etc.

In English thus.

In the name of the holy and individual Trinity, Amen. For the honor and
glory of Almighty God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc. And for the
honor, prosperity, and peace of the most Christian Prince, our Sovereign Lord
Henry, the most renowned King of England, and of the whole Church of England;
We William Exon, William Bath and Wells, Henry Worcester, and T. St. David's,
Bishops. Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, Humphry Earl of Hereford, Philip
Basset, John Bailof, Robert Wallop, Alan de la Souch, Roger de Somerie, and
Warren de Basingborn, providing for the welfare of the Land, etc. have thought
fit to order as follows.

1. That the Rebels be not wholly deprived of their estates, but shall have
liberty to redeem their Lands by fines, in manner following.

1. That those that were in the fight at Chesterfield, against our Sovereign
Lord the King.

Item, All those that by force of Arms impiously kept Northampton against the
King.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Lewis.

Item, Those that were taken prisoners at Kenelworth.

Item, Those that came to pillage Winchester, or were elsewhere against the
King, whom the King has not pardoned.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Evesham.

Item, All those that freely, and voluntarily, and without any compulsion, have
contributed to the War against the King or Prince.

Item, The Officers and Servants of the Earl of Leicester, that pillaged their
neighbors, or were the cause of any murders, firings, or other enormities;
that all these be fined five years revenues of all their Estates, respectively;
and that if they pay down their Fines presently, they may enjoy their Lands
presently; but if the Land must be sold for the payment of the Fine, he, on
whom the King bestowed it, shall have the refusal, if he will give as much as
any other. And if the original owner will pay down the whole Fine, he shall
have the whole Land; and likewise, if he will pay the moity or third part, he
shall have the moity, or thirds of the Land. And if at the end and term
appointed, the owner does not pay for the other moity, it shall be clearly
theirs on whom the King was pleased to bestow it.

And as soon as any one has paid down his whole Fine, such shall have liberty
to let, or set, or sell his land within the prefixed time.

Those that have Woods, and would willingly make sale of them for the payment
of their Fines; He on whom the King bestowed, and the original owner, shall
have each one his Bailiff to see it sold: and those two Bailiffs shall (as fast
as the money is made) pay it to whom the Fine was given by our Sovereign Lord
the King: this payment must be made within three years at the farthest.

All Officers and Reformadoes, that were known to be common plunderers, and
made it their business to plunder, if such have no Land, but only Goods; they
shall be fined one moity of all their Goods, and shall find sufficient
sureties, that they shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King for the
time to come. They that have nothing, shall be sworn upon the holy Gospel, and
find sufficient sureties, that they will keep the Kings peace for the time
forward, and shall make such satisfaction, and do such penance, as the holy
Church shall censure, excepting only banished persons, who are wholly left to
the will and pleasure of the King.

2. Moreover, as for Wards, or young Hei^s (that were in actual Rebellion
against the King during their minority) their Guardians shall pay their Fines,
and the said Wards (when they come to age) shall pay back the same to their
Guardians within two or three years, so that the Gardians shall have the
Wardship and their marriages (without disparagement) even till they be come to
full age, and all Wards shall pay their Fines after the same manner as those of
full age. Only the Kings own Wards shall be in the hands of those, to whom the
King shall give them, until they come to years, and then they shall pay down
their Fines according to the same manner as those of full years; Provided
alwais than there be no wast made by the Guardians upon their estates; If there
be, then the Guardians to be punished according to Law.

3. If any that were for the King before, and since the battle at Jews, be now
fined for not assisting the Prince, (when he was raising forces to rescue his
Father,) we leave him to the King to be censured or pardoned, as he shall think
fit.

4. That there be no sale or waste made of any Woods by those on whom they were
bestowed, unless the Fine be not pai'd within the time limited Only it is
allowed, that they shall cut so much wood as is necessary to keep the houses in
reparations; and if they shall exceed this allowance, to be severally punished.

5. If any be thought to be dangerous persons, and that they are like to move
sedition, and to revive the Wars; let the King secure their persons as he shall
think fit, either by sending them into foreign parts for a time, or what other
way shall be thought expedient; provided always that if they be thereby
hindered from paying their Fines, they shall not forfet their estates.

6. That if any will not submit to this Ordinance, he be left to be censured at
the Kings-bench-bar, before the feast of St. Hillary next coming. All those
that live in foreign parts shall find sureties, (according to the Laws and
Customs of those States) to live peaceably, otherwise that they shall not be
received in a peaceable manner.

7. Whereas the King's Majesty is engaged to many that served him in his Wars,
and faithfully stuck to him, who he has not yet sufficiently rewarded, and
some have been rewarded above their deserts, we desire that the King take
special care, that out of Delinquents estates they may be all rewarded to the
full, lest otherwise a new War should be occasioned.

8. That the Kings Majesty be graciously pleased to make choice of twelve able
Men, that may be authorized to see this punctually and faithfully performed,
and that the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, take care that it be all
firmly observed and maintained, and to enquire into, and regulate, and see
duly executed, what shall be by the said twelve Men ordered according to
reason and equity.

9. That all Farmers and Renters of Lands that were against the King, shall
lose their Farms for all the term or time of their leases that are to come,
(provided that the Landlords be no way endamaged) and when the term of their
Leases are out, then to return to the Landlords again.

10. As for Castles and Forts built by the Kings grant and allowance, upon any
Delinquents ground, contrary to the will of the said Delinquent; We decree that
(after the owner o^^^ at land has paid his fine, which must be within three
years) for six years more the owner of that Land shall pay such custom as was
imposed by the King, or else accept of a reasonable exchange for the said Land.

11. All Laymen who notoriously advanced the Earls designs, and assisted him
or his adherents, Attrahendo homines per mendacia and falsitates parti Comitis
and suorum, and detrahendo parti Regis and filli sui, by drawing people through
lies and falsities, either to the Earl and his party, or from the King and his
party, it is ordained that they be fined as much as two years revenues of all
their estates.

12. That all such as were pressed, or out of fear went to the Wars, but never
fought against the King, or did any mischief; also those that being not able
to go themselves, yet by force or fear were compelled to contribute toward the
Armies-against the King or the Prince; also that those that were enforced to be
plunderers, or to aid and assist any plunder-masters, and yet did return to
their habitations, as soon as conveniently they could, be all left In
misericordia Domini Regis.

13. That all those that wittingly bought any plundered goods, restore the
value of the goods, and be In misericordia Domini Regis; because they thereby
have offended against the Law, and done contrary to the Kings express command,
set for half a year before.

14. That all those that at the Earls command went into Northampton, yet never
gave the rebels their assistance, or made any resistance, but as soon as they
perceived the King coming, took Sanctuary (provided that this be attested by
the oaths of good and lawful men) likewise that those that owed no suit or
service to the Earl, and yet came upon his command, be all fined half a years
revenue of every one respectively; but those that held of the Earl in Fee, let
them be only In misericordia Domini Regis.

15 That impotent silly people, and all such as did no mischief, may enjoy
their estates as formerly, and recover damages at the Kings Bench, against
those that shall wrong them.

16 That those that accuse any of their fellow subjects out of malice, be
punished at the Kings pleasure, and that his Majesty thence forwa^d do not
easily give credit unto them. And we judge that they deserve the same
punishment as the accused, if the accusation (...) true; provided that they
lose not life, limb, or estate.

17. That all such as are accused upon mere malice, may still enjoy their
estates, and recover damage against their accusers in the Kings Bench, as
above said.

18 That all women enjoy their own inheritances and dowries, But those lands
that came by their husbands, who have been against the King, shall be redeemed
by a fine, according as his Majesty shall impose upon them, etc.

19. That all such as are acquitted (so it be by those that have authority to
acquit them) remain and stand in such a condition as they are put into; and
that all that have paid their fines, shall not be responsable for damages and
trespasses committed by them upon those, against whom they fought in the time
of the late troubles, but that all damages and trespasses be forgiven on both
sides, provided that the Church may have her dues.

20. That because it may be of dangerous consequence, that any Castles should
remain in the power of those, who were in actual Rebellion against the King,
we therefore decree and ordain, that for the Castles of Hardley, Bytham, and
Chertley, there be given a reasonable exchange.

21. As for the Earl Simon Monfort, his Countess, and his sons, we decree
nothing, because our Sovereign Lord the King has referred them, and their
offenses, to the King of France.

22. As for the City of London [taking notice, it seems of their humble
submission] we commend it, and do make this motion to our Sovereign Lord the
King, that by the advice of his Privy Council, he take order for reforming the
state of the City, and settle their Lands, Revenues, Buildings and Liberties,
and that this Order be presently debated.

23. For the Lord Ferrers, we decree that he be fined seven years revenues of
all his estate.

24. That all that now keep Killingworth Castle be pardoned, except Henry
Hastings, and those that had any hand in cutting off the Kings Messengers hand,
all which shall be fined seven years revenues of all their estates, or else
submit themselves to the Kings mercy.

25. That all men whatsoever endeavor to keep the peace of the Kingdom, that
none presume to commit any outrages, firings, murders, robberies, or by any
other means break the Peace. Which if any shall be so hardy as not to observe,
and be thereof lawfully convicted, let him have sentence according to the Laws
of the land.

26. Item, that all whom it may concern, take their oaths upon the holy Gospel
of God, that they will never take any revenge, be accessory, or consenting to
take any revenge, nor will suffer (as much as in them lies) that any revenge
should be taken against any one for any injury suffered in the late times of
trouble; and if any one shall presume to revenge himself, we decree that
punishment be inflicted upon him in the Kings Bench Court.

27. That the Holy Church receive full satisfaction from those that have
injured her.

28. But if there be any that will not submit to this Ordinance, or refuse to
be tried by their Peers before our Sovereign Lord the King, let them forfeit
their estates for ever. And if there be any that have gotten possession of the
Rebels Lands, and were himself a Rebel, he is thereby incapable of challenging
any right to the land, or to have any title to the fine by the Kings Majesty's
gift.

29. Whosoever will not submit to this Ordinance, let him be accounted a
professed enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, and to his Sons, and to the whole
Realm, and let all the Laity and Clergy (as far as the Canon Laws and Common
Laws will reach) prosecute such an one as an enemy to the peace of Church and
State. About the end of October the King assembled all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Knights of the Shires, to Northampton, where this decree was
confirmed by Act of Parliament


30. Lastly, that all those that are imprisoned, or any way debarred of their
Liberty, upon reasonable and competent security shall have their enlargement,
by putting in Sureties, or such other way as the King has allowed.

Dated, and set forth from the Camp before Kenelworth, the last day of
September, in the year of our Lord God 1^66, and of the reign of the most
renowned King Henry the third, 51.
Thus ends that Famous Ordinance called to this day * Dictum de Kenelworth;
wherein are comprised the wisest rules, that the wisest men of those times
could possibly devise, to uphold, compose, and recover a tottering, distracted,
dying Kingdom.

The Barons of Cinque Ports seeing the King prosper, made their peace with the
King
About two months after the publication of this Ordinance, viz. upon Saint
Thomas Eve, the Castle was delivered up, upon conditions (too good for those
that had so barbarously used the Kings Messenger, contemned the King, and
impoverished the Country) to march away with their goods, and to undergo no
fine for taking up Arms.

This Castle had the King bestowed upon the Earl of Leicester, in frank
marriage with his sister Elionor; but when the Earl by his Rebellion had
forfeited, and the King had now won it, he gave it to his own Son, Edmund
Earl of Lancaster, who by this time had reduced the Isle of Axholme, and all
those rude ignorant people that flockt thither, pillaging and plundering the
Kings friends round about.

The Prince also met with Adam Gurdon, a famous sturdy Rebel, that lay lurking
in Aulton Wood in Hampshire, robbing and spoiling the adjacent parts, Precipue
terras eorum qui parti Regiae adhaerebant; Rishanger.
the Prince upon his approach, hearing of his valor, sent him a Challenge for
a single Combat. Gurdon accepts it, and performed it so gallantly, that the
Prince assured him of his life and estate, if he would submit: which he did,
and was received into great favor with the Prince; but diverse of his men were
there executed.

Now the Isle of Ely was strongly fortified by a great multitude got together,
that refused to submit to the Ordinance of Kenelworth. Upon the natural
strength of this Isle, and the plenty of all provision therein, seditious
Rebels have often presumed, and from hence have molested more Kings then one,
as they did now the neighboring Counties, robbing, and pillaging Norfolk,
Sussolk, and Cambridgeshire, plundering the City of Norwich, and carrying away
the richest Citizens, made them redeem themselves: at length a message was sent
unto them, requiring them to submit to the Ordinance of Killingworth, to leave
off robbing their fellow subjects, and to return to their allegiance. Hereto
they return this insolent answer, That they had taken up arms to defend the
good of Church and State, and therefore ought to be restored to the^r lands
without paying any fine. In brief they require hostages into the Island, and
that they might hold it five years peaceably, till they saw how the King would
perform his promises, (perfidious subjects ever suspect their Princes
fidelity) which high insolency of theirs (unheard of till our times) so
exasperates the King, that he resolves to try the utmost to reduce them to
their obedience; for that purpose marches with a mighty Army against them, the
Prince also joins with a considerable power; after many assaults, at length
(after they had held it above two years) by the help of new made bridges and
boats, they stormed it on every side, that they were forced to yield.

And now men thought the fire was quite out. But there were yet some live
embers (which the Earl of Gloucester upon some distaste blowing) suddenly
flamed out again in London, where the Commons of the City forgetting their late
punishment, and as men (says mine Author) without dread of God or the King:
drew up in arms again, flocked to the Earl of Gloucester, Fabian.
plundered the well-affected to the King, sequestered their estates, brake the
Prisons, chose a new Mayor and Sheriffs, made Bulwarks and Barbicans, and
fortefied the City wonderously, and were so confident of their strength and
cause, that they durst bid the King battle, appointing Hounsloe-health for the
field.

The King by a speedy march came to the place at the time appointed, but they
instead of meeting his Majesty, ran about the City in a tumultuos manner. Some
to Westminster, and there plundered the Kings Palace, fenestras and ostia
fregerunt, (says Mat. W stm.) vix manus a cembustione totius Palatii
cohibentes; brake the doors and windows, hardly forbearing to set it all on
fire.

Then the King removed his camp to the other side of the City, and had his head
quarters at Stratford, three miles off the City, the rest of his Army lay at
Ham, a village hard by. The wiser Citizens foreseeing the danger that hung over
them, desired a treaty with the King, whereunto (though they were most unworthy
of so much clemency) his Majesty was graciously pleased to condescend, and upon
these easy terms they were again received to mercy.

Imprimis, Salvo in omnibus dicto Killingworthi, that the Ordinance of
Kill^ngworth should be observed in all points; then that the fortifications
should be razed and the trenches filled up; lastly, that 1000. Marks damages
should be paid down to the Kings brother for his Manor of Isleworth, fired by
them long before.

Also his Majesty for some years following chose the Mayor and Sheriffs
himself: but toward the latte: end of his Reign, being fully reconciled, he
restored them their (often forfeited) Then did the ^ing command, that Peace
should be proclaimed all the Kingdom over, which was received with joyful
acclamations.
Privileges.

Thus, after the Almighty (whose judgments are unsearchable) had suffered
crafty seditious spirits to seduce a whole Nation, to trample upon his
Anointed, and to tread his Honor in the very dust for a time, yet at length,
all his enemies are clothed with shame, and upon himself his Crown flourishes
again.

And now after this furious dreadful tempest, after so many storms and showers
of blood, began a joyful long-expected Calm: which that they might enjoy
without any intervening of more storms, and for the better settling and
quieting the Kingdom, the King gives express command for the razing of diverse
inland Castles; as Farnham, etc. That so if another Rebellion should be
begotten, it might no where find a Nurse, and then it could not be long-lived.

Also, for the more quiet and secure traveling of his Subjects, he appoints a
Captain in every County, who with a Troop of Horse should always assist the
Sheriff, for the taking and punishing all straggling relics of the late
Armies, and highway robbers, wherewith the Kingdom did abound at that time,
no place free from them. In some places also, Ruricolae (says R^shanger) the
Country people would generally rise against them (as against Wolves or Bears;)
and at one time, they took and killed fifty of them, that were got together
near St Albans in Hartfordshire.

Besides, the King Proclamari fecit contra pacem regni disturbantes, set forth
a Proclamation against all such as should any way disturb the quiet of the
Realm, by plundering or stealing, etc. And that if any man should presume to
steal but a Cow or a Sheep, vel aliquid aliud (says mine Author) he should
surely be put to death.

These were the petty devices of that Age, to pump and drain the huge sink of
the Kingdom; but the Staple Policy was, by a Foreign Expedition (like a wide
fluce) to let out all the filth at once: for which purpose therefore (among
others) it was resolved upon, that a great Army should be raised under the
command of the Prince, for a voyage to Palestine. And by this course especially
did his Majesty soon spend the insolences of his own, and the Rebels
Soldiers, So at a late Diet, or Parliament in Germany (after they had
undutifully strived with the Emperor, and wasted the Empire) it was concluded
that things should be reduced to the same state as it was in the year 1618.
made lawless by the late unavoidable Liberty of Civil Arms.

And here was an end of this wasting, groundless, unnatural War, wherein the
subject having strugled and wrestled with Sovereignty, till they had wasted the
Kingdom, and wearied themselves, at last are content to sit down by the loss,
to let the King have his own rights again, and some of theirs, according to the
usual event and issue of such imbroylments.

The Corollary.
Out of this brief Narration may be extracted somewhat that may be useful both
to the King, and to the subject.

To the King.
First for preventing seditions and rebellions: then for settling a Kingdom
after a rebellion suppressed.

For the first, That he beware how he entrust the government of his Kingdom
wholly to others: How he suffer his Favorites, and great Officers of State, to
suck him into necessity, and inthral him by indigency; and be thereby drawn by
extraordinary and illegal Impositions and Taxes, to vex and alienate the hearts
and affections of his subjects; and then (as he must) be constrained to fly
unto them for relief and counsel in Parliament (where he must then run the
hazard of being subject to his subjects, and they will be Kings over their
King, where he must then be content to be less then he should be, and they
will be more, where they may make advantage of his necessity, and he must
undergo many hard censures, and be vexed with undutiful demands before they
will relieve him As in the y^er 1641 and 1642.
. But whether the subject part with his money, or not, let the King take heed of
ever parting with his power.

Then, after the heat and heart of a rebellion is broken, not to be over-severe
against any, lest the rest grow desperate. Severity may blow up, but seldom
blow out the flames of a rebellion.

Yet to show some acts of power, as well as of grace and mercy, not to use the
extremity of justice, lest he thereby renew the present rebellion yet to show
some justice to prevent a future.

By a sweet mixture of mercy and justice, the King shall at once both humble
and oblige his delinquent subjects: by mercy in not taking the rigor of the
Law; by justice, in taking a part of the law: by this he shall humble them in
taking so much, by that he shall oblige them in taking no more.

Next, to take special care in rewarding, and cherishing, and countenancing,
and remembering (before others) all those that stuck close unto him; that by
their persons or their purses, showed themselves really for him, and, without
all fallacy, loyal.

After this, to prepare speedily for some foreign expedition, wherein to
employ all the late active spirits, and working heads, who will soon make work
again at home, if they have not work abroad.

Lastly, to place some one as a Scavenger in every Cou^ty, to carry away the
dregs left behind, such as will not go beyond sea, cannot work, and are
ashamed to beg.

To the Subject.
First, that they suffer not themselves to be abused and seduced into
disloyalty, by any ambitious unquiet cunning spirits, upon what pretenses
soever, and when Liberty, Religion, or any public good is pretended, then most
of all to suspect private ends.

Next, that the subject seldom get by this course, but often lose their former
ancient Liberties and Privileges, according to that very observable (though
not observed Maxim) EVERy REBellion suppressed, makes the King more King, and
the subject more subject.

Lastly, that taking Arms without the Kings authority, upon what pretenses
soever, (be they never so fair, as for Religion, or Liberty, never so foolish,
as that it is not against the King, but for the King) is most abominable in the
eyes of God, and though it seem to prosper for a time, yet in the end is most
surely and severely punished, ending commonly in a general impoverishment (if
not the ruin) of the subject, and some dreadful judgment upon the contrivers.
Pro. 24.21. and 22.
My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, who knows the ruin
of them both?

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There is newly published an excellent Book, Entitled, The World Surveyed, or
The Famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc, or White of Marseilles, who
from the age of fourteen years, to threescore and eighteen, traveled through
most part of the world, containing a more exact description thereof, than has
hitherto been done by any other Author. The whole work enriched with many
authentic Histories, originally written in French, and faithfully rendered into
English, by F. Brooks, Gent. Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in
Fleetstree, betwixt the middle Temple Gate, and Temple Bar.


