THE Charge OF THE ARMY, And COUNSEL of WAR, Against the KING. With a brief
ANSWER thereunto by some of the Loyal Party.

Printed in the Yoer. 1648.

The Charge of the ARMY against the KING.
I. THat his favorite, (the Duke of Buckingham) by his consent, laid a Plaster
to King James, and gave him a Drink, when he was sick of an Ague, although the
sworn Physicians had forbidden any to presume to give the King any thing
without their Direction^; of which Plaifter and Drink applied to him, he dyed
not long after, his body presently blistering and swelling up with the poison
thereof: being an Act of a transcendent presumption, and of the highest
Treason, and cannot be judged by us any other then Murder and Patricide. II.
That he has betrayed his Trust reposed on him by the People; Broken his
Coronation Oath, raised Moneys unjustly by privy Seals, Monopolies,
Ship Money; unjustly imprisoned Sir Dudley Digges and Sir John Eliott, and
caused new Oaths Ex Officio, etc. to be imposed, and forced on the People.
III. That he has complied with, and favored Papists, as may appear by his
Letter to the Pope, carrying on a D sign to introduce Innovations,
Seperstition and Popery into the Church, and Tyranny into the State, that the
whole Kingdom might be brought into irrecoverable slavery. IV. That he kept
back supplies, from going to relieve Rochel, so that many Protestants were
betrayed to famine, and the sword of the Enemy. V. That he occasioned the
bringing in of the Spanish-Fleet into England. VI. That he raised a War upon
his Parliament, to destroy the very beeings of Parliaments for ever after. VII.
That he endeavored to bring over the Irish to destroy the parliament; and gave
Commissions to the Rebels in Ireland; and made stop of the Ammunition sent by
the Parliament for the relief of that languishing Kingdom. VIII. For his guilt
of shedding all the innocent Blood in the three Kingdoms. IX. For his late
inviting in the Scotts to invade this Kingdom.
FOr these Reasons, it is concluded by the General Counsel of the Army, That
all such shall be proceeded against as Traitors, who shall act or speak in the
Kings behalf till he shall be accquitted of all these Charges against him, and
of the guilt of shedding Innocent Blood.

A brief ANSWER to the Charge against His MAJESTY.
WHo can behold the Pride and aspiring Ambition of these Martial Tyrants,
their deep Plotts and Treacheries against God and Man, Gospel and Law, Nature
and Reason, King, Parliament and Kingdom, without being palsie-strook at the
sad consideration thereof; especially considering, That a Freeborn People but
lately complaining of their slavish servitude under the King, and his Cavalry,
and the cruel Bondage they groaned under, by this present Parliament, their
griping Committees, and the rest of their Tormentors, should now without any
distrust, so willingly lay down their necks to be trodden on by an audacious,
mal^ipart overruling Army of Independents, who having usurped a Power,
contemn and control King and parliament, City and people, gulling and
decoying them into a belief of Liberty and Freedom, (the better to color and
drive on their Designs) when really they intend nothing less then to link and
yoke the deluded people to Slavery and Bondage, whilst their Estates, Lives,
Fortunes, Liberties and Resigion must all be forced to prostrate themselves to
the glittering of a Naked Sword, all being at the Armies command, and
disposeable at their pleasure, who mean still to persist in cruel murders and
unnatural Discords, as if the spirit of Discord had quite vanquished the
Spirit of PEACE and Love; and nothing could be concluded of, but by Blood and
Rapine, Mutinies, and Treacheries, the subvertion of the KING, and his
Posterity, Parliament, City and Kingdom, and the utter extirpation of all Law,
Government and Religion, changing or converting a well-regulated Monarchy into
a Military Anarchy, chosing a popular Parliament of unquallified Commons,
unexperienced in the Laws of the Land (such as many of them cannot write nor
read) to Rule and Govern us; which New parliament shall always be at the beck
of the Army; for what can be else expected, but a continual trade of War and
Tyrany, so long as the Sense of the Army shall be the Supreme Law of the
Realm. Besides, how strange will it be to the People, that were lately
Governed by one KING, now to be governed by above 400 Tyrants; and they but
lately ruled by a well regulated Monarchy, now to be governed by a Military
Anarchy or Democracy, that were once gently chasti^ed with rods, now to be
scourged with scorpions. O ye deluded people, be not deceived by these
Deceivers; who not long ago in their Declarations, Remostrances, Proposalls,
and Letters protested, They would endeavor to preserve the Prerogative and
Honor of the King, and settle him in Peace and happiness in his Throne;
maintain the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, establish
a true and sound Religion, and settle a firm and lasting Peace in this
Kingdom: and are they not as good as their words, when they go about to murder
their Sovereign? Is this their way to set him on his Throne in peace? It is
indeed, to settle him in his Throne in heaven: Is it to uphold the Priveledge
of Parliament, to seize on 11. Members upon a mere pretense of some great thing
laid to their Charge, when nothing could be proved against them, and under the
same pretense to carry away above 40 more, all being rightly elected? Is this
their way to uphold the Privileges of Parliament? surely it is the way to
disolve the Parliament, and the Privileges thereof. Is it for the Liberty of
the Subject, to rob and plunder Halls, or prey on any that are well-affected to
the King and parliament? Is it to settle sound Religion, to make Gods House a
stable, nay a Jakes; and to tolerate all religions but the Catholic. And are
we not like to enjoy a lasting Peace, when we and all we have are at the mercy
of their Swords? O the delusions of these Deluders! Cursed be their Rage, for
it is fierce, and their Policy, for it is Devilish.

But now we will briefly Answer your several Charges against his Majesty.
First, for his PERSON it is well known to most of his Subjects, That he has
always been as Virtuous God'y and temperate a Prince as ever Reigned in
England; an Example to all his Subjects for his constant Devotions to God;
Wise, Just, Merciful, and prone to Clemency and goodness.

For his consenting to the poisoning of his Father, we shall not need to take
much pains to Answer, it being but an ugly vizard they put upon His Majesty,
to make him look deformed in the eyes of his Subjects, not any Natural
Deformity in his Countenance or Mind; for which supposed crime, and the
raising of a War upon his Subjects, His Majesty said, he would never ask God
forgiveness, for the least thought of either never entered into his Princely
breast: But it seems Buckingham applied a plaster, and gave King James a Drink
when he was sick of an Ague: this may be true, But does this argue, that it was
by consent of the Prince, with intent to murder his Father; (the poison of
Aspes is under their tongues,) was he not Heir apparent to the Crown, and by
consequence of time, it could not be long before he enjoyed it; neither could a
son be more dutiful to a parent, then this Prince was to his Royal Father. --
Indeed King James forbearing his accustomed exercise, betook himself to drink
more then his accustomed use was to do, which occasioned a Feavorish Ague, and
a droppicall humor to predominate; whereupon, (impatient of pain) he resolved
to make trial of that plaster and Drink that he knew but a while before had
cured a great Person of the same Discase; besides the Physicians and
Apothecaries knew all the Ingredients to be good. The Kings body being opened,
was found fair and clear; Neither had Prince Charles knowledge of applying the
said plaster and Drink, and yet is adjudged by them to be guilty of murder and
patricide.

For betraying his Trust, breaking his Coronation Oath, or raising money etc.
What has he suffered for these 7. years, but for maintaining his Oath, the
established Religion, and known Laws and Statures: Had his subjects been half
so conscientious of Perivry, as his Majesty, England had not been at the pass
it now is. For Ship-mony, Monopolies, Oaths, etc. What was it then to this now?
have we not Loans extorted, Customs increast Exize, Contributions,
Sequestrations, Fifth parts, Twenty parts, Meal-mony, sale of plundered Goods,
Benevolences, Collections on Fasts. Fifty Subsidies, Compositions, sale of
Bishops Lands Impositions on all Merchandises; and contradicting Oaths and
Covenants: then pray who is most guilty, His Majesty, or you?

But he complied with Papists -- Else he had not known his Wife: But were not
the Laws and Statutes duly executed against Papists, and popish Recusants;
impudence cannot deny it. For his Answer to the Popes Letter, What he did in a
strange Country was for safty of his person. For his Religion, I refer you to
His Protestation.

But Rochel was betrayed for want of aid: the Winds were the Traitors then;
yet they were so really a yded, that Cardinal de Richilieu had cause to
remember it: besides it was a foreign war, so as what his Majesty did, he might
do lawfully, and no doubt, But justly in respect of his own Conscience.

For the Spanish Fleet; If the Kings ships had joined with them, where had the
Hollander been then? but his Majesty was so far from the least intention
thereof, that he suffered a great affront in his own Harbors; not for want of
strength.

For raising war against his Subjects; it could not be, for the King knew, That
his strength lay in the number of his People, and to destroy them, was to
destroy himself; he was not the first that raised Forces, and when he did, it
was to defend himself, first using all fair means to prevent the shedding of
innocent Blood, on any conditions as might stand with his Honor, with out
breach of his Coronation Oath, conjuring them by all the bonds of Duty, to
desist from their unnatural Rebellion; but they would not, Therefore he calls
Heaven and Earth to witness, That He would wash his hands from all the Innocent
Blood that must necessarily be spilt in that Quarrel.

For Ireland, It could never be proved, that ever he gave the least countenance
to that Rebellion, much less ever granted them Commission, as is by some idly
suggested, and by Mr. Peter's was so labored to prove; Indeed when his Majesty's
Honor was trodden down here, they had an Evidence, and example to Rebel there;
and when their own party were used so rigerously here, to use the like
cruelty, or worse there over our Protestant Brethren.

For His Majesty's having a hand in bringing in the Scots, I believe is as true
as the rest; and better known to his Majesty's Jaylors then my self.

Thus you make the King the foil, to set off you brightness, and yet you prove
but the cloud that darkens his Light.

FINIS.

