THE KINGS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION CONCERNING The High and Honorable Court of
Parliament; together with His Protestation, for a firm settlement of the true
Protestant Religion, the Law, Peace, and prosperity of this Kingdom.

As also, two Letters from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Right
Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.

C R
depiction of King Charles I

7ber: 6 LONDON, Printed for R. WOOD, 1647.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION To all His Loyal Subjects; Concerning the
High and Honorable Court of Parliament.
The Preface.
WHereas there has (of late) many Copies of great consequence, (and worthy of
the Kingdoms observation and acceptance) happened to my hands, who after
perusal of the same, found them very necessary and requisite, to present to
the view of the whole Kingdom, for general satisfaction to all, and through
the earnestness of my desire to make the said Papers visible, I thought it not
amiss to present these ensuing particulars, to all those who desires to be
satisfied concerning the present affairs of the King, Parliament, and Army.
(VIZ.)

First, His Majesty's gracious Declaration, concerning the High and Honorable
Court of Parliament, with His Protestation, disavowing any preparations in Him
to resist his two Houses of Parliament, but that all His endeavors tends to
the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just
privileges of Parliaments, the liberty of the Subject, and the peace and
prosperity of this Kingdom; as appears more fully, in His Majesty's
Declaration, a Copy whereof follows:

The Kings Majesty's Declaration, concerning His Two Houses of Parliament.
Charles Rex.

WHereas there having been many Rumors spread, and informations given, which
may have induced many to believe that we intend to make was against our
Parliament, We profess before God, and declare to all the world, that we
always have, and do abhor all such Designs, and desire all our Nobility and
Commons, who are here upon the place, to declare whether they have not been
witnesses of our frequent and earnest Declaratio^^ and professions to this
purpose; Whither they see any color of preparations or Councels, that might
reasonably beget a belief of any such design.

And whither they be not fully persuaded, that we have no such intention, but
that all our endeavors (according to our many professions) tend to the firm
and constant settlement of the true protestant Religion, the just privileges
of Parliaments, the liberty of the Subject, the law, peace and prosperity of
this Kingdom.

His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax has lately sent two several Letters to
William Lenthal Esquire; (Speaker of the House of Common) touching the Lord
Lauderdail, and the Scottish Nation, as follows:

SIR,
I Received your Letter, and another enclosed from the Commissioners of
Scotland, expressing their sense of injuries offered to them by some of the
Army. First, to my L. Lauderdail, in denying him access to the King. And 2. to
Mr. Cheisly, in detaining him at New Castle in his passage to Scotland: To both
which I thought sit to return this answer; That no man is more unwillieg to
suffer any thing to be done by any under my command, that may be
dis-satisfaction to that Nation then my self; nor any shall be more willing to
do all things which rend to keep a right understanding, and to preserve the
happy Union between the two Kingdoms, then I. But I hope, the rudeness of
Soldiers disavowed will not be made of National reflection, which is all of
the case of the Earl of Lauderdail; And as to that of Mr. Chiefly, I have sent
to the Governor of New Castle to give him a free passage into Scotland, which
(I hope) is done already; for hearing of it, I sent to him to that purpose, and
shall in all things be ready to observe your comands, and rest,

Your humble servant, T. Fairfax.

M. Speaker,
Upon consideration of the present advantage that may be made (through the
goodness of God of this late success which it has pleased the Lord to give
the Forces in Ireland, I have there upon advised with my Council of war how
the forces in this Kingdom might be improved on for that service: and I find
that there will be in readiness for that service to the number of 6000 Foot,
and 2000 Horse, which if the may have encouragement will be ready to go as
soon as you shall be plleased to command them. I do therefore desire you would
move the houses to take some effectual course for the providing of moneys and
other necessaries. And for the removing of obstructions, and the more clear
and quick proceedings in this so important a work, I shall appoint a certain
number of Officers to wait such as the House shall appoint to consult upon the
whole business, if you shall think fit I remain

Kingston, Aug. 27. 1647. Your most humble servant, Thomas Fairfax.

For the honorable William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the House of Commons.
The proceedings of both Houses of Parliament, touching the Kings coming to
London.
THe House of Peers were acquainted from the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland, (to whom the Commissioners of both Houses of the Committee of both
Kingdoms at Derby House, had communicated the Votes of both Houses in passing
the Propositions for Peace to be sent to the Kings Majesty desiring their
concurrence) that they had concurred in the said Propositions, with the
Amendments as they were presented to them, by the said Members, which their
Lordships taking into consideration, made this Vote.

Resolved upon the question, by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That a
Message be sent to the Commons to acquaint them with the concurrence of the
States Commissioners to the Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty for
Peace.

Die Mercurii Septem. 1. 1647.
Both Houses of Parliament taking into consideration, the great weight of
dispatching the Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty, to be passed, and
made into Acts, for the settling of the Kingdom, and that his Majesty may come
to London, and sit with his Parliament, that so the Kingdom may be settled in
Peace, The Houses of Parliament desiring that it may be done withal convenient
speed, made these ensuing Votes. 1. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That a day be appointed, for the
delivering of the Propositions of both Kingdoms to the Kings Majesty for a
safe and well grounded peace. 2. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, That on Tuesday next the said Propositions be
presented from both Kingdoms to the Kings Majesty. 3, Resolved upon the
question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the
Commissioners of both Houses appointed to attend his Majesty shall deliver the
said Propositions to the Kings Majesty. 4. Resolved upon the question, by the
Lords and in parliament Assembled, That the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland join with the Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of
England in the delivery of the Propositions to the Kings Majesty on Tuesday
next. 5. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, That notice be given to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland, at Worcester House, to meet the Commissioners of both Houses to
deliver the Propositions to the Kings Majesty for a safe and well grounded
Peace.


From Putney thus. His Excellency being very much wearyed and his Spirits spent
in his constant labors in the Public affairs of the Kingdom has bin a day
or 2 to refresh himself at Chiswick and Turnam green but comes hither again
this night to his quarters at the high Sherffes house, the Lieutenant General
quarters at Mr. Goodwyns and the Committee sit at Mr. Huberts Satturday last
the Earl of Ormond was with his Majesty and had some conference with him, and
from thence came on Monday to visit the General at our head quarters who gave
him the civil respect due to a person of Honor.

A Letter was Ordered to be sent to the Commissioners with the general
requiring them to give the Parliament a further account concerning the 6
thousand Foot and 2 thousand Horse which his Excellency propounds to go for
Ireland as also what Reg. they are and under whose conduct they should go and
what money and other necessaryes of provisions they require.

FINIS.

