HIS MAJESTY'S COMMISSION GRANTED To Mr. GEORGE LE STRANGE, the betraying Lyn
to the enemy.

ALSO, A TRVE RELATION OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE PLOT: As it was attested under
the Hand of Captain LEAMON, who discovered it; to be presented to the
PARLIAMENT.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for R. Mason. 1644.

His MAJESTY'S Commission granted to Mr. Roger le Strange, for the betraying of
the Town of Lynn into the hands of the Enemy.
CHARLES R.
WE having received from Our Trusty and Welbeloved Roger le Strange,
declarations of the good affection of diverse of our well affected Subjects of
Our Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and particularly of Our Town of Lynne, as
also some Overtures concerning the reducing of Our said Town of Lynn, We have
thought fit forthwith to return Our Royal thanks unto Our said well affected
Subjects; and particularly to give Our said trusty and wellbeloved Roger le
Strange these encouragements to proceed in our Service, principally in the
work of reducing the said Town of Lynn.

1. That in case that Attempt shall be gone through withal, he the said Roger
le Strange shall have the Government of the Place.

2. That what engagements shall be made unto the Inhabitants of the said place,
or any other person capable of contributing effectually to that Service, by way
of reward either in employment in His Majesty's Navy or Forts, or in moneys,
not exceeding the sum of 5000. pounds, the service being performed, shall be
punctually made good unto them.

3. That they shall in this work receive what assistance may be given them
from any of Our nearest Garrisons.

And lastly, that when ever our said Town shall be reduced unto Our obedience,
we shall forthwith send th there such a considerable Power, as shall be
sufficient to relieve and preserve them, We being at present even without this
fully resolved to send a considerable power to encourage Our faithful Subjects
in those parts, and to regaine Our Rights and Interests there.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, this 28. of November, 1644. By His Majesty's
Command, George Digby.

A TRUE RELATION Of the discovery of the PLOT AGAINST LYNNE IN NORFOLK, Tuesday
the 10th of December. 1644.
MAster Roger Le Strange, third son to Sir Hamond Le Strange, sent for
Captain Thomas Leamon of Lynne to Apleton Hall, to the house of one Mr. Paston
a Papist; And at his coming to him did acquaint him with a design intended by
him against Lynne, for which he said he had a Commission from his Majesty to
surprise the Town of Lynne, which he presently showed him, and told him, that
if he would undertake to be assistant to him, and raise a party within the
Town to effect the design, that he should have one thousand pound for his
pains, and what preferment he would desire, either in the Town, or in his
Majesty's Navy; and further he told him, that the King did value the surprising
of that Town, as half his Crown, and that within ten days after certain
notice that the Town was reduced, that his Majesty would send a sufficient
power to their relief, and that those forces should be under the command of
the Lord Goring; to which Plot the said Captain Leamon for his own present
security (having taken the Covenant) and well weighing the peace and good of
the Commonwealth, for the present seethingly gave consent; the night then
coming on he departed from him, with promise to come to him again the next
day to advise further of the design, but presently hasting to Lynne, went to
the Governor Colonel Valentine Walton, and acquainted him with it; who after
long debate resolved the next day, that at the time appointed he should go to
him to the said Apleton Hall, and take with him a Corporal of his, clad in
Sea-mans habit, who seemingly should be a partaker with him, to effect their
design, and coming thither the said Master Strange demanded of Captain
Leamon what he was that came with him, who answered that he was a man for their
turn: and immediately the said Corporal answered very discreetly, saying, he
was a poor man living in Fisher-end in Lyn, and kept an Alehouse, and that he
was forty pounds the worse for the Round heads; Master Strange replied, its no
matter, for when the design is accomplished, thou shall have one hundred pound
for it, and a Cannoneers place, which he seemingly was well pleased with. But
the better to know where the Commission was, then said Captain Leamon, Master
Strange my friend (by the way as I came) demanded of me what security you had,
if in case the plot should be discovered, to save them from the Gallows.
Captain Leamon told him you had the Kings Commission, which he desired to see.
Master Strange went immediately to a hole in the Canapy of his bed, and
produced the Commission, and read it to him; after he had read it, he put it in
his pocket: in the interim came Lieutenant John Stubbing, Lieutenant to Major
Moll, with five soldiers more, all in the habit of poor Seamen, appareld as
Ship broken men, with a Warrant to attach suspicious persons, which came
begging to the door, and getting within the Courtyard of the said house, being
so appointed by the said Governor, as soon as they came up to the door, the
Gentlewoman of the house came running up to the said Mr. Strange, and told him
there was fix or seven poor Soldiers come from Lynn, a begging; Master
Strange immediately sent them down Twelve pence, and wished them to be gone;
And when Mistress Paston went down, Master Strange went to bar the door,
which Captain Leamon seeing, gave a wink upon the said Corporal to lay hold
upon the said Master Strange, which done, gave a stamp with his foot, by which
the Lieutenant knew what he had to do, and then Master Strange, seeing he
was betrayed, conveyed his Commission to the said Captain Leamon, then the
Lieutenant, not taking notice of the said Captain, as one that should betray
the said Master Strange, did Attach the said Master Strange as an enemy to the
Common weal, and demanded his name, which he refused to mention, and after
that required his Commission, which he denied to have any: Then the said
Lieutenant seeing the said Captain Leamon, demanded what he did there,
consulting against the State, telling him he was a stinking knave, and
searched him for the Commission, and took it from him, and set a Guard over the
said Captain Leamon, and another over the said Master Strange, and would not
suffer them to speak each to other, by the way from the said Apleton-Hall to
Lynne, whether they were brought Prisoners to the Governor, with the
Commission, which was done by order and consent of the said Captain Leamon,
before the taking of the said Master Strange, which said Master Strange is
brought up to London, and committed to safe custody.

FINIS.

