AUREA DICTA. THE Gracious Words Of King CHARLES I. Of Glorious Memory: For the
Protestant Religion OF THE Church of England.

Collected out of EKN ASILIKH.

If once the Goodness and Equity of the Prince comes to be truly understood by
the People, the Authority of the Faction is extinguished.

Dec. Def. OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield for John Barksdale, Bookseller in
Cirencester, Anno Domini 1682.

AVREA DICTA. The Gracious Words of King Charles the First, For the Protestant
Religion of the Church of England: Collected out of (...).
I. Upon His Majesty's calling the Parliament, 1642.
THe odium and offenses, which some men's rigor or remissness in Church and
State had contracted upon My Government, I resolved to have expiated by such
Laws and regulations for the future, as might not only rectify what was amiss
in practice, but supply what was defective in the Constitution: no man having a
greater zeal to see Religion settled, and preserved in truth, unity and order,
than My self; whom it most concerns both in piety and policy, as knowing, That
no flames of civil dissentions are more dangerous than those, which make
Religious pretensions the grounds of Factions.

I resolved to Reform, what I should by free and full advise in Parliament be
convinced to be amiss; and to grant, whatever my Reason and Conscience told me
was fit to be desired. I wish I had kept my self within those bounds, and not
suffered my own Judgment to have been overborn in some things, more by others
importunity than their arguments; my Confidence had less betrayed my self and
my Kingdoms to those advantages which some men sought for, who wanted nothing
but Power and Occasion to do Mischief. But our Sins being ripe, there was no
preventing of God's Justice from reaping that Glory in our Calamities, which we
rebid him of in our Prosperity.

VI. Upon His Majesty's Retirement from Westminster.
I can be contented to recede much from my own interests and personal Rights,
of which I conceive my self to be Master; but in what concerns Truth, Justice,
the Rights of the Church, and my Crown, together with the general Good of my
Kingdoms (all which I am bound to prese^ve as much as morally lies in me) here
I am and ever shall be fixed and resolute; nor shall any man gain my Consent to
that wherein my heart gives my tongue or hand the lie: nor will I be brought to
affirm to men, what in my Conscience I denied before God.

VIII. Upon His Majesty's Repulse at Hull.
I desire always more to remember, I am a Christian than a King. For what the
Majesty of one might justly abhor, the Charity of the other is willing to
bear: what the height of a King tempts to revenge, the Humility of a
Christian teaches to forgive; keeping in compass all those impotent passions,
whose excess injures a man more than his greatest Enemies can: For these give
the Malice a full impression on our Souls, which otherwise cannot reach very
far, nor do us much hurt.

IX. Upon raising Armies against the King.
The bill against Root and Branch was brought on by tumultuary Clamors and
Schismatical Terrors; which could never pass, till both Houses were
sufficiently thinned and over awed To which partiality (while in all Reason,
Justice and Religion, my Conscience forbids me by consenting to make up their
Votes to Acts of Parliament) I must now be urged with an Army, and constrained
either to hazard my own and my Kingdoms ruin by my defense; or prostrate my
Conscience to the blind obedience of those men, whose zealous superstition
thinks or pretends, they cannot do God and the Church a greater Service, than
utterly to destroy that Primitive, and Apostolical, and Anciently Universal
Government of the Church by Bishops.

Which, if other men's judgment binds them to maintain, or forbids them to
consent to the abolishing of it, mine much more. who, besides the grounds I
have in my judgment, have also a most strict and indispensable Oath upon my
Conscience, to preserve that Order and the Rights of the Church. To which most
sacrilegious and abhorred Perjury, most unbeseeming a Christian King, should I
ever by giving my consent be betrayed, I should account it infinitely greater
misery, than any has, or can befall me.

XI. Upon the Nineteen Propositions,
Many of them savor very strong of that old leaven of Innovations, masked
under that name of Reformation; which in my two last famous Predecessor's tune,
threatened both Prince and Parliaments; but I am sure was never wont so far to
infect the whole mass of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, however
dispersed among the Vulgar.

Nor will I consent to more than Reason, Justice, Honor and Religion persuade
me to be for Gods Glory, the Churches good, my Peoples welfare, and my own
Peace. I will Study to satisfy my Parliament, and my People: but I will never,
for fear or flattery, gratify any Faction how potent soever.

XIII. Upon the coming in of the Scots.
The Coming again of that Party into England with an Army, only to conform this
Church to their late new model, cannot but seem as unreasonable, as they would
have thought the same measure offered from hence to them.

Nor do I know any such tough and malignant humors in the constitution of the
English Church, which gentler Applications than those of an Army, might not
easily have removed: Nor is it so proper to hewo ut Religious Reformations by
the Sword, as to polish them by fair and equal disputations, among those that
are most concerned in the differences; whom not force, but reason ought to
convince.

Wise and Learned Men think, that nothing has more marks of Schism and
Sectarism, than this Presbyterian way; both as to the ancient and still most
universal way of the Church Government, and specially as to the particular Laws
and Constitutions of this English Church; which are not yet repeated, nor are
like to be for me till I see more rational and Religious motives.

I think my self so much the more bound in Conscience to attend the Church's
Good with the most judicious zeal and care, by how much I esteem the Church
above the State, the Glory of Christ above mine own, and the salvation of men's
Souls above the preservation of their Bodies and Estates.

Sure the Church of England might have purchased, at a far cheaper rate, the
truth and happiness of a reformed Government and Discipline (if it had been
wanting) tho it had entertained the best Divines of Christendom, for their
advice in a full and free Synod: which I was ever willing to, and desirous of;
that matters being impartially settled, might be more satisfactory to all, and
more durable.

XIV. Upon the Covenant.
Although I am unsatisfied with many passages in that Covenant; some referring to
my self with very dubious and dangerous limitations; yet I chiefly wonder at
the design and drift, touching the Discipline and Government of the Church. Nor
can I see how they will reconcile such an innovating Oath and Covenant, with
that former Protestation, which was so lately taken, to maintain the Religion
established in the Church of England; since they count Discipline so great a
part of Religion.

I am prone to believe and hope, that many who took the Covenant, are yet firm
to this judgment; That such later vows, Oaths or Leagues can never blot out
those former Gravings and Characters, which by just and lawful Oaths were made
upon their Souls.

As for the Reformation of the Church, which the Covenant pretends, I cannot
think it just, or comely, that by the partial Advice of a few Divines (of so
soft and servile tempers, as disposed them to sudden acting and compliance
contrary to their former judgments) such foul Scandals and Suspicions should be
cast upon the Doctrine and Government of the Church of England, as was never
done (that I have heard) by any that deserved the name of Reformed Churches
abroad, nor by any men of learning or Candor at home: all whose judgments I
cannot but prefer, before any men's now factiously engaged.

No man can be more forward than my self, to carry on all due Reformation, with
mature jud^ment and a good Conscience, in what things I shall (after impartial
Advice) be by God's Word and right Reason convinced to be amiss. And I have
offered more, than the fullest, freest and wisest Parliaments did desire. But
the sequel of some men's Actions makes it evident, that the main Reformation
intended is the abaseing of Episcopacy into Presbytery, and the robbing the
Church of its lands and revenues. Still I see, while the breath of Religion
fills the Sails, profit is the compass by which factious men steer their course
in all seditious commotions.

I thank God, as no man lay more upon to temptations of usurping the Church
lands and revenues; so I have always had such a perfect abhorrence of it in my
Soul, that I never found the least inclination to such sacrilegious reformings:
Yet no man has a greater desire to have Bishops and all Churchmen so
reformed, that they may best deserve and use, not only what the pious
Munificence of my Predecessors has given to God and the Church, but all other
additions of Christian Bounty.

But no necessity shall ever (I hope) drive Me or Mine to invade or sell the
Priest's Lands: which both Pharaoh's Divinity and Joseph's true Piety abhorred
to do. So unjust I think it, both in the Eye of Reason and Religion, to deprive
the most sacred employment of all due encouragements; and like the other
hard-hearted Pharaoh, to withdraw the Straw and increase the Task: So pursuing
the oppressed Church (as some have done) to the Red Sea of a Civil War; where
nothing but a Miracle can save it, or Him, who esteems his greatest Title to be
called, and his chiefest Glory to be The Defender of the Church, both in its
true Faith, and its just Fruitions, equally abhorring Sacrilege and Apostasy.

XV. Upon the Scandals cast upon the King.
It was a great part of some men's Religion to scandalize Me and Mine: They
thought theirs could not be true, if they cried not down mine as false. I thank
God, I have had more trial of his Grace, as to the constancy of my Religion, in
the Protestant Profession of the Church of England, both abroad and at home,
than ever they are like to have.

Nor do I know any exception I am so liable to, in their opinion, as too great
a fixedness in that Religion, whose judicious and solid grounds, both from
Scripture and Antiquity, will not give my Conscience leave to approve or
consent to those many dangerous and divided Innovations, which the bold
ignorance of some men would needs obtrude upon Me and my People: contrary to
those well-tryed Foundations both of Truth and Order, which men of far greater
learning and clearer Zeal have settled in the Confession and Constitution of
this Church in England: which many former Parliaments, in the most calm and
unpassionate times, have often confirmed. In which I shall ever by Gods help
persevere.

XVI. Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book.
Tho I am not against a grave, modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers
Gifts, even in public, the better to fit and excite their own and the peoples
affections to the present occasions: Yet I know no necessity, why private and
single Abilities should quite justle out and deprive the Church of the joint
Abilities and concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men; such as the
Composers of the Service Book were; who may in all reason be thought to have
more of Gifts and Graces, enabling to Compose with serious deliberation and
concurrent advice such Forms of Prayer, as may best fit the Churches common
wants, inform the Hearers understanding, and stir up that fiduciary and fervent
Application of their Spirits (wherein consists the very Life and Soul of
Prayer) then any private man by his solitary Abilities can be presumed to have.

The want of Liturgy, I believe, this Church will sufficiently feel when the
unhappy fruits of many men's ungoverned ignorance and confident defects shall be
discovered in more errors, Schisms, disorders and uncharitable distractions in
Religion: which are already but too many, the more's the pity.

One of the greatest faults some men found with our Common Prayer Book, I
believe, was this: That it taught them to pray so often for Me: for which
Petitions they had not Loyalty enough to say Amen; nor yet Charity enough to
forbear reproaches, and even cursing of Me in their own Forms, instead of
praying for Me. I wish their Repentance may be their only punishment.

XVII. Of the Differences in point of Church Government.
I must now in Charity be thought desirous to preserve that Government in its
right Constitution, as a Matter of Religion; Wherein my Judgment is fully
satisfied, that it has of all other the fullest Scripture Grounds, and also
the constant Practice of all Christian Churches, till of late years.

They must give me leave having none of their temptations to alter the
Government of Bishops (that I may have a Title to their Estates) not to believe
their pretended grounds to any new ways contrary to the full and constant
Testimony of all Histories, sufficiently convincing unbiassed men.

Not that I am against the managing of this Presidency and Authority in one
man, by the joint Counsel and Consent of many Presbyters. I have offered to
restore that, as a fit means to avoid those Errors, Corruptions, Partialities,
which are incident to any one man: also to avoid Tyranny, which becomes no
Christian, least of all Churchmen. Besides, it will be a means to take away
that burden and Odium of affairs, which may lay too heavy upon one man's
Shoulders, as indeed I think it did formerly on the Bishops here.

For those secular Additaments and Ornaments of Authority, Civil Honor, and
Estate, which my Predecessors, and Christian Princes in all Countries have
annexed to Bishops and Churchmen; I look upon them but as just Rewards of
their Learning and Piety, who are fit to be in any degree of Church Government;
also Enablements to works of Charity, and Hospitality; meet strengthening of
their Authority in Point of respect and observance; which in Peaceful times is
hardly paid to any Governors by the measure of their Virtues so much as by
that of their Estates.

I would have such men Bishops as are most worthy of such Encouragements, and
ablest to use them. If at any time my Judgment of men failed, my good
Intentions made my Error Venial. I am sure I had, Whose Learning, Gravity, and
Piety, no man of any Worth or Forehead can deny.

The Abuses of Episcopacy deserve to be Extirpated, as well as the use
retained; for I hold it far better to hold to Primitive and uniform Antiquity
than to comply with divided noveltie. A right Episcopacy will at once satisfy
all just desires and interests of good Bishops, humble Presbyters, and sober
People: so as Church Affairs should be managed neither with Tyranny, Parity,
nor Popularity; neither Bishops Ejected, nor Presbyters despised, nor People
oppressed. And in this Integrity, both of my Judgment and Conscience, I hope
God will Preserve me,

XVIII. Upon Uxbridg Treaty.
In Church Affairs, where I had least Liberty of Prudence, having so many
strict ties of Conscience upon me; yet I was willing to condescend so far to
the settling of them, as might have given fair satisfaction to all men, whom
Faction, Covetousness, or Superstition had not Engaged more, than any true
Zeal, Charity, or love of Reformation.

God knows, and Time will discover, who were most to blame for the
unsuccesfulness of that Treaty, and who must bear the guilt of after
Calamities. I believe I am very excusable, both before God and all unpassionate
men; who have seriously weighed these transactions, wherein I endeavored no
less the Restoration of Peace to my People, than the Preservation of my own
Crowns to my Posterity.

Upon the Reformation of the Times.
I am sorry to see, (after the freedom of Parliament was by factious Tumults
oppressed) how little regard was had to the good Laws Established, and the
Religion settled; (which ought to be the first Rule and standard of Reforming)
with how much Partiality, and Popular Compliance, the Passions and Opinions of
men have been gratified, to the detriment of the Public, and the infinite
scandal of the Reformed Religion.

What Dissolutions of all Order and Government in the Church! What Novelties of
Schisms and Corrupt Opinions! What undecences and Confusions in sacred
Administrations! What Sacrilegious Invasions upon the Rights and Revenues of
the Church! What Contempt and oppression of the Clergy!

I conceive that where the Scripture is not so clear and Punctual in precepts,
there the constant and universal Practice of the Church, in things not contrary
to reason, faith, good manners, or any positive command, is the best Rule that
Christians can follow.

I am sure, the right methods of Reforming the Church, cannot consist with that
of Perturbing the Civil state: nor can Religion be justly advanced by
depressing Loyalty; which is one of the chiefest Ingredients, and Ornaments of
true Religion. For next to Fear God, is, Honor the King.

I doubt not but Christ's Kingdom may be set up, without Pulling down mine: nor
will any men in impartial times appear good Christians, that approve not
themselves good Subjects.

Christ's Government will Confirm mine, not overthrow it; since, as I own mine
from him, so I desire to rule for his Glory, and his Churches Good.

XXIV. Upon the denying of his Majesty the attendance of his Chaplains.
When Providence was pleased to deprive Me of all civil Comforts and secular
Attendants, I thought the absence of them all might best be supplied by the
attendance of some of my Chaplains; whom for their Function I reverence, and
for their Fidelity I have cause to love. By their Learning, Piety and Prayers I
hoped to be either better enabled to sustain the want of all other enjoyments,
or better fitted for the recovery and use of them, in God's good time, so
reaping, by their pious help, a Spiritual Harvest of Grace, a midst the Thorns,
and after the Plowings of Temporal crosses.

If I had asked my Revenues, my power of the Militiu, or any one of my
Kingdoms, it had been no wonder to have been denied in those things; where the
evil policy of men forbids all just restitution, lest they should confess an
injurious usurpation: But to deny the Ghostly comfort of my Chaplains, seems a
greater rigor and barbarity, than is ever used by Christians to the meanest
Prisoners, and greatest Malefactors; whom tho the justice of the Law deprive of
wordly comforts, yet the mercy of Religiou allows them the benefit of their
Clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their Bodies, and to damn their Souls.

But my Agony must not be relieved with the presence of one good Angel: for
such I account a learned, godly and discreet Divine, and such I would have all
mine to be.

I am so much a friend to all Churchmen, that have any thing in them beseeming
that sacred Function, that I have hazarded mine own Interests, chiefly upon
Conscience and Constancy to maintain their Rights. Whom the more I looked upon
as Orphans, and under the sacrilegious eyes of many cruel and rapacious
Reformers; so I thought it my duty, the more to appear as a Father, and a
Patron for them and the Church.

In Devotions, I love neither profane boldness, norpious Nonsense; but such an
humble and judicious gravity, as shows the Speaker to be at once considerate of
God's Majesty, the Churches honor, and his own riteness; both knowing what God
allows him to ask, and in what manner it becomes a Sinner, to supplicate the
divine mercy for himself and others.

As I owe the Clergy the protection of a Christian King, so I desire to enjoy
from them the benefit of their Gifts and Prayers: Which I look upon as more
prevalent than mine own, or other men's, by how much they flow from minds more
enlightened, and affections less distracted, than those which are encumbred with
secular Affairs.

My comfort is, that in the enforced, not neglected, want of ordinary means,
God is wont to afford extraordinary supplies of his Gifts and Graces. If his
Spirit will teach me, and help mine infirmities in Prayer, reading and
meditation (as I hope He will) I shall need no other, either Orator or
Instructor.

XXVII. To the Prince of Wales.
I had rather you should be Charles le bon, then le grand, Good then Great. I
hope God has designed you to be both, having so early put you into that
exercise of his Graces and Gifts bestowed upon you: which may best weed out all
vicious Inclinations, and dispose you to those Princely endowments and
employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those,
over whom God shall place you.

The true Glory of Princes consists in the advancing of Gods Glory, in the
maintenance of true Religion and the Churches good: Also in the dispensation of
civil power, with Justice and Honor, to the public peace.

Piety will make you prosperous, at least it will keep you from being
miserable, nor is he much a looser that loses all, yet saves his own Soul at
last.

Above all, I would have you (as hope I you are already) well grounded and
settled in your Religion. The best profession of which, I have ever esteemed
that of the Church of England, in which you have been educated: yet I would
have your own judgment and reason now Seal to that sacred Bond, which Education
has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not other men's
Custom or Tradition, which you profess.

In this I charge you to persevere as coming nearest to God's Word for
Doctrine, and to the Primitive Examples for Government, with some little
amendment; which I often offered, tho in vain: your fixation in matters of
Religion, will not be more necessary for your Souls, than your Kingdoms Peace,
when God shall bring you to them.

Let nothing seem little or despicable to you, in matters which concern
Religion and the Churches peace; so as to neglect the speedy reforming, and
effectual suppressing Errors and Schisms: which seeming at first but as a hand
breadth, by seditious Spirits as by strong Winds are soon made to cover and
darken the whole Heavens.

Your Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather than
exacting the rigor of the Law; there being nothing worse than legal Tyranny.

Beware of exasperating any Factions by the crossness and asperity of some men's
passions, humors and private opinions; employed by you; grounded only upon the
difference in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of Religion;
provided the difference amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws and
Government. Always keep up solid Piety, and those Fundamental Truths, (which
mend both hearts and lives of men) with impartial favor and justice.

I do require and entreat you, as your Father and your King, that you never
suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection from the
true Religion established in the Church of England. I tell you, I have tried
it; and after much search and many disputes have concluded it to be the best in
the World; not only in the Community, as Christian; but also in the special
notion, as Reformed; keeping the middle way between the Pomp of superstitious
Tyranny, and the meaness of Fanatic Anarchy.

Scarce any one, who has been a beginner, or an active Prosecutor of this late
War against the Church, the Laws, and Me, either was or is a true Lover,
Embracer or Practicerof the Protestant Religion established in England: which
neither gives such rules, nor ever before set such Examples.

Nor would I have you to entertain any Aversation, or dislike of Parliaments;
which in the right Institution, with freedom and honor, will never injure or
diminish your Greatness; but will rather be as interchanging of Love, Loyalty,
and Confidence between a Prince and his People.

Happy times, I hope, attend you; wherein your Subjects, by their miseries,
will have learned; That Religion to their God, and Loyalty to their King,
cannot be parted, without both their Sin and their Infelicity.

FINIS.

