The COPIES Of the Kings Letter, and General Order for the surrender of all
his GARRISONS: And several other Letters between Sir William Brereton, and Sir
Thom. Tildsley, about the overtures for the surrender of LITCHFIELD to the
PARLIAMENT.

These Papers being examined, are Printed and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for F. L. June 19. 1646.

Sir THOMAS TILDSLEYES and Colonel Baggots to Sir William Brereton, touching
the Women that were sent to their Husbands in the Close.
SIR,
YOur last nights night work which might well be ashamed of the light is an
act of so much barbarity so remote from Nature, Laws, Christianity, and so
dangerous to your Souls, that we cannot suffer you to sleep in it another,
and pray you may not harden your hearts to Counterfeit it for our parts we are
secure that neither the blood of those Innocents if shed can be said to* our
Charge nor dare we fail to let you understand to whom it must be imputed.

You have turned out of their Habitations sundry poor Women and their
Innocent Children whom you should have rather relieved) upon us that are now
freed from all Obligations to relieve the Harbourlesse, or feed the Hungry, It
is not unsuspected also that Gods visiting hand is upon some of them, which if
being true their houses are fittest for them as is by Law appointed and we have
no better warrant to entertain them then to be desperate, and tempt God. Our
Resolution is neither to receive these nor any others, you are unchristianly
resolved to expose to death, we are all absolved from the duty and the sin
that may grow by the neglect of it, and advise you to think upon it seriously
with a belief of a time when God will make Inquisition for blood. And so we
recommend them to your reception or other disposal upon more Christian
thoughts. And we further wish you to take of the vicessitude of subblnary
affairs, and that your party may be capable for though we will not menace to
be your imitators in so bad an example, yet we will not for our better
discharge omit to te^^ you, that there has bin known many an Adombethed in the
world, and the just God has his wonderful just retaliations* And so having
done our duty both to the miserable exposed and your Souls, we pray God to
keep you from so merciless unreasonable and wilful a wretchedness as you
are acting upon those innocent Women (who upon our engagments as we are
Gentlemen and Soldiers) have not done any thing this siedge prejuditiall to
your Cause by intelligence, or otherwise that we know of. If this may not
satisfy you we shall send two or three Gentlemen to meet the like number of
yours to discuss the business by word of worth, least this extremity should
be* occasioned by some mistake, in the mean time remaining

Your servants. Tho. Tildsley. Her. Baggot.

Litchfield Close May 28. 1646.

A Letter shot by an Arrow out of the Close into the Town, written by Sir Tho.
Tildsleys own hand.
Whereas for our constant persistance in our loyallty in defending and
maintaing his Majesty's Garrison of Litch. according to our duty, we have
visibly seen the blessing of God in our protection against the fury of the
enemy hitherto which has so far enraged him that not being able in a manly
way to prevail against us, he has betaken himself to barbarous and in humane
attempts, and such as have never yet bin practiced by Christians bloods, the
thrusting poor innocent Women and Children (no way engaged with quarrel) upon
the danger which they dare not look upon themselves, exposing them either to
famine or their merciless sword. We do hereby desire the Country to take
notice that the King is now in the head of a very powerful Army consisting of
^0000, Men which by Gods assistance may re-settle him and all his Royal
Subjects in their Rights, and we doubt not but will speedily relieve us. If
therefore the Country shall suffer the enemy to go on in their barbarous way
and bring any more Women for their Relation to us and a good Cause into this
danger, or suffer those to continue in it whereby they may innocently perish as
is threatened they must expect we shall be enforced to a course contrary to our
dispositions, and if God shall enable us, we will endeavor to make all men and
their Wives that consent to their proceedings, and endeavor not to hinder the
sam^, to ^ee^e those myseries which are now unjustly inflicted upon us and ours
and this we desire all that have relation to this Garrison to take notice of and
publish.

Signed by the general consent of the whole Garrison, 27. of May 1646.

Another Letter to Sir William Brereton, from Sir Thomas Tildsley and Bagot,
touching the Women.
SIR;
THe Gentleman of our party have met with yours out of hopes to have created a
right understanding about the women forced by you within our slighted works,
but your Commissioners pretending to have no instructions from you to agitate
that business made the Treaty short and fruitless, They seem to make you a
party in this uncivil act where we can hardly persuade our selves to fix it,
unless you own it your self: We believe you to be a man of so much honor,
that you will neither begin nor continue an example which would imply so great
a thirst of blood, and produce consequences of greater inhumanitie then becomes
them, though of different persuasions in some things yet linkt together in many
common Obligations, especially that great one of Christianity, which makes
profession of better things; We have tried all other means, and they failing
we make this last particular address to your self as having the greatest
command of your party here, desiring you to understand we are resolved to
defend the place like men, and shall be ready to encounter those attempts that
you shall make upon us in a manlike way* We cannot think our selves bound
either in honor conscience or reason to pester our selves with those
multitudes of women that you press upon us many of them having no relation at
all to us, and few or none to this place of an engagement. Besides we have no
entertainment here but what is fit for Soldiers, and if we should receive them
to a diet so unnatural, to there weak bodies we should expose them to
destruction as unevitable as by famine, we are therefore resolved that we
neither can nor will adant them least we should contract the guil^ of their
deaths upon our selves and we think our selves bound to prevent it in you, and
if it be possible all other the ill consequences of it, by this timely
prevention. We hope you will take it into a sad and serious consideration, and
since you are resolved to be our enemy to have so much regard to your own
honor at least as to show your self a gallant one, and not to stain your
self with these inhumanities which will render you account at the latter day,
but will lessen your esteem in the reputation of the world especially to us who
(what ever opinion we have of your Cause) will have a great one of you* if you
prosecute it nobly.

Sir, Since Captain Stone has lost civility so far that he will not answer a
letter to a business, wherein he wholly rely^d upon his word yet we are
confident you will enforce the 3. Ensigns to perform their parralls which they
cannot deny And if Captain Heskith be escaped, propose some fair exchange for
the prisoners we released upon your word. Resting,

Your Servants, Thomas Tildsly, Heroy Bagot.



Sir William Breretons answer to diverse former Leeters sent out the Close from
Sir Tho. Tildsley and Colo. Bagot.
GEntlemen, Yours of the 28. of this month I received, and two former so full
of impertinencies and insivilities that I intended not to have vouchsafed any
answer, were it not so that you might conclude I had nothing to reply in
justification and defense of that which you term barbarous and inhumane which
may be most justly retorted upon your selves for not admitting those accosse to
their husbands whom the Laws of God and man have joined together, some whereof
were never ceasing to Petition for admission to them; By all or most whereof I
conceive you might receive such abundant information of the condition of your
affairs abroad as might bring you to a more right understanding thereof, and
teach you not to disperse such silly and senseless untruths as were those
papers shot into the Town are said to be signed by the consent of the whole
Garrison, dated 27. and 28. of this instant May, a Copy whereof is enclosed.

The first whereof that I ever saw was written by Sir Thom, Tildsleys own hand
but signed by none, wherein there is nothing more true then that which is most
false, That the King is in the head of an Army, consisting of 30000, men, which
you doubt not but will speedily relieve you, and yet in the mean time you not
only refuse to give entertainment to the Wives of those with you (whose
affections to you and your cause so far prevailed with them, as to forsake
their Lives, Families and estates) but you do also detain other men's Wives,
desired from you by their Husbands) affirming your Garrison to be sufficiently
able to entertain whom you please to admit.

You pretend this to be an unpara^leld and unpresiden^ed act of cruelty, we
can put you in mind of much more cruelty practiced by your par^y in Chester
when the wives and children of those husbands with us we^e not only sent out
before the City was besieged, but after the suburbs were taken, diverse persons
sent forth, and their houses and whole estates of great value^^ well before the
siege as after the taking the suburbs seized upon, which we have not yet done
to those we have sent into you for their Families remain possessed of their
houses and estates, as when they left the same.

If there were any violence offered to any of those wom^n that were sent (for
children none were sent but such as went on their own acord) we must charg the
same upon your score who taking away a^l their provisions left many of them to
a merci^es enemy (as you term us) and disclaim any such charge to proceed from
us further then in sending those wives to their husbands, whom God has joined
together, and were fitter to be with them then with us.

You say Gods visitting hand is upon some of them* It is more then we know or
believe, but sure we are that you or some of you threatened, and did
accordingly send amongst us some of those with you that were visited with the
Plague.

And whereas you lay to our charge the barbarities and inhumanities committed
by* Us, I cannot but believe you have forgotten what has bin practiced by your
selves in fiting all Bacon street, whereby you advantaged us much, but your
selves nothing, for you may see God has made better provision for us] and in
burning and ruining diverse houses of your friends in the City ^ohing at all to
your advantage or our prejudice.

You aggravate much the battering down of your speere-Steeple, not cons^dering
how much our men were galled and annoyed from thence in several places, and
how much you had defiled the same with blood, what your selves had purposed and
endeavored by undermining and battering down the Chapel Steple [which still
stands with its wounds, to witness against you the little respect you give to
those places which you call the house of God further then they may be
servieable to your own ends.

You insist much upon the defacing the antientest Monument of Christian piety
in the Kingdom, and will not see the hand of Gods Justice upon the same for
the Ignorance and Superstition that has bin nourished and preached in that
place the guilt whereof is further increased by being made use of to be your
only refuse both for your selves, and those with you and your Magazine, and
therefore the most proper object to be demolished by us, seeing it had bin
formerly so abused by others, and now so much profaned by your selves whom God
it seems has heardened, because he purposes to distroy you otherwise, he
would not suffer you to resist in your obstinatenesse, when you cannot but know
your selves incapable of relief, and that the longer you hold ou^ the worse
condition, you must expect seeing you discover nothing at all therein, but
perverseness and frowardnes, and cannot but either know or may know that it is
as unsouldier-like as indiscreet, for you to attempt to hold out that place,
now that you have no show of relief and that the King has wholly put himself
upon the Parliament.

In your last you say you believe me to be a man of so much Honor as that you
cannot persuade yourselves to fix upon me this (as you call it) incivill act,
and you acknowledge me the Commander of the said forces here whereas formerly
in your Letter of the 13. of April, directed to Adjutant General Leuthan you
Speak scornefully and much more in your Answer to my first, Dated March 9.
which if you had remembered, might have spared you the Labor of censuring or
reflecting that upon me which you then justified to be Soldier like in your
selves.

And whereas you desire I would take notice you are resolve^ to keep that place
where you are in a Warlik way, you may hereby be assured that by Gods
assistance there shall be as manlike and Souldierlike attempts and endeavors
used for correcting your insolences, and reducing you to d^e obedience of the
Parliament, if not of making you examples to the world for your desperate
folly, obstinatenesse, and imprudence in maintaining this hold, when you cannot
but know there is no hopes of relief, and render your selves every day more
and more incapable of the Parliaments Clemency which you have so often repeated
which I desired might have bin extended to you, I shall therefore once further
advise you forthwith to submit to the mercy of the Parliament, that so that
ruin which is otherwise inevitable fall not upon you, the prevention whereof
if you willembrace the same is still desired by

Your servant Brereton,
Litchfield May 29. 1646.

From the Camp at Rainhill. Since which time Sir William Brereton has played
with his Mortar pieces and Batteries against the Clo^e, and has made several
breaches into diverse houses in the Close, and Sir William loses no advantage
that may begained upon any opportunity.
Charles Rex.

HAving resolved to comply with the designs of the Parliaments in every thing
which may be for the good of the Subjects, and leave no means unassaid for
removing of differences between us, therefore we have thought fit, the more to
evidence the realty of our intentions of settling a happy and firm peace, to
require you upon honorable conditions, to quit those Towns and Castles, and
Forts entrusted by you, to us, and to disband all the forces under your
several Commands.

Newcastle the 10. of June 1646. To our Trusty and welbeloved Sir Thomas
Glemham, Sir Thomas Tilsley, Colonel Henry Washington, Colo. Thomas Blague
Governors of our Towns, and Cities of Oxford Worcester Litchfield, and
Wallingford, and all other Commanders of any other Towns, Castles, or Forts
with in the Kingdom of England, or dominion of Wales.

FINIS.

