Die Iovis 2 Junii. 1642.
WHereas it does appear to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the King,
seduced by wicked Counsel, does intend to leavy War against his Parliament;
and whereas information has been given; That the Jewels of the Crown (which
by the law of the land ought not to be alienated) are either pawned or sold in
Amsterdam, or some other parts beyond the Seas, and thereby great Sums of money
provided to be returned to York, or to some of his Majesty's Servants or Agents
for His Majesty's use: And whereas it is more then probable, That this great
Provision of Monyes in such an extraordinary way, is to maintain this intended
war, and thereby to bring the whole Kingdom into utter ruin and combustion.
It is therefore declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. That whosoever
has been, or shall be an Actor in the selling or pawning of any of the Jewels
of the Crown, or has, or shall pay, lend, send, or bring any Money in Specie
into this Kingdom, for, or upon any of those Jewels; Or whosoever has or
shall accept of any Bill from beyond the Seas, for the payment of any sum of
money for, or upon any of those Jewels, and shall pass any sum according to
such Bill, after notice of this Order, without acquainting this House with the
receipt of such Bill before he accept the same; Or if he have already accepted
any such Bill, then with the acceptance thereof before the payment of the money,
Every such person shall be held and accounted a promoter of this intended
war, an enemy to the State, and ought to give satisfaction for this public
damage out of His own Estate.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE, Between the High and Mighty Kings, CHARLES, by
the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc.

And JOHN the 4th King of Portugal, Algarres, etc. And their SUBJECTS,
Concluded at London the nine and twentieth day of January, in the year of our
Lord 1642. Stilo novo.

Translated out of Latin into English.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

By the King.
WHereas the High and Mighty Prince, John the fourth, King of Portugal, etc.
has lately sent his Ambassadors to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
declaring his desire to renew the ancient Confederation and Amity between their
Royal Predecessors, Crowns and Subjects; His Majesty out of His royal Care
of the Peace and Tranquillity of His Kingdoms, and the freedom of Trade and
Commerce of His loving Subjects, By the advice of His Privy Council, has
been pleased to yield thereunto, and does make known to His loving people, That
the said Peace and Confederation is concluded and established between the said
Kings, their Crowns, Kingdoms, Territories and Subjects: And the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, for the direction of His Merchants in their Trade and
Commerce, has given Command, That the Articles of this Treaty of Peace shall
be published, straightly charging and commanding all His Subjects of whatsoever
degree and estate to observe the same.

Given at the Court at York the two and twentieth day of May, in the eighteenth
year of His Majesty's Reign. 1642.
God save the King.
ARTICLES OF THE TREATY.
I.
FIrst, it is concluded and accorded, that there is and shall be for ever a
good, true, and firm Peace and Amity between the most renowned Kings, CHARLES,
King of Great Britain, and JOHN the fourth, King of Portugal, their Heirs and
Successors, and their Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions, Lands, Peoples, Liegemen,
Vassalls and Subjects whomsoever, present, and to come, of whatsoever
Condition, Dignity and Degree they maybe, as well by Land as by Sea, and
Fresh-waters, so as the said Vassalls and Subjects are each of them to favor
other, and to use one and other with friendly offices and true affection; And
that neither of the said most renowned Kings, their Heirs and Successors, by
himself or by any other, shall do or attempt any thing against each other, or
their Kingdoms, by Land or by Sea, nor shall consent nor adhere unto any War,
Counsel, or Treaty in prejudice of the other.

II.
That between the most renowned Kings aforesaid, and the Vassalls, Inhabitants,
and Subjects of each of them, as well by Land, as by Sea and Fresh-waters, in
all and singular their Kingdoms, Dominions, Islands, and other Lands, Cities,
Towns, Villages, Havens, and Territories of the said Kingdoms and Dominions,
there is and shall be free Commerce (in which there was in the time of the
Kings of Casteele, or hitherto has been Commerce) so that without any
Safe Conduct, or other License general or special, as well by Land, as by Sea
and Fresh-waters, the Subjects and Vassalls of each King may and shall go,
enter, and sail, in and to the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, and the
Cities, Towns, Havens, Shores, Sea-Rodes, and Territories of the same, and with
Carriages, Horses, Burdens, Ships laden or to be laden, to bring in
Merchandises, to buy or sell, as much as they will, Victuals, and upon just
Prices to make provision of things necessary for their sustenance and Voyages,
and to repair their Shipping and Carriages of their own property, or hired, or
borrowed by them, and from thence also with the same freedom to depart with
their Merchandises, Goods, and things whatsoever, having paid only such
Customs and Tolles, as according to the Ordinances of each place are at that
time rated, and may thence go without let or impediment unto their own
Countries, or any other places where and how they please.

III.
And that the Subjects of each of the most renowned Kings before named, in the
Dominions and Territories of the other, shall not be worse dealt withal then
the natural Subjects in their Sales and Contracts for their Merchandises, as
well for Price as otherwise, but that the condition of Foreigners and natural
Subjects shall be equal and alike as aforesaid, according to the practice of
ancient Treaties made between the most renowned Kings of Great Britain and
Casteele.

IV.
That the Subjects of the most renowned King of Great Britain shall at their
own free will and pleasure use and enjoy any kind of Merchandises and Trading
in Merchandise, in the Kingdoms, Provinces, Territories and Islands of the most
renowned King of Portugal, in Europe; and that they shall as freely and in the
same manner exercise their Trade of Merchandises in the places aforesaid, as is
permitted to the Subjects of other Princes and States in League with the King
of Portugal; neither shall they be more burdened with Customs, Impositions, or
other Taxes, then the Inhabitants and Subjects of the said Lands, or other
Subjects of any Nation whatsoever in League with the Portugalls, and they shall
enjoy the same Privileges which were granted to the English before Portugal
was united to Casteele.

V.
That whenever the Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall with their
Ships arrive at the Havens of the most renowned King of Portugal in his
Kingdoms and Dominions, they shall not be constrained by the Ministers,
Officers, and Subjects of the King of Portugal, to put or load into their
ships any other kind or quantities of goods and merchandises, then it shall
please and seem good unto the said Subjects of the King of Great Britain: And
that the Subjects of the King of Portugal shall enjoy the same freedom in the
Havens and Dominions of the King of Great Britain.

VI.
That if it shall happen that the Subjects of the most renowned King of
Portugal, or any other within his Kingdoms and Dominions, or their
merchandises and goods shall be taken, seized or arrested by the Office of the
Court of Inquisition, or the Judges, or Ministers thereof, which have been or
shall be engaged or indebted to the Subjects of the most renowned King of Great
Britain, the said debts shall be fully paid out of the said goods and
merchandises, within the year immediately following the said arrest, without
any hinderance or trouble of the said Court, or the Judges and Ministers of the
same whosoever: And if any of the goods and merchandises of the said Subjects
of the King of Great Britain, shall remain in specie among the said goods and
merchandises so seized and arrested, the same shall be immediately restored
unto them.

VII.
That the Captains, Masters, Officers, and Mariners of the ships of the most
renowned King of Great Britain, or his Subjects, shall not commence any
Actions, nor procure any trouble against the said ships, or any the Subjects of
the said King, within the Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of Portugal, for
their wages or salaries, under color or pretext that they profess the Roman
Religion, or shall have put themselves into the service of the most renowned
King of Portugal.

VIII.
That the Consuls named and appointed by the most renowned King of Great
Britain, for the aid and protection of his Subjects, remaining within the
Kingdoms and Dominions of the most renowned King of Portugal, shall fully and
freely exercise the power and authority of Consuls within the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, although they shall not profess the Roman Religion.

IX.
That if any Subjects of the most renowned King of Great Britain shall depart
this life within the Kingdoms and Dominions of the most renowned King of
Portugal, the books, accounts, merchandises and goods of them, or of any other
Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, shall not from henceforth be taken
or seized by the Judges of Orphans and Absents, or their Ministers, or
Officers, neither shall they be subject to their Jurisdiction; but the same
goods, merchandises and accounts, shall be delivered, by the possessors of
them, to English Agents, or Factors residing in that City, named and appointed
by the said Deceased: And if he shall have named none while he lived, they
shall be delivered to one or two English Merchants, (provided they be
Bachelors) by authority of the Conservator of the English, having first given
Caution with good Sureties to be allowed by the said Conservator, to restore
the said Goods and Merchandises to the true Owners thereof, or their lawful
Creditors: And those Goods which shall appear to belong to the Deceased, shall
be delivered to his Heirs, Executors, or Creditors.

X
That the most renowned King of Portugal, or his Ministers within his Kingdoms
and Dominions, shall not arrest, or withhold the Ships of the Subjects of the
most renowned King of Great Britain, or his Subjects, without his knowledge and
consent, for his services of War, or any other services whatsoever; But that
the said Ships and Subjects may freely, and at their own pleasure depart out of
the Ports and Dominions of the said King, without any hinderance of the said
King of Portugal, or his Ministers: And that the Goods and Merchandises of the
Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall not be taken for the service of the
King of Portugal, but for the just and common-price thereof, to be paid within
two Months following, unless some other time of payment shall be agreed on by
both parts.

XI.
That the Subjects of the most renowned King of Great Britain shall freely
carry in their Ships all things, Goods and Merchandises, of what kind soever
they be, even Arms, Victuals, or any other of the like kind out of the Ports
and Dominions of the said King, or of any Ports and Dominions whatsoever, (so
that they be not immediately carried out of the Ports of Portugal, or the
Dominions thereof) to be transported to any Ports and Territories of the most
renowned King of Casteele; And that the most renowned King of Portugal, or his
Subjects, shall not by Seizures, Reprizalls, or any other means hinder the said
Ships, Goods and Persons of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, but that
they may safely Sail to the Ports and Territories of the said King of Casteele,
and there exercise their Merchandise and Trade: And that the Subjects of the
Kings of Great Britain and Portugal shall on both parts have the same Power,
if hereafter it shall happen that either of the said Kings shall have War with
the Friend of the other, and the Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall
carry all kind of Merchandise, even Arms, Victuals, or any other of the like
kind, with the same Freedom into the Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of
Portugal, and shall there sell the same at their own pleasure, in public
Market, or privately, without any hinderance of the most renowned King of
Portugal, or his Ministers.

XII.
Item, That the convention of Truce made between D. Michael de Loronha, Conde
de Linhares Viceroy of Goa, and William Methwold President of the English in
East India, the 20th of January 1635. Stilo novo, shall be continued and kept
between the Subjects of both Kings in East India, and in all the Dominions of
the most renowned King of Portugal beyond Cape Bona Speranza; And that the
Commissioners to be named by the said Kings, shall in East India take
Cognizance within three years of the Demands which have been or shall be made
by the Subjects and Vassalls of both Kings, for their Commerce in India
aforesaid, that so a perpetual Peace and Confederation may be confirmed and
established by the said Kings, between their Subjects on both parts.

XIII.
And because the Commerce and free coming of the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain to the Coasts and parts of Africa, the Island of S. Thome, and other
Islands comprehended under them, could not yet be agreed on by reason of the
defect of the Powers sent by the most renowned King of Portugal to his
Ambassadors, that by this debate this present Treaty of Peace and Amity
between both Kings and their Subjects be not delayed, it is on both parts
concluded on, That in the Lands, Places, Castles, Ports, and Coasts of Africa,
Guyne, Bine, etc. the Island of S. Thome, and other Islands comprehended under
them, wherein it shall appear that the Subjects of Great Britain have dwelt for
Trade of Merchandise, or have had Trade or Commerce there in the time of the
Kings of Casteele, or hitherto, there shall be no alteration or change, neither
shall they have any trouble or injury done them by the Portugalls for that
cause. And if any Customs be to be demanded from the Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, on any cause, in the Castles, Islands, and Places aforesaid,
they shall not be greater or more grievous then those which shall be demanded
from other Nations in League with the King of Portugal: And the Subjects of
the King of Portugal wanting Foreign Ships for their Navigation and Commerce
to the Coasts and Islands aforesaid, may freely at their own pleasure hire the
Ships of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain: And that Commissioners and
Ambassadors shall be named by both Kings, who shall Treat and Conclude
concerning the Commerce and free coming to the Coasts, Islands, and Places
aforesaid, which has been demanded by the Commissioners of the King of Great
Britain, for the Subjects of their King, being persuaded out of the confidence
of the ancient amity which has been between the Predecessors of the same
Kings, that the most renowned King of Portugal will grant to no Nation more
ample Rights, Immunities and Privileges, then he will grant unto the Subjects
of the King of Great Britain.

XIV.
And forasmuch as the most renowned King of Portugal by his Grant, confirmed
by his Seal, dated in Lisbone the 21. day of January, in the year of the birth
of Our Lord, 1641. has given free power to the Inhabitants of the Lands
subject to the Dominions of the States of Holland, etc. to bring in, and to
export all kind of Merchandises out of his Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Territories, That the Subjects of the King of Great Britain shall have, and
enjoy the same Power in the Kingdoms and Dominions of the said most renowned
King of Portugal, according to the Tenor of the said Grant.

XV.
And that the English Merchants, and other Subjects of the King of Great
Britain, shall enjoy as great, and the same Immunitie from being Imprisoned,
Arrested or any other way troubled in their Persons, Houses, Books of Accounts,
and Accounts, Merchandises and Goods within the Dominions of the most renowned
King of Portugal, as has been granted, or shall be hereafter granted to any
other Prince, or People in league with the King of Portugal.

XVI.
And because there is yet no agreement made concerning Fraighting of the Ships
of the Subjects of the most renowned King of Great Britain by the Portugalls,
for their Commerce and Navigation into Brasill, it has pleased both Parties,
that Commissioners or Ambassadors shall be appointed, and sent by the said
Kings within two years, who shall have power to treat and agree concerning this
Article.

XVII.
And because the Rights of Commerce and Peace shall be made unprofitable, if
the Subjects of the most renowned King of Great Britain shall be troubled for
their consciences, while they go to and from the Kingdoms and Dominions of the
most renowned King of Portugal, or reside there for Commerce or Business;
Therefore that their Commerce be safe and secure, as well on Land as on Sea,
the most renowned King of Portugal shall take care, and provide that they
shall not be molested or disturbed for the said Case of Conscience, so as they
give not scandal unto others. And although the most renowned King of Portugal
do acknowledge that he has not power to determine and dispose of Faith and
Religion, yet out of his love and great affection to the most renowned King of
Great Britain, and the English Nation, he shall take care that the English, and
other Subjects of the said King, shall have and enjoy as great Liberty in the
practice and exercise of their Religion within the Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Territories of the King of Portugal, as shall be permitted to the Subjects of
any other Prince, or Commonwealth whatsoever.

XVIII.
If it shall happen hereafter (which God forbid) that any controversies and
doubts shall arise between the said most renowned Kings, whereby there may be
danger of the interruption of Commerce and Intercourse between their Subjects,
there shall be public Monition given to the Subjects on both parts, in all and
singular the Kingdoms and Provinces of each King, and after such Monition they
shall have two years on both parts to transport their Merchandises and Goods,
and that no trouble, impediment, or hurt shall be done in the mean time either
to Things or Persons on either part.

XIX.
And if during this Peace and Amity any thing shall be attempted, committed,
or done against the force and effect thereof by Land, Sea, or Fresh-waters, by
any of the said Kings, their Heirs and Successors, their Vassalls, or Subjects,
yet notwithstanding this Peace and Amity shall remain in strength and virtue,
and the attempters and offenders only, and none others, shall be punished for
such their attempts.

XX.
Item, It is concluded and accorded that the present Peace and Confederation
shall not derogate from the Leagues and Confederations heretofore made and
contracted between the most renowned King of Great BRITAIN, and other Kings,
Princes, and Common wealths, but that the said Leagues and Confederations shall
be firmly kept, and shall hereafter remain in full strength, notwithstanding
this Treaty of Peace.

XXI.
Finally, It is Concluded that the said most renowned Kings, CHARLES, King of
Great BRITAIN, etc. and JOHN the fourth, King of PORTUGAL, etc. shall
sincerely and faithfully observe and keep, and cause to be observed by their
Subjects and Inhabitants, all and singular the Capitulations concluded and
accorded in this present Treaty, and that they shall not, directly or
indirectly, do contrary to the same: And that they shall confirm and ratify
all and singular the Conventions aforesaid, by their Letters Patents,
subscribed with their Royal Hands, and with their Great Seals, in good and due
form, and upon the first occasion shall deliver, or cause to be delivered the
same, faithfully, really, and effectually: And they shall mutually bind
themselves by promise, in the Word of a King, that they shall observe and keep
all and singular the Premises, whenever they shall be thereunto required by
either part; And they shall cause this present Peace and Amity, in manner
accustomed, to be published, so soon as the same conveniently may be done.

FINIS.

