A CHARGE OF High Treason, Prepared by the London-Apprentices, against Col.
Hewson; And the strange Apparitions that appeared unto him, immediately after
his being taken near Plymouth in Cornwall; With his Speech and Confession to the
Vision.



London, Printed for C. Gustavus, and are to be sold in Fleetstr^^^

THE Charge of High Treason exhibited by the London-Prentices against Colonel
Hewson, etc.
AMongst the rest of the Grand Traitors taken and committed to Custody, a late
and happy Discovery (we hear) has bin made of Col. Hewson near Plymouth in
Cornwall, where the Loyal Party are extraordinary vigilant in the due observing
all things whatsoever that may conduce to the peace and tranquillity of his
Majesty's good Subjects; And the London-Prentices (who formerly were as the
Leading Guard to other Cities and Countries) have demonstrated their Integrity
to the Government of his Sacred Majesty; and an absolute detestation against
all those who were any ways Abettors or Instrumental in the late Distractions
and Troubles; And in pursuance thereof, has prepared a Charge against Col.
Hewson, to this effect; that is to say,

1. That he is notoriously guilty of that most horrid and execrable Murder
committed upon the Royal Person of our late Gracious Lord and Sovereign King
Charles. 2. That He voted for the banishing of the Regal Line, and made it to
be Treason to give them their proper Titles, or that any one should pray for
them in their Pulpits, or aid and assist them with any moneys, or other
Necessaries. 3. That he has Trayterouslo put to sale diverse of the Crown
Lands, besides Bishops, Deans and Chapters; making great spoil of sundry
stately Woods, and likewise demolished seven stately Palaces and Manors. 4.
That he was instrumental in the demolishing and taking down of the Royal Arms,
and that he did break in pieces the great true Seal of the Land, and caused a
new Stamp to be made to coin money withal, with this circumscription, God with
us, when the Devil was in him.
With diverse other particulars, which we shall omit till his Arraignment; by
reason of some other Discourse here intervening, touching his Lamentation; to
wit,

O what will become of me, or whither shall I go? O how am I astonished to
think of my horrid and wicked proceedings? I have terror of Conscience within
me, and fear before me, trouble on either side of me, and horror behind me. My
horrid Acts are more then I can bear; for Judas-like my Master I betrayed, and
sat in Judgment when he was tried in that most Tyrannical and illegal High
Court of Justice.

Our happy Hate! Would I had never climbed to Dignity: O how was I enriched
with a great Estate, Lorldly Titles, great Command, rich Apparel, delicate
Fare, magnificent Buildings? I thinking my self indeed no less then a petty
King, not considering that Fortune might turn her Wheel the clean contrary way,
though now she has kicked me off.

I must declare my Conscience, that I aimed to be like my Master, and indeed to
sit in his Throne, and govern as he did: but this Whore Dame Fortune, whom I am
bound to bless for her riches, but to curse her for my Disgraces. O that I
could but get away to Graves-End, and ship my self for some Foreign Country,
and there to end my days. But hold, what groans are those that I hear? drawing
nearer and nearer to mine Ears, like unto the groans of a dying man, having
his death's Wound, in his full strength, Crying, Cobbler, Cobbler, Cobbler, and
now I see a pale Ghostly face drawing near to me; now will I make use of my Rod
of Command, for I call to mind the noble Seaman that was without cause slain
to please my envious fancy.


Ghost. Now have I found thee thou man of sin, thou tyrannous murderer, thou
flattering Parasite, thou deceiver of men, and thy Country; was it not enough
for thee to be mock-honourable, but thou must commit wilful murder upon thy
Brother Cobbler?


Hewson. I dreamed in that little slumber that I had, that I was preferred, but
not to my former Dignity; and being in a fainting sweat, and troubled with
horror of Conscience, an ugly Apparition appeared, with two Doctors, who
casting my Water, said, Nothing but Death, Nothing but Death.

The Terror whereof proved no small astonishment, especially when I heard a
Voice again crying out, No Mercy for Traitors; the blood of your Sovereign
cries for vengeance.


This being seriously considered, may it not be a sufficient motive to induce
all Rebellious Blood-suckers, to lament and cry out, O let that blood of our
dear Sovereign, shed by the cruelty, covetousness, and treachery of our hands,
be for ever silent.

But the great Cedars never fall alone: When the Sun is turned into blood, it
is no marvail if the Stars fall from Heaven; If the Fountain be dried up, it is
no marvail if the lesser Channels cease their Current; and no man of judgment
could expect, but such Rebellious Spirits who rooted out the King, and all the
Royal Race, they would likewise have destroyed the Nobles. Protestations to the
contrary were not of value with those that changed their principles together
with their Fortune: They that thought it their glory to bind Kings in chains,
deemed it their honor to bind Nobles in Links of Iron. Where the Scripture,
Well is thee, O Land, when thy Princes are the Sons of Nobles, is become
Apocryphal, there, in those men's Divinity, no Nobles must be allowed to be the
Sons of Princes. The next in honor to the Royal Race are the Noble Families,
and therefore they must be next in suffering. No Bishop, no King: No K ng no
Nobles, were the undoubted sequences of those times. Those that like Death
would level Scepters with the Spade, will teach their Children to presume
against the Ancient, and the Vile against the Honorable.

And as for our present Sovereign (whom Divine Providence has reserved to be
the repairer of the breach) let it be the prayer of all true Subjects, that He
may be as another Solomon, to sit on the Throne of his Father David, being as
eminent for his Wisdom and Excellency of Majestic Power, as his Royal Father
was for his Piety and Sufferings.

O let that Sun which has now long been muffled in Clouds, break forth with
more resplendent Majesty; Let that Tree which has been bound with Fetters
budde forth, and be as the great Tree, which spreads its branches to the four
corners of the earth, in whose branches the Fowls of the Air do nest, and
under whose shadow the Beasts of the field do rest themselves. O let all men's
hearts, tongues, hands, and prayers, contribute to such a blessing; and let it
continue from Generation to Generation, till Time shall be no more, and till
all the Kings of the Earth shall cast down their Crowns at the feet of him that
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: And in the mean time let all good People
in the passionate affections of their Souls cry out,

God save King CHARLES the Second.
FINIS.

