The Kings Majesty's ANSWER TO The Propositions, propounded by the Ministers of
the Church of ENGLAND; concerning the settling of the Presbyterian Government
within this Kingdom. With his Majesty's Resolution, about giving His Royal
Assent thereunto.

Also, the Earl of PEMBROKES Reply to the Kings Majesty's Desires.

Published by Authority.

C R
portrait of Charles I of England, Scotland and Ireland

Printed for B. A. Feb. 12. 1647.

THE ANSWER OF The Right honorable the Earl of Pembroke and the rest of the
English Commissioners, to the Kings Majesty's late Queries, about
Church Government.
THe Distractions of this Kingdom is (as we hope) at a full end and period,
and the sed expressions of War, begins to ring with a tryumphant Echo of
Peace: therefore, the greatest Object, which we have now to fix our eyes upon,
will be, the settling of a pure and firm Government in Church and Common
wealth; which God grant, that so the Light of the Gospel, may appear in its
full luster, and shine forth abundantly throughout all His Majesty's Realms
and Dominions.

But some obstructions does arise for the retarding of this great and blessed
work: For the Kings Majesty will by no means possible hearken or condescend to
the Desires of the English Commissioners about the settling of Church Government
in the Kingdom of England; and refuses to hear the English Ministers preach,
though they administered the word in the same house where his Majesty lay.

But Mr. Marshall, (that famous and learned Divine) desired to know his
Majesty's reason, why He would not hear the English Divines as well as the
Scots, both Nations having entered into a Solemn League and Covenant, for the
preservation and defense of the Reformed Religion, now exercized in both
Kingdoms.

His Majesty replied, that he had settled the Form of Church Government within
the Kingdom of Scotland and had given his Royal assent thereunto; but for the
Government of the Church of England, as it is now exercized, He never gave his
assent thereto.

And therefore, He hoped, they will allow Him Hi, Conscience, being not willing
to be forced to practice that which He at present approves not in Judgment,
not has given his Royal assent unto: But its hoped, few days will produce, a
gallant concurrence betwixt the Kings Majesty, and our renowned Parliament, his
Loyal Subjects, and Englands famous Trustees.

One thing very remarkable, I shall here recite and Memorable and deservedly to
be spoken to the honor of that Nation, is the departure of our Brethren of
Scotland, and like worthy of lasting memory was the proceedings of the
Parliament of that Kingdom to avoid all matter of scruple concerning the
dispose of his Majesty's Person.

Our Garrisons in the North are peaceably delivered to us, Carlisle and Barwick
slighted, and the Scottish army marching with all the convenient speed that may
be quite out of the Kingdom. And so commendablwas the carriage of General
Leven toward the coune try, that he made Proclamation, that if any money were
due to them from the Soldiery, they should have satisfaction.

The Parliament of Scotland have had a great debate about reducing of their
Army, and we hear they are come to this result, That their foot shall be
reduced to six thousand, and their horse to two thousand, which Forces are to
be employed against Antrim and the forces of the Gourdeons, which keep
themselves in the Hill Country, and General Lesley, Lieutenant General
Lesley, and Major General Middleton are to command them in chief.

The right honorable the Earl of Pembroke does deport himself gallantly, with
the Kings Majesty, having lately declared his great loyalty and faithfulness
toward his Sovereign, by endeavoring to renew a right understanding betwixt
the King and His People; declaring, that if his Majesty will be pleased to
hearken to the advice of his great Council the Parliament, and to unite
himself with them, he were confident, the love of all his Subjects would
increase in such abundant measure, that nothing would be wanting in them, for
the advancing of his Honor and Dignity, and his Royal Posterity that shall
succeed him.

And further, his Lordship declared, that for his own part, as he had hitherto
approved himself a loyal subject to his Majesty, and a faithful Patriot to
his Country, so he were resolved to continue his loyalty, and faithful
integrity to his death, and that nothing should be wanting in him, which might
any ways tend to the honor of his Prince, and welfare of his Country.

His Lordship, at the close of all, desired his Majesty to hearken to his great
Council the Parliament of England, it being the only way to make him a glorious
Prince, and his subjects a happy people.

When the Commissioners of Scotland parted with the King, and resigned him up
to the English Commissioners, they delivered a Declaration to his Majesty,
being grounded upon the return from the Parliament of England, as was
conceived; they purported many particulars, some of them were, that his Majesty
came to the Scots Army, without knowledge or consent of the Parliament of
Scotland; that in case he sign the Propositions, and take the Covenant, his
Royal person and posterity should not suffer.

His Majesty was much displeased (as is said) at what he received.

His Majesty is to lie at Nottingham this instant Friday, with all his gallant
Train, the Convoy consisting of nine hundred horse, commanded by Colonel
Graves, and upon Tuesday next (at the furthest) they are expected at Holmby,
where his Majesty is to remain during pleasure.

The honorable houses of Parliament have Ordered, that the Committee which
attend his Majesty, be desired to have regard to the low condition of the
Kingdom, in the expenses of their journey. And the house resolved not to settle
his Majesty's Household at Holmby.

It is supposed his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax will meet the King at
Nottingham, and accompany him to Holmby, at which place, great preparations are
making for the entertainment of our gracious Sovereign.

The Cavies in the North, gives out strange language against the Parliament,
and talks much of the Northern Armies; but alas, their malipert tongues will
loon be silenced; for General Leven is going to visit the Rebellious Rout
under Kilketto, having a gallant Army of Horse and Foot.

FINIS.

