HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER, To a Printed Book, ENTITLED, A REMONSTRANCE, OR THE
Declaration of the Lords and Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT, 26. May 1642:

In answer to a Declaration under His Majesty's Name, concerning the business
of HULL.

Printed at York: And Reprinted at London for William Ley, 1642.

His Majesty's Answer to a printed Book, entitled, A Remonstrance, or the
Declaration of the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, the 26. of
May, 1642. In Answer to a Declaration under His Majesty's Name, concerning the
business of Hull.
THough whosoever looks over the late Remonstrance, entitled, A Declaration of
the Lords and Commons, of the 26. of May, will not think We have much reason to
be pleased with it; yet We cannot but commend the plain dealing and ingenuity
of the Framers and Contrivers of that Declaration (which has been wrought in a
hotter and quicker Forge then any of the rest) who would no longer suffer Us to
be affronted, by being told, They would make Us a great and glorious King,
whilst they used all possible skill to reduce Us to extreme Want and
Indigency; and that They would make Us to be loved at home and feared abroad,
whilst they endeavored by all possible ways, to render Us odious to Our good
Subjects, and contemptible to all foreign Princes; but, like Round-dealing
men, tell Us in plain English, That they have done Us no wrong, because We are
not capable of receiving any; and That they have taken nothing from Us, because
We had never any thing of Our own to lose: If this Doctrine be true, and that
indeed We ought to be of no other consideration, then they have informed Our
people in that Declaration; that Gentleman is much more excusable, that said
publicly (unreproved) That the happiness of this Kingdom does not depend on
Us, or upon any of the Royal Branches of that Root; And the other, who said,
We were not worthy to be King of England: Language very monstrous to be allowed
by either House of Parliament, and of which, by the help of God and the Law, We
must have some Examination. But We doubt not, all Our good Subjects do now
plainly discern, through the Mask and Visard of their hypocrisy, what their
Design is, and will no more look upon the Framers and Contrivers of that
Declaration, as upon both Houses of Parliament (whose freedom and just
Privileges We will always maintain, and in whose behalf We are as much
slandered as for Our Self) but as a Faction of Malignant, Schismatic, and
Ambitious Persons, whose design is, and always has been, to alter the whole
frame of Government both of Church and State, and to subject both King and
People to their own Lawless, Arbitrary power and Government; of whose Persons,
and of whose Design, We shall, within a very short time, give Out good
Subjects, and the world a full, and (We hope) a satisfactory Narration.

The Contrivers and Penners of that Declaration (of whom We would be only
understood to speak, when We mention any of their undutifull acts against Us)
tell you, That the great Affairs of this Kingdom, and the miserable and
bleeding condition of the Kingdom of Ireland, will afford them little leisure
to spend their time in Declarations, Answers and Replies; Indeed, the miserable
and deplorable condition of both Kingdoms would require somewhat else at their
hands: But We would gladly know, how they have spent their time since their
Recesse (now almost eight months) but in Declarations Remonstrances and
Invectives against Us and Our Government, or in preparing matter for them: Have
We invited them to any such expense of time, by beginning Arguments of that
nature: Their leisure, or their Inclination is not as they pretend: And what is
their Printing and Publishing their Petitions to Us, their Declarations and
Remonstrances of Us, their odious Votes, and Resolutions, sometimes of one,
sometimes of both Houses, against Us (never in this manner communicated before
this Parliament) but an Appeal to the People? And, in Gods Name, let them
judge of the Persons they have trusted,

Their first Quarrel is (as it is always, to let them into their franck
Expressions of Us and Our Actions) against the Malignant Party, whom they are
pleased still to call, and never to prove, to be Our evil Counselors; but
indeed, nothing is more evident by their whole Proceedings, then that by the
Malignant Party, they intend all the Members of both Houses, who agree not with
them in their Opinion (hence have come their distinction of good and bad Lords,
of Persons ill affected of the House of Commons, who have bin proscribed, and
their Names Listed and read in Tumults) and all the Persons of the Kingdom,
who approve not of their actions; So that if, in truth, they would be
ingenuous, and name the Persons they intend, who would be the Men (upon whom
that Imputation of Malignity would be cast) but they, who have stood stoutly
and immutably for the Religion, the Liberties, the Laws, for all public
Interests (so long as there was any to be stood for) they, who have always
been, and are as zealous Professors, and (some of them) as able and earnest
Defendors of the Protestant Doctrine against the Church of Rome, as any are;
who have often and earnestly besought Us to consent, that no Indifferent and
Unnecessary Ceremony might be pressed upon weak and tender Consciences, and
that We would agree to a Bill for that purpose; they, to whose Wisdom,
Courage, and Council, the Kingdom owes as much, as it can to subjects; and
upon whose unblemished Lives, Envy it self can lay no Imputation, nor
endeavored to lay any, until their Virtues brought them to Our Knowledge and
Favor. Let the Contrivers of this Declaration be faithful to themselves, and
consider all those Persons of both Houses, whom they, in their Consciences,
know to dissent from them in the Matter and Language of that Declaration, and
in all those undutifull actions, of which we complain: and will they not be
found in Honor, Fortune, Wisdom, Reputation, and Weight (if not in number)
much Superior to them? So much for the Evil Counselors: Now, what is the
Evil Council it self? Our coming from London, (where We, and many, whose
affections to Us are very eminent, were in danger every day to be torn in
pieces) to York, where We, and all such who will put themselves under Our
Protection, may live (We thank God, and the loyalty and affection of this
good people) very securely; Our not submitting Our Self absolutely (and
renouncing Our own Understanding) to the Votes and Resolutions of the
Contrivers of that Declaration, when they tell Us, They are above Us, and may
(by our own Authority) do with Us what they please; and Our not being
contented, that all Our good subjects Lives and Fortunes shall be disposed of
by their Votes, but by the known Law of the land: This is the evil Council
given and taken: And will not all Men believe there needs much power and skill
(of the Malignant Party) to infuse this Council into Us? And now apply the
Argument, the Contrivers of that Declaration makes for themselves: Is it
probable, or possible, that such men whom We have mentioned (who must have so
great a share in the misery) should take such pains in the procuring thereof,
and spend so much time, and run so many hazards, to make themselves Slaves, and
to ruin the Freedom of this Nation? We say, with a clear and upright
Conscience to God Almighty, Whosoever harbors the least thought in his breast
of ruining or violating the public Liberty or Religion of this Kingdom, or
the just Freedom and Privilege of Parliament, let him be accursed; and he
shall be no Counselor of Ours that will not say, Amen. For the contrivers of
that declaration, We have not said any thing which might imply any inclination
in them to be Slaves; that which We have charged them, is with invading the
public Liberty, and Our Presumption may be very strong and vehement, that
(though they have no mind to be Slaves) they are not unwilling to be Tyrants:
(What is Tyranny, but to admit no Rule to govern by, but their own wills?)
And We know the misery of Athens was at the highest, when it suffered under the
thirty Tyrants.

If that Declaration had told Us (as indeed it might, and as in Justice it
ought to have done) that the Presidents of any of our Ancestors did fall short
and much below what has been done by Us this Parliament, in point of Grace
and Favor to Our People, We should no otherwise have wondered at it, then at
such a truth, in such a place: But when (to justify their having done more
then ever their Predecessors did) it tells Our good Subjects (as most
injuriously most insolently it does) That the highest and most unwarrantable
Presidents of any of Our Predecessors do fall short, and much below what has
been done to them this Parliament by Us, We must confess Our self amazed,
and not able to understand them: And We must tell those ungrateful Men (who
dare tell their King, That they may, without want of Modesty and Duty, depose
him) That the condition of Our Subjects, when (by whatsoever Accidents and
Conjunctures of time) it was at worst, under Our power, unto which (by no
default of Ours) they shall be ever again reduced, was, by many degrees, more
pleasant and happy, then that to which their furious pretense of Reformation
has brought them: Neither are we afraid of the highest Presidents of other
Parliaments, which these men boldly (Our good subjects will call it worse) tell
Us, They might without want of Modesty and Duty, make their Patterns: If We had
no other security against those Presidents, but their Modesty and Duty, We
were in a miserable condition, as all persons will be who depend upon them.

That Declaration will not allow Our Inference, That by avowing the Act of Sir
John Hotham, they do destroy the Title and Interest of all Our Subjects to
their Lands and Goods; but confesses, if they were found guilty of that
charge, it were indeed a very great crime. And do they not in this
Declaration, admit themselves guilty of this very Crime? Do they not say, Who
doubts but that a Parliament may dispose of any thing, wherein We, or Our
Subjects have a Right in such a way as that the Kingdom may not be in danger
thereby? Do they not then call themselves This Parliament, and challenge this
Power without Our consent? Do they not extend this Power to all Cases, where
the necessity, or the common good of the Kingdom is concerned? and do they
not arrogate unto themselves alone the judgment of this Danger, this
Necessity, this Common Good of the Kingdom? What is, if this be not to
unsettle the Security of all men's Estates, and to expose them to an arbitrary
Power of their own? If a Faction shall at any time, by Cunning, or Force, or
absence, or accident, prevail over a major part of both Houses, and pretend
that they are Evil Counselors, a Malignant Party about the King, by whom the
Liberty and Religion of the Kingdom are both in danger; This they may do:
they have done it. Then they may take away (be it from the King or People)
whatsoever they, in their judgments, shall think fit: This is lawful, they
have declared it so. Let the world judge, whether We charge them unjustly, and
whether they are not guilty of the Crime, which themselves confess (being
proved) is a great one, and how safely We might commit the Power, these people
desire into their hands, who, in all probability, would be no sooner possessed
of it, then they would revive that Tragedy which Master Hooker relates of the
Anabaptists in Germany, who talking of nothing but Faith, and of the true Fear
of God, and that Riches and Honor were vanity; at first, upon the great
Opinion of their Humility, Zeal, and Devotion, procured much Reverence and
Estimation with the people. After finding how many persons they had ensnared
with their Hypocrisy, they began to propose to themselves, to reform both the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of the State; Then, because, possibly,
they might meet with some Opposition, they secretly entered into a League of
Association; and shortly after (finding the power they had gotten with the
credulous People) enriched themselves with all kind of spoil and pillage, and
justified it upon our Saviors promise, The meek shall inherit the earth; and
declared their Title was the same which the righteous Israelites had unto the
goods of the wicked Egyptians: This Story is worth the reading at large, and
needs no application.

But We must by no means say, That We have the same Title to Our Town of
Hull, and the Ammunition there, as any of Our Subjects have to their Lands or
Money, That Is A Principle that pulls up the Foundation of the Liberty and
Property of every Subject: Why, pray? Because the Kings Property in his Towns
and in his Goods, bought with the public Money (as they conceive Our Magazine
at Hull was) is inconsistent with the Subjects Property in their Lands, Goods,
and Liberty: Do these men think, That as they assume a power of Declaring Law
(and whatsoever contradicts that Declaration, breaks their Privileges) so that
they have a power of declaring Sense and Reason, and imposing Logic and
Syllogismes on the Schools, as well as Law upon the People? Does not all
mankind know, That several man may have several Rights and Interests in the
self same House and Land, and yet neither destroy the other? Is not the
Interest of the Lord Paramont consistent with that of the Mesme Lord, and his
with that of he Tenant, and yet their Properties and Interests not at all
confounded? And why may not We then have a full Lawful Interest and Property
in Our Town of Hull, and yet Our Subjects have a Property in their Houses too?
But We, cannot sell or give away at Our pleasure Our Towns and Forts, as a
private man may do his Lands or Goods: What then? Many men have no authority to
Let or Set their Leases, or sell their Land; have they therefore no Title to
them, or Interest in them? May they be taken from them, because they cannot
sell them? The purpose of Our Journey to Hull, was, neither to sell it, o^ give
it away.

But for the Magazine, the M^^ition there, that We bought with our own Money;
We might surely have sold that, lent, or given it away. No; We bought it with
the public Money; and the proof is, They conceive it so; and upon this conceit
have Voted, That it shall be taken from Us: Excellent Justice! Suppose We had
kept this Money by Us, and not bought Arms with it, would they have taken it
from Us upon that conceit? Nay, may they not wheresoever this Money is (for
through how many hands soever it has passed, it is the public Money still, if
it ever were) seize it and take it from the Owners? But the Towns, Forts,
Magazine, and Kingdom is entrusted to Us, and We are a Person trusted; We are
so, God and the Law has trusted Us; and We have taken an Oath to discharge
that trust for the good and safety of Our people: What Oaths they have taken,
We know not, unless those which, in this violence, they have manifestly,
maliciously violated. May any thing be taken from a man, because he is trusted
with it? Nay, may the person himself take away the thing he trusts, when he
will, and in what manner he will? The Law has been otherwise, and We believe
will be so held, notwithstanding their Declarations.

But, This trust ought to be managed by their advice, and the Kingdom has
trusted them for that purpose: Impossible! That the same trust should be
irrevocably committed to Us and our Heirs for ever, and the same trust, and a
power above that trust (for such is the power they pretend) be committed to
others: Did not the people that sent them, look upon them as a Body but
Temporary, and dissoluble at Our Pleasure: And can it be believed, that they
intended them for Our Guardians and Comptrollers in the managing of that Trust,
which God and the Law has granted to Us and Our Posterity for ever? What the
extent of their Commission and Trust is, nothing can better teach them, then
the Writ whereby they are met. We called them (and without that call they could
not have come together) to be Our Counselors, not Commanders; (for however
they frequently confound them, the Offices are several) and Counselors, not
in all things, but in some things; De quibusdam arduis, etc. And they will
easily find amongst their Presidents, that Queen Elizabeth, (upon whose Time
all Good Men look with Reverence) committed one Wentworth, a Member of the
House of Commons, to the Tower (sitting the House) but for proposing, That they
might advise the Queen, in a matter she thought they had nothing to do to
meddle in: But We are trusted: and are We the only Person trusted? And may
they do what their own inclination and fury leads them to? Were not they
trusted by Us, when We first sent for them; and were they not trusted by Us,
when We passed them Our promise, That We would not dissolve them? Can it be
presumed (and presumptions go far with them) that We trusted them with a Power
to destroy Us, and to dissolve Our Government and Authority? If the people
might be allowed to make an equitable construction of the Laws and Statutes (a
Doctrine avowed by them) would not all Our good Subjects swear, We never
intended by that Act of continuance, that they should do what they have since
done? Were they not trusted by those that have sent them? And were they trusted
to alter the Government of Church and State, and to make themselves perpetual
Dictators over the King and People? Did they intend that the Law it self should
be subject to their Votes, and that whatsoever they say or do, should be
lawful, because they declare it so? The Oaths which they have taken, who sent
them, and without taking which, themselves are not capable of their place in
Parliament, makes the one incapable of giving, and the other of receiving such
a trust; unless they can persuade our good Subjects; That We are the only
supreme Head and Governor in all causes, and over all persons, within Our
Dominions; and yet that they have a power over Us to constrain Us to manage Our
Trust, and govern Our Power, according to their discretion.

The Contrivers of that Declaration tell Us, that they will never allow Us (an
humble and dutiful Expression) to be Judge of the Law; that belongs only to
them; they may, and must judge and declare. We all know what Power the Pope,
under the Pretense of Interpreting Scriptures, and declaring Articles of Faith
(though he decline the making the one or the other) has usurped over men's
consciences; and that under color of having Power of Ordering all things for
the good of men's Souls, he Entiles himself to all the Kingdoms in the World. We
Will not accuse the Framers of this Declaration (how bold soever they are with
Us) that they incline to Popery; of which another Maxim is, That We must
submit Our Reason and Understanding (and the Scripture it Self) to that
Declaring Power of his: Neither will We tell them (though they have told Us so)
that they use the very language of the Rebels of Ireland: and yet they say
those Rebels Declare, That whatsoever they do, is for the Good of the King and
Kingdoin: But Our good Subjects will easily put the Case to themselves,
Whether, if the Papists in Ireland in truth were, or by Art or Accident had
made themselves the Major Part of both Houses of Parliament there, and had
pretended the Trust (in that Declaration) from the Kingdom of Ireland;
thereupon had Voted their Religion and Liberty to be in danger of extirpation
from a Malignant Party of Protestants and Puritanes; and therefore, that they
should put themselves into a Posture of defense; That the Forts and Militia of
that Kingdom were to be put into the hands of such persons as they could
confide in; That We were indeed trusted with the Towns, Forts, Magazines,
Treasures, Offices, and People of the Kingdom, for the Good, and Safety, and
best Advantage thereof: But as this trust is for the use of the Kingdom, so it
ought to be managed by the Advice of both Houses of Parliament, whom the
Kingdom had trusted for that purpose; it being their duty to see it discharged,
according to the Condition and true Intent thereof, and by all possible means
to prevent the contrary: We say, Let all Our good Subjects consider, If that
Rebellion had been plotted with this Formality, and those Circumstances,
declared to be legal (at least, according to the equitable sense of the Law)
and to be for the public good, and justifiable by necessity (of which they
were the only Judges) Whether, though they might have thought their Design
the more cunning, they would believe it the more justifiable? Nay, let the
Framers of this Declaration ask themselves, If the Evil Counselors, the
Malignant Party, the Persons Il-affected, the Popish Lords, and their
Adherents, should prove now, or hereafter to be a Major part of both Houses
(for it has been declared a great part of both Houses have been such, and so
might have been the greater; nay, that the greater part of the House of Peers
was such (and We have not heard of any of their conversions) and thereupon it
has been earnestly pressed, That the Minor part of the Lords might join with
the Major part of the House of Commons) were We bound to consent to all such
Alterations as these men should propose to Us, and resolve to be for the
public good; and must the Liberty, Property, and Security of all Our Subjects,
depend on what such Votes should declare to be Law? Was the Order of the
Militia unfit and unlawful, whiles the Major part of the Lords refused to join
in it (as they did two, if not three several times, and it was never heard,
before this Parliament, that they should be so, and so often pressed after a
dissent declared) and did it grow immediately necessary for the public safety,
and lawful by the Law of the Land, as soon as so many of the dissenting Peers
were driven away (after their names had been required at the Bar, contrary to
the Freedom and Foundation of Parliaments) that the other Opinion prevailed?
Does the Life and Liberty of the Subject depend upon such Accidents of days
and hours, that it is impossible for him to know his right in either? God
forbid.

But now to justify their Invasion of Our ancient, unquestioned, undoubted
Right, settled and established on Us and Our Posterity, by God himself,
confirmed and strengthened by all possible Titles of Compact, Laws, Oaths,
perpetual and uncontradicted Custom by Our people: What have they alleged, to
Declare to the Kingdom (as they say) the Obligation that lies upon the Kings
of this Realm to pass all such Bills as are offered unto them by both Houses
of Parliament? (a thing never heard of till this day) An Oath (Authority enough
for them to break all theirs) that is, or ought to be taken by the Kings of
this Realm, which is, as well to remedy, by Law, such inconveniences the
Kingdom may suffer, as to keep and protect the Laws already in being; And the
form of this Oath (they say) appears upon a Record there cited, and by a Clause
in the Preamble of a Statute made in the five and twentieth year of Edward the
third.

We are not enough acquainted with records, we to know whether that be fully
and and ingeniously cited, and when, and how, and why the several clauses have
been inserted, or taken out of the oaths formerly administered to the Kings of
this Realm, yet we cannot possibly imagine, the assertion that Declaration
makes; can be deduced from the words, or the matter of that oath; for unless
they have a power of declaring Lattin, as We as Law, sure Eligerit signifies,
has chosen (as well as Choose) and that it signifies so here (besides the
authority of perpetual practice of all succeeding ages (a better interpreter
then their Votes) is evident by the reference it has to customs;
Consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit, and could that be a Custom, which the
people should choose after this Oath taken, and should a King be sworn to
defend such Customs? Besides, can it be imagined that he should be bound by
oath to pass such Laws (and such a Law is the Bill they brought to Us of the
Militia) as should put the power, wherewith he is trussed, out of himself in
the hands of other men, and so divest and disable him of all possible power to
perform the great business of the oath, which is, To protect them? If we give
away all Our power, or if it be taken from Us, we cannot protect any man: And
what discharge would it be for us, either before God or Man, (when our good
Subjects, whom God and the Law has committed to our charge, shall be worried
and spoiled) to say, That we trusted others to protect them; that is, to do
that duty for Us, which is essentially and inseparably our own. But that all
Our good Subjects may see, how faithfully these men (who assume this trust from
them) desire to discharge their trust; We shall be contented to publish, for
their satisfaction (a matter notorious enough, but which we our Self never
thought to have been but to publish, and of which the Framers of that
Declaration might as well have made use, as of a Latin record they knew many
of our good Subjects could not, and many of themselves do not understand) the
Oath it self we took at our Coronation, warranted and enjoined to it by
Custom and directions of our Predecessors; and the Ceremony or their and our
taking it, they may find it in the Records of the Exchequer: This it is.

The Sermon being done, the Archbishop goes to the King, and asks his
willingness to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors.

The King shows himself willing, arises, and goes to the Altar; The
Archbishop administreth these Questions, and the King answers them severally.

Episcopus. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; and namely the Laws,
Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the glorious King, Saint
Edward your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of
the Gospel established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of
the Kings thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm?


REX. I grant and promise to keep them.


Episcopus. Sir, Will you keep Peace and godly Agreement entirely (according to
your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?


REX. I will keep it.


Episcopus. Sir, Will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion in
Mercy and Truth to be executed in all your Judgments?


REX. I will.


Episcopus. Will you grant, to hold and keep the Laws and rightful customs
which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have; and will you defend and uphold
them to the honor of God, so much as in you lies.


REX. I grant and promise so to do.


Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King before the people,
with a loud voice. Our Lord and King, We beseech you to pardon, and to grant,
and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that you would Protect and
defend us, as every good King, in his Kingdom, ought to be Protector and
Defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government.


The King answers: With a willing and devout Heart, I promise and grant my
pardon; and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches
committed to your charge, all Canonical Privilenges, and due Law and Justice,
and that I will be your Protector and Defender, to my power, by the assistance
of God, as every good King in his Kingdom, in Right ought to protect and
defend the Bishops, and Churches under their Government.


Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table, where he makes a
solemn Oath, in sight of all the people, to observe the Premises: And laying
his hand upon the Book, says: The Oath. The things which I have before
promised, I shall perform and keep: So help me God, and the Contents of this
Book.

Let all the world judge, whether such Doctrine, or such Conclusions as these
Men teach, can follow, or have the least pretense from this Oath.

For the Preamble of the Statute, (they cite) that tells us, That the King is
bound to remedy by Law, the Mischiefs and Damages which happen to His people;
He is so: But is the King bound, by the Preamble of that Statute, to renounce
his own judgment, His own understanding, in these Mischiefs, and of those
remedies? How far forth He is obliged to follow the judgment of His
Parliament, that Declararation still confesses to be a question: without
question, none can take upon them to remedy, even mischiefs, but by Law, for
fear of greater mischiefs then those they go about to remedy.

But We are bound in Justice, to consent to their proposalls, because there is
a Trust reposed in Us to preserve the Kingdom, by making new Laws: We are
glad there is so; Then we are sure no new Laws can be made without Our
consent, and that the gentleness of our Answer, Le Roys' avisera, if it be no
denial, is no consent, and then the matter is not great. They will allow Us
yet A greater latitude of granting or denying, as We shall think fit, in
public Acts of Grace, as Pardons, or the like Grants of Favor: why do they
so? If those Pardons and public Acts of Grace, be for the public good (which
they may Vote they are) they will then be absolutely in their own disposal:
But have they left Us this power? They have sure, at least, shared it with Us:
How else have they got the power to pardon Sergeant-major-Generall Skippon (a
new Officer, of State, and a Subject, we have no authority to sent to speak
with) and all other persons employed by them, and such as have employed
themselves for them, not only for what they have done, but for what they shall
do? If they have power to declare such Actions to be no Treason, which we
would not pardon, and such Actions to be Treason, which needs no pardon, the
Latitude they allow Us, of granting or denying of Pardons, is a Jewel they may
still be contented to suffer Us to wear in our Crown, and never think
themselves the more in danger.

All this considered; The Contriver of that Message (since they will afford him
no better Title) whom they are angry with, does not conceive the people of this
Land to be so void of common sense, as to believe Us (who have denied no one
thing for the ease and benefit of them, which in Justice or Prudence could be
asked; or in honor and conscience could be granted) to have cast off all care
of our Subjects good; and the Framers and Devisers of that Declaration (who
have endeavored to render us odious to our Subjects, and them disloyal to us,
by pretending such a trust from them) to have only taken it up: Neither (we
are confident) will they be satisfied, when they feel the misery and the
Burdens, which the fury and the malice of those people will bring upon them,
with being told that Calamity proceeds from evil Counselors, whom no body can
name; from Plots and Conspiracies, which no man can discover; and from Fears
and Jealousies, which no man understands: And therefore, that the consideration
of it, be left to the Conscience, Reason, Affection, and Loyalty of Our good
Subjects, who do understand the Government of this Kingdom, we are well
content.

Where will the folly and madness of these people end? who would have our
people believe, that our absenting our self from London (where, with our
safety, we could not stay) and the continuing Our Magazine at Hull, proceeds
from the secret plots of the Papists here, and to advance the designs of the
Papists in Ireland: But it is no wonder, that they, who can believe Sir John
Hothams shutting us out of Hull to be an act of affection and loyalty, will
believe that the Papists, or the Turks, persuaded us to go thither.

An (can any sober man think that Declaration to be the consent of either, or
both Houses of Parliament, unaltered either by Fraud or Force, which (after so
many Thanks and humble Acknowledgement of our gracious favor in our Message of
the 20. of January so often and unanimously presented unto us from both Houses
of Parliament (tells us that the Message at first was, and (as often as it has
been since mentioned by us) has been a breach of Privilege (of which they
have not used to be so negligent, as in four months not to complain, if such a
breach had been) and that the way and method of proceeding should not be
proposed to them, as if we had only authority to call them together, none to
tell them what they were to do, not so much as with reference to our own
affairs: what their own Method has been, and whither it has led them, and
brought the Kingdom, all men see; what ours would have been, if seasonably and
timely applied unto, let all men judge. We will speak no more of it.

But see now what excellent Instances they have found out to prove an
Inclination, if not in Us, in some about Us, to civil war: Their gving with
Us to the House of Commons (so often urged, and so fully answered) Their
attending on Us to Hampton Court; and appearing in a warlike manner at Kingston
upon Thames; Our going to Hull; Their drawing their Swords at York, demanding,
Who world be for the King; the declaring Sir John Hotham Traitor, before the
Message sent to the Parliament; the Propositions to the Gentry in Yorkshire, to
assist Us against him, before We had received an answer from the Parliament:
All desperate Instances of an Inclination to a civil war; Examine them
again: The manner and intent of Our going to the House of Commons, We set
forth at large in Our Answer to their Declaration of the nineteenth of May; let
all men judge. Next, Do these men themselves believe (to what purpose soever
that Rumor has served their turns) that there was an Appearance in warlike
manner at Kingston upon Thames? Do they not know, that whenever We have
been at Hampton Court, since Our first coming to the Crown, there was never a
less Appearance, or in a less warlike manner then at the time they mean: We
shall say no more, But that Our Appearance, in a warlike manner, at Kingston
upon Thames, and theirs at Kingston upon Hull, is very different. What is meant
by the drawing of swords at York, and demanding, who would be for the King,
must be inquired at London, for We believe very few in York understand the
meaning of it. For Our going to Hull (which they will by no means endure shall
be called a Visit) whether it were not the way to prevent, rather then to make
a Civil War, is very obvious: And the declaring him a Traitor, in the very
Act of his Treason, will never be thought unseasonable, but by those, who
believe him to be a loving and loyal Subject; no more then the endeavoring to
make the Gentlemen of this County sensible of that Treason (which they are, in
an honorable and dutiful degree) before We received Our Answer from both
Houses of Parliament: For if they had been (as We expected they should have
been) sensible of that intolerable injury offered to Us; might not We have had
occasion to have used the affection of these Gentleman? Were we sure that Sir
John Hotham, who had kept Us out, without their Order (We speak of a public
Order) would have let Us in when they had bidden him? And if they had not such
a sense of Us (as the Case falls out to be) had We not more reason to make
Proposition to those Gentlemen, whose readiness and affection We, or Our
Posterity, shall never forget?

But this business of Hull sticks still with them, and finding Our Questions
hard, they are pleased to Answer Us by asking Us other Questions: No matter for
the Exceptions against the Earl of Newcastle, (which have been so often
urged, as one of their principal Grounds of their Fears and Iealousies, and
which drew that Question from us) they ask Us, Why, since We held it necessary
that a Governor should be placed in Hull, Sir John Hotham should be refused
by Us, and the Earl of Newcastle sent down? We answer, Because we had a
better Opinion of the Earl of Newcastle, then of Sir John Hotham, and desired
to have such a Governor over Our Towns, (if We must have any) as should keep
them for, and not against Us: And if his going down were in a more private
way, then Sir John Hothams, it was because We had that Authority to make a
noise, by Leavying and Billetting of Soldiers in a peaceable Time, upon Our
good Subjects, as it seems Sir John Hotham carried down with him: And the
Imputation which is cast by the way upon that Earl, to make his Reputation
(...) thought was not Ground enough for a Judicial Proceeding, (it is wonder
it was not) was yet Ground enough of Suspicion, must be the Case of every
Subject in England (and we wish it went no higher:) If every vile Aspertion
contrived by unknown hands, upon unknown or unimaginable Grounds (which is the
way practiced to bring any virtuous and deserving men into obloquy) shall
receive the least credit or countenance in the world.

They tell us their Exception to those Gentlemen, who delivered their Petition
to to us at York, was, That they presumed to take the style upon them of all
the Gentry and Inhabitants of that County, whereas (they say) so many more of
as good Quality as themselves, of that County, were of another opinion; and
have since, by their Petition to Us, disavowed that Act: Their Information, in
that point, is no better then it uses to be, and and they will find, that
neither the number, or the quality of those who have, or will disavow that
Petition, are as they imagine; though too many weak persons are missed (which
they do, and will every day more understand) by the Faction, Skill, and
Industry of that true Malignant Party, of which we do, and have reason to
complain: They say, they Have received no Petition of so strange a nature;
what nature? Contrary to the Votes of both Houses: that is, they have received
no Petition they had no mind to receive: But we told them, and we tell them
again, and all our good Subjects will tell them, that they have received
Petitions (with joy and approbation) against the votes of both Houses of their
Predecessors, confirmed and established into Laws, by the consent of Us and
our Ancestors, and allowed those Petitions to carry the Style, and to seem to
carry the desires o^ Cities, Towns, and Counties, when of either City, Town,
or County very few known or considerable persons have been privy to such
Petitions: whereas, in truth, the Petitions delivered to Us (against which they
except) carried not the Style of All, but Some of the Gentry and Inhabitants,
and employed no other consent, then such as went visibly along with it.

But we are all this while in a mistake The Magazine at Hull is not taken from
us: Who told you so? They who assure you (and whom, without breaking their
privileges, you must believe) that Sir Lo: Hothams shutting the gates against
us, and resisting our entrance with armed men (though we thought it in defiance
of us) was indeed in obedience to us and our Authority, and for our Service,
and the Service of the Kingdom. He was to let none in, but such as came with
our Authority, signified by both Houses of Parliament (himself and they had
ordered it so) and therefore he kept us out, only till We, or he might send
for their directions. We know not whether the Contrivers of that Declaration
meant that our good Subjects should so soon understand (though it was plain
enough to be understood) the meaning of the Kings authority, signified by both
ho^ses of Parliament: But sure the world will now easily discern, in what
miserable case we had, by this time, been ('it is bad enough as it is) if we had
consented to their Bill, or to their Ordinance of the Mili ia, and given those
men power to have raised all the Arms of the Kingdom against us (for the
common good) by our own Authority: would they not (as they have kept us from
Hull) by this time have beaten us from York and pursued us out of the Kingdom,
in our own behalf? Nay, may not this Munition (which is not taken from us) be
employed against us? Nor against our Authority, signified by both Houses of
Parliament, but only to kill those ill Counselors, the Malignant Party, which
is about us; and yet for our good, for the public good (they will declare it
so) and so no Treason within the Statute of 25. of Ed. the (...) has left us (
the King of England) absolutely (...) less provided for, in point of safety,
then the meanest Subjest of the Kingdom; and every Subject of this Land (for
whose security that Law was made, that they may know their duty, and their
danger in breaking it) may be made a Traitor, when these men please to say, He
is so: But do they think, that upon such an Interpretation (upon pretense of
Authority of Book-Cases, and Presidents, which, without doubt, they would have
cited, if they had been to their purpose) out of which nothing can result, but
confusion to King and people; will find any credit with our good Subjects? and
that so excellent a Law made both for security of King and people) shall be so
eluded, By an Interpretation, no learned Lawyer in England will at this hour
(We believe) set under his hand, notwithstanding the Authority of that
Declaration, which, we hope, shall bring nothing but infamy upon the
Contrivers of it.

Now to their privileges: Though it be true they say, That their privileges
do not extend to Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace, so as to attempt
Members from all manner of Process and Trial, yet it does privilege them in
the way or method of their Trial; the Cause must be first brought before them,
and their Consent asked before you can proceed: Why then their privileges
extend as far in these cases, as in any that are most unquestioned; for no
privilege whatsoever, exempts them from all manner of Process and Trial, if
you first acquaint the House with it, and they give you leave to proceed by
those Process, or to that Trial: But, by this Rule, if a Member of either House
commit a Murder, you must, by no means, meddle with him, till you have
acquainted that House (of which he is a Member) and received their direction
for your proceeding; assuring your self, He will not stir from that place
where you left him, till you return with their consent: Should it be
otherwise, it would be in the power of every man, under pretense of Murder, to
take one after another, and as many as he pleases, and so consequently bring a
Parliament to what he pleases, when he pleases: If a Member of either House
shall take a Purse at York (he may as probably take a Purse from a Subject, as
Arms against his King) you must ride to London to know what to do, and he may
ride with you, and take a new Purse every Stage, and must not be apprehended,
or declared a Felon, till you have asked that House, of which he is a Member:
Should it be otherwise, it might be in every man's power, to accuse as many
Members as he would, of taking Purses, and so bring a Parliament (and so all
Parliament,) to nothing. Would these men be believed? And yet they make no
doubt But every one who has taken the Protestation, will defend this Doctrine
with his Life and Fortune. Will not Our Subjects believe, That they have
imposed a pretty Protestation upon them, and that they had a very good end in
the doing it, if it obliges them to such hazards, to such undertakings? Must
they forget or neglect Our Person, Honor, and Estate, which by that
Protestation they are bound to defend, and in some degree do understand; and
must they only venture their Lives and Fortunes, to justify Privileges they
know not, or ever heard of before? Or are they bound, by that Protestation, to
believe, That the Framers of that Declaration, have power to extend their own
Privileges, as far as they think fit, and to contract Our Rights as much as
they please, and that they are bound to believe them in either, and to venture
their Lives and Fortunes in that quarrel?

From Declaring how mean a person we are, and how much the Kingdom has been
mistaken in the underdanding of the Statute of 25. E. 3. concerning Treason;
and that all men need not fear leavying War against us, so they have their
order to warrant them; they proceed, in the spirit of declaring, to certify
our Subjects in the mistakings, which near one hundred and fifty years have
been received, concerning the Statue of the eleventh year of H. 7. cap. 1. (a
Stature our good Subjects will read with comfort) and tell them, that the
serving of the King, for the time being, cannot be meant of Perkin Warbeck, or
of any that should call himself King, but Such a one as is allowed and received
by the Parliament in the behalf of the Kingdom; And are we not so allowed?
However through a dark mist of words, and urging their old Privileges (which
we hope we have sufficiently answered, and will be every day more confuted by
the actions of our good Subjects) they conclude, That those that shall guide
themselves by the judgment of Parliament (which they say is their own) ought,
whatsoever happen, to be secure and free from all all account and penalties,
upon the ground and equity of that very Statute. How far their own Chancellors
may help them in that equity, We know not, but (by the help of God, and that
good Law) we shall allow no such equity.

So then, here is the Doctrine of that Declaration, and these are the Positions
of the Contrivers of it.

1. That they have an absolute power of declaring the Law, and that what soever
they declare to be so, ought not to be questioned by our self, or any Subject:
so that all Right and safety of us and our people must depend upon their
pleasure.

2. That no Presidents can be limits to bound their proceedings: so they may do
what they please.

3. That a Parliament may dispose of any thing, wherein the King or Subject
has a right, for the public good; That they, without the King, are this
Parliament, and Judge of this public good; and that our consent is not
necessary: so, the life, and liberty of the Subject, and all the good Laws
made for the security of them, may be disposed of, and repealed by the major
part of both Houses, at any time present, and by any ways and means procured
so to be; and we have no power to protect them.

4. That no Member of either House, ought to be troubled or meddled with, for
Treason, Felony, or any other crime, without the cause first brought before
them, that they may judge of the fact, and their leave obtained to proceed.

5. That the soeveraigne power resides in both Houses of Parliament, and that
we have no negative voice: so then we our self must be subject to their
commands.

6. That the leavying of forces against te personal commands of the King
(though accompanied with his presence) is not leavying war against the King;
but the leavying war against his Laws and authority (which they have power to
declare and signify) though not against his person, is leavying war against
the King; and that Treason cannot be committed against his person, otherwise
then as he is entrusted with the Kingdom, and discharging that trust, and that
they have a power to judge whether he discharge this trust or no.

7. That, If they should makethe highest Presidents of other Parliaments, their
Patitions there would he no cause to complain of want of modesty or Duty in
them: That is, They may Depose us when they will, and are not to be blamed for
so doing.

And now (as if the mere publishing of their Resolutions, would not only
prevail with the people, but, in the instant, destroy all spirit and courage in
us, to preserve our own right and honor) they have, since, taken the boldness
to assault us with certain Propositions, which they call, The most necessary
effectual means for the removing those Iealousies and Differences between us
and our People: That is, that we will be content to direst our self of all our
Regal Rights and Dignities; be content with the Title of a King and suffer
them (according to their Discretion) to govern us and the Kingdom, and to
dispose of our Children: how suitable and agreeable this Doctrine, and these
Demands are, to the affection of our loving Subjects, under whose Trust these
men pretend to say and do these monstrous things, and to design, not only the
ruin of our Person, but of Monarchy it self (which we may justly say, is more
then ever was offered in any of our predecessors times; for though the Person
of the King has been sometimes unjustly deposed, yet the Regal power was
never, before this time, stricken at) we believe our good Subjects will find
some way to let them and the World know: and from this time such who have been
misled by their ill Counsels, to have any hand in the execution of the
Militia, will see to what ends their Service is designed; and therefore if they
shall presume hereafter to meddle in it, they must expect, that we will
immediately proceed against them as actual raisers of sedition, and as enemies
to our sovereign power.

We hane done: and shall now expect the worst actions these men have power to
commit against us: (worse words they cannot give us) and we doubt not, but the
major part of both Houses of Parliament, when they may come together with their
honor and safety, (as well those who were surprised, at the passing of it, and
unstood not the Malice in it, and the confusion that must grow by it, if
believed, as those who were absent or involved) will so far resent the
Indignity offered to us, the dishonor to themselves, and the mischief to the
whole Kingdom, by that Declaration, that they will speedily make the foul
Contrivers of it, instances of their exemplarie Justice, and brand them and
their Doctrine with the Marks of their perpetual Scorn and Indignation.

FINIS.

