CERTAIN QVERIES, Proposed by the KING, To the Lords and Commons Commissioners
from the Honorable Houses of Parliament, attending his Majesty at Holdenby,
the 23 of this instant April, 1647. touching the celebration of the feast of
EASTER.

With an Answer thereunto, given and presented to his Majesty by Sir JAMES
HARRINGTON Knight and Barronet a Commissioner there.

LONDON, Printed for John Giles, April 27. 1647.

I desire to be Resolved of this Question Why the new Reformers discharges the
keeping of Easter?

The reason for this Query is,

C. REX.

May it please Your MAjESTY,
I Cannot but from the blessed Example of our Savior (who was in his Age a new
Reformer of old errors, viz. The false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 5. 20.) but account all such Reformers in our times, blessed also; but for
the keeping of Easter although I know not any Ordinance of Parliament
discharging it; yet with submission to better judgments, I in all dutifulness
conceive that Your Majesty's Reason upon which Your Queery is built, has a
great mistake even in the foundation of it, You being pleased to lay this for a
ground that the change of the Sabbath, and the Institution of Easter are by one
and the same equal authority and Ecclesiastical Decree, which with Your
Majesty's favor I cannot yield to, for I humbly conceive that the change of
the Jewish Sabbath (the commemoration of the work of the Creation) unto the
Lords day, the remembrance of that greaterwork (the work of Redemption
finished upon this day of the Lords Resurrection) was by no less then by
Divine authority, because the keeping of one day in seven as a Sabbath to God,
was not only sanctified and set a part by Gods own example in the Creation,
Genesis 2. ver. 3. and accordingly observed by the Israelites many weeks before
the Law was given Ex. 16. ver. 23. but is one of the ten Commandments
delivered by Gods own voice, on Mount Sinay, Written by his own finger in
Tables of stone, commanded by himself to be put into the Arc of the Covenant,
which decalogue or ten Commandments, are also by our blessed Savior in his
Sermon upon the Mount, declared to be the rule of his peoples moral obedience
unto the end of the World, Mat. 5. 17. And in the following part of that
Sermon, wherein he vindicates the Law from the corrupt glosses of the Scribes
and Pharisees; He instances only in moral duties and moral Laws, from all
which Divines generally infer that the Decalogue is to continue in force unto
the worlds end; And therefore it seems most apparent that no authority that is
inferior to that which appointed the seventh day from the Creation to be the
Sabbath, could abrogate that day and appoint another day to be used instead of
it, because neither the Law of Nature nor the holy Scripture does any where
give the least intimation, that any humane power may change any of the
Commandments of God, and indeed so many absurdities would follow upon such an
assertion, that I am confident Your Majejesty will not own it; It remains
therefore that the change of the day must needs be the work of Christ
himself, or of his Apostles, who were Divinely inspired, Acts 15. 21. And to
prove that it was so, viz. That by Divine institution, the Lords day now
succeeds in the room of the Jewish Sabbath, I shall use no other Arguments then
those which I find in learned Bishop Andrews his Speech in the Star Chamber
at the Censure of Mr. Traske; who expressly says, that it has ever been the
Churches Doctrine that Christ made an end of all Sabboths by his Sabbath in the
Grave; And that presently the Lords Day came in the place of it, And that
according to Austens judgment, The Lords Day is declared to be the Christian
Sabbath by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which the said Bishop not only
says, but proves by these Arguments, first because he then began the new
world Heb. 1. 2. by whom he made the world, the first world which ended with
his burial, the second world or new creation which began with his
resurrection; secondly because the four Evangelists say Christ rose una
Sabbatorum, that is the first day of the week; thirdly the Apostles kept their
holy meetings on that day, to Preach and Pray and Celebrate the Lords Supper,
Act. 20. 7. fourthly the day is called the Lords day, not only in the Apostles
time, but by the Apostle John himself, Revel. 1. 10. And he further adds that
this epithet (Dominicum) in the Scripture is only applied to these two, the
Lords day and the Lords Supper, to show that they are both to be taken alike in
the Scripture: fifthly he says we have not only example but express precept
for it, 1 Cor. 16. 2. that upon the first day of the week which was the day of
their Assembly, then collections o^ oblations should be made; and lastly he
affirms that in all ages of the Church this day was observed; To this I may
add our Saviors rest upon that day from his works, Heb. 4*10. His often
visiting his Apostles during the forty days after his resurrection, upon that
day speaking of the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3. Now
what more material thing was there to be declared to them then this, the
change of the Sabbath, and the appointing a set time for his worship, he
accordingly appearing thrice upon the first day of the week, besides his being
seen of the women, Mat. 28. 9. to teach and instruct his Disciples, first to
the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, Luke 24. 15. secondly to the Apostles
when Thomas was absent, John. 20. ver. 19. and the third time when Thomas was
present, John. 20. 26. As also observe that those wonderful and extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost were poured out according to his promise upon the
Apostles and Church (then) met together, Act. 2. 1. The day of Penticost being
the morrow after the seventh sabbath, to be accounted from the day of the
sheafe-offering, Levit. 23. 15. by all which he seems to have honored and set
apart that day above others for his service; lastly this being a principal
institution might probably be one of those decrees ordained by the Apostles as
well as that concerning the sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 34. and delivered by Paul to
the Churches in all the Cities through which he passed, Act. 16. ve. 4. But for
the observation of Easter to be an annual festival to Christians I find
nothing in the holy Scripture, and your Majesty is pleased to place it only
upon the Churches authority; And although I will not contend about the Churches
power of Institution of such things as are simply indifferent, yet I suppose I
may boldly assert that such things as are instituted only by Ecclesiastical
Authority, having no footesteps in the Scripture, may be by Ecclesiastical
Authority be altered and laid aside.

Your Majesty's most loyal subject and humble servant.

FINIS.

