HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION And MESSAGE, To the Marquis of Ormond, in the
Kingdom of Ireland, concerning the Parliament of England, assembled at
Westminst^r, and the Army under the Command of the L G. Fairfax. Wi^h a
dangerous Declaration and Protestation of the said Marquis, to the Kings most
sacred Majesty and all other his loyal and liege People whatsoev^r, and his
Art^cles, Proposalls, and R^solution thereupon, to defend his dread Sovereign.

Signed, ORMOND.

Likewise, a new Message from his Excellency, the Lord Genesis Fairfax, to the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Comm^n C^uncell of the City of London, on Wednesday
night last, and their Results and Proceedings thereupon.

C R
HONI SOIT OVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and used as a
printer's device

London, Printed in the Year, 1648.

His Majesty's Message to the Marquis of Ormond, concerning the Lord General
Fairfax, and his Army.
RIght trusty and entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor, we greet you well,
whereas we have received several informations from our two Houses of
Parliament, concerning your proceedings with the Confederate Roman Catholics
in the Kingdom of Ireland, (the several votes and extracts whereof we do
herewi h transmit unto you) and for as much as we are now engaged in a Treaty
of Peace with our 2 Houses, wherein we have made such large concessions, as we
hope will prove the foundation of a blessed Peace. And we having consented by
one Article (if the said Treaty take effect) to entrust the prosecution and
mannagement of the War in Ireland, to the guidance and advice of our 2. Houses.
We have therefore thought fit hereby to require you to desert from any farther
proceedings upon the matters contained in the said papers. And we expect such
obedience unto this command, that our 2. Houses desires may be fully satisfied.

Given at Newport in the Isle of Wight, the 25. of November. in the 24. year of
our Reign.
To our right trusty and well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, James Marquis of
Ormond.
The Declaration of the Marquis of Ormund.
TO prevent too frequent prejudices incident through jealousies, distrusts, and
mis-constructions to all undertakings, We account it not the least worth of our
labors, upon the instant of our arivall, to prepare this people, whose welfare
we contend for, with right understanding of those intentions in Us, which in
order to his Majesty's service, We desire may terminate in their goods.

To enumerate the several reasons by which we were induced (for preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the English interest) to leave the City of
Dublin, and other his Majesty's Garrisons then under our power in this
Kingdom, in the hands of those entrusted by his two Houses of Parliament, were
to set out a narrative in place of a manifest. It may suffice to be known, that
those transactions had for one main ground this confidence, that being under
the power of the houses, they would upon a happy expected composure of
affairs in England, revert unto, and be revested in his Majesty's proper right.

But having found how contrary to the inclinations of the well affected to his
Majesty's restoration in England the power of that Kingdom has unhappily
devolved to hands employed only in the Art and labor of plucking down, and
subverting the fundamentals of Monarchy (with whom a pernicious Party in this
Kingdom, do equally sympathize and cooperate.) And being filled with a deep
sense of the duty and obligations that are upon us, strictly to embrace all
opportunities of employing our endeavors toward the recovery of his Majesty's
just rights in any part of his Dominions.

Having observed the Protestant Army in the Province of Munster (by special
providence discovering the arts and practice used to entangle the members
thereof, in engagements as directly contrary to their duties toward God and
man, as to their intentions and resolutions) to have found means to manifest
the candor and integrity thereof in a disclamor of any obedience to our
concurrence with those powers or persons which have so grosely varied even
their own professed principles of preserving his Maj. person and rights, by
confining him under a most strict imprisonment, his Maj. also vouchsafing to
graciously accept the Declaration of the said Army, as an eminent and
seasonable expression of their fidelity toward him, and in testimony
thereof, having laid his commands upon us, to make our repair unto this
Province, to discharge the duties of our place.

We have as well in obedienne thereunto, as in pursuance of our own duty, and
desire to advance his Maj. service, resolved to evidence our approbation and
esteem of the proceedings of the said Army by publishing unto the world our
like determination in the same ensuing particulars: And accordingly we
profess and declare,

1. To improve our utmost endeavors for the settlement of the Protestant
Religion according to the example of the best reformed Churches.

2. To defend the King in his Prerogatives.

3. To maintain the privileges and freedom of Pail. and the liberty of the
Subjects. That in order hereunto, we shall oppose to the hazard of our lives,
those Rebels of this Kingdom, who shall refuse their obedience to his Maj. upon
such terms as he has thought fit by us to require it; and we shall endeavor
to the utmost, the suppressing of the Independent Party, who have thus fi^rcely
labored the extirpation of the true Protestant Religion, the ruin of our
Prince, the dishonor of Parl. and the vassallage of our fellow Subjects,
against all those who shall depend upon them, or adhere unto them. And that
this our undertaking might not appear obnoxious to the Trade of England, but
that we desire a firm Union and Agreement be preserved betwixt us. We do
likewise declare that we will continue free traffic and commerce with all his
Maj. good Subjects of England, and that we will not in the least manner
prejudice any of them that shall have recourse to our harbors, either in their
bodies, ships or goods, nor shall we take any thing from them without payment
of ready money for the same, and now, that by his Maj. said Command, We have
proceeded to reenter upon the work of his service in this Province, we conceive
no higher testimony can be given of his Maj. acceptance, or of the
estimation* We bear about us, toward their proceedings, then by resorting unto
them in person with his Maj. authority, and exhibiting unto them the
encouragement and satisfaction they may receive in this assurance. That as we
bear an especial regard to their present undertakings and performances,
accompanied with a real sense of their former sufferings, So least there
should any advantages be derived unto those who endeavor to improve all
opportunities of sowing sedition, and distrust by this suggestion? That the
former differences in judgment and opinion, which have induced persons to serve
diversely under his M^j. and the Parl. will occasion a prejudice or ill
resentment to arise toward such persons as have not formerly concurred in
judgment with others in his Maj. ^ervice: We do declare that we are qualified
with special power and authority from his Maj. to assure them, that no
distinction shall be made in any such consideration, but that all persons now
interested and engaged in this cause, shall be reflicted upon with equal
favor and regard.

And that we shall make it our endeavors to improve and confirm His Majesty's
gracious disposure toward them, as that We will never call to memory any past
difference in Opion, Judgment, Action, or Prof^ssion, to the prejudice of any
member of this Army, or any Person rela^ing to it; but on the contrary, shall
be ready to attest ou^ good affection toward them, in the discharge of such
good Offices as shall be in Our power; In return whereof, We shall only
expect their perseverance in their present engagements for his Majesti^s
Service, with such allacritie, constancy, and affection, as may suite with
their late Public Declaration, and Professions, To whom We shall in the future
use our utmost care and diligence to provide for their preservation from the
like hardships, to those they have formerlie undergon; So We have already
employed Our best industry and endeavors for the settlement of such a course,
as we may (with most reason) hope, will in these uncertain times produce a
constant and competent subsistence for them, enabling them to make such a
progress in their present undertakings, as may with the great Ends thereof,
establish their own honor and content: Thus much We have thought fit to
publish to the world, to furnish it with an evidence of strong conviction
against Us, if ever we swerve (to the best of our power) from the just ways of
maintaining the true Protestant Religion, the honor and Interest of His Sacred
Majesty, the just Rights of Parliaments, the Liberties of the Subjects, and
the safety, quiet, and welfare of the People entrusted to Our care.

On Wednesday night last, His Excellency the Lord General Fairefax, sent a
Message to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
London, by Scout Master General Pitson, intimating his desire, to preserve the
peace and safety of the said City; and (as is said) to have the Sum of
40000 l. speedily collected; Whereupon a Common Council was called, and the
results was, That all possible care should be taken, for the satisfying his
Excellencies desires, and keeping a mutual correspondencie between the City
and Army.

FINIS.

