THE CHARGE OF High Treason: DELIVERED Into the House of Lords (upon Oath) by
Mr. Richard Osburn, against Cap. Rolph.

ABOUT The Design to have poisoned or made away the Kings Majesty.

AND The ORDERS of the House of Lords for Captain Rolphs Trial.



LONDON, Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men. M DC XL VIII.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by English lion and Scottish
unicorn
THE Substance of the Charge of High Treason delivered into the House of Lords
(upon Oath) BY Mr. Richard Osburne, against Cap-taine Rolph, about the Design
to have poisoned, or made away the KINGS MAJESTY.
I. THat Captain Rolph, has been privy to several Letters, sent from some
persons in the Lord Fairfaxes Army, intimating that the Kings person might by
any means be removed out of the way.

II. That the said Captain Rolph, had knowledge that the said Letters did some
of them intimate His Majesty's remove out of the way to be by poison, or
otherways, to the great hazard of His Majesty's person.

III. That the said Captain Rolph has used means to persuade the said Osburne
to join with him in the design concerning His Majesty.

IV. That in this joining of the said Osburne with Captain Rolph, the said
Captain Rolph propounded that it might be taken into consideration how to
remove the King out of the Castle.

V. That the said Captain Rolph propounded to him the said Osburne, That His
Majesty might be removed to a place of more secrecy.

VI. That the said Captain Rolph did proffer to the said Osburne that they
should take an oath, and swear each to other.

VII. That to persuade the said Osburne to join with him therein: He the said
Captain Rolph, did proffer to do what was propounded, without the privity of
Collonell Hammond the Governor.

VIII. That the said Captain Rolph has said that the King was in too public
a place, in Carisbrooke Castle; from whence he might be rescued.

IX. That the said Captain Rolph declared to him the said Osburne, That if the
King might be convayed into some place of secrefic, they might dispose of His
person upon all occasions, as they thought fit.

X. That this private conveyance (of the Kings person away) he declared he was
confident they might effect without the Governors privity.

THE Orders of the House of Lords for Cap-taine Rolphs Trial
I. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That Captain Rolph be apprehended by
Mr. Thane, the Gentleman Vshur of this House, and carried to the Prison of the
Gatehouse at Westminster.

II. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament that Sergeant Finch draw up an
Impeachment of High Treason against Captain Rolph, And that Mr. Richard
Osburne do attend the said Sergeant Finch for that purpose.

Captain Rolph being apprehended) declares that the said Charge against him is
false, and desires only a fair legal Trial, which he is to have suddenly,
at the Lords Bar.

June 16, 1648.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Manchester Speaker of the House of Peers,
pro tempore.
Right Honorable,
I Did by a Letter of the first of June acquaint my Lord Wharton with what I
send here enclosed, expecting it would before this have been communicated to
both Houses: what should be the reason of concealing a business of this nature
I know not, except it be to give those time that are concerned in it better to
think of some stratagem to evade this discovery.

I humbly desire your Lordship upon sight of this relation, to communicate it
to the House of Peers, which I shall be ready to attest upon oath in every
particular, when ever their Lordships shall please to allow me that freedom
and security which ought to be afforded to any Gentleman and Christian, in
witnessing a truth.

My Lord, I am your Lordships humble servant, Rich. Osburne.

1 June 1648:
For the Right Honorable the Lord Wharton,
My Lord,
THough I cannot but imagine I stand so highly condemned in your Lordships and
many persons thoughts, that any thing of vindication from me must come with all
the disadvantage and prejudice that may be; yet (My Lord) being conscious of my
own integrity, and confident that I shall be judged by your Lordship by no
other rules but those of justice and reason, I cannot doubt but when I have
discovered the grounds and reasons of my actions, that it will appear to your
Lordship that what I have done has bin agreeable to the several duties I
stand engaged in, as I am supposed to have acted contrary before I am heard.

Not to detain your Lordship in circumstances, I shall make this Protestation,
that as no other thing but the danger of the Kings life could in reason excuse
such attempt: So I do protest that no inferior considerations did or could
have moved to such an action; But my Lord having had such particular and
well-grounded information, that so horrid a design was intended and moved from
those that could when they pleased have had power to put it in execution; I
hope I shall not be censured for having post posed all other considerations to
that Loyalty which cannot be questioned but I owe to the King.

But not to leave your Lordship unsatisfied with this general account, the
intelligence I speak of, concerning this design, I received from Cap. Rolfe, a
person very intimate with the Governor, privy to all counsels and one that is
very high in the esteem of the Army; he My Lord, informed me that to his
knowledge the Governor had received several Letters from the Army, intimating
the King might by any means be removed out of the way, either by poison or
otherwise; and that another time the same person persuaded me to join with him
in a design to remove the King out of that Castle to a place of more secrecy,
proffering to take an oath with me, and to do it without the Governors privity,
who he said would not consent for losing the allowance of the house, his
pretense to this attempt was, that the King was in too public a place, from
whence he might be rescued, but if he might be conveyed into some place of
secrecy, he said we might dispose of his person upon all occasions as we
thought fit; and this he was confident we could effect without the Governors
privity. My Lord, considering all these pregnant circumstances, I think it will
appear that there were, if there are no such intentions concerning his
Majesty's person, as may well justify my endeavors that have been made for his
remove from so much danger: and for my own part, My Lord, I must be so plain as
to declare concerning my own actings in relation to this business, that had I
done this (having such grounds) I must believe I had then verified all those
aspersions of disloyalty and breach of Trust, which I am contented to suffer
from those whose interest is perchance opposed to my endevors to prevent such
domnable designs.

My Lord, I have spoken nothing here, but what I shall be ready to testify
upon oath when ever I shall be called to it, with promise of freedom and
security, till then I must be content to support all censures, and satisfy my
self with the vindication I receive from my own conscience.

I am your Lordships humble servant Rich. Osburne.

FINIS.

