A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE QUEEN.

With some OBSERVATIONS thereupon.

Wherein His Majesty's Actions are deciphered.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON; Printed for Hannah Allen in Popes-head-Alley at the sign of the
Crown. 1648.

To the Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader;
Last new discoveries should cause old actions to be forgotten, I thought it no
less than part of my duty, in a brief manner, to put thee in mind of some
few particulars, whereby thou may the better satisfy thy self and others in
things of this nature; not that it is any way pleasing to me, to rip open old
offenses after renewed repentance, but surly persisting in evil without
remorse, deserves no less than sharp reproof, wheresoever it is found. Here
I shall desire thee to consider of this following Letter from the King to the
Queen. Farewell.

S. E.

THE KINGS LETTER TO THE QVEENE.
DEAR HEART;
I Will be ever constant to the rules and grounds thou lefts with me, and that
the Treaty at Uxbridge was according to the little Paper thou lefts with me,
and I commend thee for thy dexterity and activity, and I think none more fit to
be a means of a glorious peace of this Kingdom, but thy self, and without thy
company, I can neither have peace nor comfort, for I value thy love above all
earthly things, and that is my contentment, for all my actions are inseparably
joined with thine; and shall ever tend to serve and please thee, and no danger
of death or misery, (which I think much worse) shall make me do any thing
unworthy of thy love, and I hope the difference between the Scots and the
Independents will increase, and the dissentions at London are rather increasing
than ceasing; and be confident, I will not desert the Bishops and Papists, mine
and thy best friends. And if thou approve of it, I will bestow Percies place
upon the Earl of Newcastle, and will not engage my self before I have thy
answer, and fear not, I have a little more wit than to go to London, or
disband any Army before a peace. The Rebels now brutish General has refused
to meddle with foreign Passes, and I am well freed now from the base and
mutinous motions by my mungrell Parliament here: and I advise thee, France is
the best way for transporting of the Duke of Loraines Army into England. As for
trusting the Rebels, either in going to London, or disbanding my Army before a
Peace, do no ways fear the hazarding so cheaply and foolishly my discretion;
for I esteem the interest thou have in me at a far greater rate, and pretend
to have a little more wit, at least the sympathy that is between us, than put
my self into the reference of perfidious Rebels. Also I give thee power in my
name to promise to whom thou think fit to trust with so great a secret, that I
will suspend all Laws against the Roman Catholics in England and Ireland, as
soon as God shall enable me, I will take them away by a Law, so as by thy
means and favor, I may have so powerful an assistance against my Rebels of
England and Scotland, as may deserve so great a favor, and enable me to do
it; and also to promise them in Ireland, if you can have it no cheaper, that I
will join with their Forces against Inchqueene, and the Scots, and if I had
had but two of my mind, I would never have called them a Parliament: and the
argument that prevailed with me, that the calling of them did not acknowledge
them to be a Parliament: upon which consideration and condition, I did it and
no otherwise, and accordingly it is regestred in the Councell-booke with the
Councels unanimous approbation: and I pray consider above all earthly things,
that my contentment is inseparably joined with thine, for all my actions shall
ever tend to serve and please thee. I remain eternally thine,

C. R.

OBSERVATIONS UPON the Kings Letter to the Queen.
THe Queen in the first place, in her Letter then taken, advises the King to
disband this perpetual Parliament, and she certainly says, all the rest will
easily follow. And if ever you go to London before the Parliament is ended
without an Army, you are lost: and above all, have a care not to desert the
Bishops, and poor Catholics, who have faithfully served you. And had not the
King by a still March brought us a great way toward Popery and Tyranny; had
not the Conductors missed their way, and led us too far North; and was not a
strange wife prepared for him, which according to the Scripture-truth, is a
dangerous preparative for a strange god, for the King being in full conjunction
with the Popish Planet the Queen, he was totally eclipsed by her counsel, who
under the Royal Curtains persuaded him to advance the plots of the
Catholics under the color of the Protestant Religion: Did not he go into
Spain to learn the Protestant Religion? and then returned and married a
Catholic Queen: Else what think you meant the suspending of Lectures, as an
order of vagrants; then forbidding all Pastors to preach on the week days in
their own Parishes; then to inhibite preaching on the Lords day in the
afternoon; the forbidding all prayer, but in the words of the Cannon; then
bringing in Popish Ceremonies; and the Table must be set Altar-wise, and all
compelled to kneel before it, or not to be admitted to receive the Sacrament;
and then it must be cried up to be the Sanctum Sanctorum, and all must adore
and bow before it; Then an Edict must be read against our Brethren the Scots,
and an oath for Episcopacy, and pressing examples to dazell the eyes of the
less judicious of the Kingdom. As the King, the Lord Bishops, the Lords of
the most noble order of the Garter, bow toward the Altar at their Enstalment,
in his Majesty's Chapel, and it is thus and thus adorned, and so they do it
by degrees, for fear of noise, and do it so as we shall neither know nor see.
And what have you forgotten the many indulgences done by Windebanke the Kings
Secretary, to multitudes of condemned Priests and Jesuits: the Popes Nuncio's
residence here, and the several Letters to the Pope, and from the Pope about a
reconciliation with Rome, and of a Cardinal Cap sent into this Kingdom? And
can any reasonable man imagine, but it was sent to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that great Prelate and favorite of the Kings? Also remember his
Majesty's Letter to Capt. Pennington, the Vice Admiral, to deliver up the
English Fleet to the French, and if any should disobey, he should sink them,
to the utter ruin of the Protestants in France. Concerning Ireland, have you
forgotten the often private meetings at White Hall two months before the
rebellion in Ireland broke forth by Muskery Plumket, Brown, and Gormonston,
etc. the arch Rebels of Ireland, and now of the supreme Council at Kilkenny
in Ireland? and when the King first heard of that horrid rebellion, and of the
massacre of 100000 of his Protestant Subjects (he being in Scotland) diverse
standers by then did discover by the Kings several questions to the Messenger,
and by his gesture, that he had little sorrow for so horrible and treacherous a
massacre. And how often was he pressed at the beginning of the rebellion, to
publish Proclamation against them, by the Proclamation of England, and to be
read in all the Churches of this Kingdom? And with what difficulty it was
gotten, and but forty must be printed, and none issued out but by his Majesty's
special command. And did not the Irish Rebels call themselves the Kings and
Queens Army in all their Papers and transaction of business; saying, they have
good warrant under black and white for their proceedings, and crying out
against the English-Parliament, and Puritans, as the Kings enemies, and theirs?
and diverse depositions and papers, etc. extant and in print to that purpose
before these unnatural wars began, that they have the broad Seal for their
warrant. And have you forgotten the great General Oneale his offer to the
General Monrose, the Scots General in that Kingdom, that who could show, of
them two, the best Commission from the King, should submit to each other? Did
not the Lord Digbies Letters lately taken in a battle by the Lord Inchequeene,
advise the Lord Taffe not to fight, for all the Kings designs and welfare, did
much depend upon the good success of that Army, which by the hand of
providence is since broken? His employing the Lord Taffe in England, and many
other Irish in his Army against the Parliament, is too apparent. Must not
glamongon make peace with the Irish Rebels, when the Earl of Ormond would not
do it; and Digby must accuse Glamorgon for so doing? both which have been
Agents since for his Majesty, and granted them all they could desire of him
underhand, as fearing so broad faced iniquity, no mask either in Oxford or
Dublin would fit. And was not the Sabbath at White Hall for diverse years
before these troubles supplied with strange Chaplins, that constantly preached
up the Kings Prerogative; and set before him; by way of emulation, the broken
Parliament of France, etc. and that he was Lord of all the Kingdom, and that
all men's estates were his; And that if the King, like Nebuchadnezzar, should
set up a golden image to be adored, the people if they refused that Idolatry,
are bound to suffer death quietly, and not resist the King, as if whole Nations
were made for the pleasure and will of a King, and be subject to him, as the
beasts were to Adam: and such men as these generally were preferred by the
Bishops, which when they had another head the Pope, the matters of State, many
times went very justly, for the interest of the Commonwealth; but of latter
times were mere servants to Prerogative, and against all interest of the
Commonwealth. And has not King CHARLES ever called Parliaments factious, etc.
because they were ever opposite to his Tyrannical Prerogative, and Court
designs? And have you forgot the under hand dealings with the King of Denmark,
as appears by the Kings own Letters and practices with the Army raised
against the Scots, and with the Scots Army. Also large proffers of the four
Northern Counti^s, and pillage of London, as was commonly reported, for the
destruction of the Parliament, before any war was thought on. And when he
pretended to raise a Guard only for the safety of his person, soon after his
endeavor of that horrid violation intended to the five members of the house of
Commons. Was not the Jewels of the Crown pawned by his Catholic Queen, for
to buy Powder and Arms to fight in England for the Protestant Religion, and
liberty of the Subjects? And were not all Papists forbidden to come to the
Court at York, until he had engaged great numbers of the prelaticall,
ambitious, needy, and beggarly Court-Protestants, and he knowing they being
once engaged, could not well go back; then he sends for the Papists horses,
that he might set Protestant-riders (as he pretended) upon them: and soon
after issued out a Proclamation, that all Papists might arm themselves for
their own defense: and not long after, he did receive hundreds and thousands of
them into his Army, in England, Ireland, and Scotland, etc. And have not the
Kings Army had all the prayers and contributions from Rome, and from all other
Catholics in Christendom, for his Majesty's good success in his war
against the Parliament? And has he not for diverse years been butchering and
spoiling his protestant Subjects in these three Kingdoms (as a sacrifice to
his prerogative) by hanging up fourteen Clothiers, he being present? And has
not he and his agents by his Lions skin and Machavilian policy, gone about to
apply to every man in great trust and eminency, several baits of honor and
profit, according to their several humors, and corrupted many eminent persons
in this Kingdom, and have made them fall from their first principles? and has
not he used all means to divide, that he might destroy us, and to bring the
King dome into that condition that the Parliament should be constrained to
disengage the people by requiring large contributions, rather than engage them
by present freedom and reformation? Have not his designs been to bring in
Popery and Tyranny into Scotland, beyond expression, and his often breach of
Treaties with them, and designs to have destroyed the most eminent persons
amongst them; as the Marquess Hamilton, Argile, and Lowden? And have you
forgotten what has bin commonly talked concerning King Jamses death, and what
a great account he has to make for not planting the protestants religion in
Ireland: and for not ayding the protestants in Germany, and in the Palatinate?
And did not Hinderson, that godly and learned Divine tell him, he had made them
1500 widows in Scotland in one morning: And have you forgotten the
Commissioners of Scotland, when he desired about three years since a personal
Treaty, they told him in the name of that Kingdom plainly and honestly, that
they could not admit of it, though desired by his Majesty, for they told him
there has been so much innocent blood of his good Subjects shed in this
unnatural War by his Majesty's Command, and Commissions. First, Irish Rebels
brought over into both his Kingdoms, and also from sorreine parts, etc. There
being also Forces in Scotland against that Parliament, and the Kingdom by his
Majesty's Commission. The war in Ireland fomented and prolonged by his
Majesty's Command, whereby the Kingdoms are brought near to utter ruin and
destruction; we conceive that until satisfaction be first given to both his
Kingdoms, his Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by us assented
unto: And has he since recalled his Proclamations, and given satisfaction for
the bloodshed, and security to the peace of the Kingdoms, yea or no; and have
not the Scots consented to the making void the titles of honor bestowed on
such as have fought against the Parliament (I hope the Scots have not
considered better of the virtue and merits of those men that fought against the
Parliament, though their language of late have been very large concerning
Prerogative) look but back before this Parliament, if ever well minded
Countrymen, that thought their Countries privilege and their own birthright
worth the standing for, was not called Puritans, and of late years Round
heads; and take heed now, though you have a fair game to play, that you are
not cheated of your Religion and Liberty, for Antichrist turns himself now
into another shape, and name; now he sees his Kingdom almost destroyed in this
Kingdom by taking away the Prelates, which were the pillars thereof, etc. And
now are not by him the great Champions of the Army, Parliament, and Country,
that stand for a good peace, liberty, and freedom, of the freeborn people of
England, and against a Regal Militia, and a negative voice, and against an
unlimited power, (that some of the Clergy desire under the pretense that they
and their Elders must be Judges of what is scandalous, and what is ignorance, a
greater power than ever the Bishops had, though under a new name;) called
Independents, Brownists, Sectaries, etc. whatsoever their opinions be, for by
this trick and some other, he thinks to gain the Scots Nation, with a
considerable party of the City, to those he has there already, and earnestly
endeavored to make a division in the House, by being in the likeness of a
Presbyterian, until such time as we have gotten the King into our power,
PLACE="marg" The Kings party.
and then a considerable Army of French, and our Catholic brethren of
Ireland, about him, and then we will put the Scots in mind, it is no deceit to
deceive the deceiver; And then we will put the Londoners in mind of their
former zeal to the Parliament cause; and let them know our good King has
often called them the Rebellious City, and has long time since given them us
for our arreares; And is it not now come to pass, that whosoever is an active
man for the Parliament, whatsoever his judgment be, he must be called an
Independent, or an Anabaptist; This Parliament did not begin to lop the
branches as former Parliaments did, but to hew down the maine body of the
tree, as, Canterbury, and Strafford. And have not they broken many an iron yoke
for you, by taking away Bishops, Councell-Table, Star Chamber, Court of
Wards, High Commission Courts, Shipmoney, Knighthood, Forests Laws, and
multitudes of several Monopolies, even to the marrow-bones and rags upon the
dunghill; and freed you from the design of bringing in the Germaine-Horses;
and from enslaving you, as in France, etc.

And now Reader, judge whether a King or a Parliament is most likely to bring
in Popery, and an arbitrary and tyrannical government into this Kingdom. And
are they not chosen by you, and had but only these two things to choose,
either to give you, and your posterity up to slavery, or ruin, or to hazard
the ruining of themselves, and families; and if you desert them, you desert
your selves. The Wolves desired the Sheep to put away the Dogs, and then they
would enter into a League with them, and when they had thereby stripped
themselves of their best friends, and laid themselves open to their fierce
foes, they were then devoured without pity. And many other particulars might
be instanced, to make as bloody a History of this Kings Reign, as ever was
since the world began. Judge if it be agreeable with divine dispensation, that
all this stir, and bloodshed, etc. should procure, now at last, but a cold
accommodation: and God grant the drawing of this Curtain may be as fatal to
Popery, and tyranny, and all other Antichristian heresies, (here now) as the
rending of the veil was to the Jewish Ceremonies (in Judea) at the Incarnation
of our Savior.

FINIS.

