A Pretended VOICE FROM HEAVEN, Proved to be The Voice of Man, and not of God.

OR, AN ANSWER To a Treatise, called A Voice from Heaven, Written by Mr.
Gualter Postlethwait, an unordained Preacher, Taking upon him to exercise the
Pastoral charge, in a Congregation at Lewis in Sussex.

Wherein, his weakness, in undertaking to prove all Protestant Churches to be
Antichristian, and to be separated from, as no true Churches of Christ, is
discovered; and the sinfulness of such a Separation evinced.

Together with, A brief Answer inserted, to the Arguments for Popular
Ordination, brought by the Answerers of Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, in
their Book called The Preacher sent.

By Ezekiel Charke, M. A. And Rector of Waldron in Sussex.

Job 6.25. How forcible are right words? but what does your arguing reprove?
Gal. 4.17. They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude us,
that you might affect them. Imprimatur,

Edmond Calamy.



London, Printed for Andrew Kembe, and are to be sold at his shop at St.
Margarets hill, near the Talbot in Southwark and under St. Margarets Church on
New-Fishstreet-hill. 1659.

To the Christian Reader.
Reader,
UNderstand the Reasons, why this Answer came forth no sooner, to be, 1 That
Mr. P's Book had been a good while public, ere I thought of being his
Respondent. 2 This Answer was drawn up, above a year since; But some Brethren
not judging his Book worth an answer, I had almost resolved to lay it by. Yet
afterward, considering that some answer might be needful, for the Peoples
sake in these parts, some of whom are easily shaken, and to repress Mr. P's
Arrogance; I reviewed and contracted it, and divided it into Sections. 3 There
coming of late to my hands, the Book called The Preacher sent; which pleads,
among other things, for a popular Ordination of Ministers: I judged it
convenient, to insert an Answer to that part of their Treatise in mine.

Withal, I desire thee to take notice, that although many things in this
Treatise, touch the Congregational Brethren in general; Yet, I put a great deal
of difference, between many of them, and Mr. P. and those of his way and mind:
Well knowing, that their Moderation, freeth them, from many of those charges,
which his rigid principles and way fall under; And, that there are hopes, that
if matters between us, were subjected to a fair, free, and amicable inquiry,
upon principles owned on both sides, (but rejected mostly, by those of the
principles and way, which Mr. P. cleaves to) we might prove agreed.

For the evidencing of which, I shall set down those Principles, as yielded and
owned by some of the chief Masters of their Assemblies in their Tracts, wherein
they hold a fair correspondency with us.

1 Concerning the Subject of Church Power and Rule, in general.
Mr. Cotton Keys. p. 20.
The Key of authority and rule, is committed to the Elders of the Church; and
so, the act of Rule, is made the proper act of their Office. The Church, and
its Elders, are not Coordinate societies, in respect of ordinary execution.
Mr. Noy, p. 34. etc.
A necessity of Members consent in ordinary execution, constitutes a Church
excessively Democratical, and renders the Elders only Titular Governors.
Governors or Rulers should have judicial power, to constrain obedience, which
is inconsistent with a necessity of the members consent. The Relation of Elders
to Churches, does challenge power complete. The Church is to be carried, not to
carry; to obey, not to command; to be subject, not to govern, etc.

2 Concerning the Subject of power, for admission of Members, and
Excommunication.
Mr. Cotton. Keye^ p. 21 Mr. Noyes p. 33, 34, 39.
It is an Act of the power of the Elders, to examine any whether Officers or
others, before they be received of the Church.

It is naturally in the power of the Presbytery, to admonish the whole Church,
to suspend the whole Church, in respect of the Seals, Elders, have as full
power, to Baptize, as to teach; and by consequence they have full power to
admit Members. What the Apostles could do in all Churches, that the ordinary
Elders can do, in respect of ordinary administration, within the Sphaeres of
their particular Churches; and the Apostles could admit, excommunicate,
threaten the Rod, make Decrees, etc. They did not ask the vote of the Church,
in admissions or excommunications. Philip could admit without the Church. The
twelve gates of New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. are the particular Churches; The Angels
are Presbyters, and are set to govern the gates, they are not to open and shut
of themselves, but the Angels are to open and shut them, in the use of the
Keys.

Mr. Baines Dioces. trial. p. 79, etc.
The Church Christ speaks of, Matthew. 18.17. he does suppose it, as the
ordinary Executioner of all Discipline, and censure: But the multitude, have
not this execution; as all, but Morelius, and such Democratical spirits do
affirm.

3 Concerning the Covenant, for admission of Church Members.
Mr. Catton Way. p. 3. and 4.
In sum, we account it all one, and of like value, when a Covenant on Gods
part is propounded, and given to a People; whether they receive it by silent
consent, or by express terms: and whether their cleaving to their brethren, and
Officers, and mutual watchfulness, be expressly mentioned, or included only
in their general profession of subjection to Gods Ordinances.

An implicit Covenant, Mr. Hooker Survey first part. p 48.
preserves the true nature of the true Church, because it carries the formalis
ratio of a confederation in it. In some cases, an implicit covenant may be
fully sufficient, as suppose a whole Congregation should consist of such, who
were Children to the Parents now deceased, who were confederate. This fully
reaches our case; Our Churches are made up of the children of such Parents,
who were confederate.

Explicit, and particular Covenants, Mr. Noyes. p. 8.
are not necessary to the constitution of Churches. Christians fell into
fellowship, without any such form in primitive times, etc.

4 Concerning qualifications of Church Members, required for their admission.
The Profession of Faith and Repentance, Mr. Noyes. p. 62, 63, 64, 65.
with knowledge of the fundamentals, and subjection to the Ordinances, ought to
give satisfaction in admission; especially, where there is testimony, of an
answerable conversation precedent. That Rule, which requires more than is
necessary, for the weakest Believer; must needs exclude the called of God. The
practice of the Apostles must confine our prudence. They expected no testimony,
not a days experience. They could not in so short a time, make any
inquisitions, or hear any persuasive relations. The Apostolical rule was large,
it did suffer many corrupt Members to creep in. None (as far as we read) were
ever put by. Yet, converts were many, young, ignorant, rude; and conversions
were sudden, and passionate. The Apostles were never acquainted with those
questions, when, where, whereby, by whom, conversion was wrought; They accepted
of Profession and subjection, with congratulations.

5 Concerning the quantity of a Church, that it may consist of diverse
Assemblies.
Mr. Hooker grants, Survey. part ^, p. 129.
that the Church of Jerusalem was so numerous, that they must needs meet in
diverse Congregations.

Several dissenting Brethren have yielded, that Corinth had more than one
Congregation.

6 Concerning the gathering of Members into Congregations.
Respect is to be had, to vicinity of habitation, Mr. Borroughs Heart Div. p.
163. 169.
according to the rule of Christ. All believers, who live in a place together,
ought, so far as they can, to join in one Church, though they be of different
judgments and tempers. The way of Christ all along in Scripture is, that those
in a place, that are not more than can join in one, should join together, and
make but one Church.

7 Concerning the return of Church Members, from gathered Churches, to their
proper Pastors in the places of their Habitations.
Mr. Borroughs Heart div. p. 165.
Do you pray for, and endeavor, the putting on reformation to the uttermost,
and then, see what they will do. They have not yet declared themselves so
joined, by any Covenant, that they may not join with you.

8 Against Separation from our Churches, as no true Churches.
Mr. Cotton. Way, p. 111, 112.
We cannot but conceive the Churches of England, were rightly gathered and
planted according to the rule of the Gospel at first. So that all the work is
now, not to make them Churches which were none before, but to reduce and
restore them to their primitive institution.

Congr. Way cleared, p. 14
Mr. Robinsons denial, of the Parishional Congregations in England, to be true
Churches; was never received into any heart, from thence to infer, a nullity
of their Church State. Neither was our departure from them, even in those evil
times, a separation from them: as no true Churches.

Mr. Buroughs Heart div. p. 163.
Men must not separ^^^ from a Church, though there be corruption in it; to
gather into a new Church, which may be more pure, and in some respects more
comfortable. Because, we never find the Saints in Scripture, separating, or
raising Churches, in such a case; and there would be no continuance in
Church Fellowship, if this were admitted.

9 Of Election, and Ordination of Church Officers.
Mr. Bains. Dioces. trial. p. 84.
If any fail in any Office, the Church has not power of supplying that, but a
Ministry, of calling one whom Christ has described, that from Christ he may
have power of Office given him, in the place vacant.

Mr. Cotton Keys, p. 21. Way. p. 40
Ordination of Officers, whether Elders or Deacons, belongs to the Elders of the
Church; and is to be performed, by prayer, fasting, and imposition of hands.

Mr. Hooker Surveys part 2. p. 76. Mr. Noyes p. 69.
When Churches are rightly constituted, and completed, the right of Ordination
belongs to the Elders. The act appertains to the Presbyters, when an Officer
is invested in his place, for of these it is expressly spoken, 1 Timothy 4.14. It
has been proved, that common Members, may not ordain, by themselves without
Officers.

10 Concerning the Ordination of the Ministers of the Church of England.
Congregational Brethren generally acknowledge, the Ordination of our Ministers
to be valid, and that, they need not any new ordination, nor those that have
been ordained by them.

11 Concerning the power of Synods.
We dare not say, Mr. Cotton Keys. p. 25.
that their power reaches no farther than giving of Counsel. They have power
by the grace of Christ, also, to command, and enjoin, the things to be believed
and done, Act. 15.28. In case a particular Church, p. 47.
be disturbed with error or scandal, maintained by a faction: now, a Synod of
Churches, or their Messengers, is the first subject, of that power and
authority, whereby error is judicially convinced and condemned, and the way of
truth and peace declared, and imposed on the Churches. See also Mr. Noyes
Temple measured, p. 56, 57, 58.

Thus far, and in several other particulars, we, and the congregational
Brethren, are, or at least were sometimes, agreed. And, did they own what may
be from these principles inferred, and practice what they lead to, I doubt
not, but that we should soon be fully agreed.

But a generation of men are now Risen up (who yet would be accounted one with
these, terming themselves Congregational also) who call most, if not all, these
principles into question: and instead of tending to an accommodation, raise and
heighten our divisions; proclaiming our Churches, Ministry, Government, to be
Antichristian, etc. Among whom I have found my Antagonist, laying about him to
this end with all his might.

I confess, I have dealt plainly with him; but believe, that my sharpest
expressions fall short of his merit.

Reader, consider and judge, and the Lord lead thee, with me, and all his
people, into all truth. So prays,

From my study in Waldron this 12th of August. 1658. Thy Servant for Jesus
sake, EZECHIEL CHARKE.

The Table.
Sections. 1 ANimadversions, upon some passages in the Epistle, concerning the
Magistrates Power in matters of Religion. Pages. 1 Sections. 2 Of Mr. P's Text,
and the interpretation thereof, and inferences from it; particularly, of the
coming out of Babylon, and an Antichristian Church State. Pages. 6 Sections. 3
Of National Churches. Pages. 11 Sections. 4 Of Parish-Churches, Ministers
maintenance, the Churches of England, the Witnesses, and Separation. Pages. 13
Sections. 5 Of Congregational, Presbyterial, Classical Churches, and of the
Church Catholic, and Synods. Pages. 28 Sections. 6 An Examination of Mr. P's
Answers, to the Objections he mentions, as made against his Doctrine of
Separation, and of his Reasons for Separation. Pages. 61 Sections. 7 Of Mr. P's
injunctions to the Magistrate, and first concerning Parishes, Parish-Temples,
and Patrons. Pages. 80 Sections. 8 Of Tithes. Pages. 89 Sections. 9 Concerning
the Commissioners, for approbation of public Preachers. Pages. 101 Sections.
10 Of Mr. P's Counsels, and Directions for Reformation. Pages. 104 Sections. 11
Of the Call of our Ministers. Pages. 106 Sections. 12 A Question discussed,
Whether any unordained persons, among us, are lawful, and complete, Ministers
of the Gospel: with, an Answer to the six Arguments for Popular Ordination,
brought by the Answerers of Jus Div. Min. Evangelici, in their Book called, the
Preacher sent. Pages. 110 Sections. 13 Containing the Authors humble
supplication, to those in Authority for Reformation. Pages. 123 Sections. 14 Of
Mr. P's Conclusion, abusing that of the Lord Du Plessis his book. Pages. 125
AN Answer to Mr. Postelthwaite's Book, Entitled, A voice from Heaven.
SECT. I. Animadversions, upon some Passages in the Epistle, Concerning the
Magistrates Power, in matters of RELIGION.
CAn God endure to be prescribed by Creatures? shall man coin Laws, for Rules
of acceptable walking with God, in spiritual, Civil, or Ecclesiastical things?
etc.

You are not ignorant, that in Ecclesiastical things, both for Doctrine, and
Discipline, we own no other Rule but the written Word of God, by which both
Magistrates and Subjects must be guided. And therefore your flourishing
insinuations of the contrary, are very uncharitable and vain. We wish that
those golden verses, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. were written in the hearts, and
transcribed in the lives of all Christian Princes. We acknowledge, that
Magistrates have no power to create new Laws, for the Government of the Church,
contrary to the Divine pattern laid down in the Word. But, have not Magistrates
power to make Penal Laws, to enforce obedience to the Law of God, in matters of
Ecclesiastical concernment? Your book does in effect deny them all power.

For the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion, Consider,

1. The light of Nature pleads for it; It has taught Heathen Princes to
interpose their Power in matters of Religion, and their people to acknowledge
it. Scripture examples clearly evince this, which God seals with his
approbation, Ezra 7. 25, 26, 27. Dan. 3.29. Jonah 3.6. etc. And Heathens
generally, have looked upon the blessing of God upon States and people, as a
consequent of their care and zeal for Religion.

2 The Magistrates and Kings of Israel had and exercised power in matters of
Religion. Moses and Joshuah had so, Exodus 32.27, 28. Josh. 5.2, etc. Josh.
24.14. to 29. So it was with the Judges, 1 Samuel 7.3, 4. And the Kings succeeded
the Judges herein, as that which God called them to, Psa. 78.70, 71, 72.
Pascant reges and principes suos subditor, primum coelesti doctrina, hoc est
curent recte doceri ecclesiam, prohibeant idololattiam, superstitiosos cultus,
extirpent errores in ecclesia, and compescant blasphemos; conferant opes ad
conservationem ministerii, and studiorum necessariorum; Deinde current etiam
corpora subditorum. Moller. in locum.
He took him from the sheepfold to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. Not only to protect them in their Civil immunities and
privileges, But to feed, or see them fed with heavenly Doctrine, pure
Ordinances and Worship, to countenance true Religion, and extirpate Idolatry.
This is the principal part of a Kings Office in reference to Gods inheritance.
So did David, So did all other good Kings and Rulers feed Israel, 2 Chro.
14.17, 29, 30, 31. Chapters, and Nehem. 13. And Gods frequent complaints
against the Kings of Israel, for not so doing, are pregnant proofs of their
power in matters of Religion.

3 Under the Gospel, the Christian Magistrate, as such, has answerably power
in matters of Religion.

For, 1. All those Texts wherein this power of the Magistrate under the Law is
made out, whether by way of Precept, approved example, or blame for not
exercising it; show the duty and Power of Magistrates under the Gospel: Since
we no where find the charge that God then laid upon those, repealed, or taken
off in relation to these.

2. The Commission of the Christian Magistrate, as such, is not only as
authentic, but every whit as large, as that of the Jewish Magistrate, Romans
13.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Here Magistrates, are
said to be sent and ordained of God. Mali nomen comprehendit, etiam omne quod
circa sacra committi^ tu^; (...), bonum qualecunque. Grot. de imper. Sum potest.
The end for, and work about which they are sent and ordained, is to punish
evil, and encourage good works: The comprehensivenesse of those expressions,
shows plainly, that the Magistrates power refers even to Religious
concernments. We must not distinguish where the Law does not. If therefore to
blaspheme the name of God, break the Sabbath, etc. be evil works, they fall
under the Sword of the Civil Magistrate no less than Murder or Adultery: and
so the Magistrate is custos utriusque Tabulae, the keeper of both the Tables of
the Law. Therefore we are commanded to obey them, as Ministers of God for
good; resisting their lawful commands, is called a resisting of God, and we
must pray for them, that under them as Rulers we may live in all Piety toward
God, as well as in all Righteousness toward men.

3 The same reasons from the object, which required the interposition of the
Magistrates power in matters of Religion under the Law, are of as much force
under the Gospel. Men's spirits are as licentious and prone to seduce people now
as then. The name of God is as much blasphemed, by damnable heretical
Doctrines. Men are as apt to be seduced by the subtle craftiness of those that
lie in wait to deceive. All m^ans, without the Magistrates sword are as
ineffectuall; Will such as decry all Churches, deny Christ's Deity, and the
Scriptures to be our Rule, care for a bare Church-censure?

4 The judgment of the Ancients, Si omnis, and vestra; Quis vos excipit ab
Universitate. Bern. ad Archiep.
that lived near the time of Christ, and of the reformed Churches in these last
ages, is fully for it. The Fathers generally assert it. Chrysostom infers from
Romans 13.1. That even Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets were bound to be
subject to the Magistrate. Constantine was termed the Maintainer of Faith and
Religion. Kings (says Austin) Serve God, as they are men one way, as Kings
another; As men they serve God by a faithful obedience to his Laws, But as
Kings they serve God by commanding things just, Aug. ad Bonif.
and prohibiting the unlawful, restraining them with convenient rigor, making
and putting Laws in execution for beating down sin, and promoting Gods glory.
Thus Hezekiah, thus Josiah served God, and thus Kings become nursing fathers,
and Queens Nursing Mothers to the Church as it was promised, Isa. 49.23. and
60.16.

The Confessions of the Reformed Churches are exceeding full and unanimous in
this point. See Corpus Conf.
And most of the Brethren of the Congregational way have seemed to be
suffragators to them herein. Platform of Church government. chapter 17.
Those of New England are very express for it: And our five Apologists for
that way, courted once the Magistrate to believe, that their opinion allowed
him more power in matters of Religion than the judgment of others. To the
Magistrates power (say they) we give as much, and as we think more than the
principle. Apologetical Narratio^. p. 19.
(...) the Presbyterial Government will suffer them to yield. (which how it may
be, I understand not, unless in a sense in the which I would not understand
it, by giving it more than the principles of their own government will suffer
them to yield,) So that the Churches in all ages are agreeed that the
Magistrate has power in matters of Religion; Neque enim aliud, aut belli
laboribus, aut pacis consilits ordinamus, nisi ut verum Dei cultum, Orbis
nostri plebs devota custodiat. Theod. and Honor. ad Marcel. Caesarei est
muneris ut non solum pacify sed pie etiam subditi vivant. Theod. ad Cyril.
(against which stand only a small company of dissenters, muchly led by
Anabaptistical unscriptural principles) And accordingly the first Christian
Princes, and their Successors since, have, with the approbation of godly
Bishops and Pastors, owned and exercised it.

But you proceed confidently, Therefore my beloved brethren accept no Lawgiver
but Jesus Christ, neither in Church nor Commonwealth, that will in due time
save us, from Devilish Government in the Church, and from all worldly
government in Common-weals, when the stone cut out of the Mountain shall smite
on the toes of the Image; Then no more place shall be found for them, no not
for the goodliest government, that ever was invented by the wit of man.

If Christian Magistrates should cause you to suffer for these lines, would you
not suffer as an Evil-doer? Does not the Apostle, Jude 8. call those filthy
dreamers that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities? You proclaim to
the world in Print, that for the present, de jure, they have no power neither
in things of Religion, nor yet of Civil concernment, and call off men from
yiedling that obedience to them, which the Laws of God and man require. You say
expressly, that de facto, they shall have no power in matters of Religion, or
Civil concernment, in the most glorious times of the Church. And this is the
doctrine which by you, and men of your opinion, is still buzzed into the ears
of the people, dangerous to Rulers, and contrary to the Word of God, and to the
blessed example of the Apostles of Christ. They, in the most glorious time of
the Church that has yet been, never exhorted men to cast off, and cast down
Magistrates, though they were then Heathen, but to the contrary, to pray for,
and submit to them. And yet the Apostles, understood, I am sure, the Monarchy
of the Lord Christ, far better than you.

That Magistrates have power in matters of Religion has been proved before;
That they s^^ll have and exercise this power, in the latter and most glorious
days of the Church, may be easily made evident from Scripture.

Isaiah 60. Speaks of a glorious time to the Church, in the days yet to come,
for it speaks of the conversion of the Jews, and the flourishing Church State
ensuing thereon. But the promise there, concerning Magistrates then, is not
that they shall be removed, but reformed and established, verse 17. and made
instrumental for the edification of the Church, verse 10, 16. (as Isa. 49, 22,
23.) and this all along that glorious time of the Church, verse 11.

Rev. 21. Is generally understood to speak of the future glorious times of the
Church; but not a word there of the ending of earthly governments; But on the
contrary, verse 24, 25, 26. it is said, The Kings of the earth do bring, and
shall bring their glory and honor into the new Jerusalem; and for this end,
the gates thereof shall not be shut.

Zech. 13. Speaks of the latter State of the Church, and verse 3. declares that
Heretical seducing Teachers shall then undergo capital punishment, Transfigent,
id est, supplicio afficiendum tradent judicibus. Pisc.
His Father and Mother shall thrust hm thorough. Which, Expositors, (and Mr.
Buroughs with them) understand of their convening them, out of zeal for Gods
glory, before the Christian Magistrate, and so causing them to be put to death.

From these and many the like places, it is evident that all along the most
glorious times of the Church, there shall be Magistrates exercising their
power and authority for the Churches good, in matters both of Civil and
Religious concernment.

What Government it is, which you call Devilish Government in the Church, you
do not here expressly tell us; But your book gives the Reader abundant cause to
conclude, that you mean, all Government in the Church but that of your way. And
if so, do you know what manner of spirit you were of, when you wrote this
passage? Dare you pronounce all Government in the Church besides the
Congregational, to be for the substance of it Devilish, and so all those that
exercise it to be the Servants of the Devil therein? What could the Antichrist
of Rome have said more against Protestant Churches? I shall say no more to you
at this time but the Lord rebuke thee; And shall now address my self to
examine, whether your Treatise does prove the Protestant Churches, and their
Government to be Antichristian and Devilish, for that is the sad task it
undertakes.

SECT. II. Of Mr. P's Text, Rev. 18.4. And the interpretation thereof, and
inferences from it; particularly, of the coming out of Babylon, and an
Antichristian Church State.
YOur explication of the Text and its context, had need to have been more
clearly and firmly laid, to have borne up such doctrines as you build upon it.
But you are mainly for the particular conclusion, P. 5.
We must depart from the fellowship of Antichristian Churches, that is with
you, Protestant Churches, or else we remain in Babylon still.

I shall a little reflect upon your text, and its context, and show that this
conclusion of yours, in the sense mentioned, can of right claim no
acquaintance with their import.

In this Revelations 18. Babylons ruin is set forth, 1 By the instrumental
causes of it, the Word of Gods mouth denounceing it, and drawing off her
associates from her, verse 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 By the procuring cause of it, her
foul Idolatries and seduceings, verse 3. 5. 3 By the consequents of it, the
sorrowing and wailing of her followers and lovers, and the great joy of the
Church and people of God, verse 9, to 21. I shall particularly consider the
four first verses.

Verse 1. I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, etc. Pareus understands it
in a literal sense. Brightman of some chief Executioner of Gods wrath, as
Commander General of Gods armies against Babylon. But, in regard by Angels in
this book, are often meant the Ministers of the Gospel, whose tongues and pens
God imploies to discover Antichrists impostures, as Interpreters agree those
places mean: Rev. 14.6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 17, 18. This Angel may also be understood
to signify them, since he brings for substance no other message than the
former; only his discovery is more clear, being nearer Antichrists ruin; and
therefore, whereas the Angel, Rev. 14.6. is said to fly in the midst of the
Heavens; this Angel is said to come down from Heaven, and to cry with a strong
voice, and the earth to be enlightened with his glory. By this Angel, I
understand the company of Gods Ministers of the reformed Churches, that have
been, and shall be raised out of the bowels of the territories of Antichrist,
who, by their preaching and writing, enlighten the earth, that is, the common
sort of Christians, who were before the footstool of Antichrist, and basis of
his Hierarchy.

For though this was in a great measure done, at the pouring out of the first
vial, upon the Throne of the Beast, when the Waldenses, Albigenses, Hussites,
etc. began every where to renounce the authority of the beast, calling Rome
ecclesiastical, the Apocalyptical Babylon: Yet this vial, is as yet poured out
but in part, as are also several others of the Vials: The dregs of them, and
of this in particular, remaining to be poured upon the beast, in a doctrinal
way by this Angel, who shall give the last warning of Babylons instant ruin.
The effect whereof is, that the earth is enlightened, that is, many more of the
common people, are drawn off from communion with Babylon, and join issue with
some of the ten horns, fallen off from the Whore, and hating her. But as for
her more honorable slaves and vassals, they receive no benefit by the
Ministry of this Angel, but either perish in Babylons ruin, or by the dregs
of the vials poured out upon her associates.

Verse. 2. Cecidit, cecidit, i. e. Paulo post casura, certissime, gravissime.
Pisc.
Here we have the sum of the report of this Angel, concerning Babylons fall,
which is by way of anticipation set down, as actually come to pass, after the
manner of the Prophets, to note the certainty of it; and the expression
doubled, to note the grievousnesse of her fall.

Verse. 3. Here we have the procuring cause of Babylons fall, her abominable
Idolatries, and whoring seducings, wherein she continues after convictions,
admonitions, and threatenings.

Verse. 4 Here it is observable, Militaris exhortatio, ut non solum ab ea
secedant, sed et acriter eam oppugnent. Grass.
that the Holy Ghost alters the usual manner, and way of witnessing against
Babylon; for here is no Angel, but a voice from heaven. It may be, vox e
castris, a voice from the camp. God is mustering up his Armies, and the war
is advancing to the very gates of Rome, and now, the voice of Providence does
thereby cry out aloud, Come out, etc.

By Babylon, I understand with Pareus, etc. not only the City of Rome, but all
those places that are under the power and jurisdiction of the Pope, where his
authority takes place, and where his idolatrous worship and doctrines, are
submitted to, and embraced. To come out of Babylon, is to renounce communion
with her, in her soul sins, and abominable Idolatries and to disclaim and
reject the usurped power of Antichrist, both in temporals, and especially in
spirituals. The not doing of this, makes men her associates, and will cause
them to partake of her plagues. Rev. 13.16, 17. Rev. 14.8, 9, 10. and here Rev.
18.3, 4. From these Texts, I observe,

1 That Antichrists sin lies principally in this, that he causes all, under
great penalties, to receive the mark of the name of the beast, in their right
hands or foreheads; that is, to own the universal headship of the Pope,
especially in spirituals: So that no point of Christian faith must be
received, unless warranted by his authority, and whatsoever is stamped with his
authority, must be owned, though never so contrary to the Scriptures.

2 The sin of his followers, lies in this, that they resign up themselves in
obedience to the Pope, and make him sovereign Lord over their persons, rights,
and consciences, in all things; receiving, owning, pleading, fighting for, his
abominable Doctrines, worship and usurpation. Kings themselves, submitting
their crowns to him, and maintaining by their Laws, and edicts, his blasphemous
doctrines, and tyranny.

3 Those only are threatened, to partake of Babylons plagues, that partake with
her in her sins. And who those are, the Holy Ghost tells us, Rev. 13.16, 17.
All, and only they, that receive a mark, the name of the beast, or the number
of his name, in their right hand, or in their forehead. That is, that own the
usurped authority of the Pope, and his doctrines and idolatries, because stamped
with his authority, which whosoever does to the death, cannot be saved, Rev.
16.3. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as set forth, and confirmed for such,
by the Tridentine Council, is this Sea, consisting of the popish errors
collected into one body, as many waters meet in the Sea. The Angel that turned
this Sea into blood, might be among others, Martin Chemuitius, who poured out
his vial on it, when he wrote his Examination of the Trent Council. And every
Soul living in this Sea dyed, whosoever owneth the Popish Religion, as set
forth by that Council, and dies in that Faith, cannot be saved; for what the
Apostle says of one of its anti-Scriptural doctrines, Gal. 5.4. may be said of
all of them that raze the foundation.

On the contrary, those that renounce the universal headship of the Pope, and
all his anti-scriptural doctrines; as, the insufficiency of the Scriptures, the
authority and necessity of his traditions, justification by works, praying to
glorified Saints and Angels, worshipping Images and Crucifixes, Purgatory and
Indulgences, etc. and withal abhor and renounce his Idolatrous worship, and
profess themselves resolved, to resist unto blood, rather than hold communion
with him in his sins: All such persons and Churches, are come out of Babylon
already. And among such are, the Protestant Churches in England, Scotland,
Holland, France, Germany, etc. professing the sound doctrines of the Gospel, in
opposition to Antichrists Idolatries. How those Churches that disown, and
reject the corrupt doctrine, and worship of the Roman Church, and have sealed
their witness against them with their blood, being by their profession and
sufferings, the instruments whereby God has shaken the Kingdom of the Beast;
How these Churches should yet be Antichristian limbs of the Beast, may well
be a Mystery to all considerate and unprejudiced men.

And whereas Mr. P. believes, that none, save a few separate Churches, named
Congregational, are yet come out of Babylon, (which the Brownists, Anabaptists,
Quakers, etc. plead each for themselves) I have one text to offer to his
consideration thereupon, which is, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.

1 By the Lamb, is undoubtedly meant the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Mount-Sion is opposed to Babylon, the Gospel Church, to the Church
Antichristian.

3 The 144000 that stand upon Mount-Sion (a definite number for an indefinite)
and have their Fathers name written in their foreheads, must therefore be
members of the true Church, in opposition to the members of the Church of
Antichrist, who have his name, or mark in their right hand or forehead.

4 By their having their Fathers name written in their forehead, is therefore
hinted, their keeping close, in the main, to Gods institutions, in profession
and worship, in opposition to the Idolatries of the Antichristian Church. Which
further appears, in that it is said, that they are not defiled with women,
verse. 4. that is, with the Idolatries of the great Whore. Now can any man say,
that those of whom the holy Ghost thus speaks, are yet in Babylon? How can
they be upon Mount-Sion, and yet in Babylon too?

5 The 144000 signify some definite number of the people of God, that in all
ages, from the first rise of Antichrists Kingdom, have cleaved to the Lamb,
and kept a true Church State, which is signified by their standing with the
Lamb upon Mount-Sion, with their Fathers name, etc. That their standing,
synchronizeth with the standing of the Antichristian Church, appears, Rev.
13.16, 17. with the four first verses of the 14th. Chapter. For the company of
the Lambs marked ones, is opposite to the Beasts whole marked company, whilst
it was such; whilst the Church State of the Beast was false and corrupt, the
Church State of the 144000 was true. And it is said, they were not defiled with
women, which argues that the Whore was at the time of their standing, seducing.
And the Apostle John, at the same time, sees an Angel going forth, and crying,
Forbes. Gyffard Fulk. Deuteronomy. Fox. Bernard. Broughton.
Babylon is fallen. Accordingly, Brightman, Mede, and sundry other worthy
Expositors, understand this context of the 144000 to denote the true Church of
God, in the midst of whom Christ reigned, who were fed with purer ordinances,
and worship, during Antichrists reign, and standing out all along against his
Idolatry.

Now seeing the Congregational Churches are as it were but of yesterday: who
are those 144000 that have stood with the Lamb upon Mount-Sion, all along the
time of Antichrists reign? Either you must assert the loss of a true
Church State in the world for many ages past; or else you must acknowledge,
that the Churches that have maintained a true profession, all along the time of
Antichrists reign, were true Churches, and that the Protestant Churches that
have owned and maintained the same profession to this day, have been, and are
true Churches, and are in the number of the 144000. If you dare not say the
former (as I suppose you do not) you must confess the latter; and then, with
what face or reason will you justify that separation from them, as
Antichristian Churches, which you contend for?

Consider, I beseech you, what you have to answer for before the Lord, in
branding all the Christian Churches in the world, from the rise of Antichrist
to this day, who have disowned and opposed him (except a few separate
Congregations of these latter days) as false and Antichristian Churches. And
the Lord give you repentance from this rash and unchristian dealing.

SECT. III. Of National Churches.
CIvil co-habitation with wicked men is dangerous; Ecclesiastical communion
with them in the times of the Gospel, p. 6, 7, 8.
much more dangerous and unwarrantable, 1 Cor. 5.1. To worship God with a
strange worship, is to worship a strange God. Stephen lost his life, for
preaching against the Temple, and so consequently against the Jews National
Church, the bond of which was, their meeting together at the Temple, in one
individual worship.

That the Church is not of the world, all grant; but that it should not be in
the world, is strange. Christ gives his Disciples leave, when persecuted in one
City, to fly to another, Matthew. 10.23. but never requires his followers to
forsake their habitations, because near wicked neighbors. As for that, 1 Cor.
5. touching the incestuous person, it is uncharitably managed by you, for
separation from Protestant Churches, who contend for the excommunicating of
scandalous persons to their power; But it comes too close to YOUR OWN DOOR,
verbum sapienti sat. The other Texts you mention, set forth the danger of
society and intimate converse and communion with Idolaters, but fasten not upon
us, because our Churches are not Idolatrous, nor our worship strange worship,
not grounded upon the Word, as shall be made appear.

In what you allege of Stephens bearing testimony against the National Church
of the Jews, and so consequently (as you would be understood) against all
National Churches, as inconsistent with Gospel times; the consequence follows,
not by Stephens Logic, but your own. For how does it appear, that because he
preached against the Temple, and the Ceremonial-Law, as things which had an end
put to them by the death of Christ; therefore he preached against a National
Church, as inconsistent with Gospel times, in respect of the Nationality of it?
Or that a National Church, purely in respect of its Nationality (considered
without the adjuncts of one single person, as the head of it, and one single
place of worship, to which all should repair at some set time; for you know
we plead not for these things, but acknowledge them to have been peculiar to
the Church of the Jews) is contrary to the institution of Christ, and his
Apostles in the New Testament?

If it be said, we have no example of a National Church in the time of the
Apostles, nor yet in the times of the primitive Church: This cannot be an
objection of weight. For in those times, whole Nations were not converted to
the profession of the Gospel, and Magistrates, in most of them were bloody
persecutors of the Christian profession. But yet,

See Divine right of the Ministry of England, p. 12. 13.
1 We have both prophecies and promises in the Old Testament, of National
Churches under the Gospel: Psa. 72.10, 11, 17. and Isa. 19.18. to the end. Here
it is prophesied and promised, that Nations shall serve God, and be his people,
and that they shall combine, and hold communion with one another, for the
better carrying on of Gods service and worship, and God approves of them, and
blesses them upon that account.

2 There have been National Christian Churches in the world, since the
primitive times, according to the Apostle John's historical prophecy. Rev.
12.7, 8, 9. we have a short description of the Heathen Emperors, See History
of the life of Constantine.
Maxentius, Licinus, Maximius, overthrown by the victorious arms of
Constantine the Great, the Man-child that the Church brought forth; and now
says verse 10. is come salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ; to wit, brought into the Roman Empire,
Persecutors, Idolatry, and Heresy being suppressed, and Christian religion
countenanced, professed, promoted by the godly zeal of Constantine in his
dominions. Again, Rev. 11. We have a description of the downfall of
Antichrist, verse 13. the tenth part of the City fell (many of the places under
the Roman jurisdiction cast off the Pope) then it follows, verse 15. The
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ. The Kingdoms which before were the Kingdoms of the Beast, become
professedly subject to the Laws of Christ, and embrace his Gospel, which our
eyes have been so happy as in part to see.

And indeed, considering that the Nationality of a Church lies properly in
this, that the body of a Nation, living under one Civil Government, and
professing the Gospel, should have one way of Doctrine and Worship, established
in all the Congregations of it, and one way of Government by greater and lesser
Assemblies: how such a constitution as this should be contrary to the mind of
God concerning Churches, under the New Testament, I do not see, nor believe any
man can demonstrate.

SECT. IV. Of Parish Churches, Ministers maintenance, the Churches of England,
the Witnesses, and Separation.
I Shall now explain what I mean by Antichristian Churches. P. 9, 10, 11
And first I mean Parish-Churches, to prove which to be Antichristian, I shall
show what I find storied of their Original, etc.

You cannot prove the Original of Parish-Churches to be from Rome, Quid certi,
aut explorati, a tempore Trajani, ad imperium Constantini haberet Ecclesia, si
Divinum thesaurum non haberet?
however confident your small reading makes you of it. Your borrowed relation,
concerning Cletus and Evaristus, is not much to be valued, as neither are most
of the Histories of the Church, for the first three hundred years. And if this
relation were true, the thing is still unproved; for I find it recorded of
Ignatius, who as some say, was Peter's successor at Antioch, and suffered
Martyrdom in the eleventh year of Trajan; that being sent from Syria, because
he professed Christ to Rome, where he suffered; when he passed thorough
Asia, he strengthened and confirmed the Parishes, through all the Cities, as
he went, with his exhortations and preaching. So that these Parishes are
ancienter than those of Rome. But, if it were granted, that Parishes had their
Original at Rome, about the time you speak of, it makes not to your purpose,
and that for two Reasons.

1 Because Rome then was, and long after continued to be a pure Church of
Christ, affording many Martyrs, that sealed the truth with their blood;
therefore division of Parishes is not in its Original from Antichrist. But, you
think you have prevented this answer sufficiently, by saying, Neither does it
help, P. 13.
that Parish-Churches derive their pedigree from times so near the Apostles,
for the mystery of iniquity did work even in Paul's time. If you could prove
that the mystery of iniquity sprung up in Rome, or chiefly there, in the
Apostles days, you would have some (though but a slender and insufficient)
ground to think that Parishes, if they began there, are Antichristian.

But, from Scripture, and Church History, no such thing appears. In the
Apostles days, Diotrephes is charged with aspiring toward an universal
Headship, 3 John 9, 10. The Church of the Galatians, mingleth works with
Christ's righteousness for justification, and are by this piece of Popery in
danger of the loss of salvation, Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. The doctrine of worshipping
of Angels, creeps in Apostle-times into the Church of Colosse, Col. 2.18. But
all this while, the Church of Rome keeps her garments undefiled, of these, and
the like abominations, and for a sound profession of faith, is famous
throughout the whole Christian world, Romans 1.8. And long after this, and even
in that very time, wherein you suppose the division of Rome into Parishes, the
Saints there sacrificed their lives in the flames to God, in the maintenance of
the profession of the Christian doctrine. And yet Mr. P. is so charitable, that
to maintain a Fable that he thinks will serve his turn, the Church of Rome
must needs be then Antichristian.

2 Because it cannot be made to appear, that Parish divisions, as such, have
in them the least evil, or appearance of evil. Without divisions according to
co-habitation, within certain bounds, Christians cannot conveniently meet to
worship, nor Ministers and people discharge their mutual duties. I no way
doubt, but that they have ever been in use, when they might be had, in the
Church of God. The Jews had their several Synagogues for several vicinities.
And it is very probable, that the Apostles in planting Churches, observed such
divisions, as far as might be; They ordained them Elders in every City, But
in many Cities, the Church consisted in each of several Congregations (as shall
be evidenced, Sect. 5.) and it is most probable, that these were distinguished,
to attend on their respective Elders, according to the neerness of their
habitation, to the several meeting-places. However, believers are still found
in Scripture, to have ecclesiastically imbodied in the places of their
habitation, as those in Ephesus, Corinth, etc. And is not this sufficient
warrant for Parochial Congregations, as such, that is, the Ecclesiastical
imbodying of such, in a vicinity, as profess the Gospel?

But now, the way of gathering Churches, used by most of the Congregational
Brethren, and your self, picking some out of one Parish, and some out of
another, and that without the leave, and against the mind of their godly
Ministers (who endeavor after reformation, and the use of all Ordinances,
according to Gods mind in their places, but are hindered therein, to your
might, by your sinister dealings) and some of those members, so many miles
distant that you are thereby utterly disabled from discharging mutual duties,
this way and practice is altogether a stranger to the Word of God, and sound
reason, and has more than an appearance of evil in it.

There is nothing in Scripture of limitation of Churches by the Ministers
function; or maintenance, by the edicts of Popes, P. 13.
Bishops, or Princes of this world. And it is enough against a thing belonging
to the worship of God, that there is no institution for it, that the Scripture
speaks nothing of it.

Then, surely it concerns you to look about you. Where have you an institution
for uniting in a single Congregation, members living at such a distance from
one another, as your practice does? and undertaking to be a Pastor to a
scattered people, over whose souls it is impossible you should watch? and
urging an explicit Covenant, as necessary for admission? etc. As for
limitation of Churches by the Ministers function, how is your Church
distinguished from other Churches, but by your taking the charge of the members
thereof, to watch for their souls? (how well or possible you can do it, it
concerns you to see to) and is not this limitation of a Church, by the
Ministers function? That the Scripture says nothing of Ministers maintenance,
by the edicts of Princes of this world, is true, if you mean de facto that
Scripture gives no example of maintenance thus appointed and raised; Princes,
when the Gospel was penned, had power to raise maintenance for the Ministry,
but would not, being enemies to the Church. But to argue, that because
Scripture gives no example of it, Christian Magistrates, who are by Scripture
appointment, to be nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Church, may not by their
Edicts, Laws, and Power settle a sufficient revenue upon the Ministers of the
Church, is vain and frivolous; and the result of it is, which seems to be your
meaning, that the maintenance of the Ministers must be by the peoples free
will, and they must live upon the Alms of the Church. That this is not the
mind of God, but that a certain liberal maintenance is by Gods ordinance due to
the Ministers of the Gospel, is from Scripture very clear.

1. Because God established a certain liberal Maintenance, for the Priests and
Levites under the Law, as appears by the books of Moses; And godly
Magistrates, quickened up by their royal commands, the backward people to pay
it, 2 Chronicles. 31.4, 5. whose examples are preceptive to Christian Magistrates
now. And shall we think that God bears a less tender respect to a Gospel, than
to a Legal Ministry? neither appointing them a certain maintenance, nor means
to raise it, if it be withheld.

2 Dependence upon voluntary contributions, is the ready way to tempt Ministers
to be the greatest temporizers in the world, since it will force many of them
to please their givers, or starve.

3 Duties required of Ministers under the Gospel, call for a liberal and
certain maintenance. They must be given to hospitality: But they cannot
exercise it, without a maintenance liberal and certain.

4 That command to hearers of the Gospel, Gal. 6.6, 7. leaves not men to their
liberty, but charge a duty upon their consciences, which they cannot neglect
without mocking God.

5 Ministers may require this maintenance in an authoritative way, as an
absolute due debt, for their work in the Ministry, 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14.

Now, a liberal maintenance being by Gods Ordinance due to the Gospel
Ministry, what hinders, but that the fixing of it should be a lawful, yea a
necessary means for their enjoying of it. Before there were any Christian
Magistrates in the world, the revenue of the Church was not altogether
unsettled. Constantine the first Christian Emperor, being come to the Crown,
enacts, that the Church Lands or goods, that had been injuriously taken away,
though annexed to his own Crown, should be restored, that such as had purchased
Church Lands, should make present restitution of the same. These lands and
possessions were, it is probable, long before purchased out of the public bank
of the money laid at the Apostles feet, and other charitable donations since
that time, and settled upon the Church, that so Ministers having some certain
maintenance, might serve God in their places with the less distraction. And
therefore the building Oratories and Churches, and endowing them with
maintenance, for the certain support of fixed Ministers, which you make the
object of your contempt, appears to be in it self considered, a lively
imitation of primitive practice.

These things considered, I demand,

1 Where a maintenance is already established, and has been so for many
hundreds of years together, and that by as firm Laws as any man has for his
personal estate; Whether now, the Magistrate may not animate those Laws, and
make meet new ones, for the due payment of that established maintenance, as
Hezekiah did? 1 Chronicles. 31.4.

2 Where maintenance is wanting, whether the Magistrate may not provide and
settle it, by a levy upon the people? Seeing it is Gods ordinance there should
be a liberal maintenance, and that many people, if left to themselves, will
rather want the Gospel, than be at charge for it; and that it is a duty
incumbent on the Christian Magistrate, to provide for the good of men's souls,
and for the continuance, support, and encouragement of the Ministry for that
end.

But to return to Parish-Churches; you say,

Consider, what Babels of confusion, and superstition they be. Here you may
see Saints and sinners jumbled together, without any kindly separation of the
precious from the vile. Great care, that all may be consecrated, but the
worshippers. Are they not given unto the Gentiles? P. 13, 19, 20
do not men of uncircumcised hearts (for so are the Major part, in those
Churches) stand seized of the power of the keys? Let us say to those
christened Gentiles, that upon pretense of being of the same Religion, and
Church with us, would interess themselves, in rebuilding our Gospel-Temple, as
the Jews did to the Samaritanes, Ezra 4.1, 2, 3.

Specious arguments to take ignorant persons. It Is common with those of your
way, to argue against the Church State of Churches, from the corruptions in
manners which are found in them. Whereas the Scripture every where declares
such an arguing to be of no force; witness its owning the Church of the Jews,
as such, under its great, and severely reprovered corruptions. So the degenrate
Churches of Asia, dead Sardis, and lukewarm and miserable Laodicea. If a man
fix his eye on those Churches, under their then condition, and apply your
charge to them (as he may) and thence conclude, that they were no true
Chruches, will he not contradict the holy Ghost, and the Truth? and what then
does your arguing prove? Whatever corruption is in out Churches, we make as
much the matter of our grief, as you of your scorn, and are as ready to bear
witness against it, as your self; But not with you, to encourage the sin of
separation, but to advance the duty of reformation. This many Church-guides do
zealously endeavor after in our Churches, so unjust is your charge, generally
fastened upon them, that they take care, all may be consecrated, but the
worshippers, and that they make no kindly separation, of the precious from the
vile. You seem to make use of a bad rule, Calumniare fort it er aliquid
haerebit. Your own knowledge of the contrary to your charge, in many
Parish-Congregations, should make you blush for these expressions. And truly
that they are no more reformed, and others in no way for reformation, may be
as much ascribed to the practices of your self, and many of your way, in
drawing off from them helpful members, and hindering endeavors for healing and
restoration, as to any other single cause, yea as to many of them put
together. And had not men of your way, in a time, when uniformity in worship
according to the Word, was about to have been established by the Magistrate in
the Churches of England, hindered that good work: it is very probable, that
reformation had been much forwarded in our Churches at this day, and many of
our civil shakings and overturnings prevented thereby. Your comparing of those,
that comply not with your opinion, in matter of Church State and Government, to
the Idolatrous Samaritans, and loading them with the opprobrious name of
christened Gentiles, is very devoid of modesty and truth. Many Church-guides in
our Congregations are as free from the least taint of Superstition, as any of
your way. And for the members of our Churches, who have been baptized in them,
and own their Baptism, though the most of them do not appear to be godly,
yet they differ very much from Heathens, being taken into an external Covenant
with God, and in the number of those that are called; And are as much the
people of God, as sometime formal and profane Israelites were; the estate of
the Gentiles at this day, to whom the ordinances are given, being not inferior
to that of Israelites of old; Romans 11.17. And therefore as the Infants of the
Israelites had generally right to Circumcision: So have the children of
Professors of Christianity, owning their Baptism (though corrupt in their
conversation, but promising reformation) right to Baptism. Else were the grace
of God streighter under the Gospel, than before Christ was exhibited in the
flesh, which cannot be.

But you have this more against our Churches, that men of uncircumcised hearts
stand seized of the power of the keys in them, because the major part are such
in our Churches.

Petitio principij! As if the people had the power of the keys committed to
them; you know we own not that doctrine.

Church-guides, have the power of the keys committed to them, and many of such
among us, are to be reputed godly. And, if in most places, wicked men stand
seized of the power of the Keys, yet this will not serve to justify
separation from our Churches, as false and Antichristian. The wicked Scribes
and Pharisees stood seized of the power of the Keys in the Church of the Jews,
and yet Christ with his Disciples held communion with that Church, and gives no
encouragement to separation from it, whilst he had not set up a new
Church State, Mat. 23.1, 2, 3.

Your prudential consideration for separation, That there is no probability of
reforming our Churches, P. 20, 21, 22
because the greatest part in them are wicked, and will hinder the work; which
you strengthen with a passage, out of the Epistle to the Little Stone; Is
certainly an argument which the Prophets and holy people of God, in the Church
of the Jews, were not acquainted with, or thought not to be of force, to
warrant them to separate, or to neglect endeavors for reformation. Neither
does Jesus Christ look upon such a reasoning, or the ground for it, as
sufficient to excuse the Angels of, and Christians in the Churches of dead
Sardis, and wretched Laodicea (who might plead the same improbability of
reformation) from putting forth their utmost endeavors for it. Your Prudence
would it seems have taught them, that they might spare themselves a labor, and
rather gather new Churches, than stand about a work so unlikely to be effected
as the reforming of the old. But surely, the Spirit that spoke by the Prophets,
exhorting to endeavors for reformation in the Church of the Jews (as miserably
corrupted at least as our Churches) and the command of our Lord, pressing the
same duty upon the Churches of Asia; do excuse us from practicing by your
prudential consideration, and teaches us to do our duty for reformation, and
leave the success to the Almighty God, depending upon him by faith. And I
doubt not but that it all Church-guides, and pious Christians in our Churches,
would to their power join, and set about this work, we should find the Lord
dispelling our fears, facilitating the work, and shaming us for our distrust.
But you say,

(...). 16.
If we would make a kindly reformation, we must not build on Antichrists
foundation, but return to primitive practice.

Agreed, But, in regard it does not appear, that Parish-Churches had their
original from Antichrist; and that it appears, that Primitive Churches were
made up of co-habiting, or neighboring families: this puts no necessity upon
us, of demolishing, or forsaking Parish-Churches, in order to a reformation; no
more than the duty of repenting, reforming, and conforming to Primitive
patterns, did upon Sardis and Laodicea, to forsake their then Church-standing,
and erect new Congregations.

Christ's Church State, and Antichrist are opposed, Rev. 11.1, 2, 3, 4. The
witnesses against this, are empowered and specified to be the two Olive Trees
(noting Magistracy and Ministry) and the two Candlesticks (noting Churches)
that arise against the Antichristian Church State. At least, at the latter end
of Antichrists reign, (...) 17, 18
shall the testimony be managed, by separating Congregations. The Holy Ghost
speaks plainly for separating, not only from the corruptions of the
Antichristian Church, but from the Antichristian Church State it self.

Can Mr. P. be so blind, as not to see, or so wilful, as not to acknowledge,
that Protestant Churches, are Churches separating from the Antichristian
Church, and from its Antichristian Church State? and that they have been
witnesses against them, from the beginning of their appearing to this day?
What? was the Antichristian Church, and Church State, never separated from,
till Independent Congregations came of late to be erected, who separate from
Churches, that separate from Rome? Grant, that there remain some Antichristian
corruptions in Protestant Churches (I am sure there do in the Independent, and
those of a higher nature, For Schism, and Separation from all the Churches of
Christ but their own, is an Antichristian corruption, of one of the first
magnitudes, The Romanists, being the great Schismatic, and Separatists;) will
it follow, that Protestant Churches, while they, in the main, renounce,
forsake, and protest against Romes pretended Supremacy, and her abominable
doctrines, Idolatry and worship; are not Churches separating from Rome, and
witnessing against her? What Churches, in the last ages to these late years,
have managed the testimony against Antichrist, but Protestant Churches, that
separated from him, and sealed their testimony with their blood? (whereon ours
have not done the least.) And must we now look upon them, as Churches still in
Rome, strip them of the glory of being witnesses against her, despise the
sufferings undergone by them, for refusing to own and subject to her? And own,
as Churches separate from Rome, and witnessing against her, only a very small
number, of late Congregations, in this corner of the world, who have little by
profession, and nothing by suffering, witnessed against Rome, but much
inveighed against, and separated from Protestant, Rome-opposing Churches, to
the great service of Rome? Surely Mr. P. must bring better proof of it, than
he does, before it can persuade, or deserve our belief.

But let us weigh his device concerning the witnesses whereby he presumes to
make it out.

1 He will have the two Olive Trees, to note Magistracy and Ministry, and the
two Candlesticks, Churches. But we have but his word for it. The holy Ghost
does not there distinguish the witnesses, but says of them both, These are the
two, Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks.

2 He says, In the latter end of Antichrists reign, the Testimony shall be
managed by separating Congregations. Whereas, the holy Ghost does not set
forth two sorts of witnesses in different times, but says that the same shall
prophecy in sackcloath one thousand two hundred and sixty days, during the
whole time of Antichrists reign.

My apprehensions of the witnesses, according to Scripture, are these. Three
pair of Types we find of them in the Old Testament, Moses and Aaron in the
Wilderness, Elias and Elisha under the Baalitical Apostasy, Zerubbabel and
Joshuah under the Babylonish Captivity: And the holy Ghost alludes to somewhat
famous, in the history of the lives of these persons, which is answered, with
something parallel, in the two witnesses. Verse 4. alludes to Zerubbabel and
Joshuah, who are called two Olive Trees, that stand by the Lord of the whole
earth, Zach. 4.

Verse 3, 5. And the former part of the sixth allude to Elias and Elisha, who
witnessed against the Apostasy, and Idolatry of their times, and more
particularly to Elias, who destroyed his enemies by fire, and did, by his
prayers, open and shut Heaven, 2 Kings 1. James 5.17, 18. Verse 6. the latter
part alludes to Moses and Aaron, who did turn the waters to blood, and did
smite the Egyptian earth with all Plagues, Exodus 7.

Now it is observable, 1 That in two of these three pair of types, one bears
the person of a Magistrate, the other of a Minister or Prophet. Moses and
Zerubbabel were Magistrates, Aaron and Joshuah Ministers. 2 That in the times
of the Baalitical Apostasy, which answers most fitly to the times of the
Apostasy of Antichrist, the witnesses are only Prophets, Elias and Elisha. 3
That we have in these three pair of types, four Prophets for two Magistrates.

These things considered, By the two Witnesses, I understand Magistrates and
Ministers, some of both sorts, who have in their several ages, witnessed
against Antichrist; from the very first rise of him, down to our times. But in
no age, have Prophets been wanting to this office and work, whereas,
Magistrates appear in it, at some times only; as, 1 In the beginning of
reformation, in a Land or Nation, as Moses appeared with Aaron. when the people
were brought out of Egypt, to serve the Lord; and Zerubbabel appears with
Joshua, in the beginning of the reformation, after the Babylonish captivity.

2 Toward the end of Antichrists reign, Rev. 17.16. But now, the Prophets,
they must prophecy in sackcloth one thousand two hundred and sixty days, that
is, all along the Tyranny of Antichrist, which has been in great part, made
good by the event.

This being so, overthrows his notion of the Witnesses, neither can
Congregational Ministers, be any otherwise reckoned, any part of the
Witnesses, than as they are taken in conjunction, with the other godly
Ministers of this and other reformed, and Rome-renouncing Churches, that have,
and in this age do stand up, as a part of the two Witnesses against Antichrist,
and for Gods truth and worship. And though, in a large sense, all those may be
reckoned, as witnesses against Antichrist; that have made open profession of
the grand truths of the Gospel, in opposition to Antichrist, and those, who
have laid down their lives in that witness: Yet, in a strict sense, Effecta,
quae efficient Praec^nes illi, in electis duo, consolatio and illuminatio;
quarom illa significatur nomine Olearum; ista vero nomine Candelabrorum. Pisc.
[the Witnesses are Magistrates and Ministers, and yet more especially,
Ministers, who have in all ages, opposed themselves to Antichrists Idolatries.
These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks that enlighten,
comfort, and feed the Church of God, during the whole time of Antichrists
reign, Rev. 11.3, 4. and Rev. 12.6. compared.

To what you cite, out of the Epistle to the Little-stone, that, Almost nine
parts of ten, in the Churches of Scotland, are not sheep, nor fit for civil,
much less for spiritual privileges: I answer, P. 21.
I am not easily induced to believe the State of the Church of Scotland, to be
so corrupt; considering what an honorable testimony holy Mr. Buroughs has
given concerning it, Lect. 13. on Hosea, p. 368. And whereas it is said, that "
many of the sheep there, turn head against their Shepherds. The more, I say,
is the pity. But certainly the reason of it is, the present laxness of
Church Government (to which, those of your way, contribute not a little) and
which, if it should recover its ancient vigor, and strength, and beauty, would
remedy this evil. And I believe, some Brethren of the Congreganal way have
cause enough to make the same complaint of their Sheep. One of them, godly, and
learned, told me some few years ago, that their people were grown to such a
pass, that they knew not what to do with them. Mr. W. G.
And how many sad proofs have we seen hereof, in these late years?

Neither let it seem harsh, to any that admire the antiquity of Churches in
England, which they conceive began to be planted, by Joseph of Arimathea, or
Simon Zelotes, that I press the casting out of the Parish-Churches, the deemed
successors of them. They retain not their privilege, whose neither
constitution, nor conversation, they can be found to imitate. And we know, P.
24, 25.
that the Holy Ghost teaches us to say of as few as may be, to give a valid
testimony against the Antichristians, of two witnessing Churches; These are the
two Candlesticks ( i. e. Churches) standing before the God of the earth.
Whereby the Churchdome of these witnessing separated Churches, is, not only
established, and approved, but the much claimed Churchdome of others rejected.

Your prohibition cannot hinder it from seeming harsh, not only to us, but
also to some Congregational Brethren, that you should unchurch our Churches,
Way. p. 54
because Parochial. It appears (says Mr. Cotton) to be an error, to say,
there is no limitation or distinction of Parishes, Way. p. 112.
meaning of Churches jure divino; and (speaking of the Churches of England;)
All the work now is, not to make them Churches, which were none before, but to
reduce, and restore them to their primitive Institution. Your self, do not deny
our Parish-Churches, to be the successors of the Churches planted here, by the
mentioned worthies; and on that account one would think, reformation should
serve your turn, without rising so high as separation. But this you think will
bear you out, that they do not imitate the constitution, nor conversation of
those first Churches. If you should go about to prove either part of this
assertion (which you wisely forbear to do) you would find a hard task of it;
Because it is not possible, you should certainly know, what was the
constitution or conversation of those first Churches. But I shall grant, and do
believe, ours do not generally imitate their conversation, being more corrupted
in manners, through the neglect of Discipline. And what then? does the
Scripture any where teach you, that corruption in manners, yea in many regards
in administration, and use of ordinances, whilst the fundamentals, and
essentials are retained, in doctrine and worship, is a sufficient ground for
Separation? I provoke you to make that appear. And indeed this is the point,
that you Separatists stand bound to make good, and which if you cannot (as I am
sure you cannot from the Word) all your declamations against our Churches, will
not a whit free you from the guilt of Schism.

As for the other branch, of not imitating their constitution, it is a charge,
as weakly bottomed, and inferring as the other. For, the particular
constitution of those Churches, is, as I have said, unknown to you, and our
Churches, are not now newly constituting, but have been long constituted, and
are successors of those first Churches. And no more unchurched, and
necessitated to be newly constituted, by the intervention of Papal
corruptions, then the Church of Israel was, by the intervention of heathenish
Idolatries in it, during the reign of bad Kings. And that way of constitution,
still holds our Churches in their State, which gave and maintained an
ecclesiastical being, to the Apostolical Churches, even the professing and
owning of the doctrines of the Gospel in them, and the associating under
Pastors, for the use of Ordinances. Which, though defective among us, in some
points that concern the been esse, yet are so far found, as suffice to maintain
the esse of our Churches. So that notwithstanding your prohibiting us, to
account your Magisterial pressing of the casting out of Parish-Churches, harsh:
it is, and must be looked upon by us, as very harsh, arrogant, unjust, and
unchristian; having no ground in reason, nor ground or example in Scripture, to
countenance it.

The Text you here build upon, Rev. 11.4 for the strengthening of your
excommunicating sentence, past upon all Protestant Churches, that are not of
your way, makes not at all for you, but much against you (as has been in part
showed;) for,

1 The two Candlesticks, cannot mean Churches properly, or peculiarly, but the
Witnesses in general, whom the Holy Ghost calls both the two Olive Trees, and
the two Candlesticks.

2 That which is attributed to the Candlesticks with the Olive Trees, verse 5,
6. that fire goes out of their mouth, etc. is proper to the guides of the
Church, and not to the Churches, as appears by viewing the types of the
Witnesses, as has been before cleared.

3 The Holy Ghost had spoken of the Church, and its state under persecution,
before, verse 1. The false Church State is also spoken of, verse 2. and verse.
3, 4, 5, 6. the Holy Ghost proceeds to describe the two Witnesses, and their
condition, during the whole time of Antichrists reign, distinguishing them from
the Church, as those that are chief in it, and are singled out, and enabled to
act in a way of eminency, for the manifestation of Gods glory, and for the
Churches good. Accordingly, they are called the two Olive Trees, and the two
Candlesticks, to note them to be instruments, bringing, in a way of office,
comfort and illumination to the Church. There being a manifest allusion to
Zech. 4.11, etc. So that the two Olive Trees, as well as the two Candlesticks,
mean the Witnesses, as they are distinct from the Churches, by way of eminency
and office. Though the Churches do witness, yet they are not The Witnesses. The
Witnesses guide and feed the Church, Rev. 12.6.

But you say; The Candlesticks, P. 17
in the language of the Revelation, chap. 1.20. are Churches, therefore they
are so to be interpreted, Rev. 11.4.

1 I answer, It follows not. For, in the former Text, they are expressed to mean
so, but in the latter not, and the circumstances lead us to interpret them
otherwise, as has been said.

2 In the former Text, there is a clear distinction, between the Stars, and the
Candlesticks; the one are the Angels, the other the Churches; But in the
latter, the Holy Ghost makes the Olive Trees and the Candlesticks all one.
Therefore, if the two Olive Trees are the Magistracy, and the Ministry, as you
grant, p. 18. you must needs acknowledge, the two Candlesticks to be so, and
not to be the Churches, as you affirm, in opposition to the Text, and your
self.

But, supposing (not granting) the Candlesticks here, to mean Churches; will it
follow hence, that the Churches of your way, are owned, to the rejection of all
others, as you modestly bear your reader in hand? Or, does not the contrary
rather follow?

For consider, These two Candlesticks, are said to stand before God, during the
whole time of Antichrists reign. But separated Churches, are but of yesterday,
and therefore, if they be in the number of, yet they cannot be the only
witnessing Churches. Seeming to be aware of this, you say, p. 18. At least, at
the latter end of Antichrists reign, shall the testimony be managed, by
separating Congregations, Indeed, if they be witnesses, they must be so only
at the latter end of his reign, for they had no existence before. But you are
not aware, how you wound your cause, by the shift which you thought would help
it. For separate Churches, arising at the latter end of Antichrists reign, and
having the dignity of being the witnesses appropriated to them by you; It will
follow hence, that till the latter end of Antichrists reign, there have been no
witnessing Churches in the world; whereas the Holy Ghost says expressly, that
the Candlesticks (which you call Churches) shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and sixty days, which is all the time of Antichrists reign. And you
have no way to free your self from contradicting the Holy Ghost, but by
acknowledging (whilst you keep to your notion, of accounting the Candlesticks
Churches) that the Churches that renounced Antichrist, from the beginning of
his reign, to the rise of the separate Churches, were witnessing Churches;
Which does (by your own rule) establish the Churchdome of the Eastern,
Western, and late Protestant Churches, that have renounced Antichrist, all
along his reign hitherto; And (say I) call in question the Churchdome of your
Congregations, that separate from the witnesses against Antichrist.

I suppose the Reader sees that your Arrow flies back in your face, and that
though your own postulatum (of interpreting the Candlesticks Churches) should
be granted you: Your excommunicatory sentence, is no more to be dreaded than
the Pope's, with whom you join issue, in reprobating Protestant Churches, that
you may appropriate Churchdome to those of your way.

And, as posito uno absurdo sequuntur multa, you foreseeing that the paucity
(as well as novelty) of your Churches, is like to inconvenience your cause; go
about to salve the matter, with this weak conceit; that, because the
Candlesticks, which you have interpreted to be Churches, are said to be two,
therefore separate Congregations, who are fewer than others, must be meant
thereby, their Churchdome thereby established, and the Churchdome of others
thereby rejected. Wonderful subtilty! Quidlibet ex quolibet. What shall by this
argument become, I pray you, of the one hundred forty four thousand, and of the
great multitude of Palm-bearers, which no man could number of all Nations, and
Kinreds, and People, and Tongues? Surely they are too many to be the Separate
Churches, therefore by Mr. P's doctrine, their Church-dome is rejected, though
they stand before the Lamb, and with him upon Mount Sion. Is not this rare
Divinity? By the same reason, any Sect that is not so numerous as that of
Congregational Churches, may rob them of their pretended Churchdome, and
appropriate it to themselves, because they being fewer, are more likely to be
meant by the Candlesticks, which are said to be two. Surely, the conceit is
not worth more words, nor so many. It Is plain, that any number may be
signified by two, and that Eastern and Protestant Churches, renouncing Rome,
have been few in comparison of Antichristian Churches, and that the Churches
witnessing against Antichrist, are held out in the Revelation, as increasing
toward the latter end of Antichrists reign, and arising out of all Nations, in
great numbers, out of which proceed the seven Angels, to pour the seven last
plagues, upon the Kingdom of the Beast, Rev. 15.2, 4, 5, 6.

SECT. V. Of Congregational, Presbyterial, Classical Churches; and of the
Church Catholic, and Synods.
P. 25, 26
We come now, in the second place, to interpret Antichristian Churches, by
Episcopal Churches, that are, the greater territories, formed into Diocesan,
Provincial, and Ecumenical Churches, under the several orders of Bishops.

Episcopacy, of the kind you mention, being now discharged among us, you might
have spared your reader, about this matter. Let those that would see, what is
said for and against that Government, read the treatises of learned men on that
subject. I shall only, here say to you in general, that corruption in
Church Government is no sufficient cause for separation from a Church. We must
not (say you, p. 52.) for respect to a right faith, swallow a wrong order. And
we must not, (say I) because of some corruptions in the form of
Church Government, forsake communion with a Church, professing the true faith.
Your assertion, in your sense, stands only upon your own authority. Mine
stands in the very light of the Scripture. The Apostle John, in his third
Epistle, mentions a great corruption in Church Government, but gives not
thereupon, any precept for, or encouragement to separation. There were great
corruptions crept into the form of Church Government among the Jews, in Christ's
time; The Lord had appointed, that there should be only one High Priest at a
time, and he was to continue in his office during life; But there were then
two Highpriests together, that acted in the function, each his year
successively, John 11.47, 49. Besides, the High- Priesthood, was at that time
bought for money, procured by favor at the hands of the Romans. Multitudes of
corruptions there were also in the Priests actings, etc. Yet, the Lord Christ
gives no command, or intimation to his Disciples, to separate from them, as
from a false Church; but only bids them take heed of being leavened with their
corrupt doctrines, and drawn to an imitation of their wicked actions. And the
Lord himself held communion with them, as a true Church, in his life time.

Jesus Christ has instituted no other visible, integral, Organical Church, or
Church with Officers, P. 26.
for the practice of his visible, public, and solemn worship, but one
particular Congregation, that may meet together, ordinarily, in the same place,
to worship in all the Ordinances of Gods house. Such was the Church at
Jerusalem, there were added to it about three thousand, Act. 2.41. They grew to
five thousand more, Chap. 4.4. yet they were all in Solomon's porch, Chap. 5.12.
Multitudes were added, Chap. 5.14. yet the Apostles call them together to them,
Chap. 6.2, 5. And Chap. 15.4. Paul and Barnabas were received of the Church,
that is, all the multitude, verse 12. who were present at the disputation,
verse 6, 7.

Here, indeed, is the Hinge of the Controversies, between us and our Reverend
Brethren of the Congregational way, in Old and New- England, who stand to their
first professed principles; owning our Congregations as true Churches, but
scrupling the Government of them by their Guides united, confining all power of
Government, to a single Congregation, and contending that it ought to be so,
with all Gospel-Churches. Had Mr. P. been such a one, I should more gladly have
entered the lists with him than I do. But he has much out-grown his Brethren
in Scruples, and nothing will satisfy him concerning our Churches, but what
the Edomites wished against Jerusalem, even the rasing of them to the
foundation thereof.

For our parts, we believe that Gospel Churches may, and commonly ought to
consist of diverse single Congregations, united under, and governed by their
Elders in common; and that we have primitive examples for it; and among them,
in the first and chief place, that of the Church of Jerusalem in the Apostles
times, which is that, that Mr. P. instanceth in, to establish the contrary
opinion.

Before I enter upon the dispute, I desire it may be considered, that the
enquiry is not, of what number of members a Church consisted, when it began
first to be planted: But, the inquiry is, how it was with Churches, when
arrived to strength and maturity, during the times in which the Apostles lived.

This premised, I begin with the Church of Jerusalem, and say, that the Church
of Jerusalem, 1 Of the Church of Jerusalem.
when it grew numerous enough for it, consisted of diverse single Congregations,
as of so many parts, making up one entire and complete Church. For proof
whereof, let it be considered, that,

1 There was a Church at Jerusalem, before the addition of the first three
thousand, Act. 2.41. And the members of the Church at that time, cannot be
conceived to have been contained within the limits of one single Congregation.
For the Ministry of Christ was exceeding successeful, Mark. 5.31. John 2.23.
John 12.19. It is said of John, Matthew. 3.5, 6. Jerusalem, and all Judea, and
all the Region round about Jordan, went out to him, and were baptized of him.
And yet, of Christ, it is said, he made and baptized more disciples than John,
John 4.1. Visibly more, so that the Pharisees could take notice of it. Unto
these converted by John's and Christ's Ministry, add those brought in by the
Ministry of the Apostles, and seventy Disciples, whom Christ endued with a
power to work miracles, that thereby they might gain faith to their doctrine,
Mark. 6. Luke 10. and yet, still there is great want of laborers, the Harvest
was so great, Luke 10.2. and besides these, more are found (not without Christ's
approbation) laboring in his Vineyard, empowered also to work miracles, to
confirm Christ's doctrine which they taught, Mark. 9.38, 39. and of those there
seem to have been many, Matthew. 7.22. Now, seeing our Brethren will not grant,
that by Baptism men are admitted into any other, than a particular Church, and
there is no mention in Scripture of any other particular Church; till long
after this time, but that of Jerusalem only: Let them from the premises judge,
whether the Church of Jerusalem, even before the addition of the first three
thousand, must not needs consist of more Congregations than one. But supposing,
that as yet there might be but one Congregation in Jerusalem; yet when we
consider, from the Texts Mr. P. quotes, the addition of the three thousand, and
of five thousand more, and afterward of multitudes, and add hereunto, Act.
6.1.7. and 12.24. which speak of the farther prevailing of the Word, and great
increase of the number of the Disciples, and together therewith, (...).
reflect on that, Act. 21.20. Thou see, how many ten thousands of the Jews
there are which believe: me thinks, reason should compel men to acknowledge,
that the Church of Jerusalem, must needs in the Apostles time, consist of
diverse single Congregations. What is said against these Texts shall be anon
considered.

2 There was a great number of laborers, in the Church of Jerusalem. There
were at first the twelve Apostles, and one hundred and eight Disciples (and
most likely it is, there were more afterward) men of rare abilities, and
extraordinary indowments, all whose labors cannot well be imagined to have
been spent in the service of one single Congregation.

3 The time, when there was a full employment for so many laborers was the
first year after Christ's Ascension, and it is likely 'twas early in that year;
for in the second year Paul was converted, whereupon the persecution begun at
Stephens death slacked, and the Churches were multiplied, Act. 9.31. Now, many
more might be brought in by the Apostles, during the persecution, for they
abode at Jerusalem, Act. 8.1. And they continued in Jerusalem diverse years
after the persecution was ended, Act. 15.2. this Council being held about
seventeen years after Christ's Ascension. Now, that all this while the number of
believers in Jerusalem, should not be increased beyond the bounds of one
single Congregation, that might meet ordinarily together in the same place, to
use the Ordinances of Gods service, and worship, is to me beyond belief.

4 At this time there were diverse languages spoken in Jerusalem, by persons
dwelling there, Act. 2.5. sixteen several languages are reckoned up, verse 9,
10, 11. Now, many of these persons being converted to the profession of the
Christian faith, Reason teaches us to apprehend, that they were distributed
into several Congregations, according to their several languages, to have in
them the mysteries of the Gospel preached unto them, for their edification in
the faith of Christ. For which cause, and that some of them might preach unto
strange Nations, Christ poured out the gift of tongues on the twelve Apostles,
and one hundred and eight Disciples, Act. 1.8.15. with Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

These considerations prevail with me to conclude, that in Jerusalem there
were diverse Congregations, under several Teachers, and yet all making up but
one complete Church. All these several Congregations, being called in the
singular number the Church of Jerusalem. This instance is granted, by the
learned Mr. Thomas Hooker, who says, It does not appear, that (setting aside
the Church of Jerusalem) they (the Christians of one Church) should needs meet
in several places. Survey part 1. P. 129.
Therein acknowledging, that it appears the Church of Jerusalem must needs,
and did; and I doubt not but others did also.

But, because your self and others much deny this of the Church of Jerusalem,
and that if this instance be made good, the cause is ours, in the point of
Presbyterial Churches, consisting of diverse Congregations; I shall answer the
Objections made by you, and others.

Object. 1 The three thousand, Act. 2.41. (say the Reverend Authors of the
defense of the nine positions, p. 125.) were added to the one hundred and
twenty. They have their communion together described, etc.

Answ. 1 If this one hundred and twenty, were the whole number of Disciples in
Jerusalem, gathered into a Church Way at this time, then no account can be
given of those multitudes converted by the Ministry of John, Christ, the
Apostles, and seventy Disciples, how they were disposed of. Neither is it any
way probable, that the three thousand should be added to the Church, before
those.

2 Either these were added before the three thousand, or not at all, for ought
appears from Scripture.

3 That there were at this time, many more believers of the Church of
Jerusalem, before the hundred and twenty, is to me out of doubt. Christ
appears to above five hundred Brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. These may be
conceived, embodied brethren of the Church of Jerusalem, met together in the
exercise of the duties of Gods worship, Luke 24.33, 36. and a part of those
converted by John, Christ, the Apostles, etc. And I am of opinion, that Christ,
during his forty days converse with his Apostles, Act. 1.3. speaking of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, gave them directions for his worship,
and the Government of his Church; and that during that time, and between it and
the mission of the holy Ghost, on the day of Pentecost, the Apostles did, by
Christ's direction, cast Christians into a certain Gospel Order (which, possibly
till now they were not fixed in) for the use of all the Ordinances of Christ, in
several societies, under their proper officers; and that these made up the
Church of Jerusalem, to which the three thousand were added, to share in those
privileges, which the rest enjoyed before, which is implied, Act. 2.42.

4 The hundred and twenty were only the Guides of the Church, their number is
made up, of the twelve Apostles, seventy Disciples, and thirty eight Persons
more, all of Christ's retinue whilst he was on earth, Act. 1.15, 21. The
Apostles, and seventy Disciples, were, we read in the Gospel, made Ministers
by Christ; and the other thirty eight, cannot well be looked upon as no
Ministers. For 1 They conversed, in the same special manner, with Christ, both
before, and after his resurrection, as the Apostles, and seventy Disciples did,
Act. 1.21, 22. 2 Any one of the thirty eight was in as near a capacity to be
made an Apostle, in the room of Judas, as any of the Seventy; which argues
them to be men of the same rank, with the Seventy. 3 All the hundred and
twenty, were to stay at Jerusalem, waiting for the promise of pouring the Holy
Ghost on them, by which they should be endued with the gift of strange tongues,
Act. 1.4, 5, 13, 14, 15. with Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. 4 From these last texts, it
appears, that the whole hundred and twenty, received the gift of tongues, on
the day of Pentecost; the end of which was, to preach the Gospel to people of
diverse languages, now in Jerusalem, and hereafter in other Nations. Therefore
all the hundred and twenty were Ministers, and the three thousand were added to
the Church of Jerusalem, where they Ministered, and they were the standing
Presbytery, the Guides and Governors of that Church, and not any of them of
the governed: The multitude of baptized believers at Jerusalem, being in all
likelihood, many hundreds, if not some thousands; Else, what account can be
given, of the success of Christ's Ministry in Jerusalem, mentioned Joh. 2.23.
and 4.1. and 7.31. and 8.30. and 11.28, 45. and 12.19? And, this standing
Presbytery of the Church of Jerusalem, is the basis of the discourse of the
Evangelist, concerning the Church, in this book of the Acts, unto which, many
passages in it, do particularly relate; which by many, and Mr. P. are thought
to relate to the whole Church of Jerusalem, as shall be made to appear.

Object. 2 All that believed were together, Act. 2.44. continuing daily with
one accord in the Temple, verse 46. Therefore they were but one single
Congregation.

Answ. Together, (...), relates not to the place of their assembling, but to
their oneness, in heart, spirit, and practice. The phrase is often used by the
Septuagint, in this sense, to note men's concurrence, in the same actions,
though distant in place, Psalm. 2.2. (...) ^ariter.
The Kings of the earth assembled themselves together, (...). So Psalm 49.2.
Give ear all ye inhabitants of the world, both high and low, rich and poor
together, (...). Where it is plain, that, together, relates not to the place of
their assembling (for what place can contain the whole world as an auditory?)
but to their concurring in attention, to the Prophets doctrine when declared to
them. Therefore these believers being (...), will not infer, that there was but
one Congregation of them, but, that they were one in heart, spirit and
practice. Neither can that other place be useful, in the service for which
it is pressed, that, they continued with one accord, in the Temple. That same
(...), confirms what has been said to the other place, and is exegetical to
it. And for their continuing daily in the Temple, It teaches us, that as yet,
they had not cast off all the worship of the Temple, but resorted thither at
the hours of Prayer, Act. 3.1. as before; holding correspondency with the
Church of the Jews so far as they might; But it does not hold out, that the
Temple was their meeting place (as our Reverend Brethren suppose) either for
the feeding Disciples with the Word, Defense of the nine positions. p. 125.
or the administering of Sacraments to them, for neither of these would have
been endured there, Act. 4.1, 2.

p. 26.
Obj. 3 " They were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, Act. 5.12.

Answ. 1 The Text speaks not of the multitude of Believers, but of the
Apostles, by whose hands miracles were wrought, as appears clearly by what
precedes and follows the parenthesis, in the 12. and 15. verse. So that the
mistake is palpable, in interpreting this of the multitude. The Text
distinguishes clearly, between the Apostles and the Church, verse. 10, 11, 12.

2 Were it granted, that all the multitude of believers was there; It follows
not, (neither can it ever be proved) that they convened there, to partake of
the Ordinances of Christ, as administered by the Apostles; Or that, the
Apostles did there Administer them to them. The work of the Apostles (as
Ministers) in the Temple, is still found to relate to the unconverted; And no
one place can be produced, that proves, that they there fed the converted.

p. 26.
Object. 4 Act. 6.2, 3. The twelve, called the multitude of the Disciples unto
them, and said, Brethren, look ye out among you seven men, etc. Therefore at
this time, the Church did all meet in the same place, and consequently were but
one single Congregation.

Ans. 1 It may be questioned, whether this multitude mean the whole number of
Believers, or only the multitude of the Presbytery, called to choose from
among themselves seven men. Authors of good note there are for the latter.

2 Supposing the choice of Deacons to be permitted to the whole Church of
Jerusalem, this will not help our brethrens cause. 1 Because it cannot be
proved, neither is it likely, that all the Members of the Church, both men and
women, did meet upon this occasion; But that of the men, as many met as would
and could, as is usual in public conventions, as in the choice of Parliament
men, etc. 2 If every individual member met, yet who knows not, that many more
may come together in the same place, who by lifting up of hands, or some other
signal, may give testimony of their choice of persons, than can meet together
in the same place to hear the word preached, and, in an ordinary way, to
partake of all Ordinances. The whole multitude might on such an occasion come
together, and yet for the orderly use of all Ordinances, meet usually in
several Assemblies.

Object. 5 Act. 15.4, 6, 7, 12. Paul and Barnabas, p. 27.
were received of the Church, by which Calvin understands, plebem ipsam, and
totum corpus. All the multitude of the Church were present at the disputation,
for they gave audience to Paul and Barnabas, and concurred with the Apostles
and Elders, immediately upon the conclusion of James his speech, v. 22.

Answ. 1 What Calvin says, will not serve your turn. Peculiarem locum assignat
Apostolis, and Presbyteris, a quibus praesertim excepti fuerunt.
You might have seen, by what he subjoyns, his meaning to be that they were
received by the Apostles and Elders, and some chief ones of the Members of the
Church, in the name of the whole. Thus, the act of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council, is reputed the Act of the whole City. So also is the third
verse. expounded by Calvin, and so to be understood; Communi Ecclesiae nomine,
adjuncti fuerunt comites.
of the Church of Antioch, for who can think, that the whole body of the Church
brought them on their way?

2 The Multitude that kept silence, and gave audience to Paul and Barnabas, was
the multitude of the Elders with the Apostles, met to decide the Question,
about which the Church of Antioch was troubled: For verse. 6. mentions no
others, The Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter; and
to them were Paul and Barnabas delegated, ver. 2. and they only speak in the
judging and deciding of this question (for such power does not belong to common
members, as shall be proved) therefore they were the multitude, that gave
audience to Paul and Barnabas.

In verse. 6.
3 There is not ground to conclude, that the whole Church was present at that
disputation. Non dicit Lucas (says Calvin) totam Ecclesiam congregatam, sed
eos qui doctrina, and judicio pollebant, and qui ratione officii, hujus causae
legitimi erant judices. Your Reason brought to prove that it is very plain, that
the whole multitude of the Church was present, because the whole Church is said
to concur with the Apostles and Elders, in choosing brethren, and sending
letters, seems to me very obscure, and not at all cogent. For though the
Apostles and Elders concluded then to write Letters and send Messengers, yet it
follows not, that the thing was immediately done; Nor that the Church was then
present to consent to the doing of it. There is no necessity that (...), should
signify immediately upon the conclusion of James his speech, no more than that,
so when they were dismissed, which follows the end of the letter, should mean
that the messengers were sent away toward Antioch that night. That which the
Apostles and Elders determined then, might be afterward put in execution,
with the concurrence of the Church, had in due time and place by way of
consent. Or, if the Letters were then drawn up, and the consent of the whole
Church was then given to it, and to the sending of the chosen Messengers (which
cannot be firmly proved) yet, there is no necessity of understanding by the
whole Church here, all the members of the Church of Jerusalem, but some chief
ones of it that might be there in the name of the whole Church, whose consent
was, on that account, the consent of the whole Church. The presence and
explicit consent of every individual member of the Church, appears not to
have been required, necessary or probable.

Nothing therefore can hence be concluded, to prove the Church of Jerusalem
one single congregation, or to disprove its consisting of many particular
congregations, which has been before evinced.

Object. 6 And whereas the Apostle speaks of many myriads of Jews that
believed, Act. 21.20. p. 27.
It is not to be restrained to Jews dwelling at Jerusalem, seeing it was the
time of Pentecost, when Jews and Proselytes came to Jerusalem out of all
Nations, and we have express mention of the Jews that were of Asia, ver. 27.

Ans. Those myriads appear to be the very same multitude, spoken of verse. 22.
that must needs come together; the reading of the context evinceth it. Now page
28. you say, It does not seem congruous, that this should be said of any
other, but the Church of Jerusalem; what other multitude should the Apostles
expect to come together? So that if I prove my assertion, your own words will
confute you. But that those myriads spoken of, were all members of the
Christian Church of Jerusalem, appears. For,

1 Paul being come to Jerusalem, gives an account to James and the Elders, of
the success of his Ministry among the Gentiles, verse. 18, 19. And they on the
other side, give Paul an account of the hand of God with their Ministry at
Jerusalem, verse. 20. Therefore to thrust in the Jews of Asia, and other parts,
is quite besides the purpose.

2 The Jews are such as it seems Paul had no account of till now, though he
were the Apostle of the Gentiles, and had labored among them many years, and
so had cause to know of them better than any other Apostle. Therefore they were
Jews of Jerusalem.

3 These Jews had the charge against Paul only by information from others,
verse. 21. which Argues that they did not live among the Gentiles, for then they
would have had personal knowledge of his carriage.

4. These Jews are supposed by the Apostles to be satisfiable by Paul's present
conformity, verse. 22, 23, 24. But Jews dispersed among the Gentiles, that had
heard Paul, and seen and known nearly his practice, would not have been thus
satisfied.

5 The Jews of Asia could be none of the number of these myriads of Jews, for
by the matter of their declaiming against the Apostle, they manifest that they
had not embraced the Gospel. But the Myriads of Jews spoken of are said to be
believing.

Therefore I conclude these Myriads of Jews did belong to the Church of
Jerusalem, and did dwell in or about Jerusalem, and therefore the Church of
Jerusalem must needs consist of many Congregations, this objection
notwithstanding.

p. 27.
But you help out the matter, as well as you can, saying, Neither is it
impossible for Myriads (in the Language of Luke at least) to come together, and
to hear at once the same Preacher, to show which Mr. Norton urges Luke 21.1.

I Answer, 1 Mr. Norton speaks not of Myriads in Lukes language (which is your
weak conceit, as if Myriads in Lukes language, were less than in the common
acceptance) neither does he urge, but merely allege that Text. 2 Though by
that place it appear, that Myriads flocked after Christ, yet it proves not
that they all did, or could actually hear him, at the same time. We know
commonly, that in a great concourse of people, in an open place, there are
many, that can neither see, nor hear, what they came to observe. And Christ is
said there, to speak to his Disciples, and not to the whole multitude. 3 A
Myriad, never consisting of more or less than ten thousand, Many Myriads could
not possibly meet in the same place, at the same time, to hear the word, much
less orderly to partake of all Ordinances, and carry on (according to your
sense especially) Church-work.

There being then, many ten thousands, in the Church of Jerusalem, it must
needs consist of diverse Congregations, this Argumenticle, notwithstanding. And
so much for the Church of Jerusalem.

P. 28.
You proceed to say. We may add to this instance, that of the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.23. and Antioch, Act. 15.30. But I find no contrary
instances.

Either you mean (if the meaning of your words may be found) that Jerusalem
only, is pressed by us, as an example of a Church consisting of many
Congregations; Or, that the Churches of Jerusalem, Corinth, and Antioch, are
the only Churches, that we plead consisted of diverse Congregations. Both which
assertions are void of truth. For, not only Jerusalem, Corinth, and Antioch,
but also Rome, Thessalonica, Philippi, and the seven Churches of Asia, are all
asserted by us, to have been Presbyterial Churches, consisting of diverse
Congregations, and that upon strong, and to us persuading grounds. A reverend
Brother adds, Hudson.
It seems difficult to find in the New Testament an express instance, or
example, of a Congregational Church, standing and continuing so, by it self.
The Church of Cenchrea, Romans 16.1. is the likeliest, yet it is not certain, for
it was a Port-Town of the Corinthians, Dr. Owen, of Schism. p. 36, 37.
but eight miles distant from Corinth. And, a learned Congregational man,
supposes the Church of Cenchrea, to be included in that of Corinth.

Come we therefore now to speak particularly to some more instances.

The Church of Corinth was a Presbyterial Church, 2 Of the Church of Corinth.
made up of diverse Congregations. For proof whereof, consider,

1 The eminency of the place. Corinth was the famous Metropolis of Achaia.
Lumen Graeciae, says Tully; (...), says Thucidides in Eustathius. It mastered
one half of Greece. Now, that in this famous City, the number of Christians
should be no greater, Vide Pisc. in 1 Cor. 14.23
than what might ordinarily meet in some one private house (for they had in
primitive times no large Temples to meet in) seems no way credible.

2 God tells Paul in a vision, Act. 18.10. that he had much people in this
City, to wit, to be added to those already converted, and brought into
Church Order, verse. 8. And they were much people, 1 In reference to the number
of the Jews there, that rejected Christ, and had a Synagogue, verse 4, 6. for
this is brought in, as a stay to Paul's spirit in that case, to assure him that
he should have an abundant seal of his Ministry, though many opposed it. 2 In
reference to the City it self, a great number of those in it. Therefore they
must be more than could meet in one house, else they had been but a very small
handful to the City.

3 Paul stays at Corinth a year and six months, Act. 18.11. Now, it being the
work of an Apostle to plant Churches, and leave them to others to water, this
makes it probable, that there were there diverse Congregations, for the settling
of which, Of Schism. p. 37, 38.
Paul stays so long. And besides this, The Christians of all Achaia (says
Dr. Owen) did belong to the Church of Corinth, and assembled therewith as they
could, for the participation of Ordinances, and the Church of Cenchrea comes
under the same name with that of Corinth. Put this together. The believers in
Corinth, in Cenchrea, and in all Achaia besides, are accounted members of the
Church of Corinth by the learned Doctor (to whom I suppose Mr. P. will
subscribe) and then, who sees not, that there must needs have been many
Congregations belonging to the Church of Corinth?

4 There was a great number of Teachers in that Church, that speech, 1 Cor.
4.15. clearly implies it; and this argues, that there were several
Congregations for so great a number of Teachers to attend upon.

5 The Apostle speaks expressly of diverse Congregations belonging to the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women, (...), keep silence in the
Churches; Therefore, there were Churches, several Congregations, to which the
women of the Church of Corinth did belong,

Against this there are chiefly two Objections.

Object. 1 1 Cor. 14.23. If the whole Church be come together, and all speak
with tongues, etc. Therefore they were but one single Congregation.

Answ. 1 The Greek is, (...), and may well be rendered, about the same thing,
or for the same end and purpose; n. to partake of Gods Ordinances. Diodate
says, to verse 31. ye may all prophecy, etc. namely, by course, and in
diverse or several Assemblies. So says Estius, The Prophets were to prophecy
in diverse Assemblies, and therefore it is said, Let your Women keep silence in
the Churches.

2 I suppose none will say, that all the members of the Church of Corinth, did
speak with tongues, for then, what need of an Interpreter, and yet the Church
here spoken of did so.

3 Therefore here is a clear pattern, of a Representative Church; The Prophets,
as distinguished from the rest of the members, are called the Church.

4 Here is a clear pattern of Prophets, in combination with, and subjection to
their fellow Prophets. Let the Prophets speak, two, or three, and let the other
judge, verse 29.

Obj. 2 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. When you are gathered together, to deliver such a one to
Satan. Therefore they were but one Congregation.

Answ. 1 The Text speaks not of the gathering together of all the members of
the Church of Corinth, but of the meeting of the Church- Officers, to
excommunicate the incestuous person. Authoritative binding, acts of rule and
government, belonging only to Church Officers, as is granted by the most
moderate and learned of the Congregational Brethren. The Key of Authority and
Rule (says Mr. Cotton) is committed to the Elders of the Church, Keys, p. 20.
and alibi.
and so, the Act of Rule, is made the proper act of their Office. Christ gave
the power of binding and loosing to all the Apostles, and the Apostles
committed it to the Elders. The power of the people, is a power of liberty, to
join with the Presbytery, in casting out, or cutting off; But authoritative
power they have not. Temple measured, p. 35
And (says Mr. Noys) A necessity of members consent, does constitute a Church
excessively Democratical, and renders the Elders only titular Governors.
Hence it appears, there was no need of the presence of all the members of the
Church of Corinth, to excommunicate the incestuous person.

2 The persons, that met for this work, were to meet with Paul's pastoral
spirit; this suits the Church- Officers, not the people.

3 Paul charge it upon the ordinary members, as their sin, that they mourned
not for that sin, (...).
and for their Elders neglect of discipline, using the passive voice, not the
active, (as Mr. Rutherford observes) whereby it appears, that the members were
patients, rather than agents. That some of the ordinary members were present,
at the excommunication, may be granted; But, that all the members of the
Church of Corinth, were present, or bound so to be, cannot be proved; Nothing
therefore is hence gained.

The Church of Antioch also appears to have consisted of diverse
Congregations; 2 The Church of Antioch.
because of the multitude of laborers there. Diverse of the Teachers of
Jerusalem come to Antioch, being driven away by the persecution, and the hand
of the Lord was with them, in bringing in Gentiles, to join with the believing
Jews, Act. 11.19, 20, 21. They soon want more laborers, Barnabas is sent to
assist in the work, verse 22. he finds the work so great, that he fetches
over Saul, to assist him, verse 25. Barnabas and Paul, stay at Antioch a whole
year, teach much people, and here Disciples are first called Christians, verse
26, and returning, they abode there a long time, chap. 14.28. What more likely,
than that there were diverse Congregations belonging to that Church, since it
needed so many Teachers, and kept there so long, men so eminent, Planters of
Churches?

Object. Act. 14.27. When they had gathered the Church together, Act. 15.30.
the mu^titude together, Act. 11.26. they assembled themselves with the Church.

Answ. The first Text may well be understood of the Representative Church, to
wit, the Elders, by whom the multitude might at their set times of meeting, for
the use of public Ordinances, be informed. And if we should understand it of
the whole Church, the Text puts no necessity upon us, of understanding it, of
their being all gathered into one and the same place. They might be gathered
into their several meeting-places, and there be informed of the success of
the Messengers, by several of them. The two other Texts may also be so
understood. The multitude might be gathered and informed of the Epistle in
their several meeting-places; and Paul and Barnabas, and the other Teachers,
might assemble with the Church in several meeting-places, some in some, and
some in others. From these Texts therefore nothing can be concluded, to prove
Antioch's a congregational Church.

4 The Church of Rome.
The Church of Rome, likewise, appears to have been Presbyterial. There was one
congregation meeting in the house of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.3, 5. and
two others meeting in other places, verse. 14, 15. and there is ground to
conclude, that there were yet more Congregations belonging to that Church. 1
Because Paul saluteth several in this Chapter, that seem to have been Teachers
in that Church, verse. 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 2 The Faith of the
Romans was spoken of throughout the whole world, Romans 1. which argues them to
have been a numerous Church. 3 Their continuing sound in the faith for many
years together, when other famous Churches mouldered away, argues the same.

We might also instance in the Churches of the Colossians, Thessalonians,
Philippians; But I shall, for a conclusion, mention the Churches of Asia.

5 The seven Churches of Asia.
The seven Churches of Asia, spoken of Rev. 2. and 3. chap. were Presbyterial
Churches, consisting of diverse Congregations, which appears; because,

1 The Cities in the which they were planted were great Cities. Ephesus was the
head of Ionia, the greatest market of all Asia, famous among the Heathen for
the Temple of Diana; and there the Apostle Paul spent his labors for three
years together, Act. 20.31. Laodicea was one of the greatest Cities in all
Phrygia, famous for traffic. The rest were also famous Cities, and of great
command. Therefore it is not probable that there was but one single Congregation
of Christians in each.

2 There was a great number of Teachers in each of these Churches. To the Angel
of the Church, write, so begins every Epistle. Now it is apparent from several
places in these Epistles, that there was more than one Minister in each Church;
and therefore this Angel must mean, either a College of Pastors in each
Church, or a President over that ruling society, as the leading man in all acts
of public concernment and Church Government. The former seems most probable,
and is proved by Smectymunus, from Rev. 2.24. But unto you, I say, and to the
rest in Thyatira, (...)
etc. where the Angel is bespoken in the Plural number, as distinct from the
members. In Ephesus alone in Paul's time, the Elders appear to have been so
many, as were more than needed for one single congregation, Act. 20.25, 36, 37.
Ye all shall see my face no more, He prayed with them all, They all wept
sore; these three alls imply that they were very many. And the Church is called
all the flock, verse. 28. (...).
which argues that there were several charges for them to attend upon. So in
Pergamos there were diverse Pastors, for there were diverse erroneous teachers
three, some teaching the doctrine of Balaam, Rev. 2.14. Some that of the
Nicholaitans, verse. 15. (and what more likely than that they did it in several
Congregations?) and others holding fast Christ's name, who were so many, that
they are required to purge out those erroneous ones. Therefore it is not
probable that they were all over one single congregation only. The like may
be said of the rest of those Churches, that are exhorted to deal in a
disciplinary way with false teachers. There were very many Pastors in them, and
consequently several Congregations on which they attended.

3 The Holy Ghost hints clearly that these Churches were Presbyterial,
consisting of diverse Congregations, when he calls each of them, first a
Church, and then Churches, Rev. 2.1, 7. and 8.11. and 12.17. and 18.29. So Rev.
3. Each of these bodies is called Churches, as it was made up of diverse
congregations under their proper Pastors, and yet but one Church, as these
congregations were combined, and subjected together to the government of all
the Elders in common.

These two Chapters well weighed, would put an end to diverse controversies
among us, about the Discipline of the Church. For, 1 Hence Christians might be
convinced, that Church Power was never committed to the people, but to
Church Officers only. The Angels only are censured for neglect, and ill
administration of Government in the Churches; and praised for, and exhorted to
the due exercise of Discipline. 2 Hence a combination of the Officers of diverse
congregations, united to govern them in common may be evinced. The Elders in
Pergamos sound in the faith, must in a disciplinary way hinder the Balaamites
and Nicholaitans, from teaching their errors in the assemblies of Christians
there. 3 Hence appears that the spirit of the Prophets is not subject to the
people, but to the Prophets only. The Angel of each Church, the
Church Officers, must try the Prophets, and those that say they are Apostles,
Rev. 2.2.

Let us now consider, how Mr. P. proceeds.

p. 29, 30, 31, 32
Classical Churches are put in the room of Episcopal Churches, by the effectual
working of the mystery of iniquity. These are combinations of congregations,
united by subjection to one and the same Court of Elders, chosen out of the
whole to govern them. These are pressed so far, as to take away power of
government, and exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline from the Congregations.
For they appropriate power of Government to the Eldership. This agrees not with
the institution, Matthew. 18.18. When Christ says, whatsoever ye bind on
earth, etc. does he not include the offending brother? Christ promised the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven unto Peter, as unto a lively confessor of him,
and did not therein look on him otherwise.

I have already given in reasons to manifest Gospel Churches in Primitive
times, to have been Classical; and more shall be said to it upon your next
paragraph. The first branch of your charge against those that are for them, I
shall now consider; which is, that they appropriate the power of Government,
and exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline, to the Eldership. A sad crime
believe it! and as much to be condemned as the appropriating of power of
government in the Commonwealth to the Magistrate; which by some passages in Mr.
P's Book, seems to be in his judgment a crime too. If the people can lay
claim from Christ's appointment to the power of the Keys; as, to the Preaching
of the Word, administration of the Sacraments, authoritative binding and
loosing (for the Keys go together, and were given to Peter together) if these
things belong to the Community in the Church; we shall confess our selves
guilty, in appropriating the power of government to the Eldership. But though
we have looked much after it, we cannot discern any such grant and
appointment of our Lord Christ the King of the Church. And when I read such
places as these, Matthew. 18.18. and 28.19, 20. John 20.22, 23. and 21.16. Ephesians.
4.11, 12. I cannot without offering violence to my reason, imagine that they
speak to and of the Community; considering withal, what express charges the
Community have upon them from God, to be subject to those that are over them
in the Lord, as to their Governors, Teachers, Pastors, Rulers, etc.

But I will particularly consider, the first of these Texts, which is that, Mr.
P. urges for his cause, and show how little it makes for it.

That Mat. 18.17, 18. speaks of the Church Officers only, does appear, because
it is spoken by Christ, with reference firstly, to the Jewish
Church Governors, than which there was then no other governing Church in
being. And this is the joint judgment of the Ancients, Ambrose, Cyril,
Theodoret, Gregory, etc. and of multitudes of later lights in the Church,
Melanchton, Aretius, Musculus, Bucan, Cartwright, Parker, etc. and Mr. Fenner
gives a reason of it from the words our Savior uses, viz. Publican, Heathen,
and that otherwise the Apostles could not have understood Christ, knowing then
no other Church governing. So that, the Lord Christ manifestly alludes to the
Jewish, and gives from it a pattern to the Christian Church. First, the
offending brother must be dealt with, in a private way; If this prevail not,
one or two witnesses are to be taken, the next time admonition is given; If
this work not on him, then the Church is to be told of it, that is, the Elders
of the Church, before whom among the Jews, Ecclesiastical causes were brought
(first the Elders of that particular congregation, then (if need be) the
associated Elders of combined Congregations, for so among the Jews the Rulers
of the Synagogue were first compl^ined to, and then the great Ecclesiastical
Court, which was the Church representative) and if the offender will not hear
them, he must be excommunicated, and accounted as a Heathen and a Publican.
And he that is thus bound on earth, if the thing be duly done, is bound in
heaven. Hence it appears, that the Communities sharing in the power and act of
binding, cannot any way be hence gathered, without offering a manifest
violence to the Text; which Mr. P. does to purpose, and withal to all rules,
both of divine and humane Polity, when he makes not only the community judges
and Governors, but even the offending brother, a judge in his own cause.

Let us now, draw an Argument from this Text, to relieve Classes against his
fierce assault. If in this place, our Savior lays down a rule, for the
healing of all the grievances of his Church; then, by the Church here to be
complained to, we must understand, not only the Church governing of one
Congregation, but also the Church governing of many Congregations: But in this
place, Christ lays down a rule for the healing of all the grievances of his
Church; therefore, we must by the Church here understand, the Church
governing, even of many Congregations, or the united Elders of several
Congregations and Churches. The minor is clear, because this is the only
express Text, wherein Christ did lay down a rule to his disciples, for the
healing of offenses in his Church; and I suppose none will say, that Christ's
remedy, is too short to reach the malady. The consequence of the major is made
out thus. Not only one Brother may offend another, but the Elders one another,
one part of the Congregation the other, the Congregation the Elders, the Elders
the Congregation, and one or more Churches, one or many Sister Churches. Our
sad experience proves this to be a truth, and it is also proved by
Scripture-examples. Now, how shall such evils be healed, but by an appeal, and
application to a representative Church, a Church governing so comprehensive, as
the case will require? If a Church so comprehensive, be not here meant, then
Christian Churches, are in such cases, left without remedy; but that being not
to be granted, it will follow, that the Church governing here spoken of, takes
into its meaning, an assembly or Church of Officers of many Congregations.

Leaving Mr. P. to consider this Argument, I return to the point, the holding
of which he charge upon us, as a crime, that the power of the Keys belongs
only to the Eldership. For which, I shall cite the suffrages of Congregational
Brethren themselves. The Key of authority and rule (says Mr. Cotton) is
committed to the Elders of the Church, Keys p. 20.
and so, the act of rule is made the proper act of their office. Common members
(says Mr. Noyes) are not to govern by suffrage with their Elders, Temple
measured, p. 30, 31, 34, 35, 36
their consent is not absolutely necessary, and is not authoritative. The
Ministerial Keys were given to Peter, as an Apostle, Peter is made, Matthew.
16.18, 19. oeconomus Ecclesiae, and is evidently distinguished from the Church;
(which Mr. P. denies, and in saying, that Christ in this speech, looked on him
no otherwise, than as a lively confessor of him, he puts into every believers
hands, the power of the Keys, for if, I give unto thee, respect Peter only as
a lively confessor of Christ, it extends to every lively confessor of Christ,
and so every true Believer is vested with power to preach, administer the
Sacraments, and bind and loose authoritatively; than which, what is more
absurd?) Again, the Elders, are Rulers, Governors, have power to command, as
superiors in authority judicial. The Church is charged to obey them, not to
command, to be subject, not to govern. The Angels are rebuked, for the
corruptions of the Churches of Asia, as if it had been in their power to
prevent, and redress things amiss. Governors, and to govern with coactive
power, are conjugates. Are they not proper Governors, which shall govern the
people, over which they are Governors, only when themselves list? Keys p. 47.
In case (says Mr. Cotton) a Church be troubled with error, or scandal, and
the same maintained by a faction among them; now a Synod of Churches, or their
messengers, is the first subject of that power and authority, whereby error is
judicially convinced, and condemned, the truth searched out and determined, and
the way of truth and peace declared and imposed on all Churches. Quid plura? Do
not our Brethren grant what we say, though in some places, they make
exceptions from their own grants, in favor of the Community? But one Objection
is to be removed.

Object. Neither Matthew 18. nor any other place, is to be understood of a
governing Church, or a Presbytery, because such a company is never called a
Church in Scripture.

Mr. Noyes answers, (...) is used for any assembly, in the New Testament,
Act. 19.39. and therefore is applicable to an assembly of Elders, and the
Presbytery is called the Congregation, or Church, in the Old Testament, Numb.
35.24, 25. with Deuteronomy. 19.12. and our Savior may well be supposed to conform
his speech to the Old Testament. We have showed, that 1 Cor. 14.23. calls
clearly the Teachers, the Church, neither can Church be otherwise understood,
in Matthew. 18. but of a Presbytery or governing Church, since the power of
binding and loosing is ascribed to it, which is no where granted to the
Community, as has been said. Let us now heed Mr. P's second assault or charge.

Secondly, They exclude the single Congregations, considered severally, each
one by it self, from having an Eldership, having power to exercise
Ecclesiastic Discipline. P. 32, 33, 34.
But is it likely, that, go tell the Church, should mean, go tell the Elders of
the combination? It has been proved, that the Church of Jerusalem and Corinth
were single Congregations, and that of Corinth exercised ecclesiastic
discipline. But they stay not here, but translate the power of Government to
their Elderships, subordinate one to another, till they come to an ecumenical
assembly. Now, if we grant, that single Congregations with their Elderships,
be excluded from the power of Government, yet will it not appear from
Scripture, that there are any higher Elderships, or larger combinations of
Churches, than those of the first form, and first step from the single
Congregations. The Churches of Asia, grant them collective Churches, do
severally receive of Christ, the praise of their good, and blame of their evil
carriage, etc.

Here, in some things you apprehend not our mind rightly, and in others, you
overthrow your cause.

1 We hold, that the power of Government residing in the Eldership; a
particular Congregation may, and ought to have an appropriate Eldership
belonging to it.

2 That a single Congregation having an appropriate Eldership, is a true Church.

3 That such single Congregations, have equal power, severally considered.

4 That though a single Congregation, be a Church; yet, it is, or ought to be
also, when it may, a part or member of a Presbyterial Church; and has not so
much power, as a Classical Church has.

5 That the Presbytery of a single Congregation, have power to end differences
among themselves, in cases that are ordinary.

6 That in cases weighty and extraordinary, as excommunication, The Presbytery
or Eldership of consociated Congregations, are concerned, as well as the
Presbytery of that single Congregation, of which the offending Brother is. Paul
writes not to the Eldership of that particular Congregation, of which the
incestuous person was more peculiarly a member, but to the Presbytery of all
the Congregations belonging to the Church of Corinth, to cast him out.

7 That there is no example, in all the New Testament, of excommunication, by
the particular Eldership of one single Congregation.

8 That therefore a single Congregation, ordinarily, is not a complete, entire
Church, furnished with full power, for all acts of Church Discipline.

9 That we find in the New Testament, Church Discipline commonly executed, in
a Presbyterial Church, consisting of diverse Congregations. Such was the Church
of Ephesus, and the Eldership of this Church, as such, did commonly exercise
Church Discipline, tried false Prophets, and those that called themselves
Apostles, and convicted them as liars, Rev. 2. The like we might say of other
Churches.

10 That in extraordinary cases, we have an example of appeal, from one
Presbyterial Church, to an association of such Churches to guide us. The Church
of Antioch (and probably also those of Syria and Silicia, Act. 15.23.) appeals,
to an assembly of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, and the Elders of that
Church united; (probably also of the Elders of the Churches of Syria and
Cilicia) and the controversy, which could not be ended otherwise, is ended in
and by that Synod.

And thus, larger Synods and Councils may be necessary, even an Ecumenical,
to heal public and spreading evils. If the Church (says Mr. Cotton) where the
offense lies, Way. p. 108
persisteth in the neglect of their duty, and the counsel of their Brethren;
the matter would be referred, to a Congregation of many, or all the Churches
together. That is, sure, to the Elders of all the Churches, for to them he
says, the power of rule, or Government, does properly belong.

Hence, you may rectify your mistakes; we exclude not the Eldership of a
single Congregation, from power of Government, but say, it has not ordinarily
power for all acts of Church Discipline. And, in that we arise from a
Congregational, to a Classical, Synodal, and Ecumenical Eldership, we have
respect to the need of the Church so requiring it, and to the precedents given
us of the two first, in Scripture; which are also a sufficient ground for the
latter.

What you say of Jerusalem and Corinth, helps you not, for it has been
evinced, that they were not single Congregations.

What you add, against higher Elderships, or larger combinations of Churches
than those of the first step from single Congregations, from the consideration
of the Churches of Asia, does you no service, but e contra. For,

1 By granting the Churches of Asia to have been collective Churches, you pull
down what you had said, for the congregationalness of Churches. Grant them
collective Churches, and the greatest part of your book is una litura.

2 By saying, that it appears not from Scripture, that there are any larger
combinations of Churches, than those of this first form; You look beside the
Scripture, and the state of the Question. The state of the question; because
we stand not for stated and fixed combinations of Churches, beyond that first
form, but only occasional ones; and the Scripture, because as has been, and
shall be showed, there was a higher Eldership, and larger combination of
Churches in the Synod at Jerusalem, than those of the first step from single
congregations: the Elders of the Presbyterial Churches of Antioch and
Jerusalem, being there combined, and in all probability, those also of Syria
and Cilicia, as has been said.

3 If you will stand to what you say, that the Churches of Asia, do severally
receive praise or dispraise, each for her self, without reflection on the rest;
I will compel you to grant positively (and not only suppositively) that they
were collective Churches. For the Epistle to every one has this close, He
that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. If what
Christ says to one Church, he says to the Churches, and yet the several
Churches do each for her self, restrainedly receive praise or dispraise; It
follows unavoidably, that every one of the seven Churches, was a collective
Church, and so you dispute against, and confute your self.

4 It Is not strange, as you say it is, that Christ should not speak of a
combination of these seven Churches, as an Ordinance of his, for their remedy;
and blame them for the neglect of it. For they were first to use, and Christ
directs them accordingly to the use of, the first means, the help of the
Presbytery of each Church. If this would do, there was no need of carrying the
cause higher; if upon trial it would not do, they knew what course was next to
be used, and had an example of it in the practice of the Church of Antioch.

To your question, Whether it be likely, that, go tell the Church, should
mean, go tell the Elders of the combination; I answer, it is likely, and it
has been proved to mean so; yet not firstly, as you seem to insinuate that we
hold, but secondarily, when the Eldership of the particular Church, where the
offense is given, prevail not to remove it.

Here was no Synod, Act. 15. that is, an assembly of Officers, resulting out of
many inferior Presbyteries. P. 35. 10 p. 45
1 Because we read not of any such combination of the Churches there mentioned,
to become subject to the rule of one Superior Eldership. 2 Because we read of
no foreigners, that came to this Synod, but those of Antioch, who concurred
not in the Decrees of it, and are excluded from the decision of the
controversy, Act. 16.4. 3 Here was no appeal from the censure of the Church at
Antioch, there passed no censure, but only had been a dissension, and
disputation; and so the errand of the Messengers was to get satisfaction, that
the same doctrine was taught at Jerusalem as at Antioch. 4 Here was no rule
exercised over the Churches, for it would argue a diminution of Paul's
Apostolical Authority, that the Decrees of the Apostles should more than
materially bind him. And these Decrees are made by a joint act of the Apostles,
Elders and Brethren (difference in the order of their concurrence we grant, but
in the nature of the Act we cannot grant) but it will not be granted that the
Brethren did exercise an Act of Rule over other Churches. To say, that by the
whole Church is meant the Synodical Church, is without ground, being built on
the impossibility of the meeting of the Church of Jerusalem in one place, which
has been refuted. And if the Brethren were shut out from a concurrence of the
same nature with the Elders, will they say, that the Elders of a Classical
Presbytery at Jerusalem, did exercise rule over all these Churches so far
distant, that could not be of their combination? If verse. 28. of laying a
burden be objected; Let it be considered whether there be not as much said of
the assertion of the Pharisees, ver. 5, and 10.

Thus, if we should grant Classical Eldership, it will be hard to grant any
more with Scripture warrant. But we shall not grant these, having proved the
most numerous Churches to have been Congregational, and called severally by the
name of Church in the singular, and the numerous Church of Corinth was not
only Congregational, but had and exercised the power of the Keys. Paul, wraps
up Elders and people together, in the exercise of discipline, with a
concurrence of the like nature. And thus, the whole fabric of the Classical
way falls to the ground.

Mr. P. (as one observes) is a man of growing scruples, and has much
out-stript in them, the Reverend New England Congregational Brethren; Keys
chap. 6.
and that in weighty points, rejecting Ruling-Elders, etc. and here Synods. Mr.
Cotton tells him, that Synods are an Ordinance of Christ, grounding himself on
Act. 15. saying, It Is a precedent for succeeding Ages. And that, they have
power by the grace of Christ, to command and enjoin the things to be believed
and done; for which he cites the express words of the Synodal letter, verse.
28. And that this power to bind burdens, arises not only materially from the
weight of the things imposed, but formally from the authority of the Synod, as
an Ordinance of Christ. Adding, that the fraternity have only a power of
liberty, not of authority, for which he quotes Act. 16.4. And excepts from the
power of a Synod, only the injoyning of things in their use indifferent, not
denying them power of Ordination and Excommunication.

But Mr. P. is an Independent of an higher form, Let us consider what he says.

1 His first reason against the Synodicalness of this Assembly, that we Read
not of a combination of Churches, is untrue, For, the deputed Elders of the
Church of Antioch, combined with those of Jerusalem; and there is no reason to
exclude those of the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, since the Decrees reach
them, and that, not only the Church of Antioch, but also those Churches, are
subjected to them. Will Mr. P. grant no more, than what he reads in express
words?

2 His second is as weak, That we read of no foreigners there, but those of
Antioch, and that they concurred not in the making of the Decrees. For, if
there were no more foreigners, yet foreigners they were; but where does he
read, that the Elders of Syria and Cilicia were not joined to them? There is
sufficient reason to conclude they were, since the Decrees reach those
Churches. In saying, that these foreigners concurred not in making the
Decrees, he speaks clearly besides the book. For they being Elders, and at
Jerusalem, met with the Elders of that Church; and he being so punctual in
holding no more than he reads in express words; Let him see whether he can
exclude them from those Texts, verse. 6, 20, 22, 25, 28. and Act. 16.4. If the
Foreigners were Elders, certainly these texts include them; and it is one of
the mysterious reaches of his wit, to apprehend them excluded from the decision
of the controversy, by Act. 16.4. for were not the Foreigners Elders, and were
they not at Jerusalem, and in the Assembly at the making of the Decrees? how
then does this text exclude them?

3 His third is frivolous; That there was no appeal from the censure of the
Church at Antioch. Grant there had passed no formal censure (which is more than
he can prove) might they not appeal, for the deciding of what was debated, and
which there could be no joint agreement upon? His fancied main end, of their
applying themselves to the Church of Jerusalem, to get satisfaction that there
was the same doctrine taught at Jerusalem, that was at Antioch; shows that he
looks on the Chapter, through spectacles of pre-occupation. Else he would
have seen that coming about the Question of difference, verse. 2. and the
Apostles and Elders coming together to consider of the matter, ver. 6. and
together decreeing and laying a burden upon the Churches concerned, verse, 28.
must needs evince, that the main end was, to have the question authoritatively
decided. The knowing of the mind, and practice of the Church of Jerusalem,
needed not all this work. Paul and others might have informed the Church of
Antioch of it before; Any Messengers sent might soon have certified them of it;
Those that came might without such a solemn convening have been assured of it.
The Apostles and Elders in their Epistles show not that they minded such an end
chiefly in assembling. For though they disown the erroneous Teachers doctrine,
and declare that they gave them no encouragement for it (in those words, To
whom we gave no such commandment, which is all that Mr. P. can build upon)
yet they clearly manifest, that the end of their convening was, upon the
hearing the difference in the Church of Antioch, to decide the Question
authoritatively; and that the end of sending chosen men with Barnabas and Paul,
was to give them the greater assurance of this decision, as the dependence of
the 28. verse. on the 27. by the illative, for, does clearly show.

4 His fourth, is a huddle of groundless surmises. Here was (he says) no
Rule exercised, because 'twould be a diminution of Paul's Apostolical
Authority. But Paul acted not then, as an Apostle, but as an Elder of the
Church of Antioch. When the Elders there could not prevail against the corrupt
Teachers, and their Doctrine, they have recourse to a Synod, joining themselves
as Elders, to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, giving herein an example of
the right way of healing Church-divisions, (that cannot be remedied in the
respective Churches) to the end of the world. The Apostles themselves acted not
merely as Apostles, but as members of the Synod, yielding to a fair dispute on
both sides.

Next he says, The Brethren concurred with the Apostles and Elders in making
the Decrees, therefore there was no rule exercised thereby, for it will not be
granted (by us) that the Brethren can exercise an act of rule over other
Churches. I Answer, no nor over their own Church neither; But it is but
supposed by him, that the Brethren out of office, concurred in making the
Decrees. They consented to the making of them, or to them made, and might use
their power of Liberty, as Mr. Cotton speaks, but concurred not in the act of
making them, for if so, they had been their Decrees, but they are not so
called, but expressly otherwise, Act. 16.4. Much less can we conceive with Mr.
P. that the Brethren concurred with the Elders, in a way of the same nature,
assigning the difference to be only in the order of their concurrence. For
hence it follows, that all in the Church are Rulers and guides, and have the
Key of Authority, and binding power, which is another absurd attainment,
wherein he goes beyond many of his brethren, and the vanity of which has been
already observed.

The whole Church here cannot, he says, mean the Synodical Church only,
because the reason given for it, the impossibility of the meeting of the Church
of Jerusalem, together in one place, has been refuted by him. The Reader may
look back, and see what cause he has to boast; and if his triumph be but
imaginary, then he has brought in an argument against himself.

But you must not think, that if he do shut out the Brethren from a concurrence
of the same nature with the Elders, he has not strength enough left him to
prove, that in this Assembly there was no Rule exercised; and for that he will
but cast an interrogation at us. Will they say that the Elders of a Classical
Presbytery at Jerusalem, did exercise Rule over all these Churches, so far
distant, and not of their combination? This being the Tail of his arguing, a
sting might be feared in it, but it is quite unarmed. We will not say so, and
yet, he gets not any thing by it; for though we say not, that the Elders of
the Church of Jerusalem, singly considered, did exercise Rule over the Churches
concerned: yet we will say, by his leave, that these Elders, and the Elders of
the Churches concerned, united in Synod, and acting jointly, did exercise Rule
over those Churches; which appears both by the tenor, and by the use of the
Decrees, Act. 16.4.

So that, Mr. P. is more bountiful, than makes for the profit of his cause, in
granting his adversaries, to make the most of, Act. 15.6. and Act. 16.4. For
besides, that in these we find not the Elders of the Churches concerned
excluded, but included, and as one; in the latter, we find the Decrees
imposed on some of the Churches concerned, as ordained of the Apostles and the
Elders which were at Jerusalem, at the time of the making of them, none
excepted, and therefore, their joint-act of authority and rule.

He has now but an answer to an Objection left him, and therein he comes off
worst of all. For, to that which is said, for the exercise of authority by this
meeting over the Churches (and accounted an unanswerable argument by most, and
which if he remove not, all his talk against that Synod is to no purpose) that
the 28th. verse. calls the Apostles and Elders Decrees, the laying a burden,
of necessary things, upon the Churches: He only says, Let it be considered,
whether there be not as much said of the assertion of the Pharisees, verse. 5.
and 10. Which, Gersom Bucer's answer, in another case, will suit well; Quis
adeo ineptire sustinuerit? Who can choose but wonder at his weakness, to put
forth such a reasoning as an argument? and at his confidence, to undertake a
debate of that moment, as is that which he is upon, whilst he appears, so
much a stranger to the Laws of a true Syllogism, and reasoning? If some of the
Sect of the Pharisees, contending for the necessity of circumcision, and
keeping the Ceremonial Law, are said, thereby, (tempting God) to put a yoke of
Jewish bondage upon the neck of believers, and this their imposition, was not
authoritatively binding; Then, when the Apostles and Elders say, that they lay
by their Decrees, a burden of necessary things upon the Churches, their
Decrees, are not to be accounted authoritatively binding. But some of the
Pharisees, etc. Ergo. This is his sad arguing, of the deplorableness of which,
I need not any farther inform any intelligent Reader.

But, there is nothing like a good courage, and therefore he concludes (be it
how it may) Thus you see, how hard it will be, to grant any more with Scripture
warrant, if we should grant Classical Elderships and combinations. Which
difficulty, I suppose, those that have considered what has been said, do not
see at all.

But, lest men should take his Supposition of Classical Elderships for a grant,
he now returns to renounce them, and tells us, 1 That he has proved the most
numerous Churches to have been congregational; To which I answer, I have
disproved it. 2 That they are called severally by the name of Church in the
singular (that is always, or else he says nothing) Witness, say I, the seven
Churches of Asia, concerning each of which his words have been made to grant,
that it is said, without reference to, or reflection upon the rest, hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches. 3 That the numerous Church of Corinth in
particular, was congregational. To which I say, witness 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your
Women keep silence in the Churches.

What he subjoyns, that the body of that Church did exercise the power of the
Keys, and that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. wraps up Elders and People together with
a concurrence of the like nature, is gratis dictum, as has been showed. I
shall add, Though the Apostle there mention no express limitation of the power
of the Keys to the Eldership, it follows not that it is not to be understood,
for to whom should acts of rule be appropriated, but to the Rulers? A
concurrence with them may be granted to the community, in the use of their
power of liberty (as they speak) but a concurrence with them in the thing, of
the like nature with the power and acts of the Elders, he will never prove,
till he has proved, that all are Rulers in the Church, and have a power of
Office, which he will do ad Graecas calendas. And, if the Apostles silence
there, concerning the appropriation of the power of exercising Discipline to
the Eldership, be an argument for the communities like power: then, the sole
mention of the Angels of the Churches, Rev. chap. 2. and 3. who are commended
for, blamed upon the neglect of, and exhorted to exercise Church Discipline; is
an argument against the communities like power therein, and a far stronger
argument against it, than the other is for it, in regard that here the Holy
Ghost appropriateth the power, and there he does not, and so by this place the
other is to be expounded. Neither has any known Writer of note in the Church,
for these sixteen hundred years past (until some of the late risen
Independents) understood, that in 1 Cor. 5. the Apostle wraps up Elders and
People together in the exercise of Discipline, with a concurrence of the like
nature; nor has any Church during that time that we read of (unless those of
the Donatists) practiced by it. And therefore well may Beza say, Quod nounulli,
ex hac vocula congregatis, colligunt, Beza in locum.
totius Ecclesiae coetum, in judiciis omnibus Ecclesiasticis convenisse, and
suffragium tulisse, neque ratione, neque ullo exemplo nititur;
excommunicationis jus, penes Pastores, (...) fuit.

What difference between the Episcopal and Presbyterial Government, wherein
does their constitution differ, P. 45, 46, 47, 48
except in the exorbitant power of a chairman? What difference between the
Universal Church of the Papists, and that of the Presbyterians? There is an
easy transition from Presbytery to Episcopacy, yea Papacy; they agree much in
nature, and therefore I have put them together; as also Mr. Bains, Diocesan
Trial, q. 1. p. 21. Those who subject themselves to a Presbytery, says he, as
being under it by subordination, may, in effect, as well be subject to an
Episcopal (and by consequence, I say, to a Papal) consistory.

Os hominis! With what face can Mr. P. put these questions? Do the Episcopal
and Presbyterial Government differ only in regard of the power of a chairman?
Do not the patrons of the former attribute all power to the Bishop in his
Dioces, excluding the Ministers of the several Congregations in matters of
Discipline? And do not the Presbyterians assert, that all Ministers have equal
power? and is this difference only circumstantial, and the transition from one
to the other so easy? And as to the Universal Church, is not the difference
between Papists and Presbyterians vast? whilst the one do restrain it to the
Romanists, that own the Papal doctrines; the other extend it to all that
embrace the fundamental truths of Christian Religion, and renounce the
abominations of Rome? (is Mr. P. so mean a scholar, that he does not know, as
to the point in hand, what Universal and particular are? Does not the Papists
referring the root and head of their Universality to Rome, make their Church a
particular Church, as our Champions against them have fully evinced? and is
this no considerable difference that the Presbyterians do the contrary?) The
one subject it to the Pope, or to a general Council of Pontificial Bishops,
convened by, and presided in by the Pope; The others to a general Council, of
the Elders of the Christian Churches, throughout the world, assembling in the
name of Christ, as the sole head of the Church? Did I love to recriminate,
might I not with more reason say, that Mr. P's. way, borders upon, and that
there is an easy transition from it, to Donatism, Brownism, Anabaptism,
Familism, Quakism, Libertinism, and confusion? and that it opens a door to the
setting up and nourishing of all sects, errors, heresies, false worship, and
blasphemies, even the Roman themselves? For, under the notion of Independentism
(of that degree as his is especially) may any thing shelter it self; and
therefore the Roman Factors usually say, that in England, Presbyterianism is a
great hinderance, but Independentism a wonderful help to them, in their gaining
Proselytes to the Roman Church.

But, if you were resolved to say your worst of Presbyterians, as the greatest
opposers of your Democracy; yet, why must you abuse the Reverend name of Mr.
Bains (whom you pretend to be altogether of your side) and obtrude upon the
Reader, a palpable untruth concerning his concent with you, in putting
Episcopacy and Presbytery together, as having little or no difference between
them? It is not Mr. Bains that puts Episcopacy and Presbytery together; but the
Objection of the Episcopal party, p. 3. which Mr. Bains answers here, p. 21.
and in his answers, repeats the terms of the Objection, and shows the
invalidity of it. 1 By telling them that they mis-apprehended the practice of
the Churches of Geneva, They have, (says he) power of governing themselves,
but for greater edification, voluntarily confederate, not to use nor exercise
their power, but with mutual communication in that common Presbytery. 2 It is
(says he) one thing for Churches to subject themselves to a Bishop and
Consistory, wherein they shall have no power of suffrage, another thing, to
communicate with such a Presbytery, wherein themselves are members and Judges
with others. 3 Say (says he) they had no power, nor were no members in that
Presbytery; yet it is one thing to submit themselves to the government of
Aristocracy, another to the Bishops Monarchical Government, for while his
Presbyters are but as Counselors to a King, though he consulteth with them,
he alone governs.

Let the Reader now judge, whether Mr. P. has Mr. Bains on his side, in
saying, What difference between the Episcopal and Presbyterial Government? and
whether he has ground to say, that because they agree much in nature, Mr.
Bains has put them together; when as they are his Objectors that do it, whom
he answers and confutes. This makes me remember, a pleasant passage in
Kekermans Eccles. Rhet. l. 2. c. ult. A young Theologue, reciting his Postil to
the people, at a time when there was health within their walls, and inveighing
therein against some sins; broke out at last into this expression; hence it is,
that God has visited you and your families with the plague, which rages
already every where in our streets. The people stood amazed at this report, and
when Sermon was ended, the Praetor of the place enquired of the Preacher, in
what families or houses the plague was broken forth; who answered, whether the
plague be in our Town or not, so I found it it in my Postil. Such an account
is Mr. P. able to give, of Mr. Bains his consent with him in putting Presbytery
and Episcopacy together, as having no difference between them in their
constitution; Whether the words of the Objection which put them together, be
Mr. Bains words, or express his mind or not, he found them printed in his book.

And now, because Mr. P. by mentioning thus Mr. Bains, does intimate to the
Reader that his doctrine has a full friend in him; It is to be considered,
that though Mr. Bains in his dispute against, and opposition to Diocesan
Episcopal Churches, does plead for Independency of Churches: yet as he judged
the difference between Episcopacy, and Presbyterial dependent Government very
great: So does he fully declare against that Democratical Government in
Churches, which most of the Independents of our days, and Mr. P. among them,
do plead for; and does very fully assert the whole power of Government, into
the hands of the Elders, in many places of that book. I shall cite some of them
to make Mr. P. do penance.

P. 80. on Matthew. 18. Christ does not by the name of Church, understand
essentially, all the Congregation, for then Christ should not give some, but
all the members of the Church to be Governors of it. Christ speaks it of
such a Church, to whom we may ordinarily and orderly complain, now this cannot
be to the whole multitude. This Church he speaks of, he does presuppose it
as the ordinary executioner of all Discipline and censure; But the multitude
have not this execution, as all but Morelius, and such Democratical spirits do
affirm. P. 81. The Church in the Old Testament notes an assembly of Priests,
sitting together as Judges in the causes of God, and Christ does here only
presuppose the joint authority, and joint execution of a representative Church,
a Presbytery of Elders, who were Pastors and Governors. P. 82. The Apostles,
in determining the Question, Act. 15. had the joynt-suffrages of the Presbytery
with them, because it was a thing to be determined by many, all who (mark that)
had received power of the Keys, doing it ex officio, and others from
discretion and duty of confessing the truth. P. 83. Ordinary power with the
execution thereof, was not given to the Community of the Church, or to the
whole multitude of the faithful, so that they were the immediate and first
receptacle receiving it from Christ, and vertually deriving it to others. P.
84. Ordinary power of Ministerial Government, is committed, with the execution
of it, to the Senate or Presbytery of the Church. If any fail in any office
(mark that) the Church has not power of supplying that, but a Ministry, of
calling one whom Christ has described, that from Christ he may have power of
office given him in the place vacant. So much for Mr. P's. correction.

One thing more I have to consider, and so shall end this Section.

P. 46.
Let it be seriously considered, that the Bishop of Rome is not reckoned the
Antichrist, from what time he got the peaceable possession of his Universal
Bishopric; But from what time he aspired to, and carried it ambitiously, and
had it usually yielded to him, to sway Bishops and Churches at his pleasure.

We have considered it, and find no very good sense in it. For when he had
it usually yielded to him, to sway Bishops and Churches at his pleasure, he
had the peaceable possession of his universal Bishopric. And as to what you
mean, that he did aspire to an Universal headship long before he was
possessed of it; and that from that time of aspiring, he is reckoned
Antichrist, you bring no Scripture, nor reason for it, but only quote a place
of Mr. Cotton, as if (...) would do the deed. Now, what says Mr. Cotton? The
head was in conception long before Phocas his grant. True, for 'twas in
conception in the Apostles days, and yet, I suppose, he would not say the
Bishop of Rome was Antichrist then. Is it likely the Holy Ghost should speak of
him, as of a formed, apparent, complete head (so visible, that all the world
should wonder after the Beast upon the hearing of it) whilst he was but yet in
his conception? And it is certain, there was not any claim laid by the Bishops
of Rome to the Universal headship, any long time before it was possessed by
them. The first that laid claim to it, was not the Bishop of Rome, but John the
fourth, surnamed the Faster, Bishop of Constantinople, about the year, 580.
(six and twenty years before the matter was determined by Phocas, for the
Bishop of Rome in the year, 606.) The Bishop of Rome, at the same time,
strongly opposing, and disputing against the name and title of Universal
Bishop, as the name of the Beast, and a new and profane title, contrary to the
scope of the Gospel, which none of his Predecessors did ever use. Saying, that
whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called, Greg. Magn. lib. 6. Ep.
30. and lib. 4. Ep. 34, and 38.
the Universal Priest or Bishop, is the forerunner of Antichrist, and that in
regard the said John did assume it, it appeared that the time of Antichrist was
now at hand. And to that John, he says, What will thou answer to Christ, in
the trial of the day of judgment, seeing that by this name Universal, thou
seek to inthral the members of his body to thy self. What Mr. P. proceeds to
say upon his supposition is not worth the considering; and so I come to see how
well he answers the objections that he considers as made against his
separating device.

SECT. VI. An examination of Mr. P's. Answers, to the Objections he mentions,
as made against his doctrine of Separation; and of his Reasons for Separation.
OBject. 1 It will be said, this way of separation that you press, P. 49, 50,
51, 52
nulls all (at least the most part of) the reformed Churches in the world.
Answ. This tends not to null, or make void, the faith of true believers, that
shall be found in the aforesaid ways of Church Order. I deny not their faith,
whereby by they are of the Mystical Church, and accordingly destroy not their
Mystical Churchdome, but assert, that though their faith he Christian, their
order is Antichristian. I deny them to be such Churches as Christ has
instituted, and to be the Candlesticks, that stand before the God of the
earth. Some have had power, to set up Christ's order, in the face, and to the
teeth of the Beast, though they were slain for it. Such was the Congregation in
Queen Mary's time, which Mr. Fox mentions; and those hundred persons which Mr.
Cotton mentions (Congr. Way cleared p. 4.) that were in Queen Elizabeth's days.
1576.

It Is one thing for Churches to be looked upon as Churches, in point of
salvation, another thing, for them to be looked upon as Churches, in respect
of outward constitution; in the former account, we cannot but give the right
hand of fellowship, to all that look to no other way of salvation, but by the
blood of the Lamb; in the latter account, we can give the right hand of
fellowship, only to those that are after the heavenly pattern.

Answ. He needed not to say, that his way nulls at least the most part of the
reformed Churches, for it clearly nulls them all; The Churches of his way and
principles, being not to be numbered among the Reformed Churches, since they
renounce them, and account them Antichristian. So that his way clearly nulls
all the reformed Churches in the world at this day; yea generally, all the
Churches that have disowned the Papal Church of Rome, throughout the ages since
the rise of it.

His Answer, whereby he would salve the matter, is exceeding frivolous and
childish. He denies not the faith of true believers in reformed Churches, nor
their mystical Churchdome. But what is that to the purpose? whilst he denies
them to be Churches of Christ, and to be the candlesticks that stand before
the God of the earth (by which he weakly understands Churches, of which Sect.
4.) does he not utterly null them as Churches? Neither will that passage
shield him (wherein he clearly contradicts himself) that it is one thing for
Churches to be looked upon as Churches, in point of salvation, another, to be
looked upon as Churches in respect of outward constitution, etc.

For if they are not to be looked upon as Churches in respect of outward
constitution, they are not to be looked upon as Churches at all; unless he
can make it appear, that believers out of Church Order, make up Churches, and
that there are many mystical Churches. And if reformed Churches are to be
looked upon as Churches in point of salvation, they looking to no other way of
salvation but by the blood of the Lamb, and he can give the right hand of
fellowship to them on that account; he thereby asserts their Churchstate, and
separates practically from them, therefore, without sufficient ground. For if
they are Churches in point of salvation, they have the essentials of
Church Order, and are not to be separated from. The Protestants would not have
separated from the Church of Rome, if they could have looked upon her
(especially after the Sanctions of the Trent Council) as a Church in point of
Salvation, looking to no other way of salvation but by the blood of the Lamb.

So that notwithstanding his distinctions, Mr. P's doctrine does absolutely
null all the Reformed Churches, and all Churches that have disowned Papal Rome,
from the rise of Antichrist to this last age; And thereby denies that there
has been a true Ministry, and a true Church State, during many hundreds of
years since Christ, in the world. Directly contrary to, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. Rev. 11.1, 2. Rev. 14.1, 8. Ephesians. 3.21.

To the instances which he brings, of Churches of his way, ushering them in
with a boast of their setting up Christ's order, in the face, and to the teeth
of the beast, though in danger to be slain for it; I Answer, that surely the
Congregational Brethren of our days, have not waded through such great dangers
in contending for, and setting up their popular government. They have had, and
have, as much countenance from the Civil Powers, as they can desire. On which
account many have struck in with Independency, to be of the rising side.
(Surely there are some whom they know, that have out-gone them in sufferings,
for cleaving to their principles) and whilst the Powers did oppose their way
heretofore, flying to New England and Holland, was not a setting up of the
order which they deemed to be Christ's, in the face, and to the teeth of the
Beast.

But to his instances. I suppose that Congregation in Queen Marie's days, to
have consisted of holy persons, but cannot from the relation that History gives
us of it, see upon what grounds he presumes them to have been a party of his
own way, in point of order and government. Mr. Bentham their last Minister, is
there said to have been soon after, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, and
therefore in all probability no Independent. As to the hundred persons in Queen
Elizabeth's days, which Mr. Cotton mentions, I should have liked their
witnessing against the corruptions in the Church, so far forth as their call
would bear them out: but if they separated from the Congregations in England in
general, as no true Churches, no man is able to prove their separation lawful
by the word of God; and the words of the same Mr. Cotton, page 14. of that
book, will condemn them, where he says, Mr. Robinsons denial of the
Parishional Congregations in England to be true Churches, was never received
into any heart, from thence to infer a nullity of their Church State; Neither
was our departure from them, even in those evil times, a separation from them
as no Churches.

So that, grant these two companies to have been Independent Churches; yet, if
they separated from the Churches of England, as no true Churches, they were in
Mr. Cottons judgment, so far in an error; and much more is Mr. P. for
nulling all the reformed Churches in the world, whereby he makes his
Independentism to become Donatism.

He adds to justify himself, We must not for respect to a right faith,
swallow a wrong Order; has not the letting go the right Order, p. 52.
let in a wrong faith? Yes, it has indeed by those of your way most evidently.
For whereas the word of God places most evidently the power of
Church Government in the Officers of the Church, as has been above proved:
your letting go this Gospel- Order, and bringing in the room of it a
fantastic Democratical government, strange to the word of God, has let in a
wrong faith with a witness; for at this back door have entered all the rabble
of Sectaries, Anabaptists (now generally at least semi-Papists) Seekers,
Quakers, and Fifth-Monarchy-men of the last edition, enemies to Magistratical
and Ministerial power, as their seditious Pamphlets, Sermons, and practices,
tending to imbrew the State in blood, and Church in confusion, do witness.

Object. 2 It will be said, this lays a ground to question all the Ordinances,
that have been administered in any other way, P. 52. to 55
than that which you press for, whether they are to be counted null and void.
Answ. Some Ordinances have been corrupted in the essentials of them, as the
Lords Supper in the Popish-Churches, and when so, they become no Ordinances,
and of no efficacy. Others were circumstantially corrupted only, as Baptism,
and when so, though we have cause to be humbled, yet we cannot reject the
Ordinance. When it is promised that the Woman should be nourished in the
Wilderness, Rev. 12.6. it must needs imply, that there should be some
Ordinances preserved from corruption, in their essentials, and that Gods people
should be accepted in the use of them. Yet, that is no argument against coming
out of the Wilderness; no more is the validness of Ordinances, in the
Episcopal, Classical, Parochial Churches, against separating from them. And
this separation, does not require rebaptization, for 1 The Scripture speaks
nothing of it. 2 We must either own our Baptism, received in the Catholic
visible Church of Rome the Mother, or in the Diocesan or National Churches the
Harlot Daughters; or else we must conclude, that the Churches owned of God,
during the four and twenty months of Antichrist, of which, Rev. 11.4. shall
want utterly the initiatory seal of the New Testament, and of this we find no
president or hint in Scripture; Or else there must be an extraordinary way, of
reviving the lost Ordinance of Baptism in these Churches, and of this, I know
neither promise nor experience, for these hundreds of years, since there have
been such Churches. Therefore, the first must be granted; for, from the
Churches rest, till the Wilderness began to set up particular visible Churches,
by the Waldenses and Albigenses, it is rare to find a man, that would
acknowledge any other Church than the Beast and his Images, that would
acknowledge a particuliar visible Church.

Answ. It is hard for Mr. P. to manage an argument, that does not fall back
upon his cause. In answering this second Objection, he overthrows what he had
said, and condemns his way of Separation; which will easily appear, in making
his concessions to speak out, what they at first sight are capable to infer
that way.

1 He grants, that when Ordinances are not corrupted in the essentials, but
only in the circumstantials of them, we cannot reject them; and thereby he
condemns his denying of our Ministry and Church State to be true, for are
they corrupted in their essentials? Will not his distinction keep our
Ordination, Ministry, and Church State from being null, as well as the
Ordinance of Baptism? The same way as he will maintain the validness of this,
we will the validness of those; and the same exceptions that he can make
against the validness of those, will equally strike at the validness of this;
Let him try and he shall find it to be so.

2 He grants that the Woman's being nourished in the Wilderness, implies, that
Ordinances were preserved in their essentials, and Gods people accepted in the
use of them, and that there were Churches owned of God, during the four and
twenty months of Antichrist. Whereby, he clearly condemns that intercision
of a true Church State, which he had before asserted, frequently and lately,
p. 52. where he says, I deny them not (speaking of Churches not Independent,
and there were none considerable but such till these late days) to be the
Woman nourished in the Wilderness, but I deny them to be the Candlesticks (that
is true Churches, in his sense.) And here, Till the Waldenses and Albigenses,
began to set up particular visible Churches, it is very rare to find a man,
that would acknowledge any other Churches than the Beast and his Images. So
also, he condemns here, his restraining of a true Church State to Independent
Churches, in saying, that during that time (wherein he says there were
Churches owned of God) particular visible Churches, (that is as Independent)
were not acknowledged. So that hence must be inferred, whether he will or no,
that the Churches not Independent, renouncing Rome, during the four and twenty
months, which includes our age, were and are true Churches, and so not to be
looked upon as Antichristian, and Harlot Daughters of Rome (as his charity
calls them) nor to be separated from. Which would farther appear, if we
should take in his notion of the Candlesticks (Sect. 4th.) for, they are in his
sense Churches, and they prophecy one thousand two hundred and sixty days,
which is four and twenty months Rev. 11.3, 4 and there were during that time,
till this last age, at least till the Waldenses, by his own concession, no
considerable Independent Churches; Therefore, the preceding Churches, not
Independent, renouncing Rome-Papal, and ours their successors, were and are
true Churches, and (if Churches be properly Witnesses) at least, as truly
Witnesses as the Congregational, and not to be separated from.

But, he seeming to foresee, that he opened us a gap to strike at his
separation, says, That the validness of Ordinances in our way, stands no more
against separating from our Churches, than the validness of them when received
in the Church of Rome, against separation from it. A doughty reasoning. He
knows, that we plead, besides the validness of Ordinances among us, a
renouncing of the Idolatries of Rome's worship, and a Professing and owning of
the true doctrines of Christianity, in opposition to Rome's blasphemies and
fundamental Antichristian errors. And surely, the validness of Ordinances so
accompanied, renders a separation from us, and our Churches, of quite another
nature than that from Antichristian Rome; which, if inconsiderateness and
prejudice lay not in many rolls upon the eyes of his understanding, he could
not choose but see. Thus, the matter of his answer recoiles upon himself, of
which more may be said, Sect. 11.

As to the form of it, in relation to the Objection, it removes it not at all.
For what says he? The Ordinances are not to be accounted essentially null,
but the Church State in the which they were administered is to be accounted
null; for he calls all reformed Churches, images of the Beast, and Harlot
Daughters of Rome, and his way sets up a new Church State, distinguished and
differenced in essential respects from that of all those Churches. Now, if
their Church State has been null, their Ministry has been null, and
consequently the Ordinances administered by such a Ministry null, and so the
Objection remains in full force against him, notwithstanding all his striving
to assoil it, and his principles drive to rebaptizing or Seekism, choose he
whether.

Neither let him say, that this touches us also, who have separated from Rome
as a false Church, through which notwithstanding we had our Ministry and
Ordinances; for he may know, and shall be told anon, that our principles and
apprehensions about this matter, do exceedingly differ from his.

I shall close this with those Queries upon his riddles. 1 Are the Woman
nourished in the Wilderness, and the Churches owned of God during the four and
twenty months, all one or not? 2 Had the Woman in the Wilderness, that had
Ordinances preserved from corruption in their essentials, and was accepted in
the use of them, any true Church State or not? 3 Were the Churches that are
said to have been these hundreds of years, and owned of God, Independent
Churches or not? 4 Did the Waldenses and Albigenses set up Independent
Churches, which seem here to be meant by particular visible Churches? If I had
his positive answer to these, I should say something more to him. But he here
delivers himself obscurely about these things, as those use to do that are such
as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 1.7.

Object. 3 But many godly men have worshipped God zealously in this way, and do
still, and God has been, and is still, no question, P. 59. 60.
found of them. Answ. This must be looked on as an indulgence of God unto
sincerity, owning what is of himself, mingled with much of man. They are much
deceived, that think it is enough to say for a way, that they have found God in
it, or rather in something of his that is practiced in it.

Answ. That the Lord is found of any of us his poor servants, seeking him in
his ways, we humbly acknowledge to be of his gracious indulgence, owning what
is of himself mingled with much of man. And will not you say the same
concerning your selves? But that our way of worship, and our Church State, are
not in the main according to divine Institution, is that which you have not,
nor will ever prove. We grant, that they are much deceived, etc. and it
touches us not, for we think not that it is enough to say so; And we
suppose, that this may better serve to indoctrinate those of your way, than us;
for it is not rare with many of them, to judge of a way, by the Impressions
they have upon their spirits, concerning, or in the use of it, more than by
Rule. But the Question should be, whether God is as much found, of those that
seek him in a false way, and much swerving from his institution, as of those
that seek him in a way conformable to his Institution? I suppose you will
answer negatively. But now, through Gods goodness, we are able to say, that
God is and has been as much found of us, in our Churches and way, and our
Ministers have received as glorious a seal of their Ministry, as any Churches
that we know of, since the Apostles days, and far more than our
Congregational Brethren themselves in their way; who although they deal out
this hard measure to us, to cry down our Ministry and Churches, as
Antichristian, owe most of them that are renewed, their conversion unto God,
unto our Ministry, as the instrument for it in Gods hand, themselves being
Judges. Though they had ten thousand Independent Instructors, yet could they
not say they are their Fathers, for in Christ Jesus the Ministry of our
Churches has begotten them to the Gospel. If I am become a fool in glorying,
they have compelled me.

Object. 4 But there may be, and has been good done this way, errors
suppressed, etc. and those that reject it now, P. 61.
made use of it once. Answ. The good that God brings out of evil, is not to be
construed into a divine approbation of it, Nor the use that has been made by
good men of a false way of Churches, to be drawn into an argument to continue
in it.

Answ. What good there has been done by reformed Churches, few can be
ignorant of: What good has been done by Independent Churches, has not yet
much appeared. That some of their flocks are pure, they owe to our Churches, as
has been said. Errors have been indeed suppressed by ours, but not by theirs,
(it appears therefore they have made but a bad exchange;) but cherished by many
of them, who have been to them as Cities of refuge, and out of which they have
swarmed abundantly, into all parts of the Land, and for this the Land groans.
And thinks Mr. P. to put off this so slightly, with his begged supposition, of
the truth of the Churches of his way, and the falseness of ours? Surely, the
beating down of error, and the promoting of truth, is no contemptible note of
a true Church, though some corruptions be found in it, Rev. 2.2, 4. and on the
contrary, etc.

That those that owned our Churches once, have now rejected them, I judge from
the word to be their sin. They should have continued in them, since Christ has
not divorced them (though he has somewhat against them) and have endeavored
to reform them. But they have not labored to heal, yea, they have widened and
increased our wounds; and then they insult over us, Antichristianize us,
separate from us, and draw away the best of our flocks, boasting in other men's
lines, of things made ready to their hands. The Lord judge between us and them.

Object. 5. and 6. But, shall we do it without the authority of the
Magistrate? P. 62, 63, 64
without the consent of the Church? Answ. That which is pressed, is but the
doing of the duty that lies upon every Christian, to separate from
unwarrantable societies. The Text has no such proviso, if the Magistrate bid
or give you leave, then come out of Babylon. Therefore, we are to resolve with
Peter Martyr, and with Wollebius, etc. After God has made known his truth,
(says the first) we must not delay. Consent indeed is to be expected, if the
matter be dubious and obscure, (to wit, to him to whom it is revealed, as the
course of his speech makes manifest.)

Answ. The Magistrate is as no body with you (unless you have him on your side,
and then you can change your note.) But we hold, that very much respect is to
be had to the Magistrate in this matter, and all means possible are to be
used, to engage the Magistrate to carry on the work of Reformation. Give me
but one example in all the Old Testament, of any considerable reformation in
the Church, without the interposition of the power of the Magistrate; or one
example of it in Ecclesiastical history, in a time when there were Christian
Magistrates. Can our Magistrates endure, that their authority and power should
be contemned as it is? I hope they will not, but that they will exert it for
the good of the Church, in discountenancing, restraining, and punishing, men of
corrupt minds, principles, and practices, leading to separation, blasphemies,
errors and rebellion; sheltring themselves under this notion, that the
Magistrate has nothing to do with Church Matters, and that all men are therein
to be left to their liberty, and the dictates of their own spirits.

The places that you pick out of Martyr and Wollebius, favor not your fancy.
The place of Wollebius, taken in his sense, I readily yield to. That when
Religion is depraved, it is to be reformed by the Magistrate; But if
reformation cannot be obtained of the Magistrate, he being an enemy to the
Church, then reformation lies upon those whom God has furnished with necessary
gifts for it; neither is the consent of Roman Bishops to be expected, for, if
our Fathers had done so (says he) there would have been no reformation. And
he produces the examples of Gideon, Jehoiada, the Maccabes, the Apostles,
etc. to make good his assertion. Now when you shall have proved, 1 That the
supreme Magistrate is an enemy of Religion, the Church and reformation. 2 That
the way of reformation you contend for, is indeed the way of God. 3 That all
lawful means have been used, and notwithstanding reformation cannot be obtained
at the Magistrates hands. 4 That Englands condition, and the State of the
Church in the time of Gideon, Jehoiada, the Maccabes, the Apostles, and
Protestant reformers, are alike. 5 That you have Instruments that have the like
call from God, and are furnished with such abilities for reforming as they had
and were; Then, I confess, this place will speak something for you. 6 The
reformation Wollebius speaks of, referres chiefly to essentials in Religion,
and that he is an Antagonist to your way of separation from reformed Churches,
appears sufficiently in his book. Martyr you much mistake also. 1 The
reformation he presses, referres chiefly to fundamentals in Religion. 2 Those
whose consent he says was not to be expected, were the Roman Bishops, whom
he calls sworn enemies to the truth. 3 He does not incite and stir up the
people, to set upon the work, without the consent of the Magistrate, but the
inferior Magistrates, to endeavor in their places a reformation of Religion,
in banishing the impure Mass out of their Cities, etc. and how does this reach
your case? 4 The cause, he says, was clear, and such as was confessed to be
Gods, and delays might endanger the loss of a good cause. Consent, indeed,
says he, is to be expected, if the matter be dubious and obscure. And here
you bring in your shameful Parenthesis (to wit, to whom it is revealed) which
Parenthesis spoils and abuses Peter Martyrs Text; For his words clearly
import, to any man that will read there, that the cause was not only clear
unto them, whom he endeavors to interest in carrying on the work of
reformation, but clear in it self, and not as to its matter dubious and
obscure, being such, as all the Churches on earth, but the Romish, would own.
For shame, leave off your abusing of Authors, at which work I have caught you
more than once or twice in this Treatise. Again, your Parenthesis is full
fraught with all seeds of Rebellion against the State, as well as of confusion
in the Church of God. For, if men may freely follow the apprehensions of their
own misguided judgments, and deluded fancies, against the mind of the
Magistrate, and consent of the Church of God: How shall our Religion, or
Liberties, Persons Estates, or Lives be secured to us? Probably, the late
fift-Monarchy-Traitours, had read your Treatise. I find a harmony between their
remonstrance and your book, in many passages; and I am sure, they will assert
the cause they undertook was clear to them, and then your parenthesis bears
them out, they needed not to expect any consent.

You now conclude, notwithstanding all Objections; Let those whose hearts God
has raised up, go up and build his house. Get we our brethren, p. 64.
if we can, along with us, but let us not delay our duty.

Indeed, reformation-work is blessed work, but people had need to have better
guides than you in it, lest they mistake their way, and whilst they think they
are flying from Babylon, they fly indeed into it; for thither your way drives,
though I suppose you perceive it not. Babylon and you are farther agreed, than
all men are aware of. 1 The Pope cries down all Churches as Antichristian, and
heretical, but his own, especially Protestant Churches. Mr. P. proclaims all
Churches that are not of his way, to be Antichristian, and especially the
Western reformed Churches, called Protestants, to be Babylon-Harlots, etc. 2
Mr. P. is an earnest contender for Democratical, and against Presbyterial
Government. The Pope, he hates a Scripture Presbytery at his heart, but
favors, by his agents, Democratical government, hoping to work out his own
designs by it. And therefore, his disguised Agents, insinuate into Independent
congregations, and strengthen them in their way of independency and separation,
as that which best helps on their work, and gives them the greatest advantage
for the sowing of their bad seed. Hence have proceeded from such Congregations,
Anabaptists, etc. with Popish doctrines and arguments in their mouths.
Therefore let Mr. P. beware, lest a blind zeal betray him, and that instead of
a Reformer, he prove a Deformer (leading men to Rome, whilst he calls upon
them to come out of it) for men of his understanding, spirit, and confidence,
are usually in danger to prove such in the end.

Consider we now, his reasons for separation from our Churches.

The Reasons of the point are, 1 Because Antichrists Churches are sin. The
great Beast spoken of, Rev. 13, 1, 2. is the Universal visible Church of Rome.
It cannot be meant of the Roman Pagan, nor Christian Empire, nor of Antichrist
which is the other beast, verse. 11. he is one of the heads, but not the Beast
it self. Antichrist causes an image to be made to the first Beast, verse. 14.
that is, to set a Church in every Nation, etc. that may have the likeness of
the Roman Church, viz. Metropolitan, National, Diocesan, Cathedral, and
Provincial Churches, as Mr. Cotton shows on Rev. 13. and these are the living
Characters of the first Beast, the Catholic visible Church of Rome, and so the
image, and the Parishes are but relics of them.

Protestant Churches; are it seems, Antichrist his Churches, and SIN, in the
abstract, if Mr. P. may be judge. If he can prove them to be so, they are no
doubt to be separated from, but hitherto, he has not come near it.

Here he seems to sum up his grounds, of so bold an assertion; which arise
from an interpretation of Rev. 13.

This Chapter, has always much perplexed Interpreters, to make out what is
meant by these two Beasts; both because of what is said of them, and because
they seem to be spoken of as but one Beast, verse. 18. and chap. 17. Some will
have the first Beast, to be the Roman Pagan Empire, the second the Pope.

But the stream of Interpreters, generally understand them to be one and the
same beast, the Pope of Rome, under a double notion; and Bellarmine himself,
Per unam, exprimitur Antichristus ratione Regiae potestatis and tyrannidis; per
alteram, ratione magicae artis, qua callide homines seducet.
judges that the same Antichrist is meant by both, indifferent respects.

But, however it be, it may easily be made to appear, that the first beast
cannot mean, as Mr. Cotton, and Mr. P. from him would have it, the Catholic
visible Church of Rome.

1 Because such a Church supposes an Universal visible head, for these are
relates; But there was no universal visible head, until long after the time of
the wound which Mr. Cotton mentions, the year 415; For Phocas conferred the
universal headship on Boniface the third, in the year 606. and not long before
that, Gregory disclaimeth such a title and power.

2 Because the setting of Diocesan, etc. See the end of Sect. 5.
Churches in every nation, cannot be a making of an Image to the Catholic
visible Church of Rome; Since these as Papal, are parts of that Church, and
help to make it up: And that the Image will then be more perfect than the
Original, or pattern. For the Catholic visible Church of Rome, was never such
in that manner and measure before, as after the wound. Yea, the Visible
Catholickness of the Church of Rome, has little or no appearance at all in
History, before that time of the wound.

3 Because the things predicated of this first Beast, verse. 2. are no way
applicable to the Catholic visible Church of Rome, especially before that time
of the wound. The power of a Bear, and of a Lion, and of the Dragon, giving it
his seat, and great authority; cannot be found in History, to have been
possessed and exercised, by the Catholic Visible Church of Rome, before that
time. And a man must speak mere dreams that will undertake, to make what is
said of the first Beast, unto the rise of the second, verse. 11. to suit to the
universal Visible Church of Rome, before that rising of the second.

4 Because, the Text expressly distinguishes between the Beast that exercises
Sovereign rule and authority, and those that are under his rule and Government.
He is set forth, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Those under his rule are set forth
by their admiring of him, and worshipping and subjecting to him, verse. 3, 4, 7,
8. and these make up the Roman Catholic Visible Church.

Mr. P's foundation therefore is found to be null, and so consequently his
inferences from it fall to the ground.

2 Because they are Harlots, and will entice, and draw away to their lewd
Courses. p. 67, 68.
Babylon has golden pretenses, for her abominable idolatries; The prevention
of Schisms, and Heresies, for a Catholic Church visible; Reverence to the womb
that bare us, and the paps that gave us suck, for Metropolitan, National,
Diocesan, Parish-Churches, etc. And she is stubborn, she will not return to
you. Gods people would have cured her, but she is not cured. None that would
have thorough reformation, dare take the whole Parish along with them to the
work. Why should they be washed at the same laver (at least their children)
that may not eat at the same Table? Let us take the Prophets Counsel; forsake
we Babylon, and go every one to his own Country; Let us wash our hands of her,
and expect what God has determined of her, as Du plessis once said of the
Roman Church.

Babylon, and the best reformed Churches in the Christian World that are not of
his way, are all one with this modest Theologue. Rome renounceth, abhors,
anathematizeth them; and they have separated from, renounce and abhor Rome's
Doctrine and Worship; and yet, this piece of subtilty finds them to be one and
the same Babylon. Surely, should the Pope understand what service this
Separatist's book tends to do him, in proclaiming the Protestant Churches to be
Harlots, and the Babylon to be separated from, he would account himself
endebted to him for it.

They are Harlots (says he) they have lewd courses, abominable Idolatries;
and what are they? A Catholic Church visible, and National and Parish
Churches, these are abominable Idolatries, in Mr. P's Atheological Divinity. Of
the two latter I have spoken enough before, to vindicate them from this charge;
I shall now add something, to what has been said for the former. A Catholic
visible Church, has been always generally acknowledged among Christians in
all ages; So that Mr. P. lays abominable Idolatry, to the charge of all the
Christian Churches, that have been, unto this last age; yea, of some of those
writers that have appeared on the side of the congregational way. Dr. Ames
says, that the Church never cease to be visible (which cannot be
understood of any paticular Church, for that may fail) and that Particular
Congregations, are as similar parts of the Catholic Church, and so participate
of its name and nature; and those that by profession only are believers,
whilst they remain in a society, are members of that Church, as also of the
Catholic Church, in respect of its External estate. And in Bell. Enerv. We
acknowledge the Militant Church to be visible, as to its outward, and
accidental form, in its parts both separated and conjoined. What can be more
plain? But let us briefly consider, what Scripture says to it, Act. 8.3.
speaks of a visible Church, else it could not have been persecuted, and yet not
of a particular Church, for the persecution was in Jerusalem, Damascus, in
every Synagogue, in strange Cities, yea, against all of that way; therefore it
speaks of the Catholic visible Church. 1 Cor. 10.2. must needs be understood
of it also. 1 Cor. 12.28. is too clearly for it, to be denied with any likely
reason; for, 1 The Church here spoken of is an Organical Church. 2 It cannot
be understood of a particular Church, Apostles, and Prophets, being
Catholick-Officers. 3 It must therefore be understood collectively, of all
that were within the bounds of the Apostles Commission, the Church in the whole
world. Indeed, this whole Chapter treats of the Catholic visible Church. All
the members of Christ mystical are one body, verse. 12. and 20. Jews and
Gentiles are baptized into one body, verse. 13. and they are one Church, verse.
28. Ephesians. 3.10. cannot mean otherwise, nor Ephesians. 3.21. What Church can the Church
of all ages mean, but the Catholic Visible Church? Which, though some
particular Churches, may and have failed, has continued, and shall continue in
all ages. Matthew. 16.18. proves this, and the point in hand; for, it may not be
understood of any particular Church, and it cannot be understood of the
Invisible Church, as distinct from the visible; for the invisible Church, is
not built upon a visible profession, as Peter's was; and the Church here spoken
of, is such whereof the Keys are given to Peter, and every Minister of Christ,
to let in members, and eject scandalous sinners; Now, how a member of the
invisible Church, as such, can by a censure be cast out of the Church
invisible, who can see? but, out of the Church visible he may be cast,
therefore, this Text speaks clearly of the Catholic Church Visible, against
which the gates of hell shall not prevail.

Add to this, that all the Metaphors, that set out the Church in Scripture,
shows the unity of the Catholic Church as visible. She is a Woman, Rev. 12.1.
One sheepfold, John 10.16. One body, Romans 12.5. The House, Temple, City of God,
1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 2.19. Heb. 12.22. Rev. 3.12, etc. Therefore Mt. P's eyes were
bloud-shotten, when he wrote, that a Catholic visible Church, is an
Abominable Idolatry. But he is angry, it seems, at the pretense too, and makes
it a piece of Babylons golden cup; to wit, the prevention of Schisms and
Heresies (what he insinuates thereby, that Protestant Churches have but this
pretense for it, and no ground in the Word, is untrue, and unworthy) Surely we
may think, that Mr. P. sees, that the opposing of Schisms strikes at his
Democracy, and separation, and that therefore he is not well pleased with the
prevention of Schisms; if they be let alone, his Schism will escape among
them. But Protestant Churches have not so learned Christ, knowing that they are
enjoined to take the Foxes, and the little Foxes that spoil the vines, Cant.
2.15. and to mark them that cause divisions, and offenses, and avoid them, Romans
16.17. and to have no divisions among them, 1 Cor. 1.10. and that when single
Churches cannot effect this, they must labor to do it united, so fully as the
case will require, Act. 15.

What he addds, to prove the stubbornness of Protestant Churches, (which his
dialect terms Babylon) that Gods People would have cured her, but she is not
cured; is an impudent, unreasonable, and false speech. Wonderful impudence it
is, especially in such a Theologaster, as he, that needs to be taught what a
Church is, to charge all reformed Churches with stubbornness in evil;
Stubbornness is a sinning against light, and conviction, and what
audaciousnesse is it, in this aeccuser of the brethren, to publish in print,
that all the reformed Churches sin against conviction, in cleaving to their
Church State, and way of government? Unreasonable also it is, for him to say,
that Gods people would have cured Protestant Churches; for thereby, he seems
to confine Gods people to those of his way, and those of his way, have not, I
am sure, put forth requisite endeavors to cure our Churches (supposing them to
be sick of Romish diseases) unless reviling of them to the uttermost, neglect
of means to reform them, separating from them as fast as they can, yea while,
and when they are reforming, drawing away others, lest they should help to
reform them, and proclaiming them to be Antichristian, and wholely to be
rased, be requisite endeavors to cure them; and that destroying of them be
curing of them. Nay, it is sufficiently known, to those that have acquainted
themselves with the carriages of our and their Church-guides, in these late
years, that when overtures were made by ours, for an accommodation, and for
unity in reformation, upon Scripture principles, it was refused; and the
hopeful beginnings of it, broken off by them. Yet I must not be so much a
Disciple of Mr. P. as to say, that they were stubborn therein, though there be
much moer ground to say it of them, than of us. False also it is, to say
Universally, that Protestant Churches are not cured, by endeavors put forth
for their cure; For, though not by Independents, I confess, yet by the
endeavors of many zealous Protestants, much of that, which looked like
something of Rome, and was more according to the Traditions of men, than the
word of God, has been removed, and in particular in our Land; which
notwithstanding the prejudice Mr. P. is overgrown with, he cannot, I suppose,
but acknowledge. I confess, much of corruption there is remaining, but such as
cannot by the rule of the Word, deprive Protestant Churches of their
Church State, or render it Antichristian.

What he says next, That none of those that would have a thorough
Reformation, dare take their whole Parish along with them to the work, as it is
nothing to his purpose (for corruption in manners, proves not a Church to be
Antichristian) so it is ridiculously propounded. For though a godly Minister,
that is a Pastor to a Parish-Congregation, think not all in a meetness for the
Lord's Supper, nor admits them all to it; yet it follows not, that he takes not
the whole Parish-Congregation along with him to the work of Reformation,
considering it in a Scriptural sense. He may speak to all, admonish all,
instruct all, and endeavor to reform all, though he administer the Supper
only to those who are fit for it; and it is one of Mr. P's Slanders, to say as
he does of our Ministers, that they lay aside the most of their people, as the
Jews the Samaritans; for they own their membership, tell them in relation to
the Supper, they have a Fundamental right, though not a proximate right to
present participation, being as yet unfit; receive them to all Ordinances that
they are capable to profit by, and exhort them to labor in the use of means,
for fitness for the use of all Ordinances, and then they shall rejoice to
administer even the Lords Supper to them; and is this to lay them aside, as the
Jews the Samaritans? No more, than the keeping from the Passover under the
Law, those that were judged by the Law to be in a present incapacity to use it.

But, the man's head is full of his Democracy, which makes him measure us by his
principle, and think, that those whom we admit to full communion, we admit to
exercise the power of the Keys also (which makes him talk, of taking them
along with us to the work of reformation, and admitting them to the management
of that matter) and that those that are not admitted to all Ordinances, are
quite laid aside, because it is so with him.

To his Query, Why should they be washed at the same laver (at least their
children) that may not eat at the same Table? If he be ignorant of our
answers to it, let him read them in those many Tracts that have them; and if
he be not ignorant of them, why puts he the Question, and that without
answering our arguments for this practice? Some men will ask why? though they
have been told why a hundred times, and can say nothing that is worth hearing
against it.

His inference from his sorry Reasons, the words of which he borrows, from
that famous assertour of Reformed Churches, the Lord Du Plessis, is a farther
evidence of his weakness, mistakes, and impudence. Our Churches, this man
brands every where as Antichristian and Babylon it self; but not one argument
of weight does he bring to prove it. Neither answers he the solid arguments
of the godly-learned, condemning separation from our Churches, as no true
Churches, for a grievous sin; which indeed should have been properly his work
(since he had an itch to write) in regard, he stands charged by those
writings, with this sin. But this, belike, he finds too hard a task, and
that it is easier to lay on, than to take off charges (and we must not blame a
man for not undertaking what he cannot perform) and so instead of answering
their arguments, sometimes he wrests their words, and perverts their sense, to
make it serve his turn; Sometimes abuses their expressions for separation from
Rome, by pressing them, for the service of his unscriptural separation from
reformed Churches, as he shamefully does here, those of this champion of the
reformed Churches.

Did ever Du Plessis think, that his exhortation to separation from Rome,
should have been so much polluted and abused, as to be managed for separation
from Reformed Churches? or that the World would have produced a writer so
absurd, as to account reformed Churches, to be yet in, and of, and the Babylon
it self? How could he, if he had any forehead left him, so much as name that
woruhy Champion of the Protestant Churches, when he exhorts to separation from
them? But we shall have a worse carriage of this nature to look upon, at the
end of his book.

SECT. VII. Of Mr. P's Injunctions to the Magistrate, and first, concerning
Parishes, Parish-Temples, and Patrons.
P. 69. etc.
BE wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth. Take away
Parishes, by an Act of State, away with all those Consecrated places for
worship; Away with Patrons, or Lay-founders; Away with Tithes, etc. Away, I
say, with all appurtenances of a Parish Church.

Can this be Mr. P's voice (I mean not in regard of the imperiousness of it,
for there is no ground to doubt it to be his on that account, but) appealing in
matters that concern Religion, to the Magistrate, whose power he has so much
decried? Strange, that these worldly Governments, whom he exhorts men in his
preface, not to accept as Lawgivers, no not in the Commonwealth, and hopes
Christ will in due time deliver us from, should now be applied to by him, for
the exercise of their power, and that in matters that concern Religion! What
strange liberty is this that he takes, to pull down Magistrates at his pleasure,
when they stand in his light, and set them up again to be his Servants, and
drive on his designs? But possibly he means those Rulers that Mr. Feak and his
party (of which he has manifested himself to be) would have in place of
authority; and then his injunctions might have been deferred till their time,
which I hope we shall never see. But consider we a little what he does enjoin.

First, take away Parishes by an Act of State, the Ecclesiasticalness of them.
But, no Reason that he has urged against them hitherto, will warrant it. What
says he now for it? Hezekiah brake the brazen Serpent, because the Children of
Israel did Idolize it. Josiah demolished the Altar of Bethel, and the high
place there. Rare arguing! What analogy is there between these things? Are
Protestant Parish-congregations idolatrously worshipped? because, whilst Rome
was owned in them they were Idolatrous, are they to be demolished now that they
renounce it, and own Gods true worship? Are they like the Altar of Bethel, and
the High Places, against Divine institution, in place of being, and means of
worship? For place, Churches are now confined to no set place, as that of the
Jews was then, but may any where be made up of co-habiting professors of
Christianity. For the means of worship, let the Reader judge, whether he has
proved our Churches Idolatrous. And what would this Arguer say, I trow, from
his instances, against those Protestant Churches, that are not Parishional in
France, etc. made up of Professors, whose dwellings are scattered in the Popish
Parishes, in compasses near to their meeting-places? Must they be taken away by
an Act of State too, if such a one could be procured there?

Next, our Temples feel his wrath.

Away with all those Consecrated places for Worship, P. 70. 71
those holds of Mahuzzim, Demons, or Saint-Gods, as Mede expounds them; may
monuments of Idolatry be better endured than heretofore? The argument for the
demolishing of these is perpetual, and so the precept, Deuteronomy. 7.5, 6, 25, 26.
the reason why they are suffered, is want of zeal, as is hinted by Master
Cotton, Vial the 7. p. 14.

I fear Mr. P's zeal is as misguided, as that Luke 9.54, 55. want of due
consideration, and the power of prejudice, and wrath, do, it is to be feared,
kindle his zeal. For, are our Temples holds of Mahuzzim now? Is any Saint-God,
but the holy Trine-une-God, worshipped and owned in them, as their Protector
and Defender? How untrue is Mr. P's insinuation of it? Surely, learned Mede is
much abused by him (as are most of the Non-congregational Authors, whom he
quotes) in being made, from that expression he mentions, to account our Temples
holds of Mahuzzim; whereas, he intends it only for the Romish Temples, where
Saints are worshipped; distinguishing Protestants from Papists, p. 101. True
Christians have with David one Mahoz, but apostate Christians have their many
Mahuzzims; and how much he was for the holiness of our Churches, as places not
Idolatrous and profane, his tract bearing that name, with that of the
reverence of Gods house, and several other places in his works, do
sufficiently demonstrate, to shame Mr. P. if he be not perfrictae frontis. But
says Mr. P. They are monuments of Idolatry, and may they be better endured
than heretofore? Here he reasons strangely; for, if because they were
heretofore abused to Idolatry, they may not be used now without Idolatry, but
must be pulled down: then the Temple should have been destroyed, and not used
for the performing of the worship of God in it by Josiah, because Manasseh his
father had set up Idolatrous Altars for all the Host of Heaven, and a carved
Image in it, 2 Chronicles. 33.4, 5, 7. but he neither pulls down, nor scrupleth
worshipping in the Temple, when he had purged it, which yet he should have done
by Mr. P's doctrine; because his father had made it a monument of Idolatry.

In times near the Primitive, Christians scrupled not to use for Christian
worship, Temples before used for the worship of Pagan gods, when they came to
be in their power; neither, I believe, would the Apostle Paul, who preached
upon Marshil, have scrupled to have used them for the worship of God, if they
had been in the hands of Christians in his time. About the text in Deuteronomy.
(however confidently he build his Temple-demolishing doctrine upon it) he is
much deceived; and has need to be taught, that the reason of those precepts,
for the destroying of the Canaanites places and means of worship, and not using
them in Gods service, was, that God had purposed and appointed, that there
should be but one only place, in the whole Land of Israel, to which they were
to bring their gifts, offerings, and sacrifices, as the Levitical Law required;
which is expressly told us, Deuteronomy. 12.1. to 8. And we find, that that precept,
Deuteronomy. 7. did not bind them to demolish, and reject from being used in Gods
service, whatsoever was abused to undue worship. The Censers of the two hundred
and fifty, that should not have offered incense, were made broad plates for the
covering of the Altar, Numb. 16.39. and the Censers that Nadab and Abihu put
strange fire in, were not, that we read of, cast away, and made no use of in
the Tabernacle, and therefore probably Eleazar, and Ithamar, that succeeded,
used them. Our Temples, many of them had a being before the Popish religion
prevailed in our Land, and some of them have been built since it was removed,
and had they been all erected during the prevalency of that religion, yet their
use being changed, to the worshipping and religious honoring of God alone,
they are no more holds of Mahuzzim, but Temples of Christ. As to Mr. Cottons
opinion, which he mentions, it is built upon exceeding slender grounds. He, p.
9. and 14. does expound, Revel. 16.20. thus. By Islands are meant Churchyards,
and there grounds consecrated by Popish devotions; by Mountains, Cathedral
Churches, and all those high places that overtop the people of God. Hence he
concludes, when the zeal of God lifts up the hearts of his people, they will
not endure a Consecrated place in the world. With reverence to Mr. Cottons
piety and learning, let the judicious Reader judge, whether any thing may not
be said and inferred, at this rate of interpreting. Never did any man in the
Christian Church so interpret this text; neither can it in any reason be
thought to be the sense of the Holy Ghost; but rather, that Islands and
Mountains are put for places of strength, and the powers in them, wherein Rome
relies, and which in the overthrow of Babylon, though she look for help from
them, are not able to afford it her, but fall, as many as adhere to her, under
ruin themselves; which is, that the generality of the best Interpreters,
understand by it.

But would you think, that Mr. P. that inveighs thus against our Temples,
should use them himself? He tells us plainly, that he not only has done, and
does, but also hints that he intends to continue so to do; and that with the
help of this pretty distinction.

I confess, were it not to cry out against the Altar at Bethel, P. 71, 72, and
81.
and gain an advantage of speaking, that otherwise I cannot have, after the
example of the Churches meeting in Solomon's Porch, after the Temple was
abolished, Act. 5.12. I would never more preach, or perform any holy duty in
them. I could not meet with the Parish, were it not that I come as a Prophet
from Judah to Bethel to them, to cry out against the Altar there; or upon
occasion of the Churches meeting, not theirs primarily.

If he comes as a Prophet, yet will he say, he is so extraordinary a Prophet,
as to have a dispensation, to do evil that good may come of it, which the
great Apostle durst not do, Romans 3.8? Surely his practice speaks it in effect,
supposing that he believes that to be true, which he has delivered, that our
Temples are high places, and that it is equally sin to use them, at it was to
use these. Either he must recant what he has said, or he must acknowledge that
he does evil (to him evil) that good may come of it. If this confident accuser
charge us, who are not convinced of the Antichristianism of our Temples, of
living in a sinful practice, for using them: how deeply may he be charged for
using them, who accounts them holds of Demons, Idolatrous high places, not to
be endured by any zealous person, such as God expressly forbids men to have to
do with? But let us consider his pretenses, for the warrantableness of this
practice, notwithstanding his Principle; what weight are they of? even none.

1 He comes as a Prophet from Judah to Bethel, to cry out against the Altar
there. But surely, (besides that he can never show such a Commission, for his
inveighing against our Temples, as that Prophet had, to declare against the
Idolatrous Altar at Bethel, as may be easily concluded from what has been
said) it is plain, that he uses not our Temples always on this account, but
commonly, for the performing of Divine services to God, with the people that
are with him, in the use of all Ordinances; which I am certain, that Prophet
would not have done at the Altar of Bethel. So that, this is but a mere empty
pretense.

2 He does it to gain an advantage to cry out against the Altar, etc. that
otherwise he cannot have, after the example of the Church, Act. 5. But,
(besides, as I have said, that this is not commonly his work, when he appears
in our Temples, but to use ordinarily Gods Ordinances with the people there,
which the Prophet would not have done at the Altar of Bethel, and which we read
not that the Apostles did in Solomon's Porch, though if they had, the case had
been far different from that in hand) Can he not cry out against the Altar,
etc. elsewhere, and that with more probable advantage? Would it not better suit
with Mr. P's Principles, to ascend to the top of the Marketplace, or upon some
Scaffold erected on purpose, and there to cry out against our Temples? And I
dare say, in so doing, he shall have more hearers than he can expect in a
Temple.

3. He meets with the Parish in the Temple, upon the account of the Churches
meeting there, not theirs primarily. But, cannot his Church meet elsewhere?
Surely, after all his drawing away of the Members of our Churches, his company
is not so big, but that some room of theirs may contain them, as it does when
they list; and, one would think, this Prophet should instruct and lead his
flock better, than to carry them to, and suffer them to meet and worship God,
in an Idolatrous place, as unwarrantable to be used, in his judgment, as the
high places, and the Altar of Bethel in Isreal's time. It Is a sad thing, that
this Prophet should be so like that other old Prophet, mentioned, 1 King.
13.18, 19, etc. he in his practice leads his people to use our Temples; and yet
in his doctrine he condemns the use of them, as very sinful, Idolatrous, and
not to be practiced by any; and thereby condemns, both those who are led by him
into this practice, and himself much more, who is found, and leads others into
it, contrary to his principles, convictions, and doctrine. Is it not to be
feared, that in this he is not a true Prophet of the Lord? and that his voice
in this Book is no more from Heaven, than the Message of that old Prophet was
from an Angel? But yet, attend we his third injunction.

Away with Patrons, or Lay-founders, that usurp the Prerogative of Christ, they
will found Churches; P. 72.^
not only build a Synagogue, but appoint the Church, and the Minister. Is not
Christ Jesus the builder of the house? Durst Paul and Barnabas exercise such
tyranny, as to impose a Minister on the people? Acts 14.23.

Certainly, Mr. P. invents a crime against Patrons, especially those of our
days. Do they appoint the Congregations of Professors? surely he dreams; they
only present Ministers to Congregations already formed; and if those Ministers
can be proved by any in those Congregations, to be unfit to be over them in
the Lord, there is now, and has commonly been, by public appointment, a way
to keep them out, and make the presentation null; but if they have no valid
exception against them, what harm is there done by the Patrons presenting? I
shall not here speak to Patrons right; But I think, their using of that
privilege of nominating Ministers to places (which was bestowed upon them at
first, by the favor of Princes, that men might be thereby encouraged to so
good a work, as building Temples, and endowing them with means, to maintain
Ministers to preach there, for the edification of Souls) cannot truly be
termed, an usurping of the Prerogative of Christ, nor an exercising if tyranny
over the people. Ministers may have Christ's mission, either wholly, or
inchoatively by fitness, and a true desire of edifying Souls in the Ministry,
though they be presented by Patrons; yea, Patrons present them, upon the
account that they apprehend them to have Christ's mission; and people have
sufficient means to invalidate the Presentation (especially among us) in case
they can evidence them to be unfit; and to procure them to be ejected, after
admission, in case they can prove them insufficient, ignorant, or scandalous.
Those that are presented, must bring a sufficient Testimonial of their good
conversation; They must undergo a trial, in relation to their abilities; and it
any Objection of weight, is laid in by the people against them, they cannot
enjoy the benefit of their presentation, unless that be removed; Also, it is
no hard matter, for prudent godly people, to prevail with Patrons, to present
whom themselves shall pitch upon.

All which things considered, as I cannot look on their presenting as an
exercising of Tyranny over the people: So I think, that places are better
provided for this way, considering the condition of our Churches, than if they
had the full power of nominating, choosing, and admitting their Ministers.

But Mr. P. would have done well, since he accounts the presentations of
Patrons such abominations, to have instructed, and reproved, Mr. L.
one of his chief members, who, not long ago, sinned against his Antipatronical
doctrine. For, enquiring what course he should take, to be settled in the
Living where he was, he in whose right he held it being deceased; and being
answered by me, that he must have recourse to the Patron: Though he then
much inveighed against Patrons, and declared that he would have no recourse to
him, nor use him in this matter; yet he soon after, addressed himself to him,
and procured himself to be presented by him. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames?

The Text, Act. 14.23. whence Mr. P. queries, Durst Paul and Barnabas impose a
Minister on the people? is mistaken by him; but for once, he does not wrong the
Presbyterian Author he quotes, p. 72, 73
(which is a rare virtue with him) about the import of the word (...). For it
is true, that Reverend Calvin, Beza, and some others, say that Paul and
Barnabas, are by this word to be deemed, to have put the Election of the
Elders, to the suffrages of all in the Churches. But others, not a few, nor
mean, hold, that as they were Elders themselves, and more than Elders, so they
chose and ordained Elders for the Churches, by virtue of their Office, as best
able to appoint to them therein; and that, (...), referres not to the peoples
choosing, by lifting up of hands, but to the act of Paul and Barnabas, who by
imposition of hands, ordained them Elders. Scriptores Ecclesiastici (says
Marlorat) (...) usurpant, pro solemni Ordination is ritu, qui in Scripturis
vocatur manuum impositio.

And indeed, by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, were Ministers
put into office, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. And as yet, I have not seen one example
of weight produced from Scripture, of a Minister, Pastor, or Elder, chosen by
the people, much less thereby constituted a Minister. That Text, Act. 1.21.
etc. reaches not the case; for the Apostleship is allotted to Matthias, not by
the choice of the Disciples, but by divine decision; and if the choice had been
by the Disciples, yet they were not all the Believers in Jerusalem, but only
the one hundred and twenty, who were all Ministers, as has been before
evinced. Act. 6, 1. to 6. concludes nothing in the case in hand neither; for,
probable it is, as has been showed, that the Deacons were not chosen by the
multitude of the Disciples at Jerusalem, but by the Presbytery; and if they
were chosen by the people, it makes nothing here, for it speaks not ad idem.
There is a wide difference, between a Deacon and a Pastor; though it were left
to people to choose their own Deacons, yet it cannot hence be concluded, that
de jure divino, people have power to choose their own Ministers. Let Mr. P.
consider, what the Author, whom he elsewhere so unhappily leans upon, says to
this, n. Mr. Bains in a place already quoted. If any (says he) fail in any
Office, Diocesan Trial. p. 84. Conc. 4.
the Church has not power of supplying that, but a Ministry of calling one,
whom Christ has described, that from Christ he may have power of Office given
him, in the place vacant.

Let the world, as well as the Church, p. 74
be supplied with Ministers according to Christ's institution. But then, say
I, they must not be supplied with such as your self, gifted brethren,
unordained; for these are not Complete Ministers, according to Christ's
institution, of which more afterward; And you have given no solid reason, why
presented Ministers, that are tried, approved of, ordained, and sent to
Congregations, to administer Christ's Ordinances, should not be, in your
account, Ministers according to Christ's institution.

That which is stuck at, is the rights and properties of Patrons; the taking
away these, is looked upon as a piece of injustice. Remember Pharaoh King of
Egypt, and Sihon King of Heshbon, how their hearts were hardened, by abuse of
righteous principles, urging them against Gods command. Mr. P. has not yet
produced a Command of God, against Patrons properties; And it is a mystery to
me, how Pharaoh can be said, to have stuck to righteous principles, in
oppressing so grievously the Israelites, by whose means he and his land had
been saved from famine; and refusing to let those enjoy their liberty, by whom
he and his land enjoyed life and freedom. Mr. P. has a strange art in
reasoning, if he can make it out, that Pharaoh acted toward the Israelites as
he did, from righteous principles.

I am sorry for men in these days, that make it a ground to break up
Parliaments, p. 75.
and make Ordinances to preserve the right of Patrons, etc.

Neither was that Parliament, which Mr. P. intends, broken up properly, by any
power but their own; Nor was the reason of their dissolution, either wholly or
chiefly, the preserving of the rights and properties of Patrons. But the
Committee having presented to this Parliament these proposals, 1 That
Commissioners be sent down into the Counties, and enabled to eject scandalous
and unable Ministers, and settle able Ministers in void places; 2 That such as
are, or shall be approved for public Preachers of the Gospel, shall have, and
enjoy such maintenance as is already settled by Law; 3 That upon hearing and
considering what has been offered to the Committee, touching propriety of
Tithes, of Incumbents, Rectors, Possessors of Donatives, or appropriate Tithes;
It is the opinion of the Committee, that the said persons, have a Legal
propriety in Tithes: Instead of concurring with the Honorable Committee, a
Party in this Parliament resolve, 1 To put out of Office all the Ministers in
the Land. 2 To abolish the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, no other
maintenance being provided in the stead thereof. 3 That no Ministers should
have been capable of being admitted to exercise their Ministry, that would not
have renounced their former call to the Ministry, and taken up a new call from
the People.

Hereupon, the Major part, with the Speaker, resign up their power into his
Excellencies hands, whence they had it; foreseeing, that confusion, and much
evil would have ensued upon the execution of such Counsels.

Mr. P. would, it seems, have rejoiced to have seen them executed; But not
only Presbyterians, but also Independents, that are not of his form, bless
that hand of providence, that disappointed them. Sad would that day have been
to England, that should have brought forth the fruits of them.

His bitter insinuation, that, Patrons presenting, p. 75.
does oblige Ministers to daub with untempered mortar, and sew pillows under
their elbows; is very uncharitable, and unreasonable.

Godly Ministers will be rather engaged, by being presented, to labor to
edify the souls of Patrons. And were Ministers chosen by the people, and cast
off by them when they please, as Mr. P. would have it; they would lie thereby,
under a far greater temptation, to humor the people in their lusts; Since
among them they live, and with them they have continually to do: Whereas
Patrons, most of them, live not in the places to which they present; and have
no power to put out, whom they have once presented. So that, the power which
he claims for the people, is far more likely to produce that evil, than is the
power of Patrons; and instances might be given that it has done so. But I
forbear recriminating.

SECT. 8. Of Tithes.
MR. P's. fourth injunction to the Magistrate, is concerning Tithes.

Away with Tithes, that Old Testament maintenance, plainly distinguished from
the New Testament maintenance, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. It Is plain he argues a Simili,
and like is not the same, Gospel maintenance, differs from Law maintenance, in
the very kind. Tithes, are a legal, Jewish, Popish way of maintenance. Either
Tithes are paid by the light of nature, or Moral command, or else by a
Ceremonial precept; But not by either of the two former; The instances of
Abraham's, and Jacobs paring them, before the Law, are not sufficient; for
Circumcision, and Sacrifices, were then, and yet part of the Ceremonial ^aw:
and, the institution of our Savior, Luke 10.7. urged 1 C^r. 9.14. and
explained, Gal. 6.6. will not stand with Tithes; These are out of the seed of
the land, the fruit of the Trees; or the herd, or the flock; the
Gospel-maintenance is raised out of all good things. Therefore, Tithes belong
to the Ceremonial Law, which to practice, is to dig Christ out of his grave,
and a Character of Antichrist. Neither will it avail, for any to say, that they
take them not as Tithes, for the Corinthians could not be so excused, as to
their eating things sacrificed to Idols, etc.

Mr. P. knows, or might know, that there are several pleas for Tithes, as the
Ministers maintenance; The Power and Laws of the Magistrate, The right of
Donation, and The Divine Right. And therefore, since he thought fit, to give a
reason of his excommunicatory sentence against them, with relation to the last
of those pleas, he should have done it, in relation to the rest also. Else,
though it shall happen, that his strong arguing may cause men to quit them with
one hand, on the last account; yet the other pleas, being not impugned by him
in particular, they may hold them with the other hand, on their account; and
so, his away with Tithes, may lose its labor. Two Cords may hold them, though
the edge of his arguing, should be so keen, as to cut the other.

1 The Magistrates Power, and Authority, is generally acknowledged, to have
been given them by God, in relation to the good of the Church; and cannot
fairly be denied, to extend it self, by his appointment, to the Teachers, as
well as to the taught in it. Those must live, and be maintained, as well as
these; the text he quotes, evinceth this, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and Magistrates are
to take care, that what God has appointed, may be performed; how are they
else, Ministers of God, for good, without exception or restriction? Now the
even so, in this Text (leaving his apprehension, of the farther sense of it, to
be considered under the last plea) implies clearly, that a set, determinate,
and sufficient maintenance, is to be assigned, and paid to the Ministers of
Christ, and established for them (for such a one there was enjoyed, by the
Ministers of holy things, under the Law) and surely, the effecting of this,
falls under the Christian Magistrates care, and is within the verge of his
power. But now, certainly, there is no reason, why the Magistrate may not
appoint, as well a tenth, as a ninth, or an eleventh, to be the Ministers
maintenance; And having so fair a precedent before them, as the determinate
proportion, once allotted by God to his Ministers, n. a Tenth; and no other
mentioned in Scripture: No reason can be given (supposing them not to consider
that allotment as binding now) why they should not pitch upon this, rather than
any other. The equity of that proportion, does undoubtedly still remain; it is
the proportion which the wisdom of God chose, and he has no where forbidden
them to pitch upon that proportion, or pointed out any other; therefore, that
proportion they may best pitch upon, and establish to be the Ministers
maintenance. This proportion, Christian Magistrates, and ours in particular,
have pitched upon, and established by Laws to be the Ministers maintenance; and
that out of the increase of the land, which might easily be proved, to be the
most fit, certain Maintenance, the most suitable, to al incident conditions of
the land, that can be found.

And why, upon this account, may not Tithes be appointed and maintained by the
Magistrates, required by the Ministers, and paid by the People? What Law of
God, do those, or these, sin against herein? Suppose the determinate
proportion, and way of maintenance, not expressed and determined by God, now in
New-Testament-daies, but only that there should be a fit Maintenance; Does
not the determining of the way and proportion of maintenance, belong to the
Magistrate? And is this way and proportion Jewish, when they pitch not upon it
on the Jewish account, as any way a part of, or subservient to the Ceremonial
Law? Or is it oppressive, and unreasonable (as some complain) seeing it is the
equitable way, which the wisdom of God once appointed, for his Ministers
maintenance? Is not here a sufficient bottom, for any man's spirit to rest
upon, in relation to Tithes? But if this were not enough,

2 None can deny, that men may give away, and perpetually bequeath to others,
the tenth part of the profits of their goods, lands, and inheritances. If any
man of Mr. P's. Congregation, should bequeath to him and his Successors, the
future Pastors of that Congregation, the tenth part of his own proper revenues
for ever; might not he, and his Successors lawfully claim and enjoy it? would
not their title be good to it? Now thus it is, in the case of Ministers
claiming, and taking Tithes in England; as is sufficiently known, to any that
know any thing to purpose, in this matter. The first Monarchs of this Nation,
when all the Lands in England were their Demesne, demised the Tenth of all the
profits of them, to the Ministers of holy things. I shall here transcribe
something of what is unquestionably recorded about it.

Mr. Treleyny of Tithes, p. 13 etc.
Tithes are legally the Ministers own, not given to him by the Subject, as is
now pretended, but paid unto him, as a rentcharge laid upon the land; and that
before the subject, either Lord, or Tenant, had any thing to do in the Land at
all. It appears ( says Sir Edward Coke) by the Laws and Ordinances of
ancient Kings, and especially of King Alfred, that the first King of this
Realm, had all the Lands of England in Demesne. And at this time it was, when
all the lands of England were the Kings Demesne, that Ethelwolph, the second
Monarch of the Saxon race (his Father Egbert being the first which brought the
former Heptarchie under one sole Prince) conferred the Tithes, of all the
Kingdom, upon the Church, by his Royal Charter. King Ethelwolph (says
Ingulph) with the consent of his Prelates and Princes, which ruled in England
under him, in their several Provinces, did first enrich the Church of England,
with the Tithes of all his Lands and Goods, by his Charter Royal. He gave
(says Ethelward) the Tithe of his possessions, for the Lords own portion, and
ordered it to be so in all parts of the Kingdom. He discharged (says
Florence of Worcester) the tenth part of his Realm, of all tributes and
services due unto the Crown, and by his perpetual Charter, offered it to the
three-one God. The Charter makes it evident, that the King did not only give,
de facto, the Tithe, or tenth part of his whole Realm, to the use of the
Clergy, but that he had a right, and a power to do it; as being, not only the
Lord Paramount, but the Proprietary of the whole Lands; The Lords and great men
of the Realm, not having then a property, or estates of permanency, but as
accomptants to the King, whose the whole Land was. And this appears yet
further, by a Law of King Athelstanes, made in the year 930. about which time
not only the Prelates of the Church, as formerly, but the great men of the
Realm, began to be settled in estates of permanency, and to claim a property in
those Lands which they held of the Crown, and claiming so, begun it seems, to
make bold to subduct their Tithes. For remedy whereof, the King made this Law,
commanding all his Ministers, throughout the Kingdom, that in the first place,
they should pay the Tithes of his own estate (which he held in his own hands,
and had not estated out to his Lords and Barons) and that the Bishops did the
like of what they held in right of their Churches, and his Nobles and Officers
of that which they held in property, as their own possessions, or inheritance.
So then, the Land being charged thus with the payment of Tithes, came with this
clog unto the Lords, and great men of the Realm, and has been so transmitted,
and passed over, from one hand to another, until it came to the possession of
the present owners; who, whatsoever right they have to the other nine parts,
either of Fee-simple, Lease, or Copy, have certainly none at all in the Tithe
or tenth, which is no more theirs, or to be so thought of, than the other nine
parts are the Clergies. For in whatsoever tenure they hold their Lands, they
purchased them, on this tacit condition, that besides the Rents and Services
they pay to the Lord, they are to pay to the Clergy, or those who succeed in
their right, a tenth of all the fruits of the earth, and of the fruits of their
Cattle, and all Creatures tytheable.

And, by how many Acts of Parliament, Tithes have been confirmed to the Clergy
on this account, in the reigns of several of our Princes, unto this day;
appears fully in the Treatises of learned Lawyers, as also what care has been
taken, for the true payment of them.

These things considered, it is evident, that by Donation, the Ministry of
England has as good a civil right to the Tithes, as any other persons have to
the other nine parts possessed by them. And I fear therefore, that many of
those who are now so hot for the abolishing of Tithes, would soon labor, if
they had power in their hands, to extinguish Landlords Rents also.

Thus, Tithes are made over and held, may be claimed, and ought to be paid, on
the account of the Magistrates lawful appointment, determination, and Laws, and
the right of ancient Donation in England. And these two grounds,
well-considered, are sufficient to satisfy any man, that there is no need to
take them away, though the Divine right of them should not be made good.
Suffices, there is a firm civil right for them. But yet, because Mr. P. is so
confident, and peremptory, in denying and opposing the Divine right of Tithes
(though, as his manner is, he answers not the many and weighty arguments, urged
by no mean Divines, and Masters of reason for it) I shall view what he says
to that plea. Consider we then, that,

3 Some plead for Tithes, upon the account of Divine right; alleging, that
this way of Ministers maintenance, by Tithes, was appointed by God before the
Law, and under the Law, and is not repealed, or any other substituted in its
room, by the Gospel. And that therefore, Tithes are due by a Moral, and
perpetually binding Law of God.

What says Mr. P. to this? It is an Old Testament maintenance. Be it so, this
is that is pleaded. The older the better, as to evidence, if it be not
repealed. The Sabbath is an Old Testament Ordinance, and has no New Testament
Law, expressed, to establish it; will he therefore say, away with the Sabbath?
What says he to the repeal of Tythe-maintenance? It seems to me, plainly
distinguished, from the New Testament maintenance, in that, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
Plainly! Every man has not so good eyes as Mr. P. I see not the least
appearance of any such thing, in that text. It Is well he says, to me plainly;
for I dare engage, upon my little reading, that no Expositor of note, did ever
see any such thing, in this Scripture, much less see it plainly. Some of them
have thought, they have seen the contrary to this notion in it, and have
pleaded from the SO, for the Divine right of Tithes: but none that I know of,
did ever behold the maintenances plainly, or indeed at all, distinguished in
it. This sharpness of sight, Mr. P. shall carry away the glory of. Well, but he
will make us see it. Behold we then. It Is plain, (says he) he argues a Simili,
from the like, and like is not the same. Now, it is plain to me, that Mr. P.
understands not the text, and that he abuses Logic; though not out of ill
will to it, I suppose. The Logic is too too bad, even for a Midsummer
Bachelaur. For the axiom, as used by him, has a gross fallacy in it, A dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. It is true, that like is not, cannot be,
the same Numerically, but it may be the same Specifically, and is; and, if Mr.
P. had been better acquainted with Aristotle, he might have known so much.
(...). (...) 10. E^. c. 3.
Like things are not the same simply, but they are the same as to species, or
kind.

Suppose then, the Apostle to argue from the like, when he argues for a
Gospel-maintenance, from the consideration of the maintenance had under the
Law; does it follow, he must mean another kind of maintenance, by that which he
pleads for? Are not Tithes paid under the Law, and Tithes paid under the
Gospel, alike, as Tithes paid? and yet, are not they the same, as they are one
kind of maintenance? May not Mr. P's Successor in his Church, have such a
maintenance as he has, a maintenance like his, and yet the same kind of
maintenance?

But, if Mr. P's Logic were as good as it is bad, yet he has no footing in
the Text for his arguing, he plainly misunderstands it. For the context,
compared with the text, evinceth, that the Apostles aim and scope is not to
compare the maintenances as to their peculiar kind, but to prove that
maintenance is due to Gospel Ministers for their work, as well as it was to
legal Ministers for theirs. A maintenance these had, whereby they did live, and
had a subsistence suitable to their condition, as Ministers of holy things; and
a maintenance thus sufficient, whereby they may live as Gospel Ministers, he
argues those ought to have, by the Lords Ordinance. He that ordained, that
Legal Ministers should have a sufficient and honorable maintenance, has also,
yea and therein, ordained that Gospel Ministers should have such a maintenance.
Gods Ordinance in this respect reaches the one as well as the other, and is
accordingly applied by the Apostle, to all Ministers of holy things as one in
this thing, verse. 10. For our sakes no doubt this is written, that is, for the
sakes of all Ministers of holy things. God would have them subsist, by a
sufficient and honorable maintenance. Thus this plain text is plainly nothing
to his purpose.

But, he has more than one string to his bow. Next comes an Argument, that he
thinks will do the deed. The sum of it is this. Tithes are paid, neither by
the light of Nature, nor by a Moral command; for the instances of Abraham's and
Jacobs paying Tithes will not evidence so much; for Circumcision was of the
Fathers, and yet obliged to keep the whole Law; and Sacrifices were as old as
Cain and Abel, yet part of the Ceremonial Law. Again, no Gospel-Law is
inconsistent with a Natural or Moral Law; but the institution of our Savior
for maintenance, explained Gal. 6.6. will not stand with Tithes. Therefore they
are paid by a Ceremonial precept, and belong to the Ceremonial Law, which to
practice is to dig Christ out of his Grave, and a character of Antichrist.

Strange confidence this, to build so peremptorily, so deep, so censuring a
conclusion, on such slenderly-proved premises. Two Reasons he has here, why
Tithes are not paid by a Moral command, which pretend to overthrow two of
those, whereby they that are for the Divine right of them, assert that they
depend upon a Moral command.

1 The instances of Abraham and Jacob will not serve the turn for it. And why I
pray? We know, the Priesthood to which Abraham paid was not Ceremonial, and no
Scripture tells us, his payment was a branch of the Ceremonial Law. The portion
due to Melchisedecks Priesthood, is due to the Priesthood of Christ, it being
after the order of his; and so to Gospel Ministers, as Christ's servants. If
therefore Abraham in duty paid Tithes before the Law, to Melchisedecks
Priesthood, are they not now to be paid, to the Priesthood of Christ, and
received by his Ministers? No, says Mr. P. for Circumcision and Sacrifices
were before the Law, and yet did belong to the Ceremonial Law, and are
abolished. What a wonderful confutation is this? For, (besides that he says
nothing, to what is commonly alleged concerning Melchisedecks Priesthood, when
that instance is urged) does it follow, that because Circumcision and
Sacrifices, that were before and under the Law, are abolished, that therefore
Tithes, that were so, are abolished also? certainly by no Logic but Mr. P's.
For the two former we have express Scriptures, declaring that they are
abolished, but not so for the latter. It is not every thing that was appointed
before the Law, and continued under the Law, and was not explicitly
recommanded by the Gospel, that is abolished (for so the Sabbath it self should
be abolished) but, what the declared will of God has abolished. Therefore Mr.
P. has but confirmed the opposite argument. Abraham paid Tithes by command;
Mr. P. denies it not. That command is not expressly and explicitly repealed, as
are those for Circumcision and Sacrifices; Mr. P. does not show, or say that it
is. What hinders then, but that it should be looked upon as a Moral and
perpetually binding command? It must be his second Reason, if any thing, for
his first says, it is not in me.

2 The Assumption (says he) is manifest, because no Law appointed in the
Gospel, is inconsistent with a Natural or Moral Law of God: But the institution
of our Savior, explained Gal. 6.6. will not stand with Tithes; these are out
of the seed of the land, the first fruit of the trees, and the herd, or flock;
The Gospel-maintenance, is raised out of all good things, that the person
taught has. Tithes were paid, the first tenth to the Levites, and they paid
the tenth of the tenth to the Priests, etc.

This Reason is Mr. Hookers, and (saving the reverence due to so worthy a man)
may justly be said, to have no cogency at all in it. Tithes may very well
consist with Christ's institution, for Ministers maintenance, as explained, Gal.
6.6. For 1 Suppose this expression of the Apostle, in all good things, be as
comprehensive, as Mr. Hooker would have it: Yet, it appears not, but that under
the Law Tithes were so paid. No places in the Law of Moses, that mention
Predial Tithes, do restrain the payment to them, excluding personal Tithes. The
Law mentions the chief, and comprehends under them the rest; as may appear, by
considering, that neither grass, nor honey, nor wax, nor several other things,
that might be mentioned, are referrible to any of the mentioned expressions,
being neither of the seed of the Land, nor the fruit of Trees, nor of the herd,
or flock, which yet, no man doubts, I suppose, but were tithed. Therefore, Mr.
Hooker, could not on sufficient ground say, that the Tithes under the law, were
not of all good things, even in his sense. Nay, there is as express a place, to
prove that Tithes under the Law, were paid of all good things, as this Gal. 6.
is for the communicating maintenance out of them, under the Gospel, which is
Luke 18.12. I give Tithes (says the Pharisee) of all that I possess. Is not,
all that I possess, as fully expressive, as, all good things? 2 May not Gal. 6.
mean suitably to the Law? In all good things, that is, in all things
communicable, and whereof a portion was to be communicated to Ministers, under
the Law. If it must be understood in a limited sense (as who can doubt but it
must, in relation to many particulars) where shall we have a rule to limit it,
and bound it, but the practice under the Law?

3 What ever becomes of the Tithe under the Law, we are sure, we can match
this expression, in Gal. 6. with those, whereby Abraham's and Jacob's paying of
Tithes, before the Law (which is firstly to be heeded in this business) is
set forth.

Of Abraham, it is said, Genesis 14.20. He gave him Tithes of ALL, spoils and
all, Heb. 7.4. And says Jacob, Genesis 28.22. Of ALL that thou shall give me, I
will surely give the tenth unto thee.

Where lies the Reason now, why the Institution of Christ for Ministers
maintenance, should not stand with Tithes? That requires, men should
communicate to Ministers, in all good things, and herein it is answerable to
the Law of Tithes, for Abraham before the Law, gave tithes to Melchisedeck of
all, and Jacob Tithes to God of all, and persons under the Law (as appears by
that of the Pharisee) gave tithes of all that they possessed; and these, cannot
but be deemed, to have acted therein according to Gods Ordinance.

As for the other branch of this second reason, that the first tenth was under
the Law to the Levite, etc. it speaks nothing at all, for the inconsistency of
Tithes with Christ's institution. For, that order and distinction is
acknowledged on all hands, to have been Ceremonial, and adventitious to the
nature of the maintenance. We must strip the Ordinance of the Sabbath it self,
of morality, if we will have no appointment moral, that was attended, under
the Law, with something Ceremonial.

Thus, it may clearly appear, to the considerate Reader, that as yet Mr. P.
has not made his assumption manifest, but rather his weakness; neither of his
Reasons holding good. And therefore, consequently, his flourishing conclusion
makes but a vainshew. He has no way proved, that Tithes are paid by a
Ceremonial Precept, and belong to the Ceremonial Law. And withal, he has
avoided, or omitted, one great part of his task under such an attempt; n. to
prove that, and show how, Tithes 1 were a shadow of Christ, or grace to come by
Christ here; in the Law for them, nature of them, proportion in them; 2
Analogically represented heavenly things; which are porperties, that enter into
the definition of Legal Levitical ceremonies, from Scripture; and which, I am
assured, Mr. P. will never be able to make out concerning Tithes.

But yet, poor man, he seems to think, he has done such wonders, in
confuting Tithes, that now, if any dare refuse to let them go, yet they will
not have, he thinks, the face to take them as, and under the notion of Tithes.
And therefore follows, Neither will it avail, for any to say, that they take
them not as Tithes; for the Corinthians could not be so excused, as to their
eating things sacrificed to Idols, etc. Certainly, there is no cause to fear,
from any thing that he has said, that men, that have duly considered the
thing, should betake themselves to that refuge; or to think, they should judge
the case of eating things offered to Idols, in the Idols Temple, and the taking
of Tithes alike. Alas! what unequal yoaking of things is here?

Nay but, Tithes are Popish, and were sacrificed to Idols, either directly, or
interpretatively by Papists. Not Popish sure, in their institution; nor since
Christ, owned at first, as the Ministers maintenance, by Papists, or to promote
directly, or indirectly, Popery, or Idolatry. Mr. P's reading should have
taught him better. Tithes are far Elder than Popery, even in the Christian
Church. And however Papists have abused, either Tithes, or Temples, there
arises hence, no more necessity to forsake them, now that those abuses are
renounced, and expelled; than there did to Israel, to abolish their Tithes or
Temple, because they were used during the prevalency of Idolatry in that
nation, to maintain it.

But withal, I must mind Mr. P. that as to the Divine right of Tithes, the
Papists shake hands with him, for they generally disown it, and dispute against
it.

Now we are reminded of his injunctions hitherto with a caution.

Away, I say, with all appurtenances of a Parish Church. p. 82
Let us not desire the silver and gold of the Idol, lest we be snared, and
become an abomination like it, and accursed like it.

Mr. P. does well to comprehend himself, and those that are with him in his
admonition to avoid that, which he deems to be a curse. But he would do
better, since his judgment is thus, if he did more labor to reform at home,
what he does so highly declaim against in others. One lately of his Church,
though he weakly renounced his Ordination, yet to his end, would not quit his
Tithes. Others of the members of his Church, are Parish-Preachers, and
receivers of Tithes. May it not now be queried, upon Mr. P's principles,
whether his Church be come out of Babylon, when such brats of Babylon, as he
accounts Parish-Ministers, and receivers of Tithes to be, are the main Pillars
of it, and are suffered in it, though they live in a practice directly contrary
to their Pastors Doctrine? Or, is it Antichristian in all others, to receive
Tithes, but not in the Members of Mr. P's Society?

But Reader, is it not more strange than this, and matter of wonder, that Mr.
POST LETHWAIT himself, who does so highly inveigh against Tithes, should defile
his fingers with the silver and gold of the IDOL, that accursed thing in his
judgment? and give an acquittance for Tithes, by the name of TITHES, under his
own hand, and that Since he has appeared in print, in his Pamphlet against
Tithes? I can assure thee, it is not more strange than true. Judge now, what
heed is to be given to his declamations against us, who take tithes, which we
judge we may lawfully receive; whenas, he can allow himself to take them, who
professedly condemns them, and accounts them Antichristian.

I shall presume, to give Mr. P. some advice hereupon, and so close this
Section. 1 I beseech him, to make sure, of an actual particular repentance,
from that sin against his judgment. 2 I wish him, to study controverted points
more thoroughly, before he adventure, to determine of them so peremptorily. 3 I
entreat him to consider, that if his judgment be still the same, concerning
Tithes; he should labor, speedily, to his power, to restore that Tythe-money,
he has heretofore received. If it be Babylonish Gold, an accursed thing,
gain unjustly gotten, why should it abide in his Tabernacle, to consume both it
and him? This he was minded of, by a Parish-Minister, who breaks bread with
him; who told him, that by the Principles of his book, he was bound to make
restitution, of the Tithes, he had at any time received, to the utmost of his
estate. I hear his evasion is, he would make restitution, if he knew to whom.
But, does not he know, that when the right owners of goods unlawfully gotten,
cannot be discovered, the Poor are the Heirs, Luke 19.8? Herewith, Mr. P. will
do well, to think upon that of Austin, Non aufertur peccatum, nisi restituat
rab latum.

SECT. IX. Concerning the Commissioners for approbation of public Preachers.
TAke heed, that you set not up Episcopacy again. p. 84, 85.
Saints are afraid, what the Commissioners for the trial of Ministers will
come to at last. At first, I was pretty well satisfied with the Ordinance for
their sitting, save that it is grounded in part, on the defense of Patrons
rights and properties. But since, my scruples increase. I know no
qualification, that is put on the Patrons presentation, but only to take care
to preserve his rights and properties. Again, is there not the same kind of
Tyranny exercised over the elections of the people, that was formerly? If the
Patron and the Commissioners agree, that brings in a Minister into a Parish, in
spite of their hearts.

I am sorry to find, and it sounds very ill toward him, that Mr. P. who is so
scrupulous a man, should in relation to Tithes, as we have seen, and the
Commissioners trial, as he tells us here, adventure upon practices, that his
scruples condemn; and so act against his Conscience. Surely, this no way
becomes such a Reformer, and must needs lay a great block, in the way of his
endeavored reclaiming of those, whom he accounts to be in Babylon. Though he
was in part satisfied concerning the Commissioners, yet he tells us, he was not
satisfied in them, in that the Ordinance for their si^ting, is grounded on the
defense of Patrons rights and properties. Now Patrons, being in Mr. P's
apprehension, so great an abomination as he does express; and Tithes, which by
their approving of him, he had power to receive, and did receive, being in his
account an accursed thing: It must needs be that he sinned against his
Conscience, in addressing himself to them, and in procuring them, to gratify
him, with some of the gold and silver of the Idol. Should our professed
Principles, and apparent practices thus jarre, how ill should we hear from Mr.
P? Surely, whatever Saints of his way are afraid of, Saints of ours see cause
to fear, that he is not a man of such a tender conscience, as he makes show of.

He fears, the Commissioners will set up Episcopacy again, though none of them
are of the Episcopal judgment, and many of them favor the Congregational way.
So he fears, with Mr. Ellis (p. 95.) that Popery rective, will follow upon
Presbytery; though the experience of Protestant reformed Churches, that have
exercised this Government for above a hundred years together, and are as far
from Popery rective, as at the first, forbid this fear. But indeed (if men must
speak their fears) I fear rather, that those of his rigid way of separation,
will bring in Popery again. Rective they may, for Doctrinal they have; it has
already crept in, at the back door of their Democratical Government, and is too
frequently found in many Societies of high-flown Sectaries, that have swarmed
out of their hives.

But, since Mr. P. is so scrupulo and fear full, I wonder he made no scruple,
and did not fear (which is a further sad evidence against the tenderness of his
Conscience) to charge, most falsely, the Protector and Council, in saying, That
there is no qualification put on the presentation of the Patron, but only care
taken, to preserve his rights and properties. For, Mr. P. cannot but know, that
the Ordinance takes care, that the person presented by any Patron to a living,
should be a meet man to preach the Gospel; which to evidence that he is, he
must have a Testimonial, under the hands of godly Ministers and others,
touching his unblameable life and conversation, from their personal knowledge
of him; which, when the Commissioners have received, they are to make trial of
the grace of God in him, of his knowledge, utterance, ability, and fitness to
preach the Gospel. And unless these evidences, concur so sufficiently, that
they can approve of him; no Patrons presentation can avail any man; his right
and property signifies nothing, as to the instating of such a person in any
Living. Mr. P. may therefore consider, whether he has not here sinned against
that Scripture, Exodus 22.28.

It also appears, how unjust his Charge is, of Tyranny exercised in this
business. It is well known (not to speak now to his fancy, of the necessity of
the peoples election, to which, and to presentations, something has been said,
Sect. 7) that Patrons are generally easily prevailed with by the People, to
present any fit man they shall desire; and that in case an unfit person be
presented, people may object against him to the Commissioners, and obstruct his
passing, if they have matter of weight against him; and in case a presented
Minister prove insufficient, or scandalous, people know how and where to be
freed from him. Unjust therefore is his Charge, and rankly uncharitable is that
speech, that if the Patron and Commissioners agree, that brings in a Minister
in spite of the peoples hearts; As if, whatever reasons the people show
against it, the Commissioners would do it right or wrong. I heartily wish, Mr.
P. may have grace, to learn more modesty, charity, and truth, than these, and
many other passages in his Treatise, manifest him to have. He now concludes his
Injunctions thus.

I know, the great Objection against what has been said is, that Ministers
will want their certainty. But for all this, p. 83.
they that trust in the Lord, will say, cast up, take away the stumbling block,
and that with a great deal of fervor. I have refused livings, when I might
have had them, and laid them down, when God called for them. Vincat veritas,
ruat coelum.

What a bitter insinuation is here? that those Ministers, that cast not up
their Tithes, and standing, and turn not Feakish Independents, as Mr. P. has
done; are persons, that do not trust in the Lord: and that they are convinced
of the unlawfulness of their maintenance and standing, but will not renounce
them, for fear of wanting their certainty. How hardly does Mr. P. judge, of
those that are not of his way? But there are some, not only of his way in the
main, but also of his Church, who are Parish-Ministers, and receivers of
Tithes, and who will not, with Mr. P. cry, Cast up, take away Tithes; unless
they be first well assured, of a settled maintenance another way. And will Mr.
P. say of these, that they trust not the Lord, and that fear of wanting a
certainty, makes them act against their consciences? If so, having persisted in
it after admonitions, why communicates he with them? If not, but he judges
otherwise of them; how is it true which he says, that those that trust in the
Lord will cry, cast up.

What Livings Mr. P. has refused, I know not; but as forward as he is, in
trumpeting out hereby his Self-denial: so forward, I think, he is bound in
conscience to be, to make restitution of the silver and gold of the Idol (as
he phraseth it) which he has received, ever since he first took upon him to
preach. Let him hereby manifest his fervor, in saying cast up; and, that he
spoke from his heart, when he said, Let truth prevail though the sky should
fall. But I fear the sky will fall, as soon as he do it.

SECT. 10. Of Mr. P's Counsels, and direction for Reformation.
IN his 89. and 90. page, he subjoynes to his injunctions to the Magistrate,
an exhortation to all, to come out of (Babylon that is, in his sense) Reformed
Churches. And to this end, makes use of his old unworthy Art, of abusing
Authors. The greatest part of those pages, being a citing of some passages, out
of Diodati, and Calvin, (Minister in the Protestant Church at Geneva) intended
against Rome, as separated from by that, and all other Protestant Churches: and
wresting them, to carry on his exhortation to separation, from those separating
Protestant Churches. This is a way of abusing Protestant writers, whereby Mr.
P. outstrips the very Papists themselves; who, though they be their sworn
enemies, yet never had such a foreheadlesse impudence, as to abuse them in this
kind.

His Directions follow.

1 Reform not only substance, but circumstance; hate the garment spotted by
the flesh, p. 91.
etc.

Here is nothing but unkind insinuations, that we labor not so to do, the
contrary to which has been evinced. I wish rigid Separatists, had the
substance of Religion well reformed among them, and did not look more after
Circumstances, than it; and that Mr. P. whilst he is so zealous about
Circumstances, close not in with those of them, that have embraced Popish
opinions and doctrines, and so pervert the substance. But what Circumstances,
inconsistent with the word, do we retain? Mr. P. mentions none here. Si
accusare sat est, quis erit innocens?

2 Take away, not only Idolatrous notions, but the things. God (say those
Reverend Lights, p. 92.
Dod and Cleaver) in Deuteronomy. 7.25. forbids the Israelites to covet, or touch the
plate of Idols, covered with gold and silver, l^st it should make them remember
the Idol, and so Worship it. So, we must lay aside, all superstitious things
and actions.

I suppose, he strikes here at our Parish-Churches, Tithes, and Temples, which
have been abundantly proved to be no Idolatrous things; and which, those pious
writers, never thought of, when they wrote this; or imagined, that any man
would be so unreasonable, as thus to mis-apply, and abuse their expressions.
But it is observable, that Mr. P. who calls them Reverend lights, and has thus
flowers at hand, See whom this resembles, Matthew. 23.29, 30, 31.
to strew upon the hearses of these dead Ministers, would, notwithstanding,
have the Living lights of our Churches, who are men of the same Principles, in
matters of faith and discipline, put under a bushel; and laid aside as broken
vessels, of no farther use in the Church of God.

Mr. P. may remember time, place, and company, when, where, and in which he
thus expressed himself. I profess, were I a man in absolute authority, I would
make SCAVINGERS, of all the Parish Priests in England, to clean the ways, or
rake the dunghills. Reader, art thou not amazed? Truly, though I cannot
sometimes, but answer him according to his folly; my soul mourns for him, and I
fear, God will severely visit, these murderous intentions, desires, and
expressions upon him. How sad is it, that such thoughts of heart, should be
found, and manifested to be in him, in relation to many as worthy, dear, and
painful Servants of the Lord, as are this day in the world; only because, they
close not with his apprehensions, and differ from Congregatinal men, in matters
of discipline? Certainly, we may judge by this, that we should have a sad
Reformation, were it referred to Mr. P's will. The gravest, holiest, and most
painful Parish-Ministers, would be accounted Idolatrous things; and so taken
away according to his Direction. How well is it for England, that God has
given him no more power in it?

As for the mentioned Comment, we readily assent to it, and it touches us not.
We have showed, that our Churches, Maintenance, Temples, cannot be proved to
be Idols, or Idolatrous. But Mr. P. must be again minded, that though it was
not lawful for the Israelites to convert the silver and gold, of the
Canaanitish Idols, to their own private use: yet, they were not forbidden, to
convert it to the use of the house of the Lord. And there is a command for it,
Josh. 6.18, 19.24. It was an accursed thing, if they took it to their own
private use; But being brought into, and bestowed upon the house of God, it was
holy to the Lord. And so, answerably now, Places, and Things, however
idolatrously used heretofore, being consecrated to God, and employed in his
service, and for his worship, do no more remain Idolatrous.

p. 93
3 Return, NOT only to the true object of worship, but to the right means, that
are instituted in the word of God.

Understands not Mr. P. what the right means of Gods worship are? or does he
knowingly, and falsely, accuse his Christian Brethren? Prayer, Preaching,
Singing of Psalms, administration of the Sacraments, these are the principal
means of Gods Worship, and have we not these in our Congregations? But Mr. P.
does, I suppose, apprehend Discipline, and a form of Church Government, to
contain virtually all the means of worship. But surely, Church Government is no
means of worship; though it be a means, to preserve the Ordinances of God free
from pollution. And, as to Church Government, I suppose, and believe, to have
proved in this Treatise, that that which we plead for, is agreeable to the
Divine pattern, and the Independent not so. That 2 Cor. 11.3, 4. is misapplied
by him. The Apostle speaks not there of Church Discipline, but of Fundamental
Christian doctrins.

SECT. 11. Of the Call of our Ministers.
p. 94
LAstly, beware of Antichrists Brokers, and buy nothing of him at second hand.

This man's modesty, is pleased to call as pious, able, and successeful a
Ministry, as the Christian world has, Antichrists Brokers. And why so? Our
Ordination is that which will not down with him, it is from Rome, and therefore
we are Antichrists Brokers and Antichristian.

For answer, I conceive, that this Objection and charge, may be two ways taken
off. I shall propound them, and leave them with the judicious Reader.

Jus. Div. Min. Angl. p. 33, etc.
1 The common Answer, which is that that is in particular laid down, improved
and urged, by the Reverend Provincial Assembly of London, is, that, Our
Ordination and Ministry, is descended to us from Christ, and his Apostles, and
the primitive Churches; through, but not from, the Apostate Church of Rome;
And, that the receiving of our Ministry thus through Rome, makes it no more
null and void, than the receiving the Scriptures, Sacraments, or any other
Ordinance of God, through Antichristian Rome, does make them null and void.
Nay, that it is a great strengthening to our Ministry, that it appears hereby
derived to us, from Christ and his Apostles, by the succession of a Ministry
continued for 1600. years. And that, we have not only a lineal succession,
from Christ and his Apostles, but also a Doctrinal succession, which is more,
etc. So much they have said, in vindication of our Ministry from
Antichristianism, as I am confident can never be fairly answered.

Mr. P. as his manner is in other points, takes no notice of what they, or
others have said, in this argument; But cries out, Antichristian Ministers,
Antichrists Brokers, etc. How easy is it, but how unreasonable, and absurd,
thus to keep fresh, and renew charges, without removing the answers, that have
taken them off? And upon what ground, can men that act so, expect that any
notice be taken of what they say? But one good turn is, that Mr. P. in this
charging book, answers himself; and says, that which does in effect establish
the mentioned Plea, for the validity of our Ordination and Ministry. When
Ordinances (says he, page 53.) are but circumstantially corrupted, we cannot
reject them, no more, than the Israelites could reject the Ark, because it was
carried, in a Cart of the Philistims making. And he instanceth in Baptism; in
which though much were added, as Anointing, Crossing, etc. yet the essentials
were retained, whilst it always was administered by washing, sprinkling, or
dipping in water in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Let any man
now apply this to our Ordination and Ministry, and see whether it will not fit
them, as well as Baptism. The essentials of Ordination, have been always
retained; Ministers being ordained by Ministers of the Gospel, with Prayer, and
imposition of hands, according to Christ's institution, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy
4.14. and 5.22. Therefore though some Circumstantial Corruptions, cleaved to our
Ordination received through Rome; yet according to Mr. P's own conclusion, we
may not renounce it. Neither can he say any thing, against the validity of
Ordination so received, which will not equally strike at Baptism, received
through Rome also.

Our Ministers are no more Antichristian Ministers, or Antichrists Brokers,
because they received their Ordination through Rome; than those that have
undergone the Ordinance of Baptism among us, and Mr. P. among them are
Antichrists Christians, or Antichristian baptized persons, because the
Ordinance came to them through Rome. We must (says he) own our Baptism
received in the Church of Rome; and is there not as much ground to say, we
must own our Ordination received in the Church of Rome? Especially in England,
which had a true and pure Ministry in primitive times (as the Congregational
Brethren confess.) Now this Ministry, for the Essentialness of it, has been
derived successively to our times, wherein it is purged from those corruptions,
that did, during the prevalency of Popery, cleave unto it. And our Ministry
thus derived, can no more be called an Antichristian Ministry, than the
Ministry and Priesthood of those Priests under the Law, that were consecrated
during the prevalency of Idolatrey in that Church, or of those that succeeded
them; could be called, when the service of the Lord was restored in purity,
and they attended upon it, a Heathen Ministry or Priesthood.

2 Though I account that answer good and strong, and believe, that our accusers
will never be able to remove it: Yet, I conceive, we need not grant them so
much, as that our Ministry is descended to us through Rome. The Congregational
Brethren say, some of them, that we are Antichristian Ministers, because we
received our Ordination from Rome. Papists say, we are not Christian
Ministers, because we do not receive our Ordination from Rome. Well, let those
two parties dispute it out. We need not trouble our selves with the
controversy. We may assert the Christianity of our Ministry, upon another
account, which is this,

The Ministers of the Protestant Reformed Churches, have their Doctrinal, and
Lineal Succession, from the hands of Christ and his Apostles, FROM and THROUGH
the hands, of the witnesses prophesying in Sackcloath, during Antichrists
reign. To evidence this, let it be considered,

1 That there have been true Churches of Christ in the World, yea in the
territories and Nations where Antichrist has prevailed, more or fewer, all
along the time of his reign, to this last age; maintaining the profession, and
Ordinances of the Gospel of Christ, in opposition to his corruptions, though he
has persecuted and sought to destroy them for it. And among these, those of
Bohemia, and the Waldenses, and Albigenses, are famously known to have
continued a long while. Enemies themselves, acknowledge concerning these last,
that in all likelihood they had their beginning, though possibly under other
names, near the time of the Apostles.

2 That in these Churches, considered in their order of time, there was both a
Doctrinal, and lineal succession, from Christ and his Apostles, unto the rise
of the Churches, called Protestant.

3 That the Protestant Reformers, and the Churches that withdrew with them
from Rome, did own the same fundamental truths, in Doctrine and Discipline,
that those did; as sufficiently appears by the History of the Waldenses, and
the conferences that passed, between the Protestant Reformers and them about it.

4 That although (whereas it is certain, that the Waldenses being by
persecution scattered, did sow the seeds of the true religion in sundry
Countries, where afterward Protestant Churches were established, which did lay
a groundwork for their arising) we have not much evidence, of the Protestant
Ministers receiving Ordination, from their Ministers: yet, we are assured from
the Histories of those times, that there was a very cheerful, and unanimous
consent, between those Waldensian Churches, and the Protestant Churches; and a
full concurring, in matters of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Ministry; as
also there was, for the main, between the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas,
and ours, afterward, in England, in their time of Reformation.

Now, in cases so extraordinary, as those of the Protestant Churches in their
first rising were; the right hand of fellowship, (which some of the
Congregational Brethren, judge in ordinary cases sufficient) being given in
effect, to the Ministry of beyond sea Protestant Churches, by the Ministry of
those former Churches; and to the Ministry of our Churches, by the Ministry
of those Protestant Churches; may well be thought enough, to supply the want,
and stand in the room, of formal Ordination from them. And this Ministry of
Protestant Churches, received from Christ, through the Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloth, has been since continued by formal Ordination, both beyond Seas
and among us; as that, which in fixed Churches, and where it may be had
completely, is of necessity, according to the rule of the Word, to be
maintained and used formally, for the continuation of a Gospel Ministry.

SECT. 12. A Question discussed, Whether any unordained persons among us are
lawful and complete Ministers of the Gospel. With, An Answer to the six
Arguments for Popular Ordination, brought by the Answerers of Jus Div. Min.
Evangelici, in their Book called, The Preacher sent.
Whilst Mr. P. and the Congregational Brethren of his form, are so forward to
condemn our Ministry as Antichristian; it will be hard for them, to free their
own from that charge. This proposition I will engage to make good;

Those Preachers, that are either not at all Ordained, or are ordained only by
the People, when they might have been, and might be ordained by a Presbytery of
preaching Elders: either they are no Ministers at all, or their Ministry is
more liable to the charge of Antichristianism, than the Ministry of any of the
Protestant Churches.

For proof hereof let it be considered, that as Ordination is by the Word
rendered necessary, when it may be had, for the constituting of a
Gospel Ministry: so there is no rule, for any other way of Ordination of
Ministers left us, in the Word of God, neither by command, nor yet by example,
but only by a Presbytery of preaching Elders, either extraordinary, or
ordinary, or mixed. By a Presbytery of preaching Elders, was Ordination always
conferred in Primitive times, on the Officers of the Church. All the texts that
speak of Ordination, will bear witness to this truth, Acts 6.6. Acts 13.1, 2,
3. Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5. Church Officers
extraordinary, or ordinary, are the persons ordaining in all these places.
There cannot be one text of Scripture produced, so much as for the concurrence
of private Believers, with Officers extraordinary or ordinary, in the act of
ordaining any, though the lowest Officer in the Church. Therefore, the London
Ministers assertion holds good, Ordination of Ministers by the People, is a
perverting of the Ordinance of God; and of no more force than Baptism
administered by a Midwife, or the consecration of the Elements in the Lords
Supper by a person out of office. And, since Ordination of Ministers, by
Ministers of the Gospel, is the only way of ordination warranted in the Word,
as the former texts prove: then, Ordination of Ministers by the People must
needs be an Antichristian way of Ordination, because it wholly crosses Christ's
rules for Ordination, given us in the New Testament.

What is pleaded, for unordained persons assuming the holy Office of the
Ministry, may be easily answered.

1 Many of them, are gifted for the Ministry.

Ans. 1. But who has made trial of their abilities? That they should be their
own Judges, in this case, is unreasonable; that People ordinarily are not able
to judge of their gifts, is certain. Who so meet to judge of their fitness, as
Ministers? and is not this work appropriated to them? 1 Timothy 3.2, 8, 9, 10, 14,
15. compared, and 5.22?

Ans. 2. Suppose their gifts and qualifications for the Ministry, were proved
and approved; yet, Ordination is necessary ordinarily, to invest them into
office. The Apostles were endowed with choice abilities, for the work of the
Ministry; yet they take not upon them to be Preachers of the Gospel, until they
are invested into office by Jesus Christ, Mark 6.7. to 14. So also the seventy
Disciples preach not the Gospel, until they have a special Commission from
Christ, Luke 10.1. to 12. Timothy, and Titus, must have sufficient proof of
men's abilities, and qualifications for the Ministry, and then such persons must
be invested with Office, by imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. This is
Gods way, and in it those that would serve him should desire to be found.
Wheresoever (says Calvin) there is a Church of God, In Jer. 23.21
it has its Laws and certain Rules of Government; and there, no man ought to
thrust himself into the work of the Ministry, although he should equal all the
Angels in holiness. How God has born witness against such persons, as have
boldly thrust themselves into this holy Office, without a lawful call and
investiture; (as he did against Uzziah, 2 Chro- 26.19, 20) who, though many of
them were before reputed sober and Orthodox Christians, yet soon after have
been given up to believe a lie, and are become instruments to draw off others,
into the erroneous and crooked paths of Socinianism, Arminianism, Papism,
Quakism, Atheism, is most sad to consider. From such Prophets as these, is
profaneness gone forth into the Land.

2 They are not only gifted, but they find in themselves a strong inclination,
and desire to preach the Gospel, that they may win souls to God. Therefore they
may take upon them the Ministry.

Ans. What Anabaptist, Arminian, Quaker, may not thus plead? And indeed, in the
Schools of Arminians, and Anabaptists, was this Doctrine tending to confusion,
and all error hatched. The Remonstrants judge it lawful for any one to preach
the Word, Episcop. These. private. Disp. 26. These. 5. Zanch. in Praecept. 4.
if he be fit to teach, and the People desire it; and the Anabaptists in
Zanchy's time, thought it lawful for any man to take upon him the Ministry, if
he thought he had the call of the Spirit. Those that desire to win Souls to
God, ought to desire, if they are fit for it, to be invested with office in the
way of Christ, by a lawful Ordination, by a Presbytery of preaching Elders.

What is pleaded for Popular Ordination, comes now to be considered. The
Answerers of Jus Div. Min. Evangelici, lay down this proposition. In a Church
that has no Officers in it, some Believers may lawfully, and warrantably
Ordain without Officers.

The Preacher sent, p. 323. to p. 330,
This they endeavor to prove, by six Arguments.

Arg. 1. To hold that some Believers may not lawfully and warrantably ordain
Officers, in a Church that has none in it, would necessarily and unavoidably
infer, Ordination to be in such a case unattainable; therefore it is contrary
to sound Doctrine, and not to be asserted. For the Antecedent, they say, There
are no Officers on earth, authorized or appointed by Christ, to Ordain (in case
a Church has no Officers in it) any more than Believers without Officers. In
regard, the special rules and examples left in the Gosp^l, about Ordination,
give no more warrant to Officers to ordain, in such a Church, than Believers
without them. For, either they were extraordinary Officers that ordained, or
had an extraordinary Call to ordain. There is no precept for, or example of any
ordinary Officer, acting in Ordination (out of the particular Church he is
over) upon any ordinary call, in any one text.

Ans. This Argument is built upon a false Hypothesis, That the Churches of the
Gospel are Congregational only, which I have disproved before. Were our
Churches generally conformed to the Gospel-pattern, diverse single Congregatious
being united in one complete Church, after the constitution of the Church of
Jerusalem, Corinth, Rome, the Churches of Asia, etc. this case would hardly
fall out that is mentioned. For, though the Officers of a single Congregation
might fail, yet there would still be a sufficient Presbytery left in that
Presbyterial Church, to Ordain others in their room.

But take the case as it is, these Brethren fall short of proving their
Argument; for, 1 Suppose, that all the Officers, mentioned as Ordainers in
other Churches in the New Testament, were as to their Office or Call
extraordinary: yet, how in-consequent must it needs be that therefore the
People may ordain? All the precepts and examples, hold forth the Ordainers to
be Church Officers; none of them give the least hint, of the like power in the
people, in any case; therefore, surely this power is restrained to Officers,
and denied to the people. That this work belongs to Officers, the Precepts and
Examples prove clearly; that it belongs in any one case to the People, let them
give us one precept or example. 2 The matter of the Objection, which they
pretend to answer, is a sufficient answer to them; That, the extraordinary
Officers mentioned, might act in this as ordinary Officers, and so their acting
may warrant ordinary Officers in ordaining, even in the case they mention.
Officers are appointed to Ordain, the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery
is required in Ordination, ordained Officers had it in those Primitive times
(whose practice is our pattern) though from Ministers, that belonged not in
particular to the Congregations for which they were ordained; and, will it not
hence follow, that in unpresbyterated Churches, Officers of other Churches are
to ordain Ministers? If not, (to retort these Brethrens reasoning, and use it
more consequently than they do) Ordination will be in such Churches
unattainable; for Christ, who has given expressly power for it to
Church Officers, has no where given it to the people. Their Medium, will
better serve against them, than for them. 3 It is as evident, as that they say
sometimes the contrary, that there was then ordination by ordinary Officers.
Act. 13.1, 2, 3. speaks of Ordination by ordinary Officers at Antioch, such
certainly were many there, and it is a wonder these Brethren should question
it; What, no ordinary Officers at Antioch? The Presbytery at Antioch (says the
New England platform) laid hands upon Paul and Barnabas; Platform. p. 12.
The Presbytery at Ephesus, upon Timothy an Evangelist. Ordinary Officers laid
hands upon the Officers of many Churches. Where there are no Elders, we see
not why imposition of hands may not be performed by the Elders of other
Churches. Timothy and Titus did ordain with imposition of hands, in
Unpresbytered Churches, but they laid not on hands alone, but with a
Presbytery, for so had Paul appointed them, as must be confessed, unless
(which is groundless and unreasonable) we do suppose Paul's command and
directions, to cross his own practice. See 1 Timothy 4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6. But,
say these Brethren, those Presbyteries had an Extraordinary Call, they acted
not in such Ordinations upon an ordinary call. That is easily said, but they
would have done well to have proved that their call was extraordinary. They do
not do it, they cannot do it.

It Is warrant then enough, for Ordination in Unpresbyterated Churches, by
Presbyteries, Ministers of other Churches, and against the peoples Ordination;
that Ordination, is made by the word the work of a Presbytery, and signified to
have been performed in such Churches by a Presbytery, which these Brethren
cannot prove to have had an extraordinary call to it; and that it is no where
made the work of the people, or signified to have been performed in any case by
them.

Argum. 2 In a Church that has no Officers, either some believers may ordain
without Officers, Preacher sent. p. 330. to 334.
or else Believers and Officers of other Churches, or else Officers of other
Churches only, or else there is no way laid out by Christ, for Ordination in
such a case. But Officers of other Churches only, are not appointed; let our
Brethren prove it. We have under the former Argument found, that all the Texts
that speak about Ordination, intimated, either the Officers that acted in it,
or the call to be extraordinary.

Ans. In such a case, neither may Believers alone, nor Believers and Officers
of other Churches jointly, ordain; Because, we have no example in the
New Testament, of the peoples concurring with Officers, extraordinary or
ordinary, in ordaining any, though the lowest Officer in the Church, much less
of their ordaining alone. And therefore, we st^^^ retort their argument
against them; Either Ordination in the case mentioned, must be the act of
Officers of other Churches only: or else, there is no way laid out by Christ
for ordination, in such a case. Let them prove, by Precept or Example, that it
may be the peoples act (affirmanti^ incumbit probatio) or else, they jangle to
no purpose. They tell us, they have under the former Argument found, that all
the Texts that speak about Ordination, intimate the Officers that acted in it,
or the Call, to be extraordinary; When as all that they have said, is only,
that they might be all extraordinary Teachers in Antioch, and they much
question, whether the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. were an ordinary Presbytery, and
they might be all extraordinary; and not one word to prove, that if there were
any ordinary Officers among them (and who but they think there were not) their
Call was extraordinary in this business; which, notwithstanding, was the main
thing they should have done.

They require proof, for the peculiarness of ordaining power, in Officers of
other Churches, in the case in hand. We have proved, and do prove it.
Ordination is by the Holy Ghost, committed to Church Officers, and we find them
acting in it, and no intimation that the people have any thing to do in it;
Therefore to Church Officers alone it belongs, to act in it in all cases, and
so in the case in hand.

Their harping upon the extraordinariness of the Ordainers which the
New Testament mentions, cannot enervate the argument; no not if they could
prove, that none but extraordinary Officers ordained, in the places in relation
to which Ordination is mentioned, which they can never do: for still it
remains, that it is the work of Officers, and put upon and practiced by none
else: Therefore, if Ordination be to be continued in the Church, after the
cessation of extraordinary Officers, it is the work of ordinary Officers, and
of none else.

We read of none, that administered the Lord's Supper, but Extraordinary
Officers, the Lord Jesus, and the Apostles, Act. 2. and Paul, Act. 20.11. and
the Commission given by Christ (This do,) in the institution of this Ordinance,
was given to Extraordinary Officers, even to his Apostles. But, will it hence
follow, that the Administration of this Ordinance, belongs not to ordinary
Officers, and to them only, now? Yet, by these Brethrens way of arguing, this
may be as well concluded, as what they do contend for. Their begged
supposition, that there is no Scripture-warrant for any other Presbytery, but
that only which is in a particular Congregation; and no rule, to justify a
Presbyteries putting forth any acts, as a Presbytery, toward any but the
particular members of that Congregation, where they are fixed (which is another
false hypothesis they build upon) I shall not here consider, having spoken to
it in this Treatise.

Preacher sent. p. 335.
Argum. 3 Some Believers, who are no Officers, may publicly Preach, as we have
proved; therefore, some Believers, who are no Officers, may ordain without
Officers, in a Church that has no Officers. For, Scripture does not evidence,
that Ordination is so great work as Preaching, or that it is more limited or
restrained to Officers, than preaching is,

Answ. That Believers, who are no Officers, may publicly and ordinarily
Preach, they have not proved: as Reverend Mr. Collings, his late Vindicia Min.
Ev. revind. does abundantly manifest, to which I refer them and the Reader, to
see how poorly they have acquitted themselves, under that attempt. All reformed
Churches condemn the practice of such persons, as Antiscriptural, that without
Ordination, take upon them to be Preachers, in a constituted Church; allowing
them to Preach, only for Probation, in order to Ordination desired by them. As
for their Argument, and the Reason of it, they are very wild. For, were it
granted, that Believers that are no Officers, might ordinarily Preach, yet they
themselves will grant, they preach not as Officers. But Ordination they cannot
find in Scripture (neither do they say they do) committed to, or performed by
any, but Officers; Therefore, it is an act of Office, and so, it no way
follows, that if Believers may preach (as no Officers) they may also Ordain.
But (say they) Ordination, is not more limited or restrained to Officers, than
Preaching. Well, but what Preaching mean they? Extraordinary, occasional,
probational preaching, is not so much limited or restrained to Officers, as
Ordination; but Authoritative preaching, is as much restrained to them as
Ordination, and Ordination as that. But it is not (say they) so great a work as
Preaching; therefore, if believers may Preach, they may Ordain. Alas! is the
Preaching the Scripture magnifies the preaching of private Believers, or of
Officers? certainly their Argument, and their Reason speak not ad idem.

The Scripture magnifies an authoritative Preaching of the Gospel, by
Church Officers above other acts; These Brethren, speak of the preaching of
gifted Brethren out of Office, which is not authoritative; and then tell us
they may Ordain, because they may Preach, which is the greater work. How
unhandsome is this arguing for men of parts? And if unordained gifted Brethrens
preaching be that great work, which the Scripture magnifies, above other
Ministerial acts: may they not at well say, such may administer the Sacraments?
every whit as well.

Argum. 4 Some Believers may with Christ's allowance act in other public
special Church-works, and such, as that there can be no special reason given,
against their ordaining, more than against their doing those other works.
Therefore in a Church that has no Officers they may ordain. Act. 15.2, 22, 23.
and 2 Cor. 8.18, 19, 23.

Answ. If their proposition were true, yet they could gain nothing by it; for
it is Reason enough against private Believers Ordaining, that the Holy Ghost
has expressly put this work upon Officers, and no where upon private Believers.
But, they are far from proving what they say. Act. 15.2. speaks in all
probability, of the Officers of the Church at Antioch only; read 1, 2, 3.
verses. They that determined to send, were those between whom there was no
small dissension and disputation. The certain other of them, are some of those
Teachers sent with Paul and Barnabas; and they are all distinguished from the
Church, as Officers from the people. That they were all Teachers, the 32. verse
also evinceth. But, if the Church of Believers, had chosen and sent these their
Officers, for this work; will it follow hence, they might put men into Office?
Apage. That there were any private Brethren, in the number of the chosen and
sent here, let them prove; they cannot.

The 22. and 23. verses, whence they say, that the brethren acted in the Synod,
and therefore Believers may act in ordination (unless we will say, that men
may act in making Decrees, in a Synod, that may not ordain) give them no
sufficient ground thus to speak, and are much mistaken by them, as by what has
been said, Sect. 5. of this Treatise may appear. The whole Church, may mean
that Synodical Church. The Brethren are mentioned, to signify their consent to
what was decreed; Yet it cannot be proved, that private Brethren, much less
that the whole Church of Jerusalem, were present at the Synod. (...) ( then,
verse. 22) can be no way necessitated to signify, immediately upon the
conclusion of James his speech; no more than [so when they were dismissed]
verse. 30. signifies that the Messengers from Antioch, went away that night. The
Decrees might be written out, and the consent of the Church of private
Brethren might be had, in due time and place; though not at that particular
season. And, though the private Brethren are mentioned, as consenting to the
Decrees; yet, as it inferres not that there was a necessity of their consent:
So does it not at all prove, that they concurred in making the Decrees, for
then, they had been their Decrees. But, as they are not said to come together
to consider of this matter, but only the Apostles and Elders, verse. 6. (though
it is possible some of them might be there, to hear how it was considered of)
So, the Decrees are not called their Decrees, but expressly the Deerees ordained
of the Apostles and Elders, Act. 16.4.

That the Brethren are taken into the inscription of the Letter, is far from
proving, that they concurred in making the Decrees, or had any joint power,
with the Apostles and Elders, in imposing them; Because, it is frequent, for
the Epistles of the New Testament, to take into their inscriptions, for
Salutation, and by way of consent to what is written, those who cannot be
reputed, to have had joint power with the Writer of them; and of whom, all that
is spoken, even without limitation, cannot be affirmed, etc. as Gal. 1.2. and
8. and other places.

These Brethren, therefore, are too too weakly confident, in saying, Either our
Brethren must say, that some Believers may ordain; or else, That men may act in
making decrees in a Synod, that may not ordain: It is denied them, that private
Believers may act in making Decrees in a Synod, and that they did it in that
Synod; and they have not proved, nor will ever be able to prove it.

That other place, 2 Cor. 8.18, 19, 23. helps them not at all neither. For, it
does not appear, that these messengers were any of them private Believers; nor
that they were chosen and sent by private Believers; and if they had, what can
they infer from hence for private Brethrens ordaining? Nothing certainly by all
their Logic. Messengers are chosen by the Churches, to carry their
contribution to necessitous Brethren, Therefere, they may depute private
Believers (to whom Christ never gave power for it) to ordain Ministers. Who
sees not the weakness of this consequence? is there any equality, or analogy
between these acts?

Arg. 5. Those that give the essence of the Call to Office, Preacher sent. p.
337.
may also give the adjunct. But some Believers without Officers, do give the
essence of the call to Office; For Election is that which gives the essence to
the outward call to Office, and that belongs to a Church (of believers
without Officers) Ergo, they may give the adjunct, Ordination.

Answ. This is another false Hypothesis of theirs, and a main cause of their
many mistakes, that Election gives the essence of the call to Office, nay, the
whole essence of it, p. 242. and that Ordination is but an adjunct.

But, because this point is largely discussed, between the Reverend Authors of
Jus. Div. Min. and them; I shall say the less to it.

1 If Election did give the Essence of the Call to Office, and Ordination were
but an adjunct; yet it follows not, that Private believers may ordain. Because,
whatever ordination be, Christ has made it the work of Officers, and no where
of the People, as has been said. Their reasonings will do them no good,
without a Precept, or Example.

2 If Election did give the whole essence of the Call to Office, yet, it
follows not that the Peoples Election alone does do it. Surely, Ministers have
an electing Power also. When Titus is appointed to ordain, to constitute Elders
in every City, he is charged to look, that they be such, as were able to
convince gainsayers, Tit. 1.5, 9. and that ordinarily, private Believers, yea,
Churches of private believers, are not sufficient to judge of, nor any where
appointed Judges of it. If then, the Ministers, who are the proper Judges of
this, do not approve and choose as such persons, those whom the People choose;
the peoples choice has no validity in it, and so does not constitute them
Ministers. In vain should Paul tell Titus, what abilities Elders should be
found by him to have, in order to his constituting them in every City; if the
people might choose men, whom he judged unable, and their election stand valid.

3 If Election did give the essence of the Call to the Office of Eldership, yet
these Brethren cannot prove from Scripture, that it belongs to private
Believers, as giving such a Call. No Scripture, that I know of, gives power to
people, to choose their Elders, so as to give them thereby a Call to Office.
They may choose them in order to the exercise of their Ministerial Office among
them; but, do not by that choice, confer the Ministerial Office upon them; no
nor empower them, to exercise that office among them. The Scriptures commonly
urged for it, prove no such thing. For which see Sect. 7. of this book, about
the the end. That Ministers have power to choose and set Elders in the Churches,
that mentioned place in Titus proves. That People have such an electing power,
no Scripture proves. There is some show, of their power to choose Deacons, but
not Elders; and that choice, Act. 6. does not appear to have constituted them
such. Besides, there is a great deal of difference between choosing those who
are to look to the goods of the Church, and those who are to watch over the
souls of the Church, and to rule them in the Lord. The Deacons are the Churches
Servants, but Elders their Rulers.

4 That Ordination gives the essence of the Call to Offfice, the Authors they
answer have proved; and will, I suppose, vindicate their proofs from what they
have said against them, if they shall find it to be tanti. The very first of
them, from the New Testament, is sufficient to conclude this, which is
concerning Deacons, an Office inferior to Eldership, Act. 6.3. Look ye out
among you (say the Apostles) seven men, whom we may appoint over this
business. They cannot be deemed to have had the Essence of the call to
Office, till they were appointed to it; the looking of them out, did not
appoint them to it; the setting them before the Apostles, did not appoint them
to it, for it is whom we (not you) may appoint. Appointed to it they were then,
by the Apostles laying of hands on them with prayer. Therefore, the Apostles
Ordaining them, with prayer and imposition of hands, gave them the essence of
the call to office; and so Ordination gives the essence of the call to office,
and is not an adjunct. This Argument then, is far from proving that people
may ordain.

Arg. 6. If Ordination consists in, Preacher sent, p. 338, etc.
or be made up of such acts only, as Believers may undoubtedly perform, and
these acts be not limited in their use, upon this occasion, to Officers only;
then, in a Church which has no Officers, some believers may lawfully and
warrantably ordain without Officers. But, Ordination consists, etc. Ergo. The
minor they endeavor to prove, by saying, that, The three things belonging to
Ordination on the part of the Ordainers, fasting, prayer, imposition of hands,
may be all performed by Believers.

Ans. The minor is exceeding weak. That private believers may join with the
Ordainers, in fasting and prayer, none deny, but what is that to the purpose?
That Ordination consists in prayer (as they say) we deny, and they can never
prove it. It consists in mission, appointing, setting apart; which, Scripture
precepts, and examples, teach us do belong to Officers, and no where hints to
belong to the People. That private believers may lay on hands on Officers in
Ordination, no Scripture proves; Numb. 8.10. is far from it; for, 1. Nothing
can be certainly concluded from Mosaical Ceremonies, for practices under the
New Testament, unless they be there opened, and the practices there confirmed,
by precept or example; and this might be answer enough. 2. They are told, that
those of the People who laid on hands, had a command to do it (their talking
of mediate and immediate is to little purpose) but there is no such command,
express, or included in the New Testament; And will they say, from that
command, that there is now a necessity of the peoples laying on hands in
Ordination? They must say it if they will make use of this text their way; and
then it will follow, there have been none rightly ordained for one thousand six
hundred years since Christ. 3. It is clear from this eighth of Numbers, by
reading the following verses, that the Levites being taken instead of the
firstborn, which were Gods by his appointment, verse. 16, 17, 18. the people,
whoever of them they were, did by this Ceremony only declare, that they closed
with the Lords appointment, and desired the Levites might according to it, be
accepted and taken in the room of the first born; and therefore, they are
called, an offering of the children of Israel, verse. 11. they offered them by
Gods appointment to the Lord, instead of the firstborn, and the laying on of
hands was a sign thereof. After this, sacrifices being offered for them, and
they offered to the Lord by Aaron and his sons, verse. 12, 13. they were to
enter upon their Office, verse. 14, 15. Now, what analogy is there, between the
Peoples offering of the Levites, with imposition of hands, upon such a special
reason and account, and but in order to their being constituted Officers, and
admitted to the service of the Tabernacle, which they were afterward by Aaron
and his Sons: and the ordaining of Ministers, with impositions of hands by the
people, and that without Officers, now under the New Testament, where we have
clearly, institution, and example, to declare it to be the Ministers work?

They proceed to say; None of the texts, which speak of Ordination, limit it to
Officers only. Let our brethren prove any such limitation, else private
believers may warrantably ordain.

What Readers, did these Brethren think, their Book would meet with, to urge
this reasoning, again and again, as an argument for popular Ordination? They
might have considered, how easy the proof is. Either it is limited to Officers
only, or committed to others as well as them; But it is not committed to
others; therefore it is limited to Officers only. Let them show, by
Scripture-precept, or example, out of the New Testament, that it is committed
to others; else, private believers Ordaining, must needs remain unwarrantable.
Let them show private Believers warrant, as Ministers can theirs. We prove it
is committed to Officers, they cannot prove it is committed to others; does it
not then follow that it is limited to Officers only. May they not by their way
of reasoning, as well say that Magistrates, as such, may ordain Ministers,
because they are not by name excluded? and so screw Erastus his way one pin
higher, than ever he durst bring it to? Nay, may they not, by this reasoning,
argue that private believers may administer the Sacraments, since no place of
Scripture does express the administration of them to be limited to Officers, by
excluding the people from it?

These Brethrens Arguments, then, are not at all conclusive for their purpose.
The Holy Ghost has committed Ordination to Ministers, and no where to the
people; for them therefore to act in it, is a gross and very sinful usurpation.

Hence also it will follow, that people cannot, without sin, own unordained
persons, or such as are ordained only by the People, as Ministers of Jesus
Christ. As these may be justly charged, to run before they are sent, as those
did, Jerem. 23.21. so those may be charged justly, as the Israelites about
their Kings, Hos. 8.4. to set up Pastors but not by him, and Ministers but he
knew not (approved not) of it.

Therefore, let such supposed Ministers, be humbled for their rash intrusion,
and seek for Ordination at the hands of Gospel Ministers; And People, who have
such Pastors, urge them to it, and upon their refusal and neglect of it, let
them know, that they cannot own them as Ministers of Christ.

SECT. XIII. Containing the Author's humble supplication to those in Authority,
for Reformation.
SInce, notwithstanding the Criminations of the Accuser, whom this Book
answers; and the several charges from others; our Churches remain true
Churches of Christ, and need not new making, but reforming; and our Ministry a
true Ministry; and that it appears, that such only are lawful Ministers of
Jesus Christ, and Ambassadors for him (among us who have a constituted
Church,) as have been ordained by a Presbytery of preaching Elders: My humble
request to the Magistrates of our Land, is,

1 That they would improve to their utmost, the power put into their hands, by
the King of the Church Jesus Christ, for Reformation in our Churches; by
stirring up, and enjoining Ministers, to lay out themselves more fully, for the
instructing, admonishing, and reforming, of the flocks committed to them; and
people, to receive, yield, and submit, unto their Ministerial labors, and
authority, in order to the due use of all the Ordinances of Christ, and such a
conversation as becomes the Gospel. And that therefore, they would be
pleased, to countenance, and enjoin, the n^cessary works of Catechizing, and
private instruction; and, by their authority, to strengthen the hands of
Christ's Ministers, in their keeping the Ordinances of Christ, and particularly
that of his Supper, from profanation.

2 That they would take care, that every Congregation, so far as may be,
stand furnished with a Minister of the Gospel, rightly qualified, and invested
into office, by Ordination, received from Ministers of the Gospel, according to
Christ's institution. Jehosaphat, sent none with his Princes, to teach the
People the Law of God, but Levites, and Priests, persons regularly invested
with office, 2 Chronicles. 17.8, 9. The Churches of God, in Primitive times, in
after ages, at this day, in Scotland, France, Sweden, Denmark, Helvetia,
Germany, the Netherlands, New England, all the Presbyterian Churches in
England, yea of Congregational Churches almost all, do with one consent
affirm, that authoritative preaching of the Word, and dispensing of the
Sacraments, belong only to a lawfully Ordained Ministry. I beseech our Rulers,
in the bowels of Christ, that effectual care be taken, that all our Ministers
may be such; that countenance, public places, and public maintenance, be
afforded only to such. How should we expect our comforts should be dear to
God, if we are not zealous for that, which so nearly concerns his glory?

3 That they would be pleased, effectually to suppress, to their power, all
Blasphemies, Heresies, and Anti-fundamental Errors; that they may not be
written, taught, vented, promoted, to the prejudice of the Truth, trouble of
the Church, and endangering the immortal Souls of people; and that men may not
have liberty to defame, and every Blatero to rail at, and charge with
Antichristianism, the Churches and ways of God, which Protestants have
generally owned, and sealed their testimony unto, with the blood of multitudes
of Martyrs.

Then would their light break forth as the morning, and the glory of the Lord
would be their rereward.

Let timid spirits cry out of Lions in the way, and fear, that if there be an
owning of through Reformation, erroneous and loose persons will be
discontented, and ready to join with foreign enemies, to disturb the public
peace, and procure the ruin of Church and State. But, let Magistrates, who are
the Ministers of God, and bear his Name, zealously go through with the work of
the Lord, and expect confidently protection, and a blessing from him in it;
setting before them that excellent pattern, Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. whose
care, and zeal for Reformation, was remarkably owned, and rewarded by God; for,
He stablished the Kingdom in his hand, all Judah brought him presents, and the
Philistines and Arabians tribute, he had riches and honor in abundance, and
the fear of the Lord fell upon the Kingdoms of the Lands, that were round about
Judah, so that they made no war against Jehosaphat. Thus will the Lord
reward, Rulers that are zealous for his honor, and against whatsoever strikes
at it; And our Supreme Magistrate, and Chief Rulers, may, in the discharge of
this work, look for like success.

SECT. XIV. Of Mr. P's conclusion, abusing that of the Lord Du Plessis his Book.
I Shall conclude all, with that noble Speech, P. 95, 96.
of that noble Lord Du Plessis. May we not lawfully say with the Prophet, We
would have cured Babel, but she would not be cured? forsake her, and let us go
every one to his own Country, etc.

It is no small aggravation of this man's sin, in renouncing Protestant
Churches, and declaiming against them as Antichristian; that, he does so grossly
abuse, in many places of his Pamphlet, the exhortations, and expressions of
their Writers, so as to outstrip therein in impudence, the Papists themselves.
And yet, he is so insensible of the evil of this miscarriage, that he dares,
to conclude his Treatise with it; (for though he marks but eight lines as Du
Plessis his words; his two last pages, from the beginning of the words now
mentioned, to the end of his Book, are verbatim, the translated conclusion of
Du Plessis his Book.) Now, how highly unworthy this carriage of his is,
appears, in that, 1. He smooths, and speaks honorably, of this Lord (whom the
very drift of his Book casts disgrace upon, he being a main assertor and
defender of the Protestant Church State) calling his Speech, that noble Speech,
of that noble Lord. Wherein, he is exceeding like those Pharisees, against
whom Christ pronounces a woe, Mat. 23.29. 2. He grossly wrests his exhortation,
which is to separation from Rome; in pressing it, for separation from
Protestant Churches, which never came into this Lords heart. 3. He shamefully
abuses his exhortation, which is to close with, and get, to that holy
Mountain, the little Zoar, Gods Church, how small and contemptible soever in
the eyes of the world (by which he meant Protestant Churches) in managing it,
for joining with separate Congregational Churches, as distinct, and separating
from those Protestant Churches as Antichristian; and setting up a Democratical
Government, contrary to theirs; which Du Plessis would have abhorred the very
thought of. If he does not (as he says, p. 95.) scornfully upbraid any,
explicitly; yet, surely, he does implicitly upbraid this Lord, and all
Protestant Churches, with owning an Antichristian Church State; and withal
foulely abuses their admonitions to separate from Rome, in urging them for
separation from them; as if they had condemned their own standing, which they
are sufficiently known to have thoroughly asserted as Christian.

The Lord give Mr. P. repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth; and
deliver him, and all others of his mind, from their deluding apprehensions, and
sinful separation. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold and printed for Andrew Kembe, at his Shop at
St. Margarets Hill in Southwark.
DOctor Williams right way to the best Religion, wherein at large is explained
the principal head of the Gospel. fol. Mr. Elton, on 7, 8, 9. Romans, fol. Mr.
Paul Baynes on the Ephesians, fol. A view of holy Scripture by Mr. Broughton,
fol. Ancient Funeral Monuments within the united Monarchy of Great Britain,
Ireland, and the Islands adjacent, their Founders, and what eminent Persons
have been interred. Paraeus upon all the Revelations, fol. Luther on the
Galathians, and upon the Psalms of Degrees. The Gospel Covenant, or the
Covenant of Grace opened, by Peter Buckly, sometimes Fellow of Christ's College
in Cambridge. Gods holy mind in ten Words, or ten Commands, which he himself
uttered and taught his Disciples, by Questions and Answers, by the late learned
and faithful Preacher Mr. Elton, late Pastor of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondsy,
near London, 4o Arraignment of Error, by Doct. Samuel Bolton, late Master of
Christ's College in Cambridge. Bounds of Christian Freedom. The Exposition of
the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with the other three parts, 4o All Mr.
Henry Smiths Sermons gathered into one Volume, with his Life, and Picture. Mr.
Dod on the Commandments, 4o Mr. Calamies Sermons, 4o Military Discipline, or
the Young-mans Artillery, wherein is shown the posture both of Musket and Pike,
By Lieutenant Colonel Barriffe. The Art of Dialing, or Court of Arts, by S. M.
Mr. Slater on the fourth of the Romans, 4o Also on the book of Malachie.
Dariotts Judgment of the Stars, containing the whole Art of Astrology.
Hudsons Vindication of the Church Catholic visible, and the priority thereof,
in regard of particular Churches. Also an Addition, or Postscript to the Church
Catholic visible. Mr. Cradicots Sermon preached at the Spittle, 4o The Guard
to the Tree of Life, by Dr. Samuel Belton, late Master of Christ's College in
Cambridge.
Octavoes.
Mr. Goodwin on the Sacrament. On Family Duties. On the Sabbath. Mr. Ford of
the singing of Psalms. Bakers Arethmetick. Mr. Tippin of Eternity. Dr. Sibbs on
Canticles. Dr. Tailor, on Circumspect Walking. Amesius upon the whole Book of
Psalms, and the two Epistles of Peter. 8o. Francis Spira.
School-Books.
Farnabies Phrases. Farnabie on Seneca. Farnabie on Juvenal and Persius.
Farnabie on Martial. Farnabies Epigrams, Greek and Latin. Dux Grammaticus, by
Mr. Clark. Macropedius de conscribendis Epistolis. Vigerius Idiotism. Graecae
Linguae.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 18. r. him, p. 83. l. 18. for three r. there, p. 85 l. 33. for if
r. of, p. 102. l. 13. for scrupulo r. scrupulous, l. 39. for person r. person.


