A CHARITABLE CHVRCH WARDEN.

OR, An Hypocrite Anatomized.

Set forth in a Discourse between two Churchwardens, one of them being an
honest man, and that is a wonder.

Wherein is discovered the manifold abuses and impious Actions of many
Officers in this City, with the oppression of the poores Box, frequently used
by many Churchwardens, especially by him which is here mentioned.

Very pleasant and delectable, and very true i will assure you, as Master
Coniwooll the Churchwarden can witnesss.

Written by Thomas tell-troth, and dedicated to all those that are well-willers
to virtue, and despisers of vice.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS. 1641.

The Charitable Churchwardens,
Mr. Coney-woole, and Mr. True-man. True-man. WEll met Mr. Coniwooll? whether
away so fast this melancholy morning.


Con. Troth neighbor, J am going to get a protection, or a Justices warrant.


True. What Is the matter man?


Con. J^e tell you Neighbor, you know that last winter coals were extreme
dear, and our Parishoners being charitably disposed laid in thirty chaldron of
coals at their own charge for the relief of the poor, and because J could
get no sellering so convenient for my own benifit J laid them in my own, and
alack you know we poor Churchwardens take all and pay all, we bear all the
burden of the Parish upon our backs, therefore J thought best now while J had
the staff in my own hand, to make use of time, and get something by my place,
and yet as J am an honest man J sold the poor folks them at a reasonable rate,
they gave me but sixteene-pence a bushel.


True. What did they cost you?


Con. Why truly Neighbor they cost me (as I am an honest man seven pence a
bushel, J got but poor 9. pence in a bushel.


True. was not that enough Neighbor?


Con. On my honesty neighbor 'twas very reasonable, and yet these beggarly
Rogues are not content, but abuse me, and throw dirt upon my hats, nay the
dagletaile water bearers threaten to scratch my eyes out, nay my seven stars
are so imbrodered with kennell-durt, that they appear like so many broken
Citizens muffled in black cloaks to hide them from the phangs of Tripes and
his griping associates and long nayl'd Griffins, wherefore J intend to go; to a
Justice that promised me not (Long) ago to stand my friend and bind them all
to the peace.


True. Believe him not, he durst not do it, he dares not take your part in so
unjust a cause.


Con. Is it not just that every one should live by his calling, am not I called
to be a Churchwarden, and when did your ever know but that the Churchwarde^
shared with the poor, shall a man have a place and shall he not make a benefit
of it.


True. But Neighbor such benifit will turn to loss in the end, the curses of
the poor are like killing plagues theirs no resisting of them.


Con. Tut, tut, tell not me of their curses, what care I if they starve so that
I have enough, what care I if they sit and blow their fingers for want of fire,
so I have coals, yet if they will give me my price I care not if I trust any
poor man for half a bushel, provided that they leave me a sufficient pawn,
the times are dangerous, and I am loath to be a looser by my love.


True. Well Brother, J am sorry to hear your resolution, but pray tell me when
you were overseer for the poor, how did you order your sums of money that were
gathered.


Con. By rates, and that which was given on Communion days, then Brother are
you to learn that, at these years, i will tell you every inf^rior Office from
the under Beadle to the Doctor of the Parish is perfect in that quaint mystery.


True. Pray relate it.


Con. As for moneys gathered by rates, that we for the more gloss to color
our proceeding, distribute justly to the poor according to their necessities,
because they partly know to what value the rates amount, only now and then we
share a crown or an Angel, for expenses spent in our Circuits, though perhaps
we spend not above six pence, alas Brother you know the labourer is worthy of
his hire.


True. But for the other moneys which is gathered on Communion days.


Con. That is equally shared amongst the poor Officers, alas; Sack must be had
in the morning to make us speak clear and cry, Pray remember the Poor,
heartily, and then at noone a cup of burned wine to warm us after we have
stood an hour in the cold, alas Brother, our places are chargeable, and
therefore we had need have some co^mings in, should the poor have all and we
none, they would be rich, and then we should be poor Churchwardens indeed.


True. J have often wondered indeed, that men have been so ambitious to get
Offices, which J conceived could not choose but be very expensive and
laborious, but never knew till now what the reason was, I had thought it had
bin a charitable disposition that induc't them to take upon them so troublesome
a Stewardship.


Con. No no brother you are deceived, it is no such matter, it is ambition to
have our wives pleased, who are never content though we do as much as possible
we can our selves, and wink at their doings abroad, yet if they be not
exalted as high as their Husbands crests, they never leave pouting, and perhaps
scolding too at their Husbands want of sufficiency (of wit J mean)


True. Speak you by experience Master Coniwooll, was your wife guilty that way.


Con. O abhominably, she was never quiet till she had the title of Mrs.
Churchwardon, that she might take the upper hand of her betters, and sit in the
chief places at Gossipings and Feasts, then flew my stock for this taffata
Petty-coate, and that lac't Gorget, that I protest to you Neighbor as I am an
honest man, had not the poores box helped me and lent me money a matter of five
and twenty times in one year, J had been as poor as Job, and as low a Rascal
as ever lay under a Hedge.


True. It seems neighbor the poores box has bin a true friend to you, that
has furnished you upon all occasions.


Con. J protest to you in sincerity, it has been an indifferent friend, but I
have had many strings to my Bow. For I had the fortune to be made Executor to a
good Gentleman, he left me a brace of thousand pounds, Heaven rest his soul,
but J thank my wit J increast it, for every Legacy that he gave, I detained in
my hands some twelve months, putting them off with fair promises, and that I
could not get in debts, then after J had made use of the money a matter of a
twelve month, I paid them their moneys all in farthings a crown sealed up
together, and out of every crown I gelded a shilling.


True. But would they take them, were they content with farthings.


Con. Content or not, it is all one to me if they would take and give me a
discharge they might, if not they should not get a cross, tush, I knew them
poor, and should they go to Law i would make their Legacies serve to fee some
clubfisted Lawyer, and hold them play with their own moneys.


True. But do not you think of death, your ill-got goods will never thrive,
besides do not you fear to boast these actions, your Parishioners by your
own words may overthrow you, and force you to make a restitution.


Con. J let them, alas they dare not, they are as deep themselves, besides the
Masters of our Parish you know, are of my profession and J can plague them, J
know they do not love me, but they dare not displease or tax my actions,
because themselves are guilty of the same.


True. Pray sir relate, how you can curb them, and keep them so in Awe.


Con. J shall sir, J have a Pattent lately granted, me, to buy, ingrosse, and
sell all sorts of Coniwooll which make our Castors, nor can they buy a hand
full in the City but what they fetch from me, at such a rate as J shall please
to afford to sell them at, and should they mutter at my equal share, or weeks
allowance from the Poore-mans box, i would so torment them with my Coniwooll,
there should not be a Castor in the Kingdom but what my shop should utter.


True. Believe me a rare Project.


Con. A Project, the Abel-Alderman was but an Ass to me, J have got more by my
Pattent in one month, then ever he shall do as long as he lives, although he
should broach his own Hogshead, and Kilverts to boot, tush there is never a
state informer of them all that J fear, i will live secure and merrily, and
brother be ruled by me, you are but newly come to your place, but if you will
come to my house, I will give you such directions, as J warrant, you although
the poor curse you, the curse of poverty shall never fall upon you.


True. Well neighbor, J will come and see you.


Con. You shall be kindly welcome, I must away to find my Justice, I fear J
have stayed to (Long) and then those beggarly Rogues will escape his powdering
tub, farewell neighbor, farewell.


True. Ill shall he fare, that takes thy council, had J not believed it; well
my fair Haberdasher, it shall go hard but i will spoil your proceeding, and be
a means to right the poor, which in this City suffers under the tyranie of
such irreligious Officers, but first i will go and deliver a Copy of these
abuses to the higher Powers, and I will come a witness against this gryping
Haberdasher, It Is not his lease for a long life shall secure him, if I
prevail, and that the poor obtain what I desire.


In stead of curses, I shall have their prayer,
My cause is just then why should I despair,
Poor folks pray for me, for till death i will stand,
The best Churchwarden, in this English Land.
FINIS,

