His Majesty's Answer to a Message sent to him by the House of Commons, at
York, March 19. 1641.

ALSO Two Remarkable Letters from IRELAND Sent over by Robert Pickering,
Secretary unto Sir Simon Harcourt, March, 17. 1641.

The first being the Copy of a Letter written by the Earl of Osmond one of the
Commanders of the Rebels, unto the Earl of Delvin, wherein he declares the
great distress they are in for want of Ammunition and other Provision, and
also frustrate of the relief they hoped for out of Flanders.

Which Letter and Bearer was intercepted by the night Scouts of Sir Simon
Harcourt.

The second, the Copy of the Popes Bull sent unto the Irish Rebels, found in
the Trunk of Macke Orobie, his Legate, who was taken prisoner in the Lord
Mountgarrets Quarter.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

The Copy of a Letter written by the Earl of Osmond a Commander of the
Rebels, unto the Earl of Delvia, that lay at the Head of Hoare.
COUSEN;
I Wish J could salute you with better News, or you served me with better
Council, when it would have stood me in stead; J give us all for undone, only
this choice as yet is left us, that we may choose the Sword before the Halter,
Tom Butler writes from Brussels: That the Spaniard loves us well, but himself
a great deal better: I he Governout of Flanders has made stay of the Ships in
Dunkirke, norwithstanding the means he made to his Confessor, who labored by
all Jmportunity to get the Ammunition free, if not the bottomes, but could
obtain nothing we then deal effectually with the Governor and Captain of
Dunkirke by the Solicitation of the Irish Cloister, to let them steate away as
if it were unknown to them, but neither would hear him. The Count from
Brussels had been asore him, and had laid such a strict charge upon him, that
he would listen to nothing: The King of Spain in this case, his reason is
setcht from Portugal, that none of the English may help against him. he with
holds his wonted aid to us, but the English will as certainly deceive him, when
their own turn is served and they have made an end with us: The Spaniard will
find more English in Portugal then he will be willing to bid welcome, they
hate him as cordially as us, and us the more for the Respect bore us from
Spain.

More Forces are arrived from England, 400 under the command of one Greenvill,
with 700 more, the Scots are of a certain arrived in the North also, but what
number yet J cannot learn.

It is Rumoured in Dublin, that now the Parliament in England will press a
great Army for Leicester, and that he will be here before Easter.

We are likely to be beset on all sides, and for ought I see to be devoured,
Roach is Arrived out of France, but with as little comfort, The Cardinal
gives good words, but we may justly suspect his performance.

The French King is so embarked in the Spanish Broyle, that he I fear will
little heed us, my men begin to be weary of it already, The same Philomy writes
of his, And so it will follow in others, For we are naked of Arms, And
especially destitute of powder, The taking of that provision at Eniskenning
has lost us both our Lives and Honor, Let me desire you, at your first
conveniencie, to send my Wife and Three Daughters for Nantes, or Dunkirke, And
for my part, if friends abroad regard neither the Common tie of the Catholic
Faith; Not their former promises, But only their own particulers: As we have
but too just cause to doubt they do not, J will shortly over too, leaving all
to the Arbitrament of Fortune, Rather then to see the miserable slavery of my
Nation, And utter treading down of my Country by the Barbarous morellesse
Scots, and proud insulting English; If you have any better Tidings to write,
You may Commit them to the bearer safely, Macke me Cherrie, Who by reason of
his perfect English Tongue, passes for one of that Nation; And thereby
sometime does advantage us; My Love Commend unto my Careful Countess and
Young Daughter; Thus Committing your and our affairs to the Almighty, and
protection of Saint PATRICKE.

From Dondeniell. March. 14. 1641. Charles Osmond.

The Coppie of the Popes Bull unto the Irish Rebels.
URBAN the eight, by the Divine providence, Bishop of Rome. Bishop of Bishops,
and servant of the servant of God. To all the Clergy, Peers, and people of
Jreland, his well beloved Sons in Christ, now consederate in holy League, for
the maintenance of Catholic Religion to the very peril of their blood,
greeting and Apostolical benediction.

SEeing that your unspeakeable sufferings have been now of late related unto
us, by the Provost of the Irish Nation, of late which ye have undergone for
these many Ages, not only patiently, but willingly groaning under the Egyptian
Yoke of Hetesie, more heavy then that of Pharoahs, yea and most ready to
bear it still, so that, the one thing necessary, the most unvaluable Pearl,
the better part might not he taken from you, nor the gate of Eternal
happiness after Life ended shut against you. Which when we understood, We as
our duty required, with bended Knee both of heart and body, have recommended
this your most pious intention to the Throne of grace, at the blessed Sacrifice
of the Altar, fear ye not that ever aid celestial shall be wanting to you,
who have so religiously preferred the salvation of your Souls, Christ's Spouse,
the welfare of the Church Catholque, before your lively hoods and honors,
friends, Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Children, Sons, Daughters, Yea, and then
which nothing is more dear to man, life it self, how shall the Savior of the
World pass by you disregarded, whom in his Gospel he solemnly professes to
be more dear unto him then his own Brethren shall not Christ fight for his
own Champions, will not blessed St. Peter maintain them that weigh not their
own possessions, so they may desend his, God forbid that you should ever be
destitute of assistance, who have the blessed Mother of God for their shield
and Buckler, as whom they honor, reverence, and adore, more zealously then all
the World, go on with prosperous success, behave your selves manfully, that
which ye have with transcendant piety begun, We earnestly require that with
resolved constancy ye endeavor to accomplish, strictly charging you that you
by no means ye withdraw your hand from this plough, least ye be ever after
unfit for the glorious society of heavenly trumphant Catholics, you shall not
only have the universal party of the Roman Catholic faith spectators, but
Orators and fuitors to the divine Deity in heaven but coadjutors, contributors
to their utmost power in wishes consultations, allowances both for Arms,
Victuals and other things necessary there in your Country and of this be
assured, as for us to whom the government of our Lords blessed vessel is
committed, doubt ye not but that you shall continually have us an intercessor
to the Court of heaven for you, and an advances of your success, and
enterprise there in your Kingdom, all the ways we for our Pastoral duty
shall think meetest: What remains, We by this our Legate Orobie with the
sum of Four hundred Ducats; with hearty recommendation and pastoral
affection bestow upon you our plenarie Judulgence of all your sins, and
benediction Apostolical.

Given at Rome the last of February New-stile, Anno Salutis 1642. Under the
Seal of the Fisherman, in the Nineteenth year of our Popedom.
Under written, Rancone and S. R. L. P. S.

His Majesty's Answer to a Message sent to Him by the House of Commons,
concerning Lycences granted by him to persons to go into Ireland.
HIS Majesty has seen and considered the Message presented to Him by the Lord:
Compton and Master Baynton, the 19th of March, 1641. at York; Touching such
persons as have been Licensed by His Majesty to pass into Ireland.

Though he will not insist upon what little Reason they had to suspect that
some ill-affected persons had passed into Ireland, under color of his
Majesty's License (Inferences being slender Proofs to ground belief upon) yet
he must needs avow, That for any thing that is yet Declared, He cannot see any
ground why Master Pym should so boldly affirm before both houses of
Parliament, I hat since the stop upon the Ports by both Houses against all
Irish Papists, many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels,
have been suffered to pass by his Majesty's immediate VVarant; For as yet
there is not any particular person named that is now so much as in Rebellion
(much less in the head of the Rebels) to whom his Majesty has given License.

And therefore according to his Majesty's Reply upon that Subject, His Majesty
expects, That his House of Commons publish such a Declaration, Whereby this
mistaking may be cleared, That so all the World may see his Majesty's Caution
in giving of Passes; And likewise, That his Ministers have not abused his
Majesty's trust, by any surreptitious Warrants.

And lastly, his Majesty expects, That hen^eforth there be more warine^^e used,
before such public Aspersions be laid; unless the Grounds be beforehand
better Warranted by sufficient Proofs.

FINIS.

