HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER TO The DECLARATION and VOTES of both Houses of Parliament
concerning HULL, SENT May 4. 1642.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms of Charles I

His Majesty's Answer To the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament
concerning Hull, sent May 4. 1642.
SInce Our Gracious Message of the 24. of April last to both Houses of
Parliament (demanding Justice for the high, and unheard of Affront offered unto
Us at the Gates of Hull, by Sir John Hotham) is not thought worthy of an
Answer; but that instead thereof they have thought fit by their printed Votes
of the 28. of April last, to own and avow that unparalleled Act of Sir John
Hothams, to be done in obedience to the Command of both Houses of Parliament
(though at that time he could produce no such Command) and with other
Resolutions, against Our Proceedings there, to publish a Declaration concerning
that business, as an appeal to the People, and as if their intercourse with
Us, and for Our satisfaction were now to no more purpose, though We knew this
course of theirs to be very unagreeable to the Modesty and Duty of former
times, and unwarrantable by any Precedents, but what themselves have made; yet
We are not unwilling to join issue with them in this way, and to let all the
world know, how necessary, just, and lawful all Our Proceedings have been in
this Point, and that the defense of these Proceedings, is, The defense of the
Law of the Land, Of the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and that by the
same Rule of Justice, which is now offered to Us, all the private Interest and
Title of all Our good Subjects to all their Lands and Goods are confounded and
destroyed. Master Pym himself tells you, in his Speech against the Earl of
Strafford (published by the Order of the House of Commons) The Law is the
safeguard; The Custody of all private Interests; your Honors, your Lives,
your Liberties, and Estates are all in the keeping of the Law; without this,
every man has a like right to any thing. And We would fain be answered, what
Title any Subject of Our Kingdom has to his House or Land, that We have not to
Our Town of Hull? Or what right has he to his Money, Plate, or Jewels, that We
have not to Our Magazine or Munition there? If We had ever such a Title, We
would know when We lost it? And if that Magazine and Munition (bought with Our
own Money) were ever Ours; When, and how that Property went out of Us? We very
well know the great and unlimited Power of a Parliament; but We know as well,
that it is only in that sense, as We are a part of that Parliament. Without
Us, and against Our consent, the Votes of either, or both Houses together, must
not, cannot, shall not (if We can help it, for Our Subjects sake, as well as
Our own) forbid any thing that is enjoined by the Law, or enjoin any thing that
is forbidden by the Law, but in any such alteration which may be for the Peace
and happiness of the Kingdom, We have not, shall not refuse to consent: and We
doubt not but that all Our good Subjects will easily discern in what a
miserable insecurity and confusion they must necessarily and inevitably be, if
Descents may be altered, Purchases avoided, Assurances and Conveyances
cancelled, the Sovereign Legal Authority despised and resisted by Votes or
Orders of either, or both Houses: And this We are sure is Our case at Hull; And
as it is Ours to day, by the same rule it may be theirs to morrow.

Against any desperate designs of the Papists, We have sufficiently expressed
Our zeal and intentions, and shall be as forward to adventure Our own Life and
Fortune to oppose any such Designs, as the meanest Subject in Our Kingdom.

For the Malignant Party, as the Law has not to Our knowledge defined their
condition, so has neither House presented them to Us, under such a Notion as
We may well understand whom they intend, and We shall therefore only enquire
after, and avoid the Malignant Party under the Character of persons disaffected
to the Peace and Government of the Kingdom, and such (who neglecting and
despising the Law of the Land) have given themselves other Rules to walk by,
and so dispensed with their Obedience to Authority: Of these persons (as
destructive to the Common Wealth) We shall take all possible Caution.

Why any Letters intercepted from the Lord Digby (wherein he mentions a
Retreat to a place of Safety) should hinder Us from visiting Our own Fort, and
how We have opposed any ways of Accommodation with Our Parliament, and what
ways and Overtures have been offered in any way, or like any desire of such
Accommodation, or whether Our Message of the 20. of January last (so often in
vain pressed by Us) have not sufficiently expressed Our earnest desire of it,
let all the world judge: Neither is it in the power of any persons to incline
Us to take Arms against Our Parliament, and Our good Subjects, and miserably to
imbroil this Kingdom in Civil Wars. We have given sufficient evidence to the
world how much Our Affections abhor, and Our heart bleeds at the apprehension
of a Civil War; And let God and the world judge if Our Care and Industry be
only to defend and protect The Liberty of the Subject, The Law of the
Kingdom, Our own just Rights (part of that Law) and Our Honor (much more
precious then Our Life) and if in opposition to these any Civil Wars shall
arise, upon whose Account the Blood and destruction that must follow must be
cast: God, and Our own conscience tells Us that We are clear.

For Captain Legs being sent heretofore to Hull, (though by the way, this is
the first time We ever heard that he was accused for the practice of bringing
up the Army against the Parliament, neither do We yet know that there is such a
charge against him) or for the Earl of Newcastles being sent thither by Our
Warrant and Authority, We asked a Question long ago in Our Answer to both
Houses concerning the Magazine at Hull, which We have cause to think is not
easy to be answered: Why the general rumor of the design of Papists in the
northern parts, should not be thought sufficient ground for Us to put in such a
person of Honor, Fortune, and unblemished Reputation (as the Earl of Newcastle
is known to be) into a Town and Fort of Our own, where Our own Magazine lay;
And yet the same rumor be Warrant enough to commit the same Town and Fort
without Our consent to the hands of Sir John Hotham, with such a Power as is
now too well known and understood. How Our refusal to have that Magazine
removed upon the Petition of both Houses, could give an advantage against Us to
have it taken from Us; And whether it was a refusal, all men will easily
understand who read Our Answer to that Petition, to which it has not been yet
thought fit to make any Reply.

For the Condition of those persons who presented the Petition to Us at York,
(whom that Declaration calls, Some few ill affected persons about the City of
York) to continue the Magazine at Hull, We make no doubt but that Petition will
appear to be attested both in number and weight, by persons of Honor and
Integrity, and much more conversant with the Affections of the whole County,
then most of those Petitions which have been received with so much Consent and
Approbation: And for their presumption of interposing their advice, We the more
wonder at that Exception, when such encouragement has been given, and thanks
declared to multitudes of mean, unknown People, Prentices and Porters, who have
accompanied Petitions of very strange natures.

For the manner of Our going to Hull, We have clearly set forth the same in Our
Message to both Houses of that Business; And for any intelligence given to Sir
John Hotham of an Intention to deprive him of his life; as We know there was no
such Intention in Us, having given him all possible assurance of the same at
Our being there; so we are confident no such intelligence was given; Or if it
were, it was by some villain, who had nothing but malice, or design to fright
him from his due Obedience, to warrant him. And Sir John Hotham had all the
reason to assure himself, that his life would be in much more danger by
refusing to admit his King into his own Town and Fort, then by yielding Him
that Obedience, which he owed by his Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
the Protestation, and he well knew was due and warrantable by the Laws of the
Land.

For the number of Our Attendants (though that could be no Warrant for such a
disobedience in a Subject) it is well known (as We expressed in Our Message to
both Houses, to which credit ought to have bin given) that We offered to go
into the Town with twenty Horse only; Our whole Train being unarmed: And
whofoever thinks that too great an attendance for Our Self, and Our two Sons,
have sure an Intention to bring Us to a meaner Retinue then they yet will avow.

Here is then Our Case (of which let all the world judge) We endeavored to
visit a Town and Fort of Our own, wherein Our own Magazin lay, a Subject in
Defiance of Us shuts the Gates against Us, with armed men resists, denies and
opposes Our Entrance, tells Us in plain terms, We shall not come in. We do not
pretend to understand much Law, yet in the point of Treason, We have had much
Learning taught Us this Parliament, and if the sense of the Statute 25. E. 3.
cap. 2. be not very differing from the Letter, Sir John Hothams Act was no
less then plain high Treason: And We had been contemptibly stupid, if We had
(after all those circumstances of Grace and Favor then showed him) made any
scruple to proclaim him Traitor: And whether he be so or no, if he shall
render himself, We will require no other Trial, then that which the Law has
appointed to every Subject, and which We are confident We have not (in the
least degree) in those proceedings violated, no more then We have done the
Privilege of Parliament by andeavouring in a just way to challenge Our own
unquestionable Privileges: for that in such a case, the declaring him
Traitor, being a Member of the House of Commons, without Process of Law,
should be a breach of Privilege of Parliament (of which We are sure none
extends to Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace) against the Liberty of the
Subject, or against the Law of the Land, We must have other Reasons then bare
Votes.

We would know if Sir John Hotham had (with those Forces by which he kept Us
out of Our Town of Hull) pursued Us to the gates of York (which he might as
legally have done) must We have staid from declaring him Traitor, till
process of Law might have issued against him? Will fears and jealousies
dispense with real and necessary forms, and must We when actual War is
leavied upon Us, observe forms, which the Law it self does not enjoyne? The
cause is truly stated, let all the world judge (unless the mere Sitting of a
Parliament does suspend all Laws, and We are the only Person in England
against whom Treason cannot be committed) where the fault is: And whatsoever
Course We shall be driven to for the Vindication of this Our Privilege, and
for the Recovery and maintenance of Our known and undoubted doubted Rights, We
do promise in the presence of Almighty God, and as We hope for his blessing in
Our success, that We will to the utmost of Our Powers defend and maintain the
true protestant Profession, the Law of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject,
and the just Privilege and freedom of Parliament.

For the Order of Assistance given to the Committees of both Houses, concerning
their going to Hull, We shall say no more, but that those persons named in that
Order, We presume will give no Commands, or Our good Subjects obey other, then
what are warranted by the Law (how large and unlimited soever the directions
are, or the Instructions may be) for to that rule We shall apply Our own
Actions, and by it require an account from other men. And that all Our good
Subjects may the better know their duty in matters of this nature, We wish
them carefully to peruse the Statute in the 11th year of H. 7. Chap. 1.

We conclude with Master Pyms own words: If the Prerogative of the King
overwhelm the liberty of the People, it will be turned to Tyranny; If Liberty
undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchy, And so We say into
Confusion.

FINIS.

