A COPY OF THE KINGS Message sent by the Duke of Lenox.

Also the Copy of a Petition to the KING from the Inhabitants of
Somersetshire, to come with him to the Parliament.

A Declaration by the Committee of Dorsetshire, against the Cavaliers in those
parts; declaring how six French Papists ravished a woman one after another:
She having been but three days before delivered out of Childbed.

Also, how a Gentleman at Oxford was cruelly tortured in Irons, and for what
they were so cruel toward him.

And how they would have burnt down an Alehouse at the Brill, because the
woman refused Farthing tokens; And other cruelties of the Cavaliers, manifested
to the Kingdom.

depiction of Cavalier atrocities

Publissied according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Jane Coe. 1644.

A Declaration of the vile and wicked ways of the cruel Cavaliers.
AS our cunning Enemies have still labored to involve these three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, into equal misery with Germany and other
desolate Countries; that as themselves were falling under the rod of Justice,
so we all might partake of equal calamity with them, and (if possible) hinder
the rightful proceedings in Parliament; which would otherwise make us happy,
by bringing evil actions to just censures, and therefore choose rather to bring
the whole bodies of all the Kingdoms to be destroyed, then they (though rotten
and imposthumed Members) be either cut off or lanched: Yet nevertheless these
Jesuiticall Sophisters, have still labored to mask all their bloody designs,
under the white visard and pretense of Peace, like that of France, which was
but a Preface to the ensuing massacre. I will first present you with a Petition
of the malignant Gentry and Freeholders of the County of Somerset, which
Petition was given to the King when he was at Sturmister, very fairly drawn
thus.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Gentry,
Freeholders, and others, your Majesty's loyal, and Protestant Subjects, of the
County of Sommerset.
Most humbly shows:
THat among the many miseries that the present war has brought upon them, it
has been a great comfort to them to see your pious inclination to, and
continued endeavors for settling Peace again, and had hoped that your Majesty's
gracious Message to that purpose would have produced that desired effect. But
not finding that success answerable to their expectations, and your Majesty
being now upon a march nearer toward London;

They humbly beseech your Majesty, that thoy may have liberty to wait in
person upon your Majesty, and at a nearer distance of place, become Petitioners
to the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Westminster, to embrace
your Majesty's gracious offers of peace, and put an end to the calamities of
this distracted and almost ruined nation, with due care to the preservation of
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, your Majesty's Right and honors, the
privileges of Parliament, and your subjects liberties and properties,
according to the Laws of this your Kingdom: And in case they may not obtain
so just a request, they shall hold their lives best spent in assisting your
Majesty to compass that by the sword, which by any other fair and just way
could not be effected; to which end they desire liberty to put themselves in
Arms, and as they always lived, shall rejoice to dye,

Your Majesty's most loyal and faithful Subjects.

This Petition being presented to the King, from the Cavalieres and Malignants
of the Country, was read, and the Duke of Lenox and Richmond being then by, the
King spoke thus to the Duke.

It is well known that the people of this County of Somerset are very
Heathenish and ignorant, and yet me thinks they might have had so much sense
and reason as to know that to put an end to these Calamities we now groan
under, are not by Banding with Priests Jesuits and Friars, Irish Rebels, and
Papists against the Representative body of the Kingdom, now sitting in
Parliament, who fit there to reform all the grievances of Kingdom. If we
would live in peace and see good days, we must join with the Parliament
against these Romish Jesuiticall Army, that so the Protestant Church may be
delivered from their Idolatry: and wickedness, Jesus Christ may be be
advanced unto his Throne, and the Church and state settled in heaven.

The Kings Speech to the Duke of Lenox and Richmond; in Answer to the Petition.
My Lord,
I Desire you to signify to the Petitioners, that I do well approve their
hearty and loyal affections, and accept the free offer of their service to me,
with thanks; and give them free liberty to meet and put themselves in Arms,
according to their desire, and wait upon me; and freely do give leave to them
to become Petitioners of the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at
Westminster, for composing the unhappy differences of this poor Kingdom in a
peaceable way; and shall be glad to hear the Petitioners, and all other my
loyal and well affected Subjects present with me, and be witnesses who is in
the fault, if they be not presently restored to an happy peace again. I hereby
assuring them, that I will only insert upon the preservation of the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, my own known Rights, the Privileges of
Parliament, and my Subjects liberty and property, according to the Laws of the
Kingdom; and shall endeavor to have all these settled, in a full and free
Convension of Parliament.

And because I would not have the good intentions of the petitioners
frustrated, I wish them to take care to make such propositions, as may be
necessary for their Journey, and they shall not fale of my best assistance
likewise therein. And I desire the Sherief of this County do summon the posse
thereof, or any other persons inhabitants of the same, at such time, and in
such places, as the Commissioners shall think fit, for the advancement of this
business.

This Message the Duke of Lenox and Richmond delivered to the Commissioners of
Array, who endeavored to press and forse all they could to go to join with
the King, so that the Inhabitants were feign to fly from their dwellings, and
the honest Gentlemen, and Freeholders, with what they could safely take with
them, were driven to ride into Glostershire, Dorsetshire, and other parts, and
some to come to London, to be rid of, and secure themselves, whose houses were
soundly plundered in their absence,

And who can be so blind as not see, that they seek for to destroy this, and
in this all Parliaments, secondly to spoil the Famers City of London, and with
them all the rest of Kingdom, which they call Round Heads. There usual course
being to swer they will make the Roundheads bow to a Cross.

The poor Hostess at the Brill, because she told her Bostocke Gueste the last
week that farthings would not go, and disired them to give her silver, they
kicked her up and down house, and set fire of the house, and had burnt it
down, but that by large rewards, and importunity, they permitted her neighbors
to quench it.

And an honest man a prisoner in Oxford said not long since that if he was at
London in peace, he did not doubt but through Gods blessing to be able to give
to them, who now deny him bread, and for this he was put neck and heels in
Irons three days to gether and in Iron fetters a month after.

But these are no strange things, for thus do they abuse the King himself, for
notwitstand all these protestations and shows of love, and What not to the
King, yet at the late fight at Newbery; they all fled from him, to Wallingford,
save only about 20. of his Life Guard; that the King cried out after them,
saying, Will you all leave me, they will take me prisaner, and carry me to the
Tower, and they left him in this condition, are not these pretty fellows to be
trusted by the King before his Parliement, this was a base dog trick of them,
one would think that the King should never trust them again.

And although there are many axamples more of the unworthy, yea and exceeding
barbarous examples of the Kings forces, to honest godly people where they come,
and especially by the Papists, and such as are most in esteem and trust amongst
them; yet I shall conclude with a most inhumane and beastly action done by some
of their beloved French Shouldiers in Dorcetshire, certified under the hands of
the Committee in that County, and by a Declaration from them, of which here
follows a coppie.

At the standing Committee of the County of Dorset, 24. October, 1644.
Countrymen friends and neighbors.
WHereas we are informed of many monstrous outrages in several towns and
parishes, in this County, by the French Papists of the Queens Regiment, and
others who are put among us by some ill affected Gentlemen, to assist them in
raising forces, and amongst the rest a most horred act, most execrable, and
Abominable in the sight of God and man, committed by six of those French
Troopers, who forced a woman in a most beastly manner, one after another, three
days after her delivery from childebed, to the hazard of her life, and have
also committed diverse others, Rapes, Murders, and other actions, unfit to be
named by us, in sundry places of this county, we profess to the world our
hearty hatred, and detestation of the abominable facts, and do Resolve by the
help of Almighty God, to cause justice to be executed upon the offenders, and
do hereby declare our resolutions to the uttermost of our endeavors, to drive
out of these parts those barbarous Blood-suckers, and inhumane beasts, and all
their abettors, their endeavors being to extirpate our Religion and Liberty,
and to bring us, and our posterity into perpetual bondage, and slavery, and by
these and such like instruments, to triumph over us at their pleasure, if
therefore your zeal to God, your love to Religion, and liberty, your care to
have justice executed, and your desires to enjoy your wives children, and
estates in peace, shall stir you up to join with us in this action, so much
concerning the glory of God, and good of your Country, we promise to assist
you with our lives and fortunes which we intend to demonstrate, by our present
taking the field, and whosoever shall join with us in a business of such
importance shall be furnished with Arms and other things needful for the
service. And thus in expectation of your Readiness,

we heartily remain: Your loving friends. Subscribed by Anthony Ashley Cooper,
and the rest of the Committee.

FINIS.

