THE CHARGE upon Sr Hamon l'Estrange Together with his Vindication and RECHARGE.

London, Printed in the Year, 1640.

The Charge upon Sir Hamon L'Estrange, together with his Vindication and
Recharge.
Solomon says, There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak.

I have lately understood that I have much suffered by a report thrown abroad
by some gentlemen of Norfolk (who were in Lynne during the siege thereof) of a
foul practice and combination of mine for a secret surprise and arrest of
sundry of those Gentlemen, and a meeting to that end contrived and appointed by
me to be at Swaffham in Norfolk, and I am seasonable awakened to speak for my
self, and to endeavor to wipe off this unjust and malign spatter upon my
name and reputation.

In 1643 the Town and Borough of Kings Lynne in Norfolk being fortified by
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Counsell there, and a soldiery raised by
contribution in addition to the Trained-bands, for the defense thereof, they
passed a Declaration, not to deliver the Town to any not authorized to demand
it by joint consent of King and Parliament.

Afterward the Earl of Manchester (being authorized and appointed by the
Parliament to reduce Lynne) sent a Message to the Major, and demanded entrance,
and Passage through the same, in the name of King and Parliament, but was
denied and refused.

A short time after (among sundry other Gentlemen that repaired thither) Sir
Hamon L'Estrange Knight (living within twelve miles thereof, and one who had
often tasted of the bitter cup of the times, and had advertisement of new
menaces toward him,) went thither also for safety, and within two or three
days the Town was besieged by the forces of the Earl of Manchester, during
which time Sir Hamon L'Estrange was plundered of seventeene hundred sheep, and
sundry other goods and cattle to the value of above twelve hundred pounds.

After the Town had been besieged about three weeks, it was rendered to the
Earl of Manchester, upon Articles agreed betwixt Commissioners on both parts,
whereof the sixth is as follows.

The Commissioners on the part of the Earl of Manchester do agree, that
neither the Persons, nor Estates of any of the Inhabitants, Gentlemen or
Strangers, now resident in Lynne, shall be hereafter any ways molested or
prejudiced, for any thing past or done by them, or any of them, since the Earl
of Manchester his coming into these parts.

Nneverthelesse,

Upon the ninth of December following some Inhabitants of Lynne petitioned and
obtained from the Lords and Commons and Order as follows.

Forasmuch as the Earl of Manchester in his Articles of agreement with the
Town of Kings Lynne remitted their offense in reference to himself and his
Army, but touched upon no private injuries done by the Malignants to the
well-affected; It is Ordered that such persons as did any damage to their
houses or Mills, or any other ways unto them, shall make restitution; and that
Colonel Walton ( Governor of Lynne) Mr Percivall and Mr Toll (Members of the
House of Commons) shall enquire the damages, and make reparation under pain of
sequestration ( from Colonel Walton, Mr Peircivall, and Mr Toll, of so much as
will make reparation) upon default.

This is no place, nor is it pertinent to the scope of this discourse, to
gloss or paraphrase upon the Order; but to speak to matter of fact only in
question, Sir Hamon L'Estrange (having a responsall estate (wherein he was sui
juris, and dwelling nigh Lynne) was charged by warrant from the said three
Referees to pay sundry great sums of money, which (for fear of sequestration
menaced in the said warrants) he was subdued to pay, to the sum of betwixt two
and three hundred pounds.

And before the days were accomplished for payment of more monyes upon the
warrants of the Referrees, Sir Hamon L'Estrange, and one Robert Clench Esquire,
complained by petition to the House of Commons of the violation of the Articles
of Lynne, and obtained an Order from the House of Commons the 12. of May 1645
of reference to a select Committee of the said house, to examine, state and
report the whole matter to the House.

In February following Sir Hamon L'Estrange, and Mr. Clench, being summoned by
warrant from the select Committee, attended at London, with Counsel, and two
Solicitors, and twelve witnesses, from about a hundred miles distance, by the
space of a month, to the charge of above sixty pounds, and nothing was done
therein.

Matters thus rested until that, Hamond L'Estrange, and one Mr Kirby of Lynne,
for the payment of two hundred seventy five pounds, twelve shillings and three
pence a piece, in all, five hundred fifty one pounds four shillings six pence
(within ten days next after notice) to the Major and Burgesses of Lynne, for
damages done during the siege in the demolishment of an Hospital belonging to
the said Town, or to show cause in writing to the contrary, to which Sir Hamon
sent an answer.

In August following Sir Hamon L'Estrange was charged (with nineteen others
mentioned in the warrants of the Referrees, whereof Mr. Clench was one, and the
said Mr. Kirby left out) to the payment of the said five hundred fifty one
pounds four shillings six pence, at a day prefixed, or to show cause in
writing to the contrary, to which also Sir Hamon returned answer.

And thereupon he wrote and sent letters to sundry Gentlemen named in the said
warrants, and desired of them a meeting for conference and consideration about
the said charge of five hundred fifty one pounds four shillings six pence,
but they all failed to meet at the day and place prefixed by Sir Hamon.

In October following, Sir Hamon L'Estrange, and Mr. Clench and Mr. Kirby, were
all three charged (by warrants from the Referrees, and the other eigh^eene
(secondly charged) all omitted) ^o pay an hundred eighty three pounds ^ourteene
shillings ten pence a piece, (...) all, five hundred fifty one pounds ^oure
shillings six pence, at days pre^^xed severally unto them.

Soon after Sir Hamon L'Estrange being at London his goods were sequestered in
the Country to the said sum of one hundred eighty three pounds fourteen
shillings ten pence; for the payment whereof bond was entered to the Collectors,
who also took nine pounds for fees.

The said bond being after put in suite contrary to the expectation of Sir
Hamon L'Estrange by reason of a supersedas of the said Sequestration obtained
from Colonel Walton (and Mr* Corbet formerly added in supply o^ Mr. Percivall
deceased) and havin^ stayed the said action (commenced a^ the Common Law, upon
the default o^ payment) by Injunction out of the Chancery) in April 1647, Sir
Hamo^ L'Estrange repaired to Lynne to confer with Mr. Toll about the said
suit^ and other suites which he understoo^ were menaced toward him and other
by some inhabitants of Lynne, who apprehended encouragement from the success
which late before Mr. Toll obtained at Bury Assizes upon the trya^^ of two
Actions of Imprisonment of himself and his wife at Lynne at the time of the
siege there, wherein he recovered one hundred pounds for himself, and one
hundred and fifty pounds for his wife, against Sir Hamon L'Estrange, Thomas
Dereham, and Robert Jegon Esquires.

Mr. Toll declared, upon conference with Sir Hamon L'Estrange, that forasmuch
as he was fully satisfied that the rest of the Gentlemen (who were in Lyn
during the siege, and adhered to the defense thereof, and advised and abetted
to the pulling down of the said Hospital, and other damages) were alike
liable to the charge of the reparation, he would therefore endeavor that they
might ease one another, by a more general contribution, and was persuaded that
if Sir Hamon L'Estrange would write unto the Gentlemen, and request a meeting
for consideration thereupon, the Gentlemen would readily meet and fairly
comply: Sir Hamon L'Estrange utterly disliked the motion, despairing of any
good event, by reason of his former endeavors, and the repulse o^ neglect
which he received; As also because the other parties had most o^ them hitherto
enjoyed the quiet o^ their person and purse, and hoped an^ aimed at the
continuance of their calm condition; Sir Hamon L'Estrang^ further alleging
the great toil, trouble and charge, of writing and sending so many several
letters to so many several, remote, and scattered parts o^ the Gentlemen's
abode.

Nevertheless the pressing advice and persuasion of Mr. Toll prevailed a^
length with Sir Hamon L'Estrange to make trial and assay, and forthwith he
drew the form of a letter (which he thought fittest to be one and the same to
all) and showed the same to Mr. Toll, who approved thereof, and was as
follows.

Sir,
I suppose that before this time you have understood of the late verdicts
passed against Mr. Dereham, Mr. Jegon and my self at the last Assizes at Bury,
at the suit of Mr. Toll and his wife, and Mistress Percivall, and how the Judges
there declared their opinions, that all persons commanding, and all other
(present or absent) consenting or abetting to any damages done at Lynne during
the siege, are by law equally liable to reparation, which may justly awaken us
to consider the danger and charge that will certainly befall every one of us
upon further questions and suit, which moves me to advise and desire, that in
such joint concernment we may meet and consult how to reduce the state of our
business to the soonest and safest period for all of us in general, otherwise
for my particular, (who have hitherto sustained and endured the whole storm of
these troubles with very small assistance, to the great to isle of my person,
and charge of my purse) I shall study and endeavor to procure mine own peace
at the best terms I may for my self.

I have presumed to nominate and appoint Thursday the Fifteenth of this Month
in the afternoon for the time and Swaffham for the place of our meeting.

Apr. the 6. 1647. Sir, Your commandable, Hamon L'Estrange


Soon after Sir Hamon L'Estrang^ wrote letters to sixteen Gentlemen t^ the
tenor aforesaid, from some he received answer by writing, from other^ by
message, and word of mouth, bu^ all such as gave him cause to despair o^ the
coming or meeting of any o^ them.

Nevertheless at the day appointed Sir Hamon L'Estrange travailed to the place
(which was about eighteen mile^ from his own house) and there understood of
one Gentleman who had bee^ there and was departed, R. P.
and one only met there and stayed of the many Gentlemen summoned and
concerned.

Sir Hamon signified to him the cause of his desires of a meeting, and after
some discourse passed interchangeably, Sr Hamon L'Estrange offered his sense
and opinion, that if the heat and earnestness of Mr. Toll (who was then Mayor
of Linne, and the most powerful man thereof, both by his Office and his
Membership of the House of Commons) might be mitigated and abated by a general
reasonable compliance for amends and satisfaction toward the Hospital, it
might advantage all the Gentlemen in better acceptance toward Mr. Toll, and
the Burgesses of Lynne, and cool their rancour and inflammation toward
further suites and vexations of all the Gentlemen; Sir Hamon further showing
that the sum of 551 l. 4 s. 6 d. imposed in charge of damages was extremely
excessive, when he had offered to maintain and prove (by Mr. Kirbyes
allegations and otherwise) that less then 100 l. would have made i^ (as it was
left at the render of the Town) in as good a condition to the full as it was
before the siege. At lengt^ Sir Hamon L'Estrange produced a writing (conceived
and digested by him and subscribed by himself and M^* Clench, and subscription
also promise^ by Mr. Dereham, but after retracte^ and refused) which writing he
intende^ to have communicated to all the Gen^ thither summoned and requested,
and hoped it might have received their approbation, as also have given
satisfaction to the Mayor and Burgesses of Lynne which writing was as follows.

Whereas the Hospital or Almeshouse o^ Geywood (in the county of Norfolk, o^
and belonging to the Mayor and Burgesse^ of Lyn) was (in 1643. by the comman^
of the then Mayor of Lynne at the tim^ ^f the siege thereof) uncovered and mad^
inhabitable for the poor people of the same, which damage was further
augmented and increased after the render o^ the Town, the walls and other
materials of the Hospital being demolished, and taken and employed (by the
Governor there) in and about the works and fortifications of the said town,
we (whose names are hereto subscribed) being moved with compassion for the
loss and damage of so good a work and monument of charity, and willing that
it should not perish but be revived and preserved to posterity, and desirous to
remove the trouble and delay which by disputes of comparative distributions may
arise, and considering the nature of the work, and the power and force
invitatory of acts of mercy and goodness, (and that the moment and charge by
contribution from many is rendered light and easy to every one) do freely and
cheerfully give and bestow, and promise (upon demand) to pay ten pounds a
piece for and toward the reedifying of the said Hospital, or Almeshouse, as
under our hands and subscriptions is in this paper hereafter expressed.

April 15. 1647.

This writing had reasonable and fair acceptance of the Gentlemen, but
reinfecta for want of appearance, and Sir Hamon L'Estrange and the Gentleman
took leave each of other.

Instantly after the gentleman being gone down the stairs, R. P.
returned again to Sir Hamon L'Estrange, and complained that he was much
abused, for through his letter and invitation he came thither, and was now
arrested at Mr. Tolls suite by one of the two persons that followed him (which
two had kept close and undiscovered;) Sir Hamon L'Estrange was much much
troubled thereat, and protested (as he now does in the name and word of a
gentleman and a Christian) that he was altogether innocent and ignorant of any
such intention, practice or purpose, and one of the officers said, he durst
swar^ that Sir Hamon L'Estrange knew nothing thereof, and Sir Hamon himself
had no sooner said, for any thing that I know I may be arested also, but
forthwith he was also accordingly arrested.

And whereas Sir Hamon L'Estrange conceived the arrest to be concerning the
Hospital, afterward he perceived upon the plea and declaration of Mr. Toll,
that he contrived a new Action against Sir Hamon L'Estrange and other gentlemen
for his imprisonment, and laid it at very great damages, hoping that the great
number of defendants (as many hands make light work) might invite the Jury to a
liberal verdict, the former recovery at Bury being far short of his content
and satisfaction, but his wrong calculation was soon convinced by the clear
sense of the Judges in open Court, declaring that he was barred from a second
action by acceptance of the verdict at Bury.

Thus Mr. Toll for the accomplishment of his own ends deceived Sir Hamon
L'Estrange his confidence, and further exposed him to become a suspected object
of unfaithfulness toward others; but he hopes that to candid thoughts this
narrative will wash him clean from the soil of any such silly conspiracy
against himself, or unworthiness toward others; And for such as have been
and still continue actours and abbetters in the reproach of Sir Hamon
L'Estrange, let them be filthy still, Revel. 22.11.
Con^umeliae spretae exolescunt, si irascare agnitae videntur, Contumelies are
best confuted by neglect and contempt, to be angry is to confess the charge.

So much for history and vindication, And now Ille ego- I am the man that have
thus crept into the press to show the oppression of my reputation by some
whose selfe-seeking ends are their best oratory, and who furrow their browe^ at
the noise or apparition of any thing that may endanger to lessen or lighten
them in the scales of reason, and think with the Sepia or Inkfish to hide
themselves in the black and muddy water of malediction of others; And I thank
them for this unkind summons, and shall now represent unto them (as in a glass
or mirror which hitherto hung atergo, at their backs and behind them) the face
of their own state and condition vively pourtrayd with the same penicil and
parallells with mine, by which they shall not envy me their fellowships in my
fortune by any lawful means, as by unlawful it was and ever shall be as
far from my thoughts as unworthy of a Gentleman, and an honest man.

Acts of Community, Society, and Adhaerence bind all such as are parties
thereunto.

The Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel of a Town, City, or Corporation,
agree together in the defense thereof, and whosoever therein adhaeres thereunto
by either open and expressed, or tacit consent, or not expressed dissent, is
liable to the fortune and event of every Act of the Mayors command proper and
usual, or probable and reasonable, toward that defense.

Here I say first the Mayor, etc. who has the power of Government Magistratus
opidanos obligat intra eos actus quisolent ab ipsis imperari, The Magistracy
binds the Inhabitants in such things as they usually command, alioqui consensu
opus est, otherwise there must be a consent, and therefore I say do agree
together, (which agreement is mentioned page the second) and then facta per
regentes Civitatem sunt facta per ipsam Civitatem, the act of the Magistrate is
the act of the Town or City, and qui Civitatis vice fungitur rebus oppidanorum
uti, perdere, and alienare potest ob publicam utilitatem quae privatis aliquod
jus in aliena concedit, the Magistrate (who is the representee of a Town) may
take, spoil, and exchange the goods of the Inhabitants for the common profit
and preservation, which also gives every private man a right one unto another.

Then I say Adhaeres, etc. the Civilian says Adhaerentes dicuniur qui sunt
ejusdem velle eu jus est ille vel illi cui vel quibus fit adhaesio, They are
said to Adhaere who are of the same mind with them to whom they adhaere.

Plain and Positive Adhaering is by agreement, help, counsel, liking,
approbation, and this in matters of criminal offenses branches into
Accessaries before, after.


There is also Adhaering of Privation (as I may call it) like our mesprision by
not forbidding, not countermanding, not diswading, not discovering.

But in the greatest and lest offenses as treasons and trespasses, (of which
last our alleged offense is a species or branch) there are no Accessaries but
all are Principalls.

1 The Gentlemen resorted to Lynne, and concurred with the sense of the Mayor
for the defense of the Town. 2 They daily dieted and tabled together. 3 They
daily otherwise met, conferred, and consulted for their own preservation and
defense of the Town of Lyn. 4 They contributed to the maintenance of the
Soldiers, every one inserting his name, and the sum he gave per week in a
list or paper. 5 They nominated one of themselves to be collector and
distributor of those moneys. R. P.
6 They went the rounds nightly in their course, according to a set rule. 7
They daily oversaw, and gave direction in the works and fortifications, and
therein Mr. D. was the prime Ingenier by his late before long converse and
observation of the fortifications at London.
Thus their Adhaerence is sufficiently set forth and manifested, and
consequently clearly sentenced liable by the opinion of the Judges openly
delivered as is mentioned in the copy of the letter dated April the 6. 1647. p.
6.

Lastly I say Adhaering to such agreement is liable to the fortune of every Act
of the Mayors command, proper and usual, or probable and reasonable, toward
the defense.

Here Defense is the subject, and every act conversant therein (which must bind
the Adhaerers) ought to be such as (with respect to all the Circumstances of
war) is usual and practiced, or agreeable to the best reason, sense and
equity, and until a negative be had, the affirmative allegation, and
presumption herein stands good.

Here I might enter into a spacious field of matter, but I will not hazard to
lose my self by excursions; what is said may serve to the scope intended,
which was to lay down the Position, Definition, Description and Proofs of
Adhaerence and Adhaerers.

If any will allege and plead this or that damage was otherwise or more then I
meant, this will not serve, being either usually practiced or proper to the
work, or not contradicted or opposed, ex toto enim noluisse debet qui
imprudentia defenditur, he that will save himself against the charge of this
or that which is done, must have appeared altogether unwilling before it was
done.

Nor will it serve to say I was not present when this or that was done, or I
wished or would have been gone (as Sir Hamon L'Estrange and others, though that
speaks most reason where followed a total after defection or falling off) or
such an one did most, (and therein Sir Hamon L'Estrange has not whereof to
boast) or to make comparative altercations or impeaching one another, (as
schooleboyes when they go to whipping) but actum est, the match is made, and
al concurred in the common action, and he that did least meant to take the
benefit of him that did most; rather the argument lies most against them that
did least, because like lazy droanes they meant to eat the honey of others
labors, and taste what they never toyld for: but the Imperial and Civil law
(which ought to Judge in all questions of War and Arms) tells us, In
societate pactum de lucro intelligitur etiam de damno, In Partnership the match
is made whether we gain or lose, and every one to bear his proportion, and
aequum est ut communia habeantur damna quae societatis causa contingunt, It is
just that damages should be repaired in common which ^n community were
committed.

And to weigh it yet more exactly by ^he best royal Standard, David says, 1 Samuel 30 24.
As his part is that goes down to the Battle, so shall his part be that stays
by the stuff, they shall all part alike, nay he goes further and makes it a
perpetual act, And it was so that from that day forward he made it a statute
and ordinance unto this day. 25.


But pessimum venenum sua cuique vtilitas, self-seeking and private ends and
profit does often so befogg and darken Judgment that what is equitable and
generous cannot be discerned.

Had the Gentlemen either at the first resented the violation of the Articles,
as the common concernment, and every one said to himself nunc mea res agitur,
when the neighbors house was on fire; Or hearkened to my modest desires
according to the justum and decorum of our confaederation, and shouldred
together for the maintenance of the partnership and society begun at Lynne, and
pleaded togethe^ our Charter of the Articles for our defense and indemnity, I
had not been singled out and made the sole or chief anvile of the highest
displeasure for that action, which (to our sense) was a^ clearly abolished by
those Articles, a^ the Sun ever shined; Nor had there bi^^ place lest for these
jealousies and contumelies of the Gentlemen, nor for thi^ mine Apology and
vindication; In the mean time I must tell them they are all in my debt, and
some of them have paid me the wrong way, and though the respect to my numerous
family and issue may move me to say unto them with the Epigramatist, Ignoscas
petimus Vacerre tanti
Non est ut placeam tibi perire;


Yet when my few and short arguments for the law of Society shall be answered,
(wherein some of them who are forward enough, projicere ampull as, and
sesquipedalia verba, shall do well to appear) I shall then most willingly
acquiesce to have paid most of all the score, and give a discharge, and till
then (...) charge most of the gentlemen either never at all, or too little to
have learned, or too much, and too soon to have forgotten, those just and
excellent rules and duties of humanity, intercourse, civilityes and deportment
(in all actions and affairs of life) taught us by our old Tutour Tully in his
Offices, of which book (as we say the Quartane Ague is opprobrium medicorum,
the shame of Physicians, because it poseth them to cure it) so I say of that
book of the Offices ( in cujus nomine animitus semper recreor, to borrow a few
of his own words) though by an heathen, is so divinely written (pardon the
exuberance) as may be called opprobrium Christianorum, the shame of all
christians to be so posed in the practice.

I have here spread plain and smooth to open view the charge and imputation
upon me, and my defense and answer thereunto, And after I indict the Gentlemen
at the common bar of universal opinion and Judgment (wherein nevertheless
I except a^ absolve some of them, Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan,

And who have opened and offer^ themselves in all generosity and ju^^ reason to
me) upon Apostasy and r^volt from the solemn principles society and
confaederation; if th^^ confess the Indictment I leave the^ to the fortune of
a fine and censure (...) their reputation; If they traverse, (...) am ever
prepared and ready with fu^ther evidence for the trial.

FINIS.

