ARTICLES or DEMANDS made By the KINGS most Excellent Majesty to the Gentry
and Commonalty of the County of SALOP. on Saturday the 8. of October. 1642.

With an exact Answer to every particular therein presented to His Majesty at
Shrewesbury the same day, by the high Sheriff of the said County.

Wherein is exactly manifested, How active the malignant party of this Kingdom
are to incense the King against the Parliament, and to engage him in a
destructive war against his Subjects.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown

LONDON, Printed for HENRY HYTTON, O^^ob. 12. 1642.

ARTICLES OR DEMANDS, Made by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to the Gentry
and Commonalty of the County of Salop. on Saturdty, Oct. 8.
HIs Majesty being attended by Mr. Murry, Endimion Porter and many other
Courtiers came into a Champaine Field on the East side of our town where the
Gentry and Commonalty of the County were assembled, by his Majesty's command,
where being come, and a general silence throughout the Field, every one being
with expectation, longing to hear what they were summoned thither for,

After a great and long preparation, Endimion Porter with a loud voice, began
to read these ensuing Articles, or Demands.

B^t before he began, he distributed ^eere two hundred copies, by which means
I get this which I have sent you,

1. That His Majesty having engaged himself in a war against the disturbers
of the Peace of the Kingdom, who under the name and authority of a Parliament
have to the advercement of their own particular ends actually leavied a war
against him and all other his Loving subjects that dissent from their Places,
their only aims being to alter the Frame of government both in the Church and
State, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical government into this
Kingdom, for the prevention of which His Majesty having by the assistance of
his good Protestant subjects raised an Army to suppress the said insurrections
Rebellion, in the maintenance of which Army his Majesty has spent, all that is
in his power to command, either by his own power, or the assistance of his
friends, even to his Lands and goods, his Revenue being detained from him, and
all means of further subsisting denied him, wherefore he is enforced to
Appeal to his loving Subjects and to desire their aid in this so great a
design, it seeming but a reasonable demand that they that share in the benefit
should likewise bear some of the burden, his Majesty's desire being to
maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion, the known Laws of the
Land, the just Privileges of Parliament, and the lawful Liberty of the
Subject.

Likewise to suppress Papistry, Sects and Schismer, which have lately crept
into the Church, and almost buried the Religion and Peace of the Kingdom in
Anare by and confusion, Brounists, Seperatrsts, and Anabaptists, being the
only Protestants, and the true Protestants in their opinion Church-papists, or
favorers of the Church of Rome, if the maintainers of this cause can want
assistance, if these sort of People can prevail more with you then your King,
in the defense of so just a cause, then doubtless our just God has blinded
your eyes, and in just vengance suffers you to run hoodwinckt to your own
confusion, but his Majesty hopes better things from you, not doubting of your
assistance, only this is to give the meanest of his Subjects satisfaction,
(who have all this while been misled) of the justness of his proceedings, and
to manifest unto you how near your own peace and the maintenance of this cause
is allied, so that one cannot fall without the other, these things his Majesty
leaves to your consideration till the afternoon, expecting a loyal return of
your Affections, assuring you in the Honor of a King, that the least mite
offered for the advancement of this cause, shall not fall to the ground, not be
forgotten, but shall be registered in his Majesty's princely and royal
thoughts, as the greatest token of loyalty, being expressed in a time of so
great necessity and trouble.

This being performed, his Majesty was conducted out of the Field with shouts
and acclamations made by his own followers, and some of the Ignorant country
people, who were deluded with the specious pretense of Mr Porters, but one
thing I observed by his Majesty, (notwithstanding those shouts and prayers
which were made by those that followed him) his Majesty seemed mighty
discontent, not showing the least symptom of joy, from whence I infer, that
what was done at that time, he was won to, by the persuasion of Porter and
others about him, and not by any voluntary Act of his own.

His Majesty having left the field, our chief Gentlemen of the County, with
our Freeholders and other men of esteem, met together at the George where
after a general and free debate, of what we had heard and observed, we with a
general consent drew up this ensuing Answer.

That whereas the Parliament now sitting were called together by His Majesty
legally, and that every member of the same was chosen by the general consent
of each County of the Kingdom, being men known to he Religious, Wise and
well Reputed, and whereas their actions from the beginning to this day and (how
ever censured by those that seek their destructions,) have tenned to the
advancement of His Majesty's Honor the establishment of the true Protestant
Religion, with the Laws of the Kingdom, which before the beginning of this
Parliament, were almost ruined. Bishops having introduced Popery into the
Church. The Judges having corrupted the Laws, neither can we forget the heavy
taxes which we suffered by reason of Projectors and Monopolizers, the maine
chiefest of which, are actors and contrivers of this war, from whom we can
expect no good neither to your Majesty, nor our selves.

And whereas your Majesty has been pleased to style your Parliament Traitors,
and that Army which they have been forced to raise for the defense of your
Majesty, and to maintain the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, a Rebellion,
we are forced to declare, that we are bound in conscience to God, in loyalty
to your Majesty, and in tender care of our own peace, to join with your
Parliament, for the defense of your Majesty, and maintenance of the aforesaid
causes, with many others, (namely) to defend our Wives and daughters from
rapine, our Houses from Firing, and our Goods from being made a prey to thieves
and desperate Cavaleers, which have destined all to ruin and destruction.

As touching our assistance, If your Majesty shall please to put your trust in
us, and to yield your self into the hands of such a guard as we shall raise,
of the chief Gentlemen and Free holders of our County, we will for your Royal
support, willingly expend our Estates, and venture our lives against all
apparent Enemies of your Majesty's, but for us to weaken our selves to
strengthen those that would hereafter glory in our overthrow, neither Law not
Reason can compel us, neither can we any way condescend to any such matter.

Thus humbly beseeching your Majesty, in the name of Almighty God, as you
tender the preservation of the true Religion, as you respect your own safety,
or the welfare of your Royal of spring, to abandon those evil Councelours,
and banish all Delinquents from your protection, so shall your Majesty be
secure, and we your loyal Subjects will guard you with honor to your
Parliament.

This being delivered to his Majesty, every man went to his habitation, since
which time we have heard nothing, only many Gentlemen in Authority have been
tempted by great promises to assist them, but all to no purpose.

FINIS.

