His Majesty's DECLARATION To all His loving SUBJECTS; CONCERNING The
Remonstrance of the ARMY. Delivered to the Commissioners on Wednesday last; And
brought by the Post on Thursday November. 23. to be forthwith printed and
published.

Together with His Majesty's Letter to the Lord General Fairfax; And His
Protestation and Proposals to all the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, Who
acts contrary to the will of His Majesty, or the desire of his two Houses of
Parliament.

Likewise, the Declaration of Col. Hamond, concerning the King. And his Letter
to the House of Peers.

Read and debated in Parliament, November. 23. 1648.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
ONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENS DIEV ET MON DROIT

London, Printed for Richard Brysons, 1648.

His Majesty's DECLARATION Concerning the ARMY, AND His Resolution touching
their late Remonstrance, to proceed by the way of Charge against His Royal
person.
SIR,
HIs Majesty having received a Copy of the chief Heads and Representation of
the Remonstrance of the Army, upon reading the same, declared a great dislike
thereof, and uttered many sad and solentary expressions, in reference to the
same; who after reading thereof, desired a conference with the Bishop of
London, the Bishop of Salisbury, and the rest of the Clergy attending his
Royal person, which being assented to, his Majesty remonstrated and declared
the grievances of his oppressed and afflicted heart, which follows in these
words.

Right Reverend,
Whereas divine providence has been my sole protector, and his Almighty
power the chief Anchor whereon my hopes and confidence did and shall depend; I
shall therefore in this dismal and distracted Age remonstrate unto you, before
my departure hence, the sad and heavy contemplations of my opressed and grieved
heart, occasioned the by voice and sentence of the Army against Our Royal
person and Family, and their resolution to proceed against us, by the way of
Charge: However, I shall say with the blessed Psalmist, and the patient
Sufferer, Thy will be done, O Lord, and not mine, and shall endeavor to
submit my will unto the will of the Lord, that so I may be able to bear and
undergo the cross and type of Christ in all adversity, tribulation, and
affliction whatsoever.


His Majesty having thus graciously and compassionately declared his present
apprehensions of the fears and jealousies arising within his Royal Breast,
arising from the late Councels and consultations of the Army; the Bishop of
London, and the Bishop of Salisbury made each of them a speech, tending to the
supporting of his Majesty's troubled spirits in these dangerous and perilous
times of adversity.

The Duke of Richmond, and the rest of the Nobility at Court, have declared
their sense and resolution to his Majesty, and have moved the parliaments
Commissioners to write to both Houses, concerning the Armies Demonstration for
the executing of Justice on the person of the King.

These things, upon serious debate and consultation, has caused the Royal
party to propose several particulars to his Majesty for expediting of the
Treaty, and putting a small end to his Concessions; but (as yet) they have
taken little effect: for his Majesty declares a great unwillingnesse to pass
any thing against the Marquis of Ormond, until the Treaty be wholly ended: but
has promised upon his Royal word, that he will not depart this Island for 20
days to come, beginning the 19. instant, and therefore desires liberty and
freedom; which the better to effect, his Majesty has sent a Letter to the Lord
Genesis Fairfax, desiring his admission and Grant for performance of the same. As
for his consenting to the abolishing of Episcopacy, and the sale of Bishops
Lands, though so much conducing in the opinion of all his Restoration: yet its
generally conceived he will not yield therein: and the rather, because what is
like to happen by way of difference.

Dated from His Majesty's Court at Newport, November. 22. 1648.
The Proposals of the parliament touching the Demands of the Army.
THe Honorable Court of Parliament having received a Remonstrance, or
Declaration, from the Army, containing diverse Proposals exceeding high and of
great consequence; and upon debate thereof, diverse of the dis-assenting Members
declared a great dislike thereof, and his Majesty's moderate friends desired it
might be laid aside for some certain days, others moved that it might be
ejected; and in the conclusion, after they had sufficiently declared their full
sense touching the Desires of the Army, they resolved to lay it aside till
Monday next.

After reading the said Remonstrance, Mr. Pryn made a very learned Speech,
concerning the Demands of the Army, his expressions tending much to the
dishonor of them, who argued very stiffly against the unlawfulness of their
Demands.

Diverse other Members seconded him, and desired to insist no further thereon,
but to wave their Proposals for a time.

Yet notwithstanding the said Arguments and Desires, the well-affected party
declared a great unwillingnesse to dispense with any time, but to insist
thereon immediately, and to endeavor to give all speedy and possible
satisfaction to them in all things by them desired.

The Declaration of the Citizens of London, concerning the Demands of the Army.
WHereas we have lately received a Paper entitled the Remonstrance or
Declaration of the Army, touching the King, We do unanimously declare, That We
shall willingly and freely comply with them therein, for the executing
exemplary Justice upon all capital Offenders, and endeavor the restitution of
the Freeborn people of England to their common Rights, Liberties, and Freedoms,
protesting to live and dye with them therein, for obtaining, effecting, and
making future provision for the same.

Signed by many thousands of the well-affected party in and about the City of
London.


These mutual expressions are said to proceed from those Citizens, who are
known and distinguished by the Badge of Independency; But it is said, that the
Presbyterian party, and others, are resolved to thwart them in their
Engagement, and to declare against some particular Demands of the Army, whom
they conceive to be too high and unreasonable.

But concur with them in their Proposition for the executing of Justice upon
the visible enemies of peace provided a favorable construction may be had on
his Majesty's former actions and proceedings, and that they may be weighed in
the Balance of Equity and Compassion.

November. 22. Letters from the Isle of Wight say, That his Majesty begins to
grow exceeding discontented and melancholy, and fears much the present
Overtures of the Army, touching their seizing on his Royal person, which has
occasioned many sundry contemplative expressions from his Majesty, who says,
that if they execute their wills on Him, by spilling of his Royal blood, He
fears diverse more will follow. These dismal Representations causes much
sadness and mourning throughout several corners of the Nation. But it is
thought that some new addresses will be made from the several Counties, to the
Parliament and Army, in behalf of their dread Sovereign the King.

Other Letters from the Isle of Wight say, that his Majesty has solicited Col.
Hamond (Governor thereof) that none may have the power and protection of his
person but himself, and those who were entrusted formerly by his two Houses;
but the said Colonel has declared to the contrary, being weary of so great a
charge, and has sent a Letter to the House of Peers (which was this day read)
humbly desiring their Lordships to take off from him the care of the Kings
person, and to make such provision for him; as they in their wisdoms shall
think fit, to the end that he may be discharged of the said trust or employment.

And the said Letters further make mention, that his Majesty has again
debated the heads of the Armies Remonstrance, and does declare a very ill sense
thereof, protesting that he had formerly a good opinion of them, and little
thought that they would have ever acted so contrary to his expectation, and
their former promises; and therefore desires the omnipotent God of Heaven (to
whom vengeance does belong) to repay them according to their own deserts, and
to act by them* as they intend to deal by Him.

VIVAT REX.

