A Collection of His Majesty's Gracious Messages for Peace, sent to the two
Houses of Parliament at Westminster since the 5 of Dec. 1645.
CHARLES R.

HIS Majesty being deeply sensible of the Continuation of this bloody and
unnatural War, cannot think Himself discharged of the duty he owes to God, or
the affection and regard He has to the preservation of His People, without the
constant application of His earnest endeavors to find some expedient for the
speedy ending of these unhappy Distractions, if that may be, does therefore
desire, That a safe Conduct may be forthwith sent, for the Duke of Richmond,
the Earl of Southampton, John Ashburnham, and Jeffery, Palmer Esquires, and
their Attendants, with Coaches, Horses, and other Accommodations for their
Journey to Westminster, during their stay there, and return when they shall
think fit. Whom His Majesty intends to send to the Lords and Commons assembled
in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland, furnished with such Propositions, as His Majesty is
confident will be the Foundation of a happy and well-grounded Peace.

Given at the Court at Oxford the 5. of December. 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.
SIR,
WE have received Your Letter of the fifth of this instant December, with His
Majesty's enclosed, and have sent back Your Trumpet by Command of both Houses,
who will with all convenient speed return an Answer to His Majesty, and rest

Your loving Friends, Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peers pro Tempore.
William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons.


For Sir Thomas Glemham Governor of Oxford.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty cannot but extremely wonder, that after so many Expressions on
your part, of a deep and seeming sense of the miseries of this afflicted
Kingdom, and of the dangers incident to His Person during the continuance of
this unnatural War, your many great and so often repeated Protestations, that
the raising of these Arms has been only for the necessary defense of Gods true
Religion, His Majesty's Honor, Safety and Prosperity, the Peace, Comfort and
Security of His People, you should delay a safe Conduct to the persons
mentioned in His Majesty's Message of the fifth of this instant December, which
are to be sent unto you with Propositions for a well grounded Peace: A thing so
far from having been denied at any time by His Majesty, whenever you have
desired the same, that he believes it has been seldom (if ever) practiced
among the most avowed and professed enemies, much less from Subjects to their
King. But His Majesty is resolved, that no discouragements whatsoever shall
make Him fail of His part, in doing His uttermost endeavors to put an end to
these Calamities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the ruin of this
unhappy Nation; And therefore does once again desire, That a safe Conduct may
be forthwith sent for those persons expressed in His former Message, and does
therefore Conjure you, as you will answer to Almighty God, in that day when he
shall make inquisition for all the Blood that has and may yet be spilt in this
unnatural War, as you tender the preservation and establishment of the true
Religion; by all the Bonds of Duty and Allegiance to your King, or compassion
to your bleeding, and unhappy Country, and of Charity to your selves, that you
dispose your hearts to a true sense, and employ all your faculties in a more
serious endeavor, together with His Majesty, to set a speedy end to these
wasting Divisions, and then he shall not doubt, but that God will yet again
give the blessing of Peace to this distracted Kingdom.

Given at the Court at Oxford, the 15. of December, 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore.
CHARLES R.

NOtwithstanding the strange and unexpected delays (which can be presidented
by no former times) to His Majesty's two former Messages, His Majesty will lay
aside all Expostulations, as rather serving to lose time, then to contribute
any remedy to the evils, which (for the present) do afflict this distracted
Kingdom; Therefore without farther Preamble, His Majesty thinks it most
necessary to send these Propositions this way, which He intended to do by the
Persons mentioned in His former Messages, though He well knows the great
disadvantage, which Overtures of this kind have, by the want of being
accompanied by well instructed Messengers.

His Majesty conceiving that the former Treaties have hitherto proved
ineffectual, chiefly for want of power in those persons that Treated, as
likewise because those from whom their power was derived (not possibly having
the particular informations of every several debate) could not give so clear a
Judgment as was requisite in so important a business; If therefore His
Majesty may have the engagement of the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster,
the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, the Major, Aldermen,
Common Counsel, and Militia of London, of the chief Commanders in Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Army, as also of those in the Scots Army, for His Majesty's free and
safe coming to, and abode in London or Westminster, (with such of His Servants
now attending Him, and their Followers, not exceeding in all the number of 300)
for the space of forty days, and after the said time for his free and safe
repair to any of His Garrisons of Oxford, Worcester, or Newark. (which His
Majesty shall nominate at any time before His going from London or
Westminster,) His Majesty propounds to have a Personal Treaty with the two
Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland, up on all matters which may conduce to the restoring of Peace and
happiness to these miserably distracted Kingdoms; And to begin with the three
Heads which were Treated on at Vxbridge. And for the better clearing of His
Majesty's earnest and sincere intentions of putting an end to these unnatural
Distractions, (knowing that point of security may prove the greatest obstacle
to this most blessed work) His Majesty therefore Declares, That He is willing
to commit the great Trust of the Milition of this Kingdom, for such time, and
with such Powers, as are expressed in the Paper delivered by His Majesty's
Commissioners at Vxbridge, the 6. of February last, to these Persons following,
viz. The Lord Privy Seal, the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hereford, the
Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Essex, Earl of Southampton, Earl of Pembroke, Earl
of Salisbury, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Denbigh, Earl of
Chichister, Lord Say, Lord Seymour, Lord Lucas, Lord Lexington, M. Denzill
Hollis, M. Pierrepent, M. Henry Bellasis, M. Richard Spencer, Sir Thomas
Fairfax, M. John Ashburnham, Sir Gervas Cliseon, Sir Henry Vane junior, M.
Robert Wallop, M. Thomas Chichely, M. Oliver Cromwell, and M. Philip Skippon,
supposing that these are Persons against whom there can be no just exception:
But if this does not satisfy, then His Majesty offers to name the one half,
and leave the other to the election of the two Houses of Parliament at
Westminster, with the Powers and Limitations before mentioned.

Thus His Majesty calls God and the World to witness, of His sincere
Intentions and real Endeavors, for the composing and seting of these
miserable Distractions; which He doubts not, but by the blessing of God, will
soon be put to a happy Conclusion, if this His Majesty's offer be accepted*
Otherwise He leaves all the World to Judge, who are the Continuers of this
unnatural War. And therefore He once more Conjures you, by all the Bonds of
Duty you owe to God and your King, to have so great a Compassion on the
bleeding and miserable Estate of your Country, That you join your most serious
and hearty Endeavors with His Majesty, to put a happy and speedy end to these
present Miseries.

Given at the Court at OXFORD the 26 of December, 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the
two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland.
May it please your Majesty,
THE Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster,
have received your Letters of the 5th and 15th of this instant December, and
having, together with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, taken
the ame into their serious consideration, do humbly return this Anwer.

They have in all their Actions manifested to Your Majesty and the World, their
sincere and carnest desires, that a safe and well grounded Peace might be
settled in Your three Kingdoms* and for the obtaining so great a Blessing, shall
ever pray to God, and use their utmost endeavors, and beseech Your* Majesty to
believe, that their not sending a more speedy Answer, has not prooceeded from
any intention to retard the means of putting an end to these present Calamities
by a happy Peace, but has been occasioned by the Considerations and Debates
necessary in a business of so great importance, wherein both Kingdoms are so
much concerned.

As to Your Majesty's desire of a safe Conduct for the coming hither of the
Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Southampton, John Arshburnham and Ieffrey Palmer
Esquires, with Propositions to be the foundation of a happy and well grounded
Peace, They finding that former Treaties have been made use of for other ends
under the pretense of Peace, and have proved delatory, and unsuccesseful,
cannot give way to a safe Conduct according to Your Majesty's desire; But both
Houses of the Parliament of England, having now under their Consideration
Propositions and Bills for the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace, which
are speedily to be communicated to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland, do resolve after mutual agreement of both Kingdoms to present them
with all speed to Your Majesty.

Westminster the 25. December, 1645. Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore. William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons.


CHARLES R.

ALthough the Message sent by Sir Peter Killegrew, may justly require an
expostulatory Answer, yet His Majesty lays that aside, as not so proper for
His present Endeavors; leaving all the World to judge, whether His Proposition
for a Personal Treaty, or the flat denial of a safe Conduct for Persons to
begin a Treaty, be greater signs of a real Intention to Peace; and shall now
only insist upon His former Message of the 26 of this December: That upon His
repair to Westminster, He doubts not but so to join His Endeavors with His two
Houses of Parliament, as to give just satisfaction, not only concerning the
business of Ireland, but also for the settling of a way for the payment of the
Public Debts, as well to the Scots, and to the City of London, as others. And
as already He has shown a fair way for the settling of the Militia. so He shall
carefully Endeavor in all other Particulars, that none shall have cause to
complain for want of security, whereby just Jealousies may arise to hinder the
continuance of the desired Peace. And certainly this Proposition of a Personal
Treaty could never have entered into His Majesty's Thoughts, if He had not
resolved to make apparent to all the World, that the Public good and Peace of
this Kingdom, is far dearer to Him then the respect of any particular interest.
Wherefore none can oppose this Motion, without a manifest demonstration, that
he particularly envies His Majesty should be the chief Author in so blessed a
Work, besides the declaring Himself a direct opposer of the happy Peace of
these Nations. To conclude, whosoever will not be ashamed, that His fair* and
specious Protestations should be brought to a trune and Public Test; and those
who have a real sense, and do truly commiserate the miseries of their bleeding
Country, let them speedily and cheerfully embrace His Majesty's Proposition for
His Personal Treaty at Westminster, which, by the blessing of God, will
undoubtedly to these now distracted Kingdoms, restore the happiness of a long
wished for, and lasting Peace.

Given at the Court at Oxford, the 29 day of December. 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, to be Communicated to the
two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the
Partiament of Scotland.
CHARLES R.

BUt that these are times, wherein nothing is strange; it were a thing much to
be marvailed at, what should cause this unparalleled long detention of His
Majesty's Trumpet, sent with His Gracious Message of the 26 of December last;
Peace being the only Subject of it, and His Majesty's Personal Treaty, the
means proposed for it. And it were almost as great a wonder, that His Majesty
should be so long from inquiring after it, if that the hourly expectation
thereof, had not, in some measure satisfied His Impatience: But least His
Majesty by His long silence; should condemn himself of Carelessness in that,
which so much concerns the good of all His People, He thinks it high time to
inquire after His said Trumpeter; For since all men, who pretend any goodness,
must desire Peace; and that all men know Treaties, to be the best and most
Christian way to procure it* and there being as little question, that His
Majesty's Personal Presence in it, is the likeliest way to bring it to a happy
Issue; He judges there must be some strange variety of accidents, which causes
this most tedious delay; Wherefore His Majesty earnestly desires to have a
speedy Account of His former Message, the subject whereof is Peace, and the
means His Personal Presence at Westminster, where the Government of the Church
being settled, as it was in the times of the happy and glorious Reigns of Queen
Elizabeth and King James, with full Liberty for the ease of their Consciences,
who will not communicate in that Service established by Law, and likewise for
the free and public use of the Directory (prescribed, and by Command of the
two Houses of Parliament, now practiced in some parts of the City of London) to
such as shall desire to use the same, and all Forces being agreed to be
Disbanded, His Majesty will then forthwith (as He has in His Message of the 29
of December last, already offered) join with His two Houses Parliament, in
settling some way for the payment of the Public Debts to His Scots Subjects,
the City of London, and others: And His Majesty having proposed a fair way, for
the settling of the Militia, which now by this long delay, seems not to be
thought sufficient security: His Majesty (to show how really He will employ
Himself at His coming to Westminster) for making this a lasting Peace, and
taking away all jealousies, (how groundless soever) will endeavor upon debate
with His two Houses, so to dispose of it (as likewise of the business of
Ireland) as may give to them and both Kingdoms just satisfaction; not doubting
also, but to give good contentment to His two Houses of Parliament in the
choice of the Lord Admiral, the Officers of State and others, if His two
Houses, by their ready inclinations to Peace shall give Him encouragement
thereunto. Thus His Majesty having taken occasion by His just impatience so to
explain His (...), that no man can doubt of a happy Issue to this (...) ^reaty:
If now, there shall be so much as a delay of the same; He calls God and the
World to witness, who they are, that not only hinder, but reject this Kingdoms
future happiness, It being so much the stranger, that His Majesty's coming to
Westminster, (which was first the greatest pretense for taking up Arms) should
be so much as delayed, much less not accepted or refused; But His Majesty
hopes, that God will no longer suffer the malice of Wicked men to hinder the
Peace of this too much afflicted Kingdom.

Given at the Court at Oxford, the 15 of January, 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the
two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Your Humble and Loyal Subjects of both Kingdoms, have received Your
Letters of the 26 and 29 of December last; unto which we humbly return this
Answer.

That there has been no delay on our parts, but what was necessary in a
business of so great consequence, as is expressed in our former Letter to Your
Majesty.

Concerning the personal Treaty desired by Your Majesty, There having been so
much innocent blood of Your good Subjects shed in this War, by Your Majesty's
Commands and Commissions, Irish Rebels brought over into both Kingdoms, and
endeavors to bring over more into both of them, as also Forces from Foreign
parts; Your Majesty being in Arms in these parts, the Prince in the head of an
Army in the West, diverse Towns made Garrisons, and kept in Hostility by Your
Majesty against the Parliament of England* There being also Forces in Scotland
against that Parliament and Kingdom by Your Majesty's Commission: The War in
Ireland f^^^ented and prolonged by Your Majesty, whereby the three Kingdoms are
brought near to utter ruin and destruction. We conceive, That until
satisfaction and security be first given to both Your Kingdoms, Your Majesty's
coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by in assented unto. Neither can we
apprehend in a means conducing to Peace, That Your Majesty should come to Your
Parliament for a few days, with any thoughts of leaving it; especially with
intentions of returning to Hostility against it. And We do observe, That Your
Majesty desires the Engagement, not only of the Parliaments, but of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Counsel, and Militia of the City of London, the chief
Commanders of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, and those of the Scots Army, which is
against the Privileges and Honor of the Parliaments, these being joined with
them, who are subject and subordinate to their Authority.

That which Your Majesty against the freedom of the Parliaments inforces in
both Your Letters with many earnest expressions, as if in no other way then
that propounded by Your Majesty, the Peace of Your Kingdoms could be
established, Your Majesty may please to remember, That in Our last Letter, We
did Declare, That Propositions from both Kingdoms were speedily to be sent to
Your Majesty, which We conceive to be the only way for attaining a happy and
well-grounded Peace, and Your Majesty's assent unto those Propositions, will be
an effectual means for giving satisfaction and security to your Kingdoms: will
assure a firm Union between the two Kingdoms, (...) ^^nch desired by each for
other as for themselves; And settle Religion and secure the Peace of the
Kingdom of Scotland, whereof neither is so much as mentioned in Your Majesty's
Letters.

And in proceeding according to these just and necessary grounds for the
putting an end to the bleeding Calanities of these Nations. Your Majesty may
have the Glory to be a Principal Instrument in so happy a Work; and We (however
misinterpreted) shall approve our selves to God and the world, to be real and
sincere in seeking a safe and well-grounded Peace.

Westminster, 13. Jan. 1645. Gray of Wark, Speaker of the House of Peers pro
Tempore. William Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons. Signed in the name
and by warrant of the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. BALMERINOTH.


For Your Majesty.
THis, and no more, is all they Answered to His Majesty's five Messages, and
six weeks Expectation. Such as are not, drencht so deep in blood, as to abhor
all Peace, would cheerfully embrace His Majesty's Proposition for a Personal
Treaty: It Is the very expedient Themselves proposed in all their Messages,
Declarations and Speeches. But now They renounce it, forasmuch as they find
His Majesty in Hostility, and Prince Charles in the Head of an Army in the West,
(a strange consequence, That because it is now War, therefore it shall never be
Peace;) Though it is as notorious who was first in Arms, as who first began to
Plunder. What they here intend by demanding of His Majesty Satisfaction for
bloodshed, no modest Christian but trembles to understand. And it is as
strange, that His Majesty in desiring the joint engagement of the City of
London for His Security at Westminster, should violate the Privileges of
Parliament; Remember what forced His Majesty from White Hall; those tumults
they pretended received no influence from any Vote of theirs; and for like
assurance from Sir Tho. Fairfax's Army. His Majesty asks no more then Himself
offered to the Earl of Essex in Cornwall, in a Letter signed by all the chief
Officers of His Majesty's Army; whom sure they will grant as much at His Majesty's
command as Sir Thomas Fairfax's Officers or the Citizens of London can be
subject to the Parliament. This is manifest, that His Majesty has endeavored
all expedients in the World to heal His bleeding People, though at Westminster
they will not grant so much as a Pass that His Majesty should either send Peace,
or bring it; But rather choose to spend forty days in sending two denials.

The Answer.
1. IT is here said (This, and no more, is all they Answered) Thus when Naaman
came with his Horses, and with his Chariot, and stood at the door of the House
of Elisha, 2 King. 5.9. He in stead of receiving and humoring him, sent a
Messenger to him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh
shall come to thee, and thou shall be clean: But Naaman was wrath at first, and
went away; yet afterward he was persuaded to it, and so had his flesh come
fresh again. O that His Majesty may be resolved to Sign the seven Bills to be
presented to Him in the floods of His Peoples Tears, it will wash off all the
Leprous rabble of Papists and Delinquents from about Him, and restore Him fresh
again in the glory of His strength in His Parliament and People.

2. It is said, this is all of (five Messages, and six weeks Expectation.) But
who knows not, but that whereas His Majesty can dispatch away a Message at an
instant, what, and when He pleases; yet it is not so with the Parliament,
there must be such an Answer drawn, as is the Sense of the major part of the
House, that Voted by them; then to that, the House of Lords must give their
Concurrence; and after both, our Brethren of Scotland; and if any alterations
be made in it, it must pass all round again, and there can be no remedy to
prevent it.

3. But it is further said, (Such as are not drenched so deep in blood, as to
abhor all Peace, would cheerfully embrace His Majesty's Proposition for a
Personal Treaty:) The Kingdom is drenched in blood indeeds, and to stop that
effusion. O that His Majesty would return this one Message to the Parliament
(recorded in Holy Writ) more conducing to Peace, then all Treaties, Whatsoever
is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of
the God of Heaven; for why should there be wrath against the Realm of the King
and his Sons, Ezra 7.23. That we might say, Blessed be the Lord God of our
Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart, Verse. 27.

4. Yet it is argued, ('It Is the very expedient themselves proposed in all their
Messages, Declarations, and Speeches, but now they renounce it.) But Treaties
have heretofore always been of ill consequence, and lengthned the Wars; and
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, have since considered of better ways for a
safe and well-grounded Peace. The manner drawn into Propositions to be sent to
His Majesty by way of Bills, which being Signed, the Wars are at an end, and
both Kingdoms, Church, and State, settled at once.

5. It is said again, That to renounce it, ( forasmuch as they find His
Majesty in Hostility, and Prince Charles in the Head of an Army in the West, is
a strange consequence, That because it is now War, therefore it shall never be
Peace.) Truly, the Kingdom is now sad; but would be much more if His Majesty
should come, and treat, and go again to continue in Hostility.

6. It follows, (though it is as notorious, who was first in Arms, as who first
began to plunder.) There are two Witnesses, Windsor for the English, and York
for the Irish, both Armed by Authority, who after rison, they soon fell to
plunder.

7. But it is propounded thus, (What they here intend by demanding of His
Majesty satisfaction for bloodshed, no modest Christian but trembles to
understand.) That which they desire is this, That His Majesty by sealing of
those Bills, gives His Royal Assent for the permitting of Irish Rebels, and
Popish Incendiaries, and Delinquents to be brought to a legal Trial, to
satisfy the Law for the innocent blood, that by their means has been spilt in
His Kingdoms, which will give great satisfaction to all Protestants, and
well-affected Christians.

8. But it is alleged again, ( And it is as strange, that His Majesty in
desiring the joint engagement of the City of London for His security at
Westminster, should violate the Privileges of Parliament: Remember what forced
His Majesty from White Hall; those tumults they pretended, received to
influence from any Vote of theirs.) This has been cleared by many Declarations
from the Parliament; and His Majesty's entertainment by the City when he came
from Scotland, was a good testimony of their Loyalty and Affection.

9. Then it fellows. ( And for like assurance from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army,
His Majesty asked no more then Himself offered to the Earl of Essex in Cornwall,
in a Letter Signed by all the chief Officers of His Majesty's Army; whom sure
they will grant as much at His Majesty's Command, as Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
Officers, or the Citizens of London, can be subject to the Parliament.) If His
Majesty will disband His Forces, and come to London and join with the
Parliament, He needs not doubt, but their Subordination to Him and the
Parliament, will tender him their hands and hearts, estates and lives, for the
Protection of His Person, Estate, and Honor, and the Peace, and Safety of all
His Kingdoms.

10. The Conclusion is this, ( This is manifest, that His Majesty has
endeavored all Expedients in the World, to heal His bleeding People, though at
Westminster they will not grant so much as a Pass, that His Majesty should either
send Peace, or bring it; but rather choose to spend forty days in sending two
denials.) The Propositions for Peace will be speedily sent, whereby His Majesty
may see how desirous they are, both to enjoy His Presence, and Peace too. God
direct that work which was done from above, (which James says, Jam. 3.17.) Its
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entertained, full of mercy,
and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

FINIS.
Published according to Order.


