THE DOCTRINE OF THE BODIES FRAGILITY:

WITH A Divine Project, discovering how to make these vile bodies of ours
glorious by getting gracious Souls.

Represented in a SERMON preached at Martins Ludgate at the Funeral of that
worthy and reverend Minister of Jesus Christ, Dr. Samuel Bolton, Master of
Christ College in Cambridge, who died the 15 of October. 1654. and was buried the
19 day of the same month.

By that painful and pious Minister of Gods Word Mr. EDMUND CALAMY, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Moore over against the Pump in Little-Britain, and
are to be sold at Westminster, and in Paul's Churchyard, 1655*

To the Christian Reader.
READER,
WE live in such times wherein most men in the world cry out with those the
Psalmist speaks of in the 4. Psalm, Who will show us any good? inquiring and
listening after the pleasures and profits and preferments of the world,
spending all their time, and improving all their parts, abilities, and
opportunities, for the promoting their temporal interests, and providing for
their frail bodies, subject to diseases, infirmities, and corruptions; and
which ere long must be laid down in the dust: and in the mean time neglecting
the concernments of their precious and never dying souls; never valuing, or at
least not laboring after the light of Gods countenance, which is better then
life, and the joys of his salvation which are unspeakable and glorious; but
prefer their bodies before their souls, greedily pursuing the world, and only
minding earthly things, whose end (as the Apostle says) will be destruction,
both of soul and body, if they still run on without repentance. This Sermon was
designed to cure part of this evil, and to put a stop to the folly and
madness of such people, by discovering to them a better way how to advance the
interest of their bodies, and to make them happy and glorious, by having their
conversations here in heaven, and securing the interest of their souls in the
first place. Possibly this ensuing discourse was only intended for the
edification of that particular Congregation where it was delivered, but being
there taken from the Authors mouth, by the pen of a ready writer, and now
exposed to public view, all good people may partake of the advantages that
are therein recorded; whereat I hope no man ought to be offended.

A Sermon preached At Dr. Samuel Bolton's Funeral.
PHIL. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself.
WE are here met at this time to perform the last office of love for a worthy,
reverend, and godly Minister of Jesus Christ, Dr. Samuel Bolton Master of
Christ's College in Cambridge; and this Text that I have chosen, will afford us
many suitable and seasonable considerations for such a meeting: for here you
have, first, the condition that the bodies of men (even the best of men, the
Saints of God) are in, in this life, they are vile bodies, the Greek is very
emphaticall (...), corpus vilitatis, that is, bodies of vileness, or a vile
body, the Greek (...) signifies abjectam conditionem, a vile and abject
condition, such as is the condition of slaves or bondmen.

2. Here we have the condition that the bodies of the Saints shall be in at the
glorious resurrection of the Just, then their vile bodies shall be made like to
the glorious body of the Lord Jesus Christ, the body of vileness shall then be
the body of glory.

3. We have h^^e the persons that shall be thus changed at the glorious
resurrection, and they are such who have their conversations in heaven; Who
shall change our, not every vile body, but our vile body, whose conversations
are in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body.

4. We have the person that shall do all this, and that person is the Lord
Jesus Christ.

5. The time when this shall be done, and that is at the great day of
Judgment, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who at
that day when he comes to judge the world, shall change our vile bodies.

6. We have the means by which all this shall be accomplished, and that is,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself, and therefore able to make this glorious transfiguration and
transformation of our bodies.

You may perceive by what I have said, that this Text is a Cabinet of many
precious truths: here you have the Doctrine of the bodies fragility and
vileness; and the Doctrine of the bodies immortality and glorification at the
resurrection of the just. You have the Doctrine of the eternal day of
judgment; you have the doctrine of the main design and end why Jesus Christ
will come to Judgment, one chief reason of it is, that he may change our vile
bodies, and fashion them like unto his glorious body.

My purpose is to pick out two of these jewels to speak to at this time.

1. The condition that the bodies of the Saints are in in this life. 2. The
condition that the bodies of the Saints are in at the great day of judgment.
First, I shall speak of the (...), of the body of vileness, or, the vile
body: and then of the (...), of the body of glory.

1. That the bodies of the Saints as long as they are in this life, they are
vile bodies.

2. That the Lord Jesus Christ at the day of jugement shall raise up these vile
bodies and make them formable to his glorious body.

1. That the bodies of the Saints in this life, they are vileness: the holy
Apostle foresaw how prone men and women would be to be proud of the bodies and
pamper their bodies, and spend their time and care about their bodies, even to
the neglect of their precious souls, and therefore he is pleased to call our
bodies vile bodies: and in 1 Cor. 25. 43. there he calls them bodies of
dishonor, (...), bodies of dishonor, or bodies of vileness.

Object. Object.
But you will say, In what respect may the body of a Saint be called a vile
body?

Answ. Answ.
The bodies of the Saints may be said to be vile in regard of his primitive
creation, before it was defiled with sin; for the body of man was made of the
dust of the earth, ex pulvere terrae, not made of excellent materials, as
silver and gold; nor of Celestial materials, as Sun, Moon and Stars, but of
perishing and contemptible materials, the body was made of dust, of clay and
muddy dust, ex luto.

2. And more especially since the fall of Adam, our bodies are called vile
bodies, because subject to vile diseases; there is no disease so vile, but the
body of a Saint is subject to it: take the example of Job, a man eminent in
godliness, yet his body full of sores and boyles, from the crown of the head
to the sole of the foot; and he says of himself in Job 7. 5. My flesh is
clothed with worms, and clods of dust, my skin is broken and become loathsome.

3. They may be said to be vile because subject to vile abominations, to vile
wickednesses and impieties; for since the fall, our bodies are become the
instruments of iniquity unto iniquity, unto drunkenness and adultery, to
murders, and theeveries, and idolatries, etc.

4. In the best of the Saints, their bodies are impediments to their nobler
souls, and therefore the body is called vincula animi, the bonds and fetters of
the soul, that hinders the soul from, and in heavenly operations.

5. The body may be said to be vile in reference to its final corruption and
dissolution; for when the soul is separated from the body, then you will all
say that the body is a vile putrified rotten stinking carcass, turning to
dust, and eaten up of worms, that says to corruption, Thou art my father, and
to the worms, Thou art my mother and my sister.

6. The body may be said to be vile in comparison of the precious soul; for the
body* as one says, is but the worst half of the soul; it is half, but it is
the worst half; the body is but the cark^sse the shell, the box of the soul,
Intus est quod homo est, it is the soul of a man that is the man of man; the
soul is like an Angel dwelling in the body, as in a house of clay. The soul is
not made of the dust, as the body is, but the soul is made of the breath of
God, ex ore Dei, (as one says) not made of the essence of God, but of the
breath of God; and therefore in that respect, in comparison of the soul, the
body may be said to be a vile body.

7. And lastly, the body may be said to be vile in this life, in comparison of
what it shall be at the glorious resurrection, for then it shall be a most
glorious body conformable unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ.

Now for the application of this, Use.
let me beseech you sirs, that you would often and often meditate upon this
appellation and epithet, that is here given unto our bodies, they are called
vile bodies, vile when separated from the soul, vile when united to to the
soul, vile before the fall of man, but especially vile since the fall of man;
subject to vile diseases and abominations: and one thing more which I forgot
before, and that is, they are vile because subject to be abused by wicked
persecutors, and by malicious tyrants, for though a tyrant cannot hurt the soul
of a Saint, yet he may torment the body; and therefore in Heb. 11. it is said
of the holy Saints; that they underwent cruel mockings and scourgings, and
bonds and imprisonment, and wandered up and down in sheeps skins and goats
skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented: all which is understood of
their bodies, and therefore vile bodies because subject to be abused, and
subject to all manner of wickednesses; but especially vile in comparison of the
precious soul, and in respect of what their bodies shall be hereafter. Now let
this meditation teach us these Lessons.

1. Lesson 1.
Let this epithet teach you a lesson of humility; the bodies you carry about
you are vile bodies, let us not then be proud of them: Beza translates the
words, corpus humilitatis, a body of humility: on purpose it was that God made
the body of the lowest elements, that we might not be lifted up with pride of
our bodies, but have a mean and low esteem of them; and hence it is that the
body in Scripture is compared to things that are very mean and contemptible, as
to the grass of the field, to hay, and dry stubble, as in Job 13. 2. to a leaf
driven to and fro with the wind: to a rotten thing, and to a garment that is
moth-eaten, in the 28 verse of this chapter, it is compared to such mean
things, that we might learn to have a mean esteem of our bodies. Why art thou
proud oh dust and ashes? what is thy handsome body, but gilded rottenness?
what are all your riches and honors but heaps of dung and dust? and God will
shortly lay your honor in the dust. Every bird makes her nest of that thou are
made of; every beast treads that under feet that thou art made of; every
creeping thing disposes of that thou art made of; every blast of wind
scatters that which thou art made of; and why then art thou proud oh dust and
ashes? what is man but rottenness and corruption, but worms meat?

I remember what I have once read in a manuscript concerning a stone that was
presented to Alexander the Great, the nature of it was this, that being put
into one part of the balance, it weighed down what ever was put in the other
part of it; but if a little dust were cast upon the stone, then every thing
weighed down the stone; and he that brought the stone being demanded what he
meant by it, he answered. Oh Alexander thou art this stone, thou whilst thou
live, do weigh down all that are against thee, and treadest down all
before thee; but when thou come to die, and there is a little dust thrown
upon thee, then every man will outweigh you, and then you will be less then
any man in the world.

Remember you are but dust, dust you are, and to dust you must return, Oh
therefore cast dust upon your beauty, cast dust upon your riches, cast dust
upon your bodies, and be not proud of your vile bodies. This is one Lesson of
humility.

2. Lesson 2.
Here is from this Epithet, a Lesson of mortification, this vile body of ours
is subject to be abused by the Devil to vile abominations; and therefore now
let us go to Jesus Christ to get power to mortify and crucify this body of
flesh, this body of sin that is in us; for we have a body of sin, and that is
it which makes this body of ours to be so vile, therefore I say let us bury our
selves in the grave of Christ, that so we may draw mortifying graces from the
Lord Jesus Christ, that may tend to the subduing of our corruptions, and the
lusts of our flesh. Excellent is that expression of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 9.
27. says he, I keep under my body and bring it into subjection, lest that by
any means when I have preached to others I my self should be a castaway. Upon
which words, S. Augustine has this saying, if the great Ram of the flock
(says he) has need to beat down his body to bring it into subjection, how
much more should we tender lambs use all means for the keeping of them under?
the body is called ( Jumentum animi) the beast of the soul, now when this beast
begins to kick against the soul, we must labor to subdue it by fasting and
prayer.

3. Lesson 3.
Let this epithet teach us a Lesson of heavenly courage and fortitude, let us
not fear what man can do unto us. Let us not fear what the worst of men can do,
for they can but kill this vile body; and therefore says Christ, Fear not him
that can but kill the body, and after that can do no more, they cannot reach
the soul of a Saint, they can but hurt the body, and that is a vile body too,
subject to a thousand diseases and abominations, and therefore why should we
fearwhat vile man can do against us, seeing they can only hurt this vile body,
and when they have done all they can, this body in spite of them will rise
again, and this vile body will become a most glorious body? Oh let us not make
shipwreck of a good conscience, to save this vile body, Oh let us not destroy
our souls to save this vile carkase in a good cause.

4. Lesson 4.
In the next place from this Epithet of vile body, let us learn this Lesson,
not to set the servant on horse back, and let the Master go a foot; let us not
prefer the handmaid before the Mistress, let us not prefer the box before the
jewel, this vile body before our precious and immortal souls. The body is
made of dust, and who ever advanced dust? we use to sweep that away off from
our clothes, and out of our houses; oh therefore let us not advance our bodies
that are but dust; the body without the soul is but a lump of clay, a rotten
carcass, do not then prefer it before thy precious soul.

It is a sad thing to consider how most people, even those that believe the
Doctrine of the souls immortality, do spend the best of their time, and cares
and affections upon these vile bodies, and in the mean time neglect to provide
for their eternal souls. Give me leave to illustrate this by a similitude,
Suppose a man should invite a Noble man to his house, and only provide
provender for the noble man's horses, without any provision at all for himself,
only such as his horses feed on, would not this be a course entertainment? and
yet this is the disposition of most people in the world; the soul is this
Nobleman, which dwells in this body of clay, as in a poor cottage, and we pamper
our bodies, and provide provender for them, but take no care at all of our
noble souls, we neglect them, our souls are never the richer for all our
worldly wealth, nor are our souls the finer for all our golden clothes. I have
read a prayer that I have oftentimes wondered at, and that is the prayer of S.
John concerning Gaius, in 3 John 2. he does there pray, that his body might
prosper and be in health, even as his soul prospered; if we should make such
prayers for many of our people, we should rather curse them then pray for them,
for if they had no better bodies then they have souls, they would have very
leanbodies. You should labor so to live that this prayer might be fit for you,
that we might pray that God would prosper your bodies even as your soul
prospers; let your chief part take up your chiefest care.

Once more in the fifth place, Lesson 5.
Let us from this Epithet learn a lesson of thankfulness; seeing our bodies
are bodies of vileness, then if God has formed you into a more handsome or
healthful body then other men, if God has made any of us ex meliore luto, of
better earth, if God has made us golden vessels in regard of our outward
condition, if God has raised any of us from the dust, and set us in high
places, especially if God has made us elect vessels, vessels of mercy in
regard of our eternal condition, as I doubt not but there are many such here:
Oh give God a great deal of glory, and give God all the glory. If God has made
thy vile body an instrument of righteousness unto holiness, if God has
sanctified it and made it a temple fit for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, then let
me speak to you in the language of the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6. 15, 19. and 3. 17.
Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? will you take the
members of Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God forbid* Know you not
that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you? and, if any
man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Will you abuse that body
that is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, to sin and iniquity? God forbid.

But I must pass from this point and come to the second, which was, that our
worthy and dear brother was very much refreshed withal, and did often repeat
in my hearing, and upon that account I made choice of this Text at this time.
The second observation then is this.

That the Lord Jesus Christ shall come down from heaven at the great day of
Judgment, Doct. 2.
and shall raise those vile bodies of ours, and shall make them like unto his
glorious body.

This Doctrine is an Alablaster box full of precious consolation, it was a
great comfort and support to our dear brother, when he was going out of the
world; and oh that it might be a precious Cordial to every one of us when we
come to lie upon our deathbeds!

I shall here by way of illustration, propound three short questions, and then
answer them.

Quest. Quest. 1.
1. What is that change that Christ shall make in our vile bodies at the
glorious resurrection?

Answ. Answ.
God will not make a substantial change of our bodies, but only of the quality
of them; the same bodies that are now vile, shall then be glorious; that look
as a piece of wool when it is dyed into a scarlet dye, yet it is the same wool
for substance, though it be made more glorious; so likewise shall our bodies be
at the resurrection, they shall be the same bodies, only made more glorious;
Mat. 22. They shall be bodies of glorification; we shall be made equal to the
Angels, not in regard of essence, but in regard of qualities.

Chrysostom has a fine simile to this purpose, (says he) as a Goldsmith
takes a little gold, and puts it into a refining pot, and melts it, and then
out of that gold forms a golden vessel fit to be set before Kings: so the
Lord Jesus Christ will melt the bodies of his Saints by death, and then out of
their dead ashes will form a vessel of gold, a glorious body fit to live
before God, and sing Halelujahs in heaven to all eternity.

Quest. Quest. 2.
What kind of transfiguration or transformation, shall our bodies have at that
day? What is this metamorphosis, this change? wherein does it consist?

Answ. Answ.
It is impossible to set out those glorious excellencies that God will bestow
upon our bodies at that great and glorious resurrection. Augustine has this
expression, says he, How great the glory of our spiritual bodies shall be at
that day, because we have no experience of it, I am afraid it will be rashness
for any man to speak peremptorily about it.

If I had time, there are many places of Scripture I would crave leave to open
to you concerning this, we shall at that day be made equal to the Angels: it
is sown a corruptible body, but raised an incorruptible body: it is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power: it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, etc. And
many other places; but I shall confine my self to the expression here in the
Text, These vile bodies of ours shall be made (...), conformable to the
glorious body of Christ; and this is enough to set out the excellency of them;
for the body of Christ now in heaven certainly is unexpressibly glorious, you
have a specification of this in his transfiguration, the face of Christ did
shine as the Sun, in so much that Peter was swallowed up with the brightness
of that glory; and yet that was but a glimpse of his glory now in heaven, Rev.
2. 2. There shall be no need of the Sun there, for the Lamb shall be the light
of Heaven.

There are many Divines of opinion, that the brightness that Paul saw when he
was struck dead off his horse, was the brightness of the body of Jesus Christ;
surely great is the glory of that body, now the bodies of the Saints shall be
changed into the likeness of the glorious body of Jesus Christ.

Quest. Quest. 3.
But how shall this be done?

Answ. Answ.
My brethren, with man this is impossible: but with God nothing is impossible:
my Text tells you how this shall be done, even according to the mighty working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. The Lord Jesus Christ he is
almighty, and therefore he is able to do it; and let me tell you this, our dear
Brother did thrice repeat these words, according to his mighty power, his
mighty power, even his mighty power, he is able to change this vile body of
mine, and make it like unto his glorious body.

Object. Object.
But shall all bodies be made thus glorious?

Answ. Answ.
No, the bodies of the wicked shall rise at the last day, but it shall be to
their everlasting shame and ruin and confusion; the bodies of the wicked shall
be immortal, but they shall be immortal fuel to immortal flames; the bodies
of the wicked shall come out of the grave, as the Baker did out of prison in
Egypt, to be executed; they shall go out of prison to the place of execution;
out of the grave as out of prison to be hung in chains for ever and ever; the
wicked shall rise, but their bodies in stead of being glorious shall be
loathsome and abominable.

Object. Object.
But what is the Character of those men and women whose bodies shall be made
thus glorious at that day?

Answ. Answ.
There is one Character of them in the Text, if thou art one that have thy
conversation in heaven, then thy body shall be glorious. For our conversation
is in heaven from whence also we look for a Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body, etc.

If thou be a man that mindest earthly things, if thou art an Epicure and
voluptuous, and given over to fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, thy body shall rise, but it shall rise to the resurrection of
everlasting condemnation. But you that are heavenly minded, that have your
dispositions and conversations in heaven; then when Christ comes from heaven,
he shall make your bodies glorious.

2. Ans. 2.
You that are Members of Christ's mystical Body, Christ has a Natural body,
and a Mystical body, all the godly that are true believers and really united
to Christ, they are all Members of his Mystical Body; now if thou be a
Member of Christ's Mystical Body, thou shall be made as glorious as Christ's
Natural body. Mistake me not, I speak not of the quality, but likeness, he
will make his Mystical body as glorious as his Natural body, therefore it is
said in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. that at the day of Judgment, he shall be glorified in
his Saints, that is, glorified in the glory that his Saints shall have at that
day; here Christ is glorified by his Saints, but there he shall be glorified in
his Saints, in the glory that the Members of his Mystical body shall then
have, Christ shall have a double glory in heaven, a personal glory; and a
refl^xive glory, the glory of the Members of Christ, shall be the glory of
Christ at that day, all you that are true and real Members of Christ's
Mystical body; your vile body at the great day of Christ appearing, shall be
made like unto his glorious body.

3. Answ. 3.
All you that have gracious souls now, you shall have glorified bodies
hereafter. It was a rare saying that of Bernard, and worthy to be written in
letters of gold (says he) Christ has a double coming, he comes now by his
Ministers to make thy soul glorious, and at the day of Judgment he will come
in his person to make thy body glorious. This is the great mistake of the
world, they spend that time in pampering their bodies, which they should employ
in providing for their souls. This present time is not the time for thy body,
this is the time for thy soul wherein thou should labor to get that adorned
with grace and holiness, and then Christ will come on purpose from heaven to
make thy body glorious hereafter. Do not therefore mistake your time, study to
get good and gracious souls here, and you shall be sure to have glorious bodies
hereafter: and you that defile and pollute your souls, and starve them by
living in sin and iniquity, you that have vile souls here, shall be sure to
have miserable and wretched bodies hereafter.

There are many rare Uses that may be made of this point, Use.
give me leave to name one of them to you, and that shall be to all you that
have gracious souls, I hope I speak to many such this night, whose souls are
adorned with the robes of Christ's righteousness, to all you that mind
heavenly things, who have your conversations in heaven; to all you that are
members of Christ's Mystical body; consider I beseech you what a glorious
condition your vile bodies shall be in at the great day of Christ's appearing,
consider it, and that in these two particulars.

1. Let this consideration comfort us against the fear Jacob in Gen 44. Fear
not to go down into Egypt (says God) for certainly I will bring thee out
again. So say I to you that are the Saints of God, fear not to go down to the
house of rottenness, fear not to lay down your heads in the grave, for God
will certainly bring you out again, and you shall come out a glorious body;
fear not to have this house, this tabernacle of thy body pulled down, for God
shall raise it up again, and make of it a glorious structure.

2. Let this comfort us against the death of our godly it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.

This body of ours in the grave is a member of Christ, and united to Christ,
even in the grave; and this dust of thine is precious, and therefore we are
said to die in Christ.

There is a Text that did very much refresh this our Brother (upon his
deathbed) which I never took such special notice of before, and that is in Job
21. 33. says Job there, the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto me; they
made their graves in the valleys, and says Job, the mould and clods that fills
the grave shall be sweet unto me: the earth shall be sweet to the Saints.



he should have a better tongue at the resurrection.

glorify God in your bodies. Oh you that are the Saints of God, whose bodies
by grace are become the Temples of the Holy Ghost, let me beseech you by the
mercies of that God, that has sanctified your bodies, and made them
instruments of his service, that you would yield up your bodies, and present
them a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, Romans 12. 1.
which is your reasonable service: make your bodies more and more the
instruments of righteousness unto righteousness.

And let us that are Ministers think of this, let us not think it much to wear
out our bodies in Gods service, at the day of Judgment we shall then have
glorious bodies. Let us not think we can do God too much service with our
bodies, especially when we consider how glorious our bodies shall be at the
resurrection, even conformable to the glo^ious body of Jesus Christ.

Here is another Use I should make of this, Use 2.
which I shall but name to you, and that is a divine project how to make your
bodies glorious: If there were such a Physician amongst you that could cure all
your deformities and diseases, and make your bodies immortal, how would you
prize him? Beloved, I have this day told you of such a Physician, and that is
the Lord Jesus Christ, that shall one day come from heaven, and make our vile
bodies like to his glorious body. Hearken to me, thou proud dust and ashes,
thou that spendest all thy time in decking and adorning thy body with sinful
deckings, consider thy madness, that whilst thou take more care for thy
vile body then for thy precious soul, thou do ruin and destroy both. Do but
hearken to me, and I will show you a way how to get glorious bodies and
glorious souls too; labor to get gracious souls here, and you shall be sure to
have glorious bodies and souls hereafter; labor to have your conversations in
heaven here, and then at the great day of Judgment, Jesus Christ will let out
some of his glory to make you glorious, he shall change our vile bodies, and
fashion them like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby, he
is able to subdue all things to himself.

But I must forbear and leave things imperfect, because there is another text
that I must speak a little to.

It has pleased God now of late to take away many worthy and godly and learned
Ministers from amongst us. And certainly my brethren this is a great Judgment,
and so much the greater, because people are so little sensible of it. And it is
not only a great Judgment it self, but also a presage of a greater.

The Jews had a saying, That it was an ill sign to the world, when the
Luminaries of heaven were eclipsed. God has lately eclipsed many Luminaries,
and put out many glorious lights. I need not put you of this city in mind of
Dr. Gouge, Mr. Walker, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Gatiker, Mr. Strong. I need not put
those of the University in mind of Dr. Hill, and now this reverend and worthy
Minister Dr. Samuel Bolton Master of Christ's College in Cambridge. If I should
enter into his commendations, I might justly say that which another said in the
like case, That there is more fear, lest we should say less, then he deserved;
then that we should praise him above his deserts. He was a burning and a
shining light in this our Israel; he was an Interpreter one of a thousand, a
man of excellent ministerial abilities, a workman that needed not to be
ashamed, dividing aright the word of truth; he was one that did not only preach
well, but live well; he was one whose life was an excellent commentary upon his
Sermons. As Nazianzen said of John the Baptist, who is called the voice of the
crier, says he, John the Baptist was ( tota vox,) all voice in his prudence,
all voice in his habit, all voice in his diet, all voice in his dwelling, all
voice in his conversation: so was our dear Brother all voice; he was a voice in
his life, as well as in his Doctrine: and let me tell you, that the life of a
Minister preaches as much as his Doctrine; it was a saying that Ruffinus has
of Gregory Nazianzen, which I may apply to this our Brother, he not condemning
himself by living contrary to what he preached, but he did do those things
himself that he taught to others: He had not only dona sanata, but dona
salutifera, not only gifts for the good of others, but grace for the good of
his own soul. Many Ministers have rare gifts and parts, but they are like a
Pearl in a Toads head, because their Lives give a lie to their Doctrines; but
this our Brother was one that not only had gifts for the good of others, but
grace for the good of his own soul, and that is his greatest commendation, he
was an humble Saint. There are 4. things, says Luther, that make a Minister,
prayer, reading, meditation, and temptation; our Christian Brother was not only
a man of reading, prayer, and meditation, but a man assaulted with many
temptations, more I believe then many hundreds of Ministers are; he was much
assaulted with temptations, and therefore the better able to comfort those that
were tempted, with those comforts where withal he was comforted. And let me
take the boldness to tell you, that he has left a writing behind him,
wherein he has recorded all the outgoings of God toward him, and all the
experiences of Gods shining with the light of his countenance upon him, and
also of his withdrawings and hiding his face from him; both those times when
God was at a distance from him, and when he approached nearer to him. He was so
zealous in his Ministerial function, that though he was head of a College in
Cambridge, yet notwithstanding for many years together, he preached freely
without any salary, at the public Church in that City. And this puts me in
mind of what was said in a Sermon in print of that reverend and godly man
Doctor Hill, that he preached the Gospel without any charges to them that
heard him: and so did this our Brother for many years; and for three or four
years he was Lecturer in this place, where he preached to the great
satisfaction of the godly, both here and in many other places of the City, that
duly waited upon his Ministry. And though he be now dead, yet he still speaks,
not only by the holiness of his life and graciousnesse of his Doctrine, but
also by the many books that he has left in print behind him, in which books
you may see a fair character of his piety and Ministerial abilities. He was
very orthodox and sound in Judgment, no spiritual leprosy in his head,
witness those two Books of his, The Arraignment of Errors, and A Vindication
of the right of the Law, and of the Liberties of Grace. He was a man of a
public spirit, witness that Book of his, A Work in season to a sinking
Kingdom. He was very careful in his Sacramental admission, when he had a
place wherein to exercise his Ministry; he was very exact in that particular,
witness that Book of his called The Wedding Garment.

For the time of sickness it was long, tedious, and constant; and yet
notwithstanding it pleased God to measure out to him a great deal of patience
and consolation; and it is observable, and may be for the comfort and
encouragement of those Ministers or people that meet with a great many crosses,
and troubles, and temptations in their life times, they do commonly receive the
greatest comforts at their death.

It pleased God to come in to this our godly Brother with a great deal of
comfort, in so much, that before he dyed, he said, his heart was as full of
comfort as it could hold, and says he, though the providence of God have been
very dark toward me, yet I thank God I have light within me. When I was last
with him, he was wonderful desirous to be dissolved and to be with Christ; and
I heard him say, Oh this vile carcass of mine, when will it give way that my
soul may get out, and go to my God? Oh this vile carcass, when will thou be
consumed, that I may go to my God? And when he did see any symptoms of death,
any thing that did threaten death, which he called the the little crevises at
which his soul did peep out, it was the joy of his heart.

It was his desire to be buried without any Funeral pomp, which puts me in
mind of good Pell, when he was a dying, the Scholars of the University came to
him and asked him whether he would be buried in his Scholastic habit or no,
says he, No, I desire to die as an humble Christian, not as a Doctor, as a
humble Saint, not as a learned man; and I trust I shall appear at the great
day, not clad with my Doctors Robes, but with the Robes of Christ's
righteousness. And this was the desire and the hope of our dear brother, and
this Text that I have preached on, he did with a great deal of earnestness of
spirit rejoice in, when he considered of that day when this vile body of his,
subject to so many diseases, should be made like to the glorious body of Jesus
Christ; in whose blessed Arms we leave this our dear Brother, beseeching God
that he would make up this great loss of him, to the Church of God in
general, and to the University of Cambridge in particular.

FINIS.

