His MAJESTY'S Declaration to all His Loving Subjects in the County of
CORNWALL, etc.
CHARLES R.

WE are so highly sensible of the extraordinary merit of Our County of
Cornwall, of their zeal for the Defense of Our Person, and the just Rights of
Our Crown, (in a time when We could contribute so little to Our own defense,
or to their Assistance; in a time when not only no Reward appeared, but great
and probable dangers were threatened to Obedience and Loyalty,) of their great
and eminent Courage and Patience in their indefatigable prosecution of their
great Work against so potent an Enemy, backed with so strong, rich and populous
Ciries, and so plentifully furnished with Men, Arms, Money, Ammunition and
Provision of all kinds; And of the wonderful success with which it has
pleased Almighty God (though with the the loss of some eminent persons, who
shall never be forgotten by Us) to reward their Loyalty and Patience by many
strange Victories over their and Our enemies, in despite of all humane
probability, and all imaginable disadvantages; That as We cannot be forgetful
of so great deserts, so We cannot but desire to publish to all the world, and
perpetuate to all Time anp Memory of these their merits, and of Our acceptance
of the same. And to that end, We do hereby render Our Royal thanks to that
Our County in the most public and Lasting manner We can devise, commanding
Copies hereof to be Printed and published, and one of them to be read in every
Church and Chapel therein, and to be kept for ever as a Record in the same,
That as long as the History of these Times, and this Nation shall continue, the
memory of how much that County has merited from Us and Our Crown, may be
derived with it to posterity.

Given at Our Camp at SUDELEY Castle the tenth of September. 1643. 15 Sept:
1643
The agreement of the Mayor, Aldermen, and inhabitants of the Town of TENBY.
WE the Major, Aldermen, and inhabitants of Tenby, do hereby humbly Declare,
that we will be always obedient to the Kings Majesty's Royal Commands, and
will serve Him with our Lives and Fortunes, and assist Him against all Rebels,
and Rebellions whatsoever, and will submit to His Majesty's Authority, now
placed in the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Carbery, Lord Lieutenant
General of the Counties of Pembrock Carmarthen, and Cardigan, the Town and
County of Haverfordwest, and the Towns of Pembrocke and Tenby, And withal
will heartily Contribute to His Majesty's Service, to the best of our
abilities; And we do farther declare and engage our selves upon the faith of
Loyal Subjects, that we will not receive into our Towns any Garrison, Force,
or Person whatsoever sent or to be sent thither from any who now are, or
hereafter shall be, in Rebellion against His Majesty, under the name of the
forces of King and Parliament, but will dutifully receive and embrace all such
armed Forces and Garrisons as our said Lord Lieutenant General shall thither
send or Command for the safe guarding of the said Town for the use and service
of His Sacred Majesty.

For assurance whereof we have hereunto fixed our Common Seal, and subscribed
our names this thirtieth day of August. 1643. Thomas Wyatt Major. David
Hammond. Fran. Long. Rice Prickard. John Rogers. Robert Brown. Richard Jewel.
Walter Sherburne. David Palmer. Thomas Barret. Rice Barrow. Richard Wyatt.
Griffeth Gibbon. John Barrow. John Sounder. Henry Gibbs. Lewis Bishop. David
Stowell. Thomas Stephens. William Record. John Stone. John Poyer. Mich. Sutton.
John Henton. Silvanus Griffith. John Hammond. Richard Williams. Nicholas
Horsam. John Thomas Phillip Davis. Rice Gitto, Bartho. King.


Printed at OXFORD, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.


