HIS Majesty's DECLARATION To all His loving SUBJECTS, Occasioned by a false
and scandalous Imputation laid upon His Majesty of an Intention of Raising or
Leavying War against His Parliament, and of having raised Force to that end.

ALSO, His Majesty's Declaration and Profession, together with that of the
Lords and others of His Council there present, disavowing any Preparations or
Intentions of Leavying War against His two Houses of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

royal blazon or coat of arms

His Majesty's Declaration to all His loving Subjects, occasioned by a false
and scandalous Imputation laid upon His Majesty of an Intention of raising, or
leavying War against His Parliament, and of having raised Force to that end.
Published at His Court at York, the 16. day of June. 1642.
THough We have these last seven Months met with so many several Encounters
of strange and unusual Declarations, under the Names of both Our Houses of
Parliament, that We should not be amazed at any new Prodigy of that kind; And
though their last of the 26 of May gave Us a fair Warning, that the Contrivers
of it, having spent all their Stock of bitter and reproachful Language upon
Us, We were to expect they should now break out into some bold and disloyal
Actions against Us; And having by that Declaration (as far as in them lies)
divested Us of that preeminence and authority, which God, the Law, the Custom
and Consent of this Nation had placed in Us, and assumed it to themselves, That
they should likewise with expedition put forth the fruits of that supreme
Power, for the violating and supressing that power they despised (an effect of
which Resolution their wild Declaration against Our Proclamation concerning
the pretended Ordinance for the Militia, and the punishing of the Proclaimers
appears to be) yet We must confess, in their last attempt (We speak of the
last We know, they may probably since, or at this present have outdone that
too) they have outdone what We conceive was their present Intention; And
whosoever hears of Propositions and Orders for bringing in of Money or Plate to
maintain Horse, Horsemen and Arms for the preservation of the public Peace,
or for the defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament (such is their
Declaration, or what else they please to call it, of the 10 of June) will
surely believe the Peace of this Kingdom to be extremely shaken, and (at least)
the King himself to be consulted with, and privy to these Propositions; But We
hope, that when Our good Subjects shall find that this goodly Pretense of The
defense of the King, is but a specious Bait to seduce weak and inconsiderate
Men into the highest Acts of Disobedience and Disloyalty against Us, and of
Violence and Destruction upon the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, they
will no longer be captivated by an implic^te Reverence to the name of both
Houses of Parliament, but will carefully examine and consider what number of
Persons are present, and what Persons are prevalent in those Consultations, and
how the Debates are probably managed, from whence such horrid and monstrous
Conclusions do result, and will (at least) weigh the Reputation, Wisdom, and
Affection of those, who are notoriously known, out of the very horror of their
proceedings, to have withdrawn themselves, or by their skill and violence to be
driven from them and their Counsels.

Whilst their Fears and Iealousies did arise, or were infused into the People
from discourses of the Rebels in Ireland, of s^ippers at Rotterdam, of Forces
from Denmark, France or Spain (how improbable and ridiculous soever that bundle
of Information appeared to all wise and knowing Men) it is no wonder, if the
easiness to deceive, and the willingness to be deceived did prevail over many
of Our weak Subjects, to believe that the Dangers, which they did not see,
might proceed from Causes, which they did not understand: But for them to
declare to all the world, that we intend to make War against Our Parliament
(whilst We sit still complaining to God Almighty of the injury offered to Us,
and to the very being of Parliaments) and that We have already begun actually
to leavie Forces both of Horse and Foot (whilst We have only in a legal way
provided a smaller Guard for the security of Our own Person, so near a
Rebellion at Hull, then they have had, without lawful authority, above these
eight Months, upon imaginary and impossible dangers) to impose upon Our
Peoples sense, as well as their understanding, by telling them, We are doing
that which they see We are not doing, and intending that they all know (as much
as Intentions can be known) We are not intending, is a boldness agreeable to
no power but the omnipotency of those Votes, whose absolute supremacy has
almost brought confusion upon King and People, and against which no knowledge
in matter of Fact, or consent and authority in matter of Law they will endure
shall be opposed.

We have upon all occasions with all possible Expressions professed Our fast
and unshaken Resolutions for Peace; And We do again (in the presence of
Almighty God Our Maker and Redeemer) assure the world, That We have no more
thought of making a War against Our Parliament, then against Our own Children;
That We voill maintain and observe the Acts assented to by Us this Parliament
without Violation, of which, That for the frequent assembling of Parliaments is
one; And that We have not, or shall not have any thought of using any Force,
unless We shall be driven to it for the security of Our Person, and for the
defense of the Religion, Laws, and Liberty of the Kingdom, and the just Rights
and Privileges of Parliament: And therefore We hope the Malignant Party, who
have so much despised Our Person, and usurped Our Office, ^^ all not by their
specious fra^dulent Insinuations prevast with Our good Subjects, to give credit
to their wicked Assertions, and so to contribute their Power and Assistance for
the ruin and destruction of Us and themselves.

For Our Guard about Our Person (which not so much their Example as their
Provocation enforced Us to take) it is known it consists of the prime Gentry
(in Fortune and Reputation) of this County, and of One Regiment of Our Trained
Bands, who have been so far from offering any Affronts, injuries, or
disturbance to any of Our good Subjects, that their principal end is to
prevent such; and so may be security, can be no grievance to Our People. That
some ill affected Persons, or any Persons have been employed in other Parts
raise Troops under color of Our Service, or have made large (or any) Offers of
Reward and Preferment to such as will come in, is (for ought We know, and as We
believe) an un-truth devised by the Contrivers of this false Rumor; We disavow
it, and are confident there will be no need of such Art or Industry to induce
Our loving Subjects, when they shall see Us oppressed, and their Liberties and
Laws confounded, (and till then We shall not call on them) to come in to Us,
and to assist Us.

For the Delinquents, (whom We are said with an high and forcible hand to
Protect) let them be named and their Delinquencie, and if We give not
satisfaction to Justice, when We shall have received satisfaction concerning
Sir John Hotham by his legal Trial, then let Us be blamed: But if the Design
be (as it is well known to be) after We have been driven by Force from Our
City of London, and kept by Force from Our Town of Hull, to protect all those
who are Delinquents against Us, and to make all those Delinquents who attend on
Us, or execute Our lawful Commands; We have great reason to be satis fied in
the truth and justice of such Accusation, lest to be Our servant, and to be a
Delinquent grow to be Terms so convertible, that in a short time We be left as
naked in attendance, as they would have Us in power, and so compel Us to be
waited on only by such whom they shall appoint and allow, and in whose
presence We should be more miserably alone, then in desolation it self.

And if the seditious Contrivers and Fomenters of this Scandal upon Us shall
have (as they have had) the power to mis-lead the major Part present of either
or both Houses, to make such Orders, and send such Messages and Messengers, as
they have lately done, for the Apprehension of the great Earls and Barons of
England, as if they were Rogues or Felons; And whereby persons of Honor and
Quality are made Delinquents, merely for attending upon Us, and upon Our
Summons, whilst other men are forbid to come near Us (though obliged by the
Duty of their places and Oaths) upon Our lawful Commands; It is no wonder if
such Messengers are not very well entreated, and such Orders not Obeyed neither
can there be a surer and a cunninger way found out to render the Authority of
both Houses scorned and vilified, then to assume to themselves (merely upon the
Authority of the name of Parliament) a Power monstrous to all understandings,
and to do Actions, and to make Orders Evidently and Demonstrably contrary to
all Known Law and Reason, (As to take up Arms against Us under color of
defending Us; To cause Money to be brought in to them, and to forbid Our own
Money to be paid to Us, or to Our use, under color that We will employ it ill;
To beat Us, and sterve Us for Our own good, and by Our own Power and Authority)
which must in short time make the greatest Court, and the greatest Person
cheap, and of no Estimation.

Who those sensible Men are of the public Calamities, of the Violations of the
Privileges of Parliament, and the Common Liberty of the Subject, who have been
baffled and injured by Malignant Men, and Cavaliers about Us; We cannot
imagine; And if those Cavaliers are so much without the fear of God and Man,
and so ready to commit all manner of Outrage and Violence as is pretended, Our
Government ought to be the more esteemed, which has kept them from doing so;
insomuch as We believe no person has cause to complain of any injury, or of
any damage in the least degree, by any man about, or who has offered his
service to Us: All which being duly considered, if the Contrivers of these
Propositions and Orders had been truly sensible of the Obligation which lies
upon them, in Honor, Conscience, and Duty, according to the high trust
reposed in them by Us, and Our People, they would not have published such a
sense and apprehension of imminent danger, when themselves in their consciences
know, that the greatest and (indeed) only danger which threatens this Church
and State, the blessed Religion and Liberty of Our People, is in their own
desperate and seditious designs, and would not endeavor upon such weak and
groundless reasons to seduce Our good Subjects from their Affection and
Loyalty to Us, to run themselves into Actions unwarrantable, and destructive to
the peace and Foundation of the Commonwealth.

And that all Our loving Subjects may see how causeless and groundless this
scandalous Rumor and Imputation of Our raising War upon Our Parliament is,
We have, with this Our Declaration, caused to be Printed the Testimony of those
Lords, and other persons of Our Council, who are here with Us, who being upon
the place could not but discover such Our Intentions and Preparations, and
cannot be suspected for their Honors and Interests to combine in such
mischievous and horrid Resolutions: And therefore We straightly charge and
Command all Our loving Subjects upon their Allegiance, and as they will answer
the contrary at their Perils, That they yield no obedience or consent to the
said Propositions and Orders, and that they presume not (under any such
Pretenses, or by color of any such Orders) to raise or leavy any Horse or Men,
or to bring in any Money or Plate to such purpose: But if notwithstanding this
Clear Declaration and Evidence of Our Intentions, these Men (whose Design it
is to compel Us to raise War upon Our Parliament (which all their skill and
malice shall never be able to effect) shall think fit by these Alarms to awaken
Us to a more necessary care of the defense of Our Self and Our People, and
shall themselves (under color of Defense) in so unheard of a manner provide
(and seduce others to do so too) to offend Us, having given Us so lively
Testimony of their Affections what they are willing to do, when they have once
made themselves able; All Our good Subjects will think it necessary to look to
Our Self: And We do then excite all Our well affected People, according to
their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and according to their solemn Vow and
Protestation (whereby they are obliged to defend Our Person, Honor, and
Estate) to contribute their best Assistance to the Preparations necessary for
the opposing and suppressing of the Traitorous Attempts of such wicked and
Malignant Persons, who would destroy Our Person, Honor and Estate, and engage
the whole Kingdom in a Civil War, to satisfy their own lawless Fury and
Ambition, and so rob Our good Subjects of the blessed fruit of this present
Parliament; which they already in some degree have, and might still reap, (to
the abundant satisfaction and joy of the whole Kingdom) if such wicked hands
were not ready to ruin all their possession, and frustrate all their hopes.

We do therefore declare, That whosoever, of what degree or quality soever,
shall then upon so urgent and visible necessity of Ours, and such an apparent
distraction of the Kingdom (caused and begotten by the malice and contrivance
of this Malignant party) bring in to Us, and Our use, ready Money or Plate, or
shall underwrite to furnish any number of Horse, Horsemen and Arms for the
Preservation of the public peace, the defense of Our Person, and the
vindication of the Privilege and Freedom of Parliament, We shall receive it as
a most acceptable service, and as a testimony of his singular affection to the
Protestant Religion, the Laws, Liberties and Peace of the Kingdom, and shall no
longer desire the continuance of that affection, then We shall be ready to
justify and maintain those with the hazard of Our life.

And We do further Declare, that whosoever shall then bring in any sums of
Money or plate to assist Us in this great extremity, shall receive
consideration after the Rate of 81. per Cent. for all such Moneys as he shall
furnish Us withal, and shall upon the payment of such money to such Persons,
whom We shall appoint to receive the same, receive security for the same by
good lawful Assurance of such of our Lands, Forests, Parks, and Houses, as
shall be sufficient for the same, and more real security then the name of
Public Faith given without Us and against Us, as if We were no part of the
Public; And besides We shall always look upon it, as a service most
affectionately and seasonably performed for the preservation of Us and the
Kingdom: But We shall be much gladder that their submission to those Our
Commands, and their desisting from any such Attempt of raising Horse or Men,
may ease all Our good Subjects of that Trouble, Charge and Veration.

His Majesty's Declaration and Profession, disavowing any Preparations or
Intentions in Him to leavie War against His Houses of Parliament.
THere having been many Rumors spread, and Informations given, which may have
induced many to believe, That We intend to make War against Our Parliament; We
profess before God, and declare to all the World, That We always have, and do
abhor all such Designs, and desire all Our Nobility and Council, who are here
upon the place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of Our frequent
and earnest Declarations and Professions to this purpose; whether they see any
color of Preparations or Councels, that might reasonably beget a belief of any
such Design, and whether they be not fully persuaded, that We have no such
Intention; but that all Our Endeavors (according to Our many Professions) tend
to the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace, and
Prosperity of this Kingdom. Given at Our Court at York this fifteenth of June
1642.

The Declaration and Profession of the Lords and others of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, now present at York, disavowing any Preparations or
Intentions in His Majesty to leavie War against His PARLIAMENT.
WE whose Names are underwritten, in Obedience to His Majesty's desire, and out
of the Duty which We owe to His Majesty's Honor, and to Truth, being here
upon the place, and Witnesses of His Majesty's frequent and earnest
Declarations and Professions of His abhorring all Designs of making War upon
His Parliament, and not seeing any color of Preparations or Counsels that
might reasonably beget the belief of any such Design, do profess before God,
and testify to all the World, That we are fully persuaded that His Majesty
has no such Intention, But that all His Endeavors tend to the firm and
constant settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just Privileges of
Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace and Prosperity of this
Kingdom.

York, June fifteenth, 1642. Lo. Keeper. Du. Richmond. Marq. Hertford. Lo. Gr.
Chamberlain. Ea. Cumberland. Ea. Bathe. Ea. Southampton. Ea. Dorset. Ea.
Salisbury. Ea. Northampton. Ea. Devonshire. Ea. Cambridge. Ea. Bristell. Ea.
Clare. Ea. Westmerland. Ea. Barkshire. Ea. Monmouth. Ea. Rivers. Ea. Dover. Ea.
Carnarvon. Ea. Newport. Lo. Mowbray and Matravers Lo. Willoughby of Eresby Lo.
Gray of Ruthin. Lo. Howard, Andover. Lo. Newarck. Lo. Poulett. Lo. Lovelace.
Lo. Rich. Lo. Savile. Lo. Mohun. Lo. Coventrye. Lo. Dunsmore. Lo. Seymour. Lo.
Capell. Lo. Falkland. Sir Peter Wych Comptroller. Mr. Secretary Nicholas. Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer. Lo. Chief Justice Banks.


FINIS.

