A GRACIOUS ANSWER FROM THE KING FOR A TREATY with the Parliament at Newport
in the Isle of Wight. And His Majesty's Desires or Conditions for entering into
the said Treaty.

ALSO, The Heads of several Letters intercepted coming out, of Scotland, and
Commission given for raising of money for the Scots in the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

WITH An exact Relation of advance and motion of the Scots Army, and the
Encounters between them and the Forces commanded by Major General Lambert, and
Lieut. Genesis Cromwell.

LONDON: Printed by B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.

An exact Relation of late actions and motions of the Scots Army in the North,
as also those forces under the command of Major General Lambert, and
Lieutenant General Cromwell.
York August 9.
THe great care and activity of Maj. Genesis Lambert in interposing the Scots, and
hindering their march Southwards, appears by the continual well ordering of
his parties abroad and stopping the passes, but especially by his endeavor to
impead their march to Broug^, which he did by casting up of Ditches, making of
trenches, and making holes, in their passage, if they come on, he is resolved
to fight them, three Counties into which they have come have suffered with a
witness, and they confess they looked for no other when once they came
amongst them, and if those in the South found cause to complain of an Army the
best Disciplined of any in Christendom surely they will prevent any other from
coming amongst them, indeed the Counties through which the Scots Army have
passed are so harrowed, that they must enlarge their quarters, and for that
purpose are advanced to Kendall, and we have intelligence that Sir Marmaduke
Langdale intends to get up into Lancashire, Lieutenant General Cromwell was at
Doncaster last night, we hope to join within two days and be five thousand
horse and Dragoones and seven thousand Foot: more new is come that some of the
Scots have plundered near Preston the Maj. Genesis takes special care to preserve
that County of Lancaster as much as possible they can, having already given
good assistance to this Army and are now generally putting themselves in a
posture o^ Defense from 16 to 60 to which purpose warrants are issued forth
into every hundred, and such as appear not, are to be proceeded against; we
hope that York shire and those Counties will follow this example and provide
for their own safety, the City of York is settled in a good Condition, and the
Militia there have published a Declaration.

In the name and power of God-Almighty to awaken and stir up all true hearted
Englishmen to join as one man for the beating back of the Scots and
confederate Papists, who have invaded England, who have already wasted part of
Cumberland and Westmerland, and stripped Men Women and Children. The Inhabitants
of York Covenant as follows.

The Engagement of the Citizens of York.
I.A.B. Do hereby as in the presence of God faithfully engage my self, that I
will not by my person, Contribution, Intelligence or any other way, assist any
forces raised or to be raised, or any whatsoever shall be employed against the
present Government, peace and safety of this City, but that I will to the utmost
of my power and ability, upon all occasions aid and assist this Authority now
established, in the preservation and defense of this City, when I shall be
thereunto required, and do further promise, that I will freely and fully
discover to the Lord Mayor of this City, or some by him appointed, any design
of force or treachery, or any other mischief intended against this City, and
the present Government of the same, so far as comes to my knowledge. And to
this Engagement I subscribe my name.

Signed by the Inhabitants of York,
August 2. 1648.
Some of the Scots forces are returned back into their own Country well laden
with gueds, they have somewhat to do at home, and then to return again and
bring more wives and bearnes into England, three and twenty prisoners most of
which were men of note in tempest escaped out of Newcastle and Tinmouth most of
them are said to be gone to Barwick, and Carlisle to seek for places of command.

Westmin. Aug. 12.
Certain letters were intercepted by Major G. Lambert found about Mr.
Aliburton, who was employed to carry a letter to the King, from the Committee
of Estates at Edinburgh, which letters were sent up to the House of Commons,
and upon opening thereof, it appeared that part of them were written in
Characters, and did import matter of great concernment: So the Commons made
choice of a Committee to read them, find out the meaning, and report it to the
House. One of these letters was directed to the Countess of Carlisle.
Recommending the trust and faithfulness of the Bearer to the Design,
signifying further, that D. Hammilton was entered the Kingdom of England with an
Army, and carried with him a Declaration, of which a Copy was also sent to her
Honor.

They intimate a desire of excuse in the pening, for that it was drawn up in
less then 48. hours, but say the matter should be maintained, saying, all
things went on prosperously according to their minds, and the desires and
invitations of their friends in England.

The Letter was subscribed in characters, which were understood to be the Lord
Callender or Lauderdail.

Another letter was directed to another noble person of this Kingdom,
expressing the good service was like to be performed by 32. which by the
characters signified the Earl of Holland, with another paper, which was desired
to be sent to the L. Jermin.

Other letters signified, that the Bearer, meaning Mr. Aliburton, could truly
inform of the state of all things in present action, and to whom anything might
be safely communicated, that were not fit to be written, for fear of
intercepting, etc. assuring, that this Gentleman the Bearer, had commission to
levy and receive Moneys for the service of the Army of that Kingdom, and was a
person of extraordinary trust, etc.

subscribed in Characters,

CALENDER.

This M: Aliburton had lately a pass from the House to go upon his public
employment to the King at the Isle of Wight, is returned back again to London,
and the Commons desire the concurrence of the Lords, that he may not be trusted
to stay here for that it appears that he is employed as a private Agent to
raise Money on the English Nation, for those that have invaded this Kingdom^ in
an hostile manner, and had other secret business here.

This day Sir Peter Killegrew (who attended the Commissioners, to his Maj. in
the Isle of Wight) returned to the Parliament and brought letters from the said
Commissiioners, on their journey back, his Maj. has given a gracious answer
to the votes of Parliament for a treaty, which its thought the Earl of
Middlesex and the other Commis. will be with here this night, or early on
Monday, That which is chiefly observeable in that message, is, that his Majesty
is very well pleased with the Vote so his Majesty to treat with honor,
freedom, and safety, and is pleased to condescend to treat with hi^ Parliament
for settling the peace of the Kingdom in the Isle of Wight, and makes choice of
Newport, being the chief town in that Isle, for holding the said Treaty: there
was a report that his Majesty, in his message bringing to the House by the
Commissioners, he propounds, that Commissioners from Scotland may be invited to
join in the said treaty; this is only by way of report, within a day or two you
will have the certainty thereof: So that for any more then that the King does
consent to treat at Newport, must for the present be left to further Relations.

FINIS.

