C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Enlargement of Concessions in His last Answer touching
Episcopacy, Sent to His two Houses of Parliament, 21 October. 1648.
1. HE has particularly Consented to the Abolishing of Archbishops,
Chauncellours, Deanes and Chapters, etc. and the whole Hierarchy save Bishops.
2. Whereas He did formerly Consent to confirm the Form of Church Government
for three years; He has now expressly Consented that no other shall be used,
And the exercise of Episcopal Government shall be wholly suspended during that
time. 3. Whereas Episcopal jurisdiction (if no other had been agreed on in
the mean time) might have risen up after the three years. He has now expressed
His Consent, That none shall be exercised after that time (other then
Ordination, which is restrained to the Council and Assistance of Presbyters)
but such, and in such manner as shall be agreed by Him, and His two Houses,
whereby, until such Agreement (or if it be not otherwise agreed) Episcopal
jurisdiction is wholly laid aside.
His Majesty also this day Consented to the following Propositions.
1. TO that for Nomination of the great Officers of the Kingdom, etc. As is
desired in the Proposition. The Nomination of them to be by both Houses, during
the Term of ten years. 2. To that concerning the City of London as is desired
in the Proposition. 3. To that concerning the Great Seal, etc. as is desired in
the Proposition. 4. To that concerning the Court of Wards, etc. as is desired
in the Proposition. A recompense being assured to His Majesty of one hundred
thousand pounds per Annum to Him, His Heirs and Successors.
Newport, 21 October. 1648.
HIs Majesty conceives, That His former Answers to your Propositions concerning
the Church, would have given more satisfaction to His two Houses, then is
expressed in your Papers of the sixteenth and seventeenth of this instant,
containing in them (if considered in their full extent). Concessions of the
most material things desired. And therefore, as well for a Declaration of His
clear intentions by those former Answers, as for a further and final Answer to
the said Preposition and Paper of the 17. His Majesty says as follows.

That albeit, for the reasons expressed in His former Paper, He cannot consent
to a Bill, and the Ordinance for Abolishing Bishops: Yet for the satisfaction
of His two Houses, and settling the public Peace, He will consent to a Bill
for the taking away of all Archbishops, Chauncellours, and Commissaries,
Deanes, and Sub-deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons and
Prebendaries, and all Chaunters, Chancellours, Tresurers, Sub-Tresurers,
Succenters, and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorall, and Choristers, old Vicars
and new Vicars of any Cathedral or Collegiat Church, and all other their under
Officers out of the Church of England, and Dominion of Wales, and out of the
Church of Ireland.

And further, His Majesty will Consent to suspend the exercise of all
Episcopal Government for the space of three years; and has Consented, and
will Consent to confirm the Form of Church Government now presented to Him for
the said three years; And that no other shall be used during that time. In
which time His Majesty continues His desire; That a Consultation may be had
with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, (twenty of His own nomination
being added) To the end, that His Majesty and His two Houses may within those
three years inform themselves of the practice of the Primitive Church in
Point of Episcopacy, and may accordingly agree in limiting the Bishops to the
Council and Assistance of Presbyters, and in the exercise of their
Jurisdiction and increasing their number if it be thought fit.

And His Majesty will Consent, that in case no Settlement shall be agreed on
within the said three years, Then after the said time, the power of Ordination
shall not be exercised by Bishops without the Council, and Assistance of
Presbyters. And that no other Episcopal Jurisdiction shall be exercised by
Bishops, but such, and in such manner as shall be agreed on by His Majesty and
His two Houses of Parliament.

And His Majesty does prosesse, That, if in that time He be Convinced, that the
Function of Bishops is not agreeable to the Word of God, or that Christ
Commanded any other Government, He will most cheerfully embrace that, and take
away Episcopacy; But until He be so Convinced, He believes Himself bound in
Conscience, as it is above expressed.

The rest of His Majesty's Answer to the Proposition concerning Religion, as it
was this day delivered by Him to the Commissioners to be transmitted, is the
same as that of the ninth instant. His Majesty professing that this now was the
furthest that He could go in Conscience.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD LOWNDES, 1648.


