Effata Regalia. APHORISMS DIVINE, MORAL, POLITIC.
Scattered in the BOOKS, SPEECHES, LETTERS, etc. OF CHARLES the First, KING of
Great Britain, etc. Now faithfully Collected and Published By RICHARD WATSON,
Fellow of Gonvile and Caius College in Cambridge.

Quid utilius potui, quam tot sententias in unum conducere, pulcras, acres, and
itame Salus amet, ad Salutem natas generis humani? J. Lips. (...). Simplic. in
Epictel. London, Printed for Robert Horn at the Turks Head near the Royal
Exchange 1661.

1. Effata Regalia. 2. Icon Animae Bsilicae. 3. Monita and Observata
Britannica.
To the Right Honorable and most Noble Lord WENTWORTH, Earl of Kildare, etc.
My Lord,
I Cannot forget, nor yet forbear gratefully to recognizance that most kind and
noble violence your Lordship vouchsafed to practice upon me in a foreign
Country, where the guilt of many years undeserved exile had rendered me morosely
jealous of all that had more lately breathed in English air; and the conscience
of discharging faithfully my duty in that trust, which with much affection, and
obligation, was committed to me, had made me somewhat obstinate in my
retirement, and half a Separatist from Conversation, what honor or advantage
soever might be obtained by it, until your Lordships more than gracious
condescension had raised my blush at what before I esteemed my virtue; and your
more than peremptory Commands forced me to the honorable fruition of that
happiness, whereof I should have been most ambitious, in a near aquaintance
with your excellencies, such as I confess unfeignedly, I more admired upon my
experience, and infallible observation, than I could have credited upon the
most authentic character might have been given me by any whom your Lordship
earlier admitted to that discovery which had no veil: all which, though I must
not here enumerate to affected minutes; nor wind up, though without slattery,
to the strain of reproach* yet there are three I shall not omit to instance, if
to no other purpose, at least (which implies no doubt) to oblige your Lordship
to perseverance, the apostasy from each being no less desperate, than
frequent; and that from one or two, sometime so countenanced or rewarded, as it
has almost the impudence to plead merit, which should beg a pardon; and to
expect to have what should be most abhorred, and detested, either imitated, or
commended.

The first, my Lord, was your conscientious and earnest care to be better
satisfied in the grounds and reason of that Religion, which you did, and were
most inclinable to profess, and practice, when most persecuted and depressed;
and, this effected, your humble and obsequious resignation to the Canon of our
Church, and that in some particulars, wherein few persons, ever prejudiced,
have been counselable; and such as were not, thought unnecessary* or, because
of desuetude, improper to be observed.

The second, was your Lordships generous and loyal resolution, in a time
difficult to be taken, and no less dangerous to be owned, to adventure life,
upon any reasonable and justifiable occasion at an age, but then mature for the
gust of worldly pleasures; and a noble Estate, into the possession whereof you
were but newly entered, whenever both, or either, might be hoped effectual
toward the restitution of your banished, and every way injured King; wherein
although your Lordship are most happily prevented by the powerful hand of
Heaven, which, without humane assistance, has overruled the change; and, by
some sweeter influence than that of a Mar^ial star, has softened the most
obdurate hearts of aged Rebels to a capacity of peace, and the impression of
allegiance to their Prince that brought it home to their doors, with so much
clemency, and such munificence, as scarcely has been, or ere will be
paralleled, if Posterity should play the wanton in blood for the like reward:
yet I cannot but erect upon that sincerity of your intention (which I humbly
crave your leave, without arrogance, thus publicly to attest) a Monument of
Honor to your Lordships name and person, unto which I wish all the indulgence
of Royal favor, that can be expected, or may be hoped from Him, who is more
likely to be endowed with Power, and Plenty, answerable to the greater objects
He has for Royal bounty, and more causes for sumptuous Magnificence and State,
than ever had any of our preceding Britannike Kings.

The third was your most intent and affectionate endeavor (in the privacy you
could possibly reconcile to the eminence of your Honor, and the importunity of
that Nation) to recover what the malignity of Times, accompanied with an
inveigling discouragement to all select and exquisite Studies, had in part
deprived you of, and wherein you had been prevented, to improve your knowledge
to a degree worthy your high birth and fortune, and necessary to the future
interest you may have in affairs of State, and Regency of your Country: unto
which by the ascendent promptness of your Lordships parts, and faculties, such
your quickness of apprehension, variety of fancy, solidity of judgment,
tenacity of memory, and all else that Nature could furnish (as if in design)
you might easily have attained, and may yet, the sphere of science you have in
your aim, if your engagements otherwise could leave you free for that steady
method, and those early hours, which you were prone, my Lord, most exemplarily
to observe, as also for the choice of a person qualified with learning,
loyalty, prudence, and integrity, for that your Lordships service and
assistance, and such a one, whenever you find him, I dare assure, will be as
much obliged by the singular ingenuity and peculiar sweetness of your Lordships
disposition; as by the nobleness of your entertainment, to advance your purpose.

For so much, or so little, as you were pleased, my Lord, to make me concerned
in it, when you found me otherwise employed abroad, I confess I never was more
satisfied in any thing of like nature, than when I could suggest at any time
what won upon your opinion, or would be of improvement to your studies in the
use. Nor was I thus affected only while your stay was on the other side; but
easily induced to promise, and earnest enough to perform, some part of the
same duty after your Lordships departure thence.

The Collection I at present dedicate with much assurance, unto your Honor, I
am not now to certify you, was first attempted, in compliance with your
Lordships kindness for such Maxims, and Corollaries, and sententious Brevets,
which by ordinary observation, and less considerable essays, I had
sufficiently discovered: and when you please to remember how much you expressed
your self transported with the first sheets I sent you over, you will not
wonder that the little manual, I first intended, is become a Volume; that I
have reviewed and passed beyond the principal Book, to a general survey of all
the Writings I hear of published in the name of that most Wise, and now,
indeed, by the merit of his intellectual, and moral; Christian, and Regal;
active and passive virtues, most Glorious King.

The benefit I mean you by it, my Lord, is not only the too-late-admiring the
superexcellency of that Royal Soul, which was the Casket of such Jewels, the
Treasury of such divine and humane Wisdom, as if He had been heir of all the
concealed riches of this sort, that had been amassed for Vid. H. Grot. ad cap.
1. Proverb.
Solomon, or since for the whole succession of Emperors among the Greeks; Nor
to give you some short diversion between the periods of your Studies, or stages
of your Lordships most serious and urgent business; but your modelling and
forming by it, at your choicest and severest hours, a Christian Canon both for
a practick and contemplative holy life; a little Rationale of the Doctrine and
Discipline of that Church, into the Communion whereof, (after an unavoidable
conflict, and intrinsic contestation, with the importunity of Presbyterian,
Independent, Anabaptistical, and other fallacies, the principles of all which
Sects and Heresies had been for many years lowdly sounded by the Trumpet of a
bloody Rebellion in your Lordships ears) with how much devout affection, with
what professed satisfaction, and resolution you know, you entered; The best
Exemplar and fairest Copy that was ere presented unto the Princes, and Great
Peers of the World, for regulating their Councels, Words, and Actions, by
Conscience, Reason, Honor; for your abominating all Sacriledg, as that which
would be the Cancer no less of your Soul, than your Estate; choosing rather, if
put upon it, to part with your inheritance, than with so much breath as may
form your vote to the profaning and sequestring, what the religious Charity of
your Ancestors dedicated to pious uses; of adhering inseparably to the Holy
Order of Episcopacy, never questioned by any, but such Wretches, as had
desperately plunged themselves into either Heresy, Schism, Sacriledg, or
Rebellion; A Caveat, never to make the counterfeit of religious zeal, serve the
purpose of Ambition; nor to torture your King's Conscience, under a pretense to
ease your own; A Monitory, how much the prudence of Nobles may fix a due
temperament in the Commons, as likewise how their chief interest consists in
their fidelity to the Crown, not in their ignoble compliance with any factious
Party of the People. A perpetual Memorial of the affronts and injuries done to
so excellent a King, no otherwise now to be repaired and recompensated, than by
paying and exacting all possible duty and allegiance, accumulating all honor,
and state, and wealth, that each one can contribute to his Royal Successor,
who, it may be hoped, will persevere in the happy government of his Nations,
according to the incomparable Maxims of piety and policy, that are scattered in
those sacred Oracular books and papers, composed not according to Plato's
Ideas, or other speculative conceits and fancies, but out of Divine emanations,
by what means, in what manner, instilled, need not be enquired; out of the
various alternate experiments of a flourishing and fading condition, a calm and
stormy season of his Reign; a quiet, and scrupulous, a self-clearing, and
sometimes, a self-condemning, disposition of Conscience; the sense of love and
loyalty from some, of Rebellion and malice from other of his Subjects; the
several events from prudent results, and mistakes, in his Council; the flattery
and folly, the sincerity and sapience, in the diversity of his Nobles; the
learning and ignorance, zeal and moderation, luke-warmness and absolute
coldness, in his Clergy; the steady resolution and giddiness of his Commons;
the courage and cowardice, the conscientious care and negligence of his
S^ldiers; the liberty and restraint, the entredeux or state of indifference,
such as may be called the Royal durance, or free Imprisonment of his person;
the apprehensions of a violent death, and hope of a kind reconciling
deliverance; finally, such variety of all sorts in Himself and others, that
were, or should have been under His Majesty's Dominion, that no Prince of like
natural endowments, of so just and pious inclinations, had such Religious,
Civil, and Military advantages, to raise such a fabric of Policy and Religion,
such a structure of Laws and Counsels, of secured assertions, and weighed
experiments, as by which not only the Princes and People of our age, at whose
ports and Palaces the rumors and terrors of our Troubles have arrived; but
all Posterity may prevent, if they please to regard and practice whatsoever
misery and mischief the infernal Spirits of Discord and Confusion, may intend
them.

All these, my Lord, and many more (which I leave to your own discovery) being
the natural issue of emolument from the book; my advice is, that you would
improve and multiply them in each particular, by your Lordships reading, and
hearing, and observing, applying to each Oracle or Apharism, here presented,
whatsoever may occur, relating with any significancy, unto it, whether in
ancient or modern History; in the Policy of our own or other Nations; in the
Relations and Discourses of wise and understanding men; in the practices right
or wrong, of any whomsoever your Lordship may have reason and opportunity to
regard. This done, my Lord, and ought else your Lordship may see necessary, if
after some few years resolution, I have the honor to kiss your hand, I shall
expect, with much confidence, your Lordships thanks, which I desire not before
you shall have reapt the profit of my pains; and become sensible of the service
done you by this Collection (how affectedly indigested soere it be) toward the
regulating your Life; whether in public employment, or private conversation;
toward the confirming you in the still-opposed, still undermined, Religion of
our Church; toward your conduct of any Government, or Command, you may have in
your Country, and your influence upon the well or ill-affected People there;
toward the honor may be, I hope, conferred upon you, for promoting the
interest of the Crown to the very uttermost extent and efficacy of your own:
and after all, above all toward your reward in heaven, for your devotion to
God, and fidelity to your King, which no man wishes you, with more
affectionate unfeigned zeal, than,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant. RICHARD WATSON.
From my Friends Lodgings, in Doctor's Commons. February 21. 1660.-61.
To the Reader.
Friend,
HAving in my Epistle Dedicatory showed at large the worth and use of the
ensuing book, I have the less wherewith to trouble you, if that it self do not,
before you read it. For although you see the design was laid in order to the
private benefit and satisfaction of the noble Lord, to whom addressed: yet
since it becomes thus public, I shall plainly tell you, that the common
neglect I discovered (and is by the booksellers themselves confessed) of the
most excellent piece that ever passed a Monarch's Pen, was a principal
incentive to me, to put it again, thus trasformed, upon the World. Alas! it may
easily enough be judged what has brought the Original, and with whom, into
disrepute; the cry of blood is loud, and summons the least guilt de profundis,
from the depth of Conscience, though the very Center, to a sentence upon it
self, and what an unsufferable torture it is, either to look upon the lively
Pourtraicture of that King, or hear him speak, though but in his papers, whom
with axe, or pen, or tongue, or wishfull thought, they murdered; or negatively
in not detesting, not decrying, not invective-writing, not preventive-acting,
were accessory in the least degree, they alone that committed the fault, and
feel the pain, can truly tell. This courtesy I have therefore done them, who
would needs turn away from the salve, because it signifies they have a sore;
they are hereby no more concerned, as to what is past, than any of the
Antipodes, under the government of a King. The Aphorisms are general, and
applicable to any Kingdom; in many of which those Subjects that mean to Act,
may read their duty, and they that do not, may expect their doom.

I at first had done as Simplicius says Arrian had, with those of Epictetus,
collected only (...), the most seasonable, the most necessary, and the most
motive, or operative upon the minds of men; wherewith being so much affected, I
thought the book very well worth review, as loath to leave ought behind that
might have the like efficacy by the sense, though not altogether the same
acuteness in the conceit, nor elegance in the language: by which gleaning, or
recollection, I recovered many as fair and full ears as those I had before
bound up in the sheaf, many Aphorisms no less considerable, no less deserving
an intent regard. Some others if you find coincident with those of the first
rank, as some you will, I pray know that the same passed me not unobserved, but
having some difference in expression, though little or none in sense, they were
ad led the more to oblige you, and to effect that prevalency upon you, which
your have from the former might not admit. Such (if any such there be) as may
seem flat and ordinary, they are to be set to my account, who confess my self
so indulgent in my reverence of the Royal Author, that nothing of his could
fall so low in my esteem. Others, that are not many, but borrowed, and made
English, I have entitled to the High Translatour, whose authority gives more
weight to 'em, and more they penetrate pressed by Him. 1. Lips.
In sententia ut penetret, valde facit robustae alicujus, and receptae
auctoritatis pondus. That all were not reduced to heads, and ranged under
Common places, has reason, such as I think not fit to be mentioned here: you
may know that the learned Grotius (who was wont neither to spare, nor to lose
his pains) has done the like in a greater Excerpt ex Comoed. and Tragoed. Graec.
Volume. As it is, if you be not more curious, than obsequious, in what
concerns you either to know, or practice, you will have for what to thank me,
who confirm you in your Religion and Loyalty, or lead you gently to it by a
Royal hand. I have one thing more to require of you, that you make not too much
have to censure me, for imposing that upon you, as His Majesty's, which may
appear composed by me: Some such Aphorisms indeed there are, for which some
little change, the inserting of some few words, was necessary to give them as
well the form, as force, of Rules, or Dictates; in which if you take no less
pains to justify, than I did to avoid, your censure, you will find it
frustrate, and me guilty of naught but more endeavors, than you have desires,
for your own advantage, wherewith I wish you well.

A Table showing where the Centuries begin.
Cent. 1 begins Page 1 Cent. 2 begins Page 22 Cent. 3 begins Page 44
Cent. 4 begins Page 67 Cent. 5 begins Page 87 Cent. 6 begins Page 110
Cent. 7 begins Page 138 Cent. 8 begins Page 161 Cent. 9 begins Page
194 Cent. 10 begins Page 231 Cent. 11 begins Page 265 Cent. 12 begins
Page 293


EFFATA REGALIA.
The First Century.
1. THe weight of Reason will counterpoise the overballancings of any factions.

2. The gravity and discretion of Gentlemen may alay and fix the Commons to a
due temperament.

3 The interest of a King and his Children give him many obligations to seek
and preserve the love and welfare of his subjects.

4 The love and welfare of subjects is the only temporal blessing left to the
ambition of just Monarchs as their greatest honor and safety, next Gods
protection.

5 Wherein a King lessens his prerogative, he may gain a recompense in the
affections of his Subjects.

6 No flames of civil dissentions are more dangerous, then those which make
religious pretensions ground of factions.

7 Kings should not suffer their own judgments to be overborn more by others
importunities, then their arguments.

8 The great abilities of Lords may make a Prince more afraid, then ashamed, to
employ them in the greatest affairs of State.

9 Officers of State, moving in an high sphere, and with a vigorous luster,
must needs raise many envious exhalations, capable to cast a cloud upon their
brightest merit and integrity.

10 Between a Kings unsatisfiedness in himself, and a seeming necessity of
satisfying the importunity of some people, it discovers more a fear of men then
of God, to prefer what is safe, before what seems just.

11 A King is not to prefer the outward peace of his Kingdoms with men, to the
inward exactness of conscience before God.

12 It is a bad exchange, for a King to wound his own conscience, thereby to
salve State-sores; To calm the storms of popular discontents, by stirring up a
tempest in his own bosom.

13 There is a fallacy in that maxim, Better one man perish though unjustly)
then the People be displeased or destroyed.

14 'The best rule of policy is, to prefer the doing of Justice before all
enjoyments, and the peace of conscience, before the preservation of kingdoms.

15 Many are terrified by tumults to concur with the condemning party, rather
then satisfied, that of right they ought so to do.

16 A King ought to be more afraid to take away a man's life unjustly then to
lose his own.

17 Suspicions, not raised out of malice, are not in reason to be smothered.

18 No present impunity, or popular vindication, will be subterfuge to men
guilty of evil machinations, sufficient to rescue them from the exact tribunals
of God and their own consciences.

19 There is an after unavoidable judgment which shall rejudg what among men is
but corruptly decided, or give the final sentence, if not at all.

20 It is a better resolution, rather to bear repulse with patience, then to
use hazardous extremities.

21 It is one of the most convincing arguments, that there is a God, while his
power sets bounds to the raging of the sea: and no less, that he restrains the
madness of the people.

22 Nothing port ends more Gods displeasur against a nation, then when he
suffers the confluence and clamors of the Vulgar to pass all boundaries of
Laws and reverence to Authority.

23 Nothing more to be feared, and less to be used by wise men, then tumultuary
confluxes of mean and rude people, who are taught, first to petition, then to
protest, then to dictate, at last to command and overawe.

24 Whoever has most mind to bring forth confusion and ruin upon a Church and
State, uses the midwifery of the peoples tumults.

25 What good man had not rather want any thing he most desires then to obtain
it by unlawful and irreligious means.

26 Men's passions, and Gods directions seldom agree.

27 Violent designs and motions must have suitable engines: such as too much
attend their own ends, seldom confine themselves to Gods means.

28 Force must crowd in, what reason will not lead.

29 It is no strange thing for the sea to rage, when strong winds blow upon it;
nor for multitudes to become insolent, when they have men of some reputation
for parts and piety to set them on.

30 Such is some men's stupid tie, that they fear no inconvenience.

31 Such is some men's petulancy that they joy to see their betters shamefully
outraged and abused, while they know their own security consists in vulgar
s^attery.

32 A Kings withdrawing, may give time for the ebbing of tumultuous fury, and
others regaining some degrees of modesty and sober sense.

33 It is a hardiness beyond true valor, for a wise man to set himself
against the breaking in of a sea.

34 A gallant man had rather ^ight to great disadvantages for number and place
in the field, in an orderly way, then shuffle with an undisciplined rabble.

35 It is safest to withdraw from the daily baitings of tumults, not knowing
whether their fury and discontent may not fly so high as ^^ worry and tear
those in pieces whom as yet they but play with in their paws.

36 A King is not bound to prostitute the Majesty of his place and person, the
safety of his Queen and children to those who are prone to insult most, when
they have objects and opportunities most capable of their rudeness and
petulancy.

37 The just avenger of all disorders many times makes men and Cities see their
sinn^ in the glass of their punishment.

38 It is more then an even lay, that men may one day see themselves punished by
that way they offended.

39 As Swine are to gardens and orderly plantations, so are tumults to
Parliaments, and Plebeian concourses to public Councels turning all into
disorders and sordid confusions.

40 God orders our disorders, and magnifies his wisdom most, when our follies
and miseries are most discovered.

41 Such is some men's activity, that they will needs make work rather then want
it; and choose to be doing amiss, rather then do nothing.

42 Good subjects will never think it just or fit, that their Kings condition
should be worse by his bettering theirs.

43 Some men know not so well with moderation to use, as with earnestness to
desire advantages of doing good or evil.

44 The Kings interest lies more then any man's in the due execuexecution and
vigor of preserved Laws.

45 A King ought not to desire more then the Law gives him, and less the
meanest Subject should not have.

46 It is ingratitude, unworthy of honor, That the more is granted them by
their King, the less he should have and enjoy with them.

47 A King may count himself undiminished by his largest concessions, if by
them he gains and confirms the love of his people.

48 The Peoples love may increase toward their King, as they have more leisure,
and less prejudice.

49 People may be miserable in this only, That some men's ambition will not give
them leave to enjoy what their King intends for their good.

50 A King may be mistaken when persuaded, that he cannot grant too much, or
distrust too little, to men that being professedly his subjects, pretend
singular piety, and religious strictness.

51 It argues a very short sight of things, and extreme fatuity of mind in a
King, to bind his own hands at the request of his subjects, when he shortly
means to use a sword against them.

52 It would be a course full of sin, as well as of hazard, and dishonor,
for a King to go about the cutting up of that by the sword, which he had lately
planted to his subjects and his own content.

53 Some men fear where no fear is, whose security consists in scaring others.

54 A King may repent his letting some men go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple,
when it does prove a temptation to them to cast him down headlong.

55 As many Kingdoms as the devil showed our Savior, and th^^ glory of them
(if they could be at once enjoyed by ambitious. People) are not worth the
gaining by ways of sinful ingratitude and dishonor, which hazards a soul worth
more worlds then this has Kingdoms.

56 It is no strange thing for men left to their own passions, either to do
much evil themselves, or abuse the overmuch goodness of others.

57 An ungrateful surfeit of others goodness is the most desperate and incurable
disease.

58 There may be an error in a King of too charitable a judgment, without any
sin of his will*

59 A King may be sorry to see other men's eyes evil because his is good.

60 To be forced to sea by a storm unprovided of tackling and victual, is
better then to venture splitting or sinking on a Lee-shore.

61 Some men's hydropick insatiableness is such as no fountain of royal Bounty
is able to overcome; so resolved, they seem either utterly to exhaust it, or
barbarously to obstruct it.

62 It ceases to be a Council, when not reason is used, as to men, to persuade;
but force and terror, as to beasts, to drive and compel men to assent to what
ever tumultuary Patrons shall project.

63 He deserves to be a slave without pity or redemption, that is content to
have the rational sovereignty of his soul, and liberty of his will and words
captivated by force and terror.

64. Kingdoms are not so considerable as to preserve them with the forfeiture
of that freedom which cannot be denied to a King, because it belongs to him, as
a man and Christian.

65 A King is to own the dictates of none but God to be above him, as obliging
him to consent.

66 Better for a King to die enjoying the Empire of his soul, which subjects
him only to God, so far as by Reason or Religion he directs him; then live
with the title of a King, if it should carry such a Vassalage with it, as not
to suffer him to use his reason and conscience in what he declares as a King to
like or dislike.

67 A King is not conscientiously tied to go against his conscience in
consenting to such new Proposals as his Reason, Justice, Honor and Religion
bids him deny.

68 So tender some men are of their being subject to arbitrary Government, that
they care not with how much dishonor and absurdity they make their King the
only man that must be subject to the will of others.

69 No man can think it other then the badge and method of slavery, by savage
rudeness, and importunate obtrusions of violence, to have the mist of his
error and passion dispelled, which is a shadow of reason, and must serve those
that are destitute of the substance.

70 That man cannot be blamable to God or man, who seriously endeavors to see
the best reason of things, and faithfully follows what he takes for reason.

71 The uprightness of intentions will excuse the possible fallings of
understanding.

72 If a Pilot at sea cannot see the Pole Star, it can be no fault in him to
steer his Course by such Stars as do best appear to him.

73 It argues those men to be concious of their defects of reason, and
convincing arguments, who call in the assistance of mere force to carry on the
weakness of their counsels and proposals.

74 Nothing should please a King more, then when his judgment so concurres with
that of his prudent subjects, as he may with a good conscience consent unto
them.

75 Where no absolute and moral necessity of reason, but temporary convenience
in point of honor is to be considered, a King may choose rather to deny himself
then his Council, as preferring that which they think necessary for his People,
before what he sees but convenient for himself.

76 A King should permit no man to gain his consent to that, wherein his heart
gives his tongue or hand the lie.

77 A King should rather choose to wear a crown of thorns, with his savior,
then to exchange that of Gold for one of lead, whose embased flexibleness shall
be forced to bend and complie to the various, and often contrary, dictates of any
factions.

78. No resolution more worthy a Christian King, then to prefer his
Conscience before his Kingdoms.

79. The meits of a deserving Lady will be her better protection from the
barbaritie of Savage Indians, then from the subtlety of some malicious
Christians.

80. All justice, so well as affection, commands a King to study the security
of his virtuous Queen, who is only in danger for his sake.

81. A King can perish but half, if his Queen be preserved.

82. A King, in his Queens memory, and their hopeful posterity, may survive
the malice of his enemies should be satiated with his blood.

83 As God is able to punish the faults of Princes, so no less severely to
revenge the injuries done to them by those who ought to have made good that
safety which the Laws chiefly provide for them.

84 Common civility is in vain expected from those that dispute their loyalty.

85 It cannot be safe to a King to tarry among them who are shaking hands with
their allegiance, under pretense of laying faster hold on their religion.

86 It Is pity the noble and peaceful foul of a Queen should see, much more
suffer the rudeness of those who must make up their want of justice with
inhumanity and impudence.

87 The sympathy of a Queen in the afflictions of her King will make her
virtues shine with greater luster, as Stars in the darkest nights; and assure
the envious World, that she loves him, not his fortunes.

88 Kings need not much to blame the unkindness of the generality and vulgar,
when those who have eaten of their bread, and been enriched with their bounty,
have scornfully lift up themselves against them, and those of their own household
are become their enemies.

89 Some think to satisfy all obligations to duty by their Corban of Religion;
and can less endure to see then to sin against their benefactors, as well as
their Sovereigns.

90 No malice can banish a beloved Queen from her Kings heart.

91 A Kings enemies may envy, but they can never deprive him of the enjoiment
of her virtues, while he enjoyes himself.

92 It is among the wicked maxims of bold and disloyal undertakers, that bad
actions must always be seconded by worse, and rather not be begun, then not
carried on: for they think the retreat more dangerous then the assault, and
hate repentance more then perseverance in the fault.

93 It is the best policy, with patience to bear what one cannot remedy.

94 To be transported with no disdain or emotion of passion in greatest
injuries, is the temper that best becomes a Christian, as coming nearest to the
great example of Christ.

95 Better for a Monarch to remember he is a Christian then a King

96 What the height of a King tempts to revenge, the humility of a Christian
teaches to forgive.

97 What the Majesty of a King might justly abhor, the charity of a Christian
is willing to forbear.

98 The excess of impotent passions injures a man more then his greatest
enemies can.

99 Apostasy unto Loyalty some men account the most unpardonable sin.

100 The superstitious sowrness which some men pretend to in matters of
Religion, so darkens their judgment, that they cannot see any thing of sin
and rebellion in the means they use with intents to reform.

The Second Century.
1 SOme men think all is gold of piety which does but glister with a show of
zeal and fervencie.

2 Downright temptations of ambition have no cloak or cheat of religion to
impose upon themselves or other.

3 Clemency is a debt which Kings ought to pay to those that crave it, when
they have cause to believe they will not after abuse it.

4 God suffers us not to pay any thing for his mercy, but only prayrs and
promises.

5 The rude demeanor of a subject toward his Sovereign carries always its own
vengeance, as an unseparable shadow with it.

6 Those often prove the most fatal and implacable executioners of vengeance, who
were the first imployers in Rebellion.

7 No punishment so stains a man's honor, as wilful perpetrations of unworthy
actions.

8 Posterity not engaged in the sactions of present times, have the most
impartial reflections on the actions.

9 A rebellious Army is but tumults listed and enrolled to a better order, but
as bad an end.

10 A Kings recess from tumultuous subjects, gives them considence that he may
be conquered.

11 A King having a soul invincible, is sure, through Gods grace, to become
conqueror, when constant to fear him more than man.

12. They will oppose by force, who have not reason to convince.

13. They confess their own weakness, as to truth and justice, who choose rather
to contend by Armies, then by Arguments.

14 A King may be made glorious, if no other way, by his sufferings.

15 It is a hard and disputable choice for a King that loves his people and
desires their love, either to kill his own Subjects, or to be killed by them.

16 The hazards and miseries of civil War, are but sad fruits for a King to
reap after a long, just, peaceable, plenteous and religious reign.

17 The hazards of War are equal, nor does the cannon know any respect of
persons.

18 A Kings person is in vain excepted, by a parenthesis of words, when many
hands are armed against him with swords.

19. Unnatural motions are often the productions of a surfeit of peace,
wantonness of minds, or private discontents.

20. Ambition and Faction easily find, or make, causes of quarrel.

21. What seems just to one man* may not seem so to another.

22. There is an instinct in all creatures to preserve themselves.

23. It has been esteemed delinquency in some prudent men not to be over-awed
with Tumu'ts and their Patrons, nor compelled to ab^^ by their suffrages or
presence the designs of those men who agitate innovations and ruin both in
Church and State.

24 The least has more evil in it then the greatest affliction.

25. What is Religious and Apostolical, and so very sacred and Divine, is not
to be dispensed with, or destroyed, when what is only of Civil favor and
privilege of honor, granted to men of holy Order, may, with their consent who
are concerned in it, be annulled.

26 The noise and show of piety, and heat for Reformation and Religion, may
easily so fill men with prejudice, that all equality and clearness of judgment
may be obstructed.

27 A Kings innocence and unpreparedness to assert his rights and honors,
makes him the more guilty in the esteem of disloyal subjects.

28 Prayers and tears, the chiefest armies of the ancient Christians, may setve
a good man's turn, if not to conquer, as a Soldier, yet to suffer as a Martyr.

29 He that made the greedy Ravens to be Elias Caterers, may also make Rebels
surprisall of outward force and defense, an opportunity to show their King the
special support of his power and protection.

30 What a pious King wants in the hands of force and power, he has in the
wings of faith and prayer.

31 The surfeit of too much power, which some men greedily seize on, may make a
Commonwealth sick both of it and them, when they cannot well digest it.

32 Sovereign power in subjects seldom agrees with the stomachs of
fellow subjects.

33 A King having the sole actual disposing of the Militia, can not protect his
people further then they protect him and themselves.

34 The use of the Militia is mutual between King and People.

35. Such is the violence and fraud of some men, that being conscious to their
own evil merits and designs, they will needs persuade the World, that none
but Wolves are fit to be trusted with the custody of the Shepherd and his
flock.

36. It can be secure neither for King nor Subject, if both be not in such a
way as the law has entrusted the public safety and welfare.

37. All Law is at last resolved to the just and necessary rights of the Crown
in point of Power, while thereby it is best protected.

38. The honor and justice due to a Kings successors forbid him to yield to
an alienation of power from them.

39. Although a King may be content to eclipse his own beams, to satisfy
their fears, who think they must needs be scorched or blinded if he should
shine in the full luster of Kingly power: yet he ought never to consent to put
out the Sun of Sovereignty to all posterity and succeeding Kings.

40. The many-headed Hydra of Government, as it makes a show to the people to
have more eyes to foresee, so they will find it has more mouths too, which
must be satisfied.

41. In a right Monarchy, counsel may be in many as the senses, but the
supreme power can be but in one as the head.

42. Those men are guilty of enforced perjury, who compel their King to take a
new and strange way of discharging his trust by seeming to desert it, of
protecting his Subjects by exposing himself to danger or dishonor for their
safety and quiet.

43. The Sword and Militia are but weak defenses against the strokes of
divine vengeance, which will overtake, or of men's own consciences, which
always attend injurious perpetrations.

44. God is able by his being with a King abundantly to compensate to him, as
he did to Job, what ever honor, power or liberty the Caldeans, the Sabeans, or
the devil himself can deprive him of.

45 The hearts of Subjects are the greatest Treasure and best ammunition of a
King.

46 Rebels that disarme their King, and study to rob him of his Subjects love,
cannot deprive him of his innocence, or Gods mercy, nor obstruct his way to
heaven.

47 A King cannot buy his own safety and his peoples peace at too dear a rate,
unless by parting with Conscience and Honor.

48 A King, rather than part with his Conscience and Honor, ought to choose to
be as miserable and inglorious as his enemies can make or wish him.

49. Whatsoever Subjects propund unto their King, ought not to be obtruded with
the point of the Sword, nor urged with the injuries of War.

50. When a King declares unto his Subjects, he cannot yield to them without
violating his Conscience; there may be some better method of Peace, than by
making War upon his Soul.

51. When Subjects require any thing of their King, they ought to offer
somewhat by way of grateful exchange of honor or requital of those favors he
has, or may yet grant them.

52. It is more Princely and Divine to be on the giving part.

53. The Jewel of Conscience is incommunicable, whose loss nothing can repair
or requite.

54. A Kings yielding too much, makes Subjects over-confident he will deny
nothing.

55. The love of truth and inward tranquillity ought to have more influence
upon a King, than the love he has of his Peoples peace.

56. Inward quiet of Conscience ought to be dearer to a King, then his Kingdom.

57. Some things which a King might approve, yet in honor and policy are at
some time to be denied, to some men, least he should seem not to da^e to deny
any thing, and give too much encouragement to unreasonable demands or
importunities.

58. For a King to bind himself to a general and implicit consent to whatever
Subjects shall desire or propound, were a latitude of blind obedience never
expected of any freeman, not fit to be required of any man, much less of a King.

59. A King may possibly exceed any of his own Subjects as much in wisdom, as
he does in place and power.

60. For a King to yield implicit consent to all, were as if Sampson should
have consented not only to bind his own hands, and cut off his hair, but to put
out his own eyes, that the Philistines might with the more safety mock and
abuse him.

61. To exclude all power of denial, seems an arrogance ill-becoming them that
pretend addresses by petition.

62. It were very foolish and absurd, to ask what, another having not liberty
to deny, neither has power to grant.

63. It can be no other then extreme injury, to confine a Kings reason to a
necessity of granting all Subjects have a mind to ask; whose minds may be
different from the Soverain's, both in Reason and Honor; as may be their aims,
and are their qualities.

64. Subjects Propositions may soon prove violent Oppositions, if once they
gain to be necessary Impositions upon the Regal Authority.

65. No man seeks to limit and confine his King in reason, who has not a
secret aim to share with him, or usurp upon him in Power and Dominion.

66. Nature, Law, Reason and Religion, bind a King (in the first place) to
preserve himself, without which it is impossible to preserve his people
according to his place.

67. Factions in the State, and Schisms in the Church, get confidence by
vulgar Clamours, and assistance to demand, not only Tolerations of themselves,
but also abolition of the laws against them, and a total extirpation of that
Government whose Rights they made.

68. Some moderate Propositions are by cunning Demanders used like waste paper,
wherein their unreasonable ones are wrapped up, to present them somewhat more
handsomely.

69. There is nothing so monstrous, which some fancies are not prone to long
for.

70. They abuse themselves, who believe all good which is gilded with shows of
Zeal and Reformation.

71. Popular Clamours and Tumults serve to give life and strength to the
infinite activity of those men, who study with all diligence and policy, to
improve present distractions to their innovating designs.

72. Armies of propositions, having little of Judgment, Reason, Justice and
Religion, taking their rise from Tumult and Faction, must be backed and seconded
with Armies of Soldiers.

73. A King is to weigh the reason and justice, not regard the number and power
of contesting Subjects.

74. Tumults can be no other then the hounds that attend the cry and hollow of
those men, who hunt after factions and private designs, to the ruin of the
Church and State.

75. If the straitness of a Kings Conscience will not give him leave to swallow
down such camels as others do of Sacriledg and Jnjustice both to God and man,
they have no more cause to quarrel with him then for this, that his throat is
not so wide as theirs.

76. Nothing of passion, or peevishness, or list to contradict, or vanity to
show a negative power, should have any byas upon the judgment of a King, to
make him gratify his will by denying any thing which his Reason and Conscience
commands him not.

77. A King should not consent to more than Reason, Justice, Honor and
Religion persuade him to be for Gods glory, the Church's good, his Peoples
welfare, and his own peace.

78. Although many men's Loyalty and Prudence be terrified from giving their
King that true and faithful Council which they are able and willing to
impart, and he may want; yet none can hinder him from craving the Council of
that mighty Councellor, who can both suggest what is best, and incline his
heart steadfastly to follow it.

79. It is no news for some Subjects to fight, not only without their Kings
Commission, but against his Command and Person too, yet all the while to
pretend they fight by his Authority, and for his safety.

80. Rebels do always this honor to their King, to think moderate Injuries
not proportionate to him, nor competent Trials either of his Patience under
them, or his Pardon of them.

81. Some with exquisite malice mix the gall and vinegar of falsity and
contempt, with the Cup of their Kings affliction, charging him not only with
untruths, but such as wherein he has the greatest share of loss and dishonor
by what is committed.

82. That King is a Cyclopick monster, whom nothing will serve to eat and
drink, but the flesh and blood of his own Subjects.

83. Some think they cannot do well but in evil times, nor so cunningly as in
laying the Odium of those sad events on others, wherewith themselves are most
pleased, and whereof they have been not the least occasion.

84. Preposterous rigor, and unreasonable severity, may be not the least
incentive that kindles and blows up into horrid slames the sparks of
discontent, which want not predisposed fuel for Rebellion, where despair being
added to former discontents, and the fear of utter extirpation to wonted
oppressions, it is easy to provoke to an open Rebellion a people prone to
break out to all exorbitant violence, by some principles of their Religion, and
the natural desires of liberty.

85. Some men of covetous zeal, and uncharitable fury, think it a great
argument of the truth of their Religion, to endure no other but their own.

86. It is preposterous and unevangelical zeal, to choose rather to use all
extremities which may drive men to desperate obstinacy, than to apply moderate
remedies.

87. Some kind of zeal counts all merciful moderation, lukewarmness, and had
rather be cruel, than counted cold; and is not seldom more greedy to kill the
Bear for his skin, than for any harm he has done.

88. The confiscation of men's Estates pleases some better, as being more
beneficial, than the charity of saving their lives, or reforming their errors.

89. Some men have better skill to let blood, than to stanch it.

90. Men prepared to misconstrue the actions of their Sovereign, have more
credulity to what is false and evil, than love or charity to what is true and
good.

91. A King has no judge but God above him.

92. God does not therefore deny a Kings innocence, because he is pleased so
far to try his patience, as he did his servant Jobs.

93. Swarms of reproaches issue out of some men's mouths and hearts, as easily
as smoke or sparks do out of a furnace.

94. Men conscious of their own depth of wickedness, are loath to believe any
man not to be as bad as themselves.

95. It is kingly to do well, and hear ill.

96. A King ought to look upon the effusion of his Subjects blood, as exhausted
out of his own veins.

97. Royal bounty emboldens some men, to ask and act beyond all bounds of
modesty and gratitude.

98. A King should not let any man's ingratitude, or inconstancy, make him
repent of what he granted for the Public good.

99. Where violence is used for innovation in Religion, many feel the misery of
the means, before they reap the benefit of the end.

100. It can not but seem either passion, or some self-seeking, more than true
zeal, and pious discresion, for any foreign State or Church to prescribe such
medicine only to others, which themselves have used rather successfully than
commendably.

The Third Century.
1 THe same Physic in different Constitutions, will have different
opperations: That may kill one, which does but cure another.

2. It is not so proper to hew out religious Reformations by the Sword, as to
polish them by fair and equal disputations among those that are most concerned
in the differences, whom not force but reason, ought to convince.

3. Men's Consciences can receive little satisfaction in those points, which are
maintained rather by Soldiers fighting in the field, than Scholars disputing
in free and learned Synods.

4. In matters of Religion, those truths gain most on men's judgments and
consciences, which are least urged with secular violence.

5. Secular violence weakens truth, which prejudices, and is unreasonable to be
used, till such means of rational conviction has been applied, as leaving no
excuse for ignorance, condemns men's obstinacy to deserved penalties.

6. There is too much of Man, to have much of Christ, when his pretended
institutions are carried on, or begun, with the temptations of Covetousness or
Ambition.

7. Wise and Learned men think, that nothing has more marks of Schism and
Sectarisme than the Presbyterian way.

8. A King is not to repeal the Laws and constitutions of the Church till he
sees more rational and Religious motives than Soldiers use to carry in their
knapsacks.

9. A King ought to esteem the Church above the State, the glory of Christ
above his own, and the salvation of men's Souls, above the preservation of their
Bodies and Estates.

10. No men may, without sin and presumption, forcibly endeavor to cast the
Churches under their Kings care and tuition into the moulds they have fancied
and fashioned to their designs, till they have first gained his consent, and
resolved both his and other men's consciences by the strength of their reasons.

11. Violent motions, which are neither Manly, Christian, nor Loyal, should
neither ^^ake nor settle the Religion of King or Subject, who knows what
Religion means.

12. The proper engine of Faction is Force.

13. Force is the Arbitratour of Beasts, not of reasonable Men, much less of
humble Christians and Loyal Subjects in matter of Religion.

14. Men are prone to have such high conceits of themselves, that they care not
what cost they lay out upon their opinions, especially those that have some
temptation of gain to recompense their losses and hazards.

15. Men jealous of the justifiableness of their doings and designs before God,
never think they have humane strength enough to carry their work on, seem it
never so plausible to the people.

16. What can not be justified in Law or Religion, had need be fortified with
power.

17. Such is the inconstancy that attends all minds engaged in violent motion,
that whom some of them one while earnestly invite to come into their
assistance, others of them soon after are weary of, and with nauseating cast
them out.

18. Much of Gods Justice, and man's folly, will at length be discovered through
all the filmes and pretensions of Religion, in which Politicians wrap up their
designs.

19. In vain do men hope, to build their Piety on the ruins of Loyalty.

20. Neither those considerations nor disigns, can be durable, when Subjects
make bankrupt of their Allegiance, under pretense of setting up a quicker trade
for Religion.

21. All Reason and Policy will teach, That the chief interest of Subjects
consist's in their fidelity to the Crown, not in their serviceableness to any
Party of the People, to the neglect and betraying of their Kings safety and
honor, for their own advantages.

22. The less cause a King has to trust men, the more should he apply himself
to God.

23. It is hard for men to be engaged by no less than swearing for or against
those things, which are of no clear moral necessity, but very disputable.

24. In points disputable the application of oaths can hardly be made, and
enjoined, with that judgment and certainty in one's self, or that charity and
candor to others of different opinion, as Religion requires.

25. Religion never refuses fair and aequable deliberations, yea, and
dissentions too, in matters only probable.

26. The enjoining of Oaths upon People must needs, in things doubtful, be
dangerous, as, in things unlawful, damnable; and no less superfluous, where
former religious and legal Engagements bound men sufficiently to all necessary
duties.

27. Ambitious minds never think they have laid snares and ginnes enough, to
catch and hold the vulgar credulity.

28. By politic and seemingly pious stratagems of oaths, ambitious minds think
to keep the populacy fast to their party under the terror of perjury.

29. After-contracts devised, and imposed, by a few men, in a declared Party,
without the Kings consent, without power or precedent from God's or man's
Laws, can never be thought by judicious men, sufficient either to absolve, or
slacken, the moral and eternal bonds of duty, which lie upon all Subjects
Consciences, both to God and their King.

30. Ambiguous, dangerous and authorized novelties, are not to be preferred
before known and sworn duties, which are dispensable, both to God and King.

31. Later Vows, Oaths, or Leagues, can never blot out the former gravings and
characters, which by just and lawful Oaths have been made upon the souls of
men.

32. Considerations, by way of Solemn Leagues and Covenants, are the common
roads used in all factious and powerful perturbations of State or Church.

33. Formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety are never more studied and
elaborate, than when Politicians most agitate desperate designs against all
that is settled or sacred in Religion and Laws.

34. Religion and Laws with the scrues of cunning Politicians, are wrested by
secret steps, and less sensible degrees, from their known rule, and wonted
practice, to comply with the humors of those men, who aim to subdue all to
their own will and power, under the disguises of holy combinations.

35. The cords and withs of Solemn Leagues and Covenants, (framed more out of
Policy than Piety) will hold men's consciences no longer than force attends and
twists them.

36. Every man soon grows his own Pope, and easily absolves himself of those
ties, which not the Commands of God's Word, or the Laws of the Land, but only
the subtilty and terror of a Party casts upon him.

37. Illegal ways of Covenanting, seldom or never intend the engaging men
more to Duties, but to Parties.

38. It is not regarded how men keep Covenants in point of Piety pretended,
provided they adhaere firmly to the Party and design intended.

39. Imposers of politic Covenants make them like Manna, agreeable to every
man's palate and relish who will but swallow them.

40. Naboth's Vineyard made him the only Blasphemer of his City, and fit to dye.

41. While the breath of Religion fills the Sails, Profit is the Compass, by
which factious men steer their course in all seditious commotions.

42. Church Lands and Revenues, issuing chiefly from the Crown, are held of it,
and legally can revert only to the Crown, with the Kings consent.

43. No necessity should drive a King to invade or sell the Priests Lands,
which both Pharaohs Divinity, and Joseph's true Piety abhorred to do.

44. It is unjust both in the eye of Reason and Religion, to deprive the most
sacred employment of all due encouragements, and like hard-harted Phara^h, to
withdraw the straw and increase the task.

45. Some pursue the oppressed Church to the red Sea of a Civil War, where
nothing but a miracle can save it.

46. A Christian King ought to esteem it his greatest title to be called, and
his chiefest glory to be The Defender of the Church, both in its true Faith,
and its just fruitions, equally abhorring Sacrilege and Apostasy.

47. A King ought rather to live on the Churches alms, than violently to take
the bread out of Bishops and Ministers mouths.

48. They are but golden Calves that must be served, when Jeroboam consecrates
the meanest of the people to be Priests.

49. A King can not so much as pray God to prevent the sad consequences which
will inevitably follow the Parity and Poverty of Ministers both in Church and
State. Because,

50. It is no less than a mo^^ing and tempting of God, to desire him to hinder
those mischiefs whose occasions and remedies are in our own power.

51. There are ways enough to repair the breaches of the State, without the
ruins of the Church.

52. As a King should be a Restorer of the State, so not an Opressour of the
Church, under the pretense of public debts.

53. If a good King had not his own Innocence and God's Protection, it were
hard for him to stand out against those stratagems and conflicts of malice,
which by falsities seek to oppress the Truth, and by jealousies to supply the
defect of real causes, which might seem to justify unjust Engagements against
him.

54. The worst effects or open hostility, come short of what is in disloyal
close designs.

55. A King should more willingly lose his Crown, than his credit; nor should
his Kingdom be so dear to him, as his reputation and honor.

56. A good name is the embalming of Princes, and a sweet consecrating of them
to an eternity of love and gratitude among Posterity.

57. Foul and false aspersions are secret engines employed against peoples love
of their King; that undermining their opinion and value of him, his enemies and
theirs may at once blow up their affections, and batter down their Loyalty.

58. The detriment of a Kings honor (by calumnies) should not be so afflictive
to him, as the sin and danger of his peoples souls.

59. Peoples eyes once blinded with mists of suspicions, are soon misled into
the most desperate precipices of actions, wherein they do not only not consider
their sin and danger, but glory in their zealous adventures.

60. Mislead people imagine they then fear God most, when they least honor
their King, and are most ambitious to merit the name of his destroyers.

61. A King's pity ought to be above his anger.

62. A King's passions should never prevail against himself, as to exclude his
most compassionate prayers for them whom devout errors, more than their own
malice have betrayed to a most religious Rebellion.

63. It is a generous charity in a King, to interpret that his Subjects in
arms fight against his supposed errors, not his person, intending to mend
him, not to end him.

64. It is somewhat above humanity in a King, not more willingly to forgive the
seductions in his Subjects, which occasioned their Loyal injuries, then to be
ambitious, by all Princely merits, to redeem them from their just suspicions,
and reward them for their good intentions.

65. A King should be too conscious to his own affections toward the generality
of his People, to suspect theirs to him.

66. A King should never gratify the spightfulness of a few with any sinister
thoughts of their allegiance, whom pious frauds have seduced.

67. A King should never be persuaded to make so bad interpretatations of most
of his Subjects actions, as to judge otherwise than that possibly they may be
erroneous, but not haeretical, in point of Loyalty.

68. A King should have as sharp a sense of the injuries done to his Subjects,
as those done to himself, their well fares being inseparable.

69. Seduced Subjects in this suffer more than their King, that they are
animated to injure at once both themselves and him.

70. A King sometimes has such enemies among his Subjects as to whose malice
it is not enough that he is afflicted, unless by those whose prosperity he
earnestly desires, and whose seduction he heartily deplores.

71. A King for restoring tranquillity unto his people, might willingly be the
Jonah, if he foresees not evidently that by the divided interest of theirs and
his enemies, as by contrary winds the storm of their miseries would be rather
increased than allayed.

72. A King should rather prevent his Peoples ruin, than rule over them.

73. A King should not be so ambitious of that Dominion, which is but his
right, as of his peoples happiness, if it could but expiate or countervail such
a way of obtaining it, by the highest injuries of Subjects committed against
their Sovereign.

74. A King should rather suffer all the miseries of life, and dye many deaths,
than shamefully to desert, or dishonourably to betray, his own just Rights and
Sovereignty, thereby to gratify the ambition, or justify the malice of his
Enemies.

75. A King ought to put as great a difference between the malice of his
enemies, and other men's mistakes, as between an ordinary Ague, and the Plague;
or the Itch of Novelty, and the Leprosy of Disloyalty.

76. As liars need have good memories, so malicious persons need good
inventions, that their calumnies may fit every man's fancy; and what their
reproaches want of truth, they may make up with number and show.

77. A King should have more patience to bear, and charity to forgive, than
leisure to answer, the many false aspersions which men may cast upon him.

78. It gives men's malice too much pleasure, for a King to take notice or
remember what they say, or object.

79. When a King confutes calumnies, it should be more for his Subjects
satisfaction, than his own vindication.

80. Men's evil manners, and seared consciences, will soon enough confute, and
revenge, the black and false scandals which they cast upon their King.

81. Rebels credit and reputation may be blasted by the breath of that same
furnace of popular obliquy and detraction, which they study to heat and inflame
to the highest degree of infamy, and therein seek to cast and consume their
King's name and honor.

82. They are misperswaded who think these two utterly inconsistent, to be at
once loyal to their King, and truly religious toward God.

83. Some popular Preachers think it no sin to lie for God, and what they call
Gods Cause, cursing all that will not curse with them.

84. Such men look so much at, and cry up the goodness of the end propounded,
that they consider not the lawfulness of the means used, nor the depth of that
mischief chiefly plotted, and intended.

85. The weakness of these men's judgments, must be made up by their clamours
and activity.

86. It is a great part of some men's Religion, to scandalize their King and
his, thinking theirs cannot be true, if they cry not down his as false.

87. A King fights not against his own Religion, who imployes Subjects of
different persuasions to maintain it.

88. Differences of persuasion in matters of Religion, may easily fall out,
where there is the sameness of Duty, Allegiance and Subjection.

79. When a King confutes calumnies, it should be more for his Subjects
satisfaction, than his own vindication.

80. Men's evil manners, and seared consciences, will soon enough confute, and
revenge, the black and false scandals which they cast upon their King.

81. Rebels credit and reputation may be blasted by the breath of that same
furnace of popular obliquy and detraction, which they study to heat and inflame
to the highest degree of infamy, and therein seek to cast and consume their
King's name and honor.

82. They are misperswaded who think these two utterly inconsistent, to be at
once loyal to their King, and truly religious toward God.

83. Some popular Preachers think it no sin to lie for God, and what they call
Gods Cause, cursing all that will not curse with them.

84. Such men look so much at, and cry up the goodness of the end propounded,
that they consider not the lawfulness of the means used, nor the depth of that
misch^ef chiefly plotted, and intended.

85. The weakness of these men's judgments, must be made up by their clamours
and activity.

86. It is a great part of some men's Religion, to scandalize their King and
his, thinking theirs cannot be true, if they cry not down his as false.

87. A King ights not against his own Religion, who imployes Subjects of
different persuasions to maintain it.

88. Differences of persuasion in matters of Religion, may easily fall out,
where there is the sameness of Duty, Allegiance and Subjection.

89. Different professions in point of Religion, cannot take away the community
of Relations, either to Parents, or to Princes.

90. It is lawful for a King in exigents to use the aid of any his Subjects,
of what persuasion soever.

91. It were a very impertinent and unseasonable scruple in a King, then to
dispute the points of different beliefs in his Subjects, when he is disputed
with by swords points; and when he needs the help of his Subjects as men, no
less than their prayers as Christians.

92. The noise of a Kings evil Counselors is a useful device for those, who
are impatient any men's councels but their own should be followed in Church or
State.

93. Bold Subjects give counsels more like a drench that must be forced down,
than a draught which might be fairly and leisurely dran^^ if their King liked
it.

94. Moderate men are sorry to see their King prone to injure himself out of a
zeal to relieve his Subjects.

95. Truly humble Christians will so highly prize the reward of persecutions,
as rather not to be relieved, than be revenged, so as to be bereaved of that
Crown of Christian patience, which attends humble and injured sufferers.

96. Men are not more prone to desire liberty, than unapt to bear it in the
popular sense, which is, to do what every man likes best.

97. The divinest liberty is, to will what men should, and to do what they so
will, according to Reason, Laws and Religion.

98. Good men count the bounds of the Laws their Ornament and Protection,
others their Manacles ^^ Oppression.

99. It is not just that any man should expect the reward and benefit of the
law, who despises its rule and direction.

100. He that seeks an unreasonable liberty, justly loses his safety.

The Fourth Century.
1. THose men are the best preservers of their true liberty, who allow
themselves the least licentiousness against, or beyond the Laws.

2. It is impossible chose men should be really tender of their fellow subjects
liberties, who have the hardiness to use their King with severe restraints.

3. A resolved King, restrained by Subjects, will rather perish, tha^ complain
to those, who want nothing to complete their mirth and triumph, but such music.

4. Conscientious tenderness attended with proud and arrogant activity, seeks
to hatch every egg of different opinion to a faction or schism.

5. Laws and Scepters of Monarchs should not entrench on God's Sovereignty,
which is the only King of men's Consciences.

6. God gives no men liberty to break the Law established, further than with
meekness and patience they are content to suffer the penalties annexed, rather
than perturb the public peace.

7. some men, in the necessities of their fortunes, distrust Gods providence,
as well as their own merits.

8. Never were any Princes more glorious than those whom God has suffered to
be tried in the furnace of afflictions by their injurious Subjects.

9. Some men speak against their King rather what they wish, than what they
believe, or know.

10. Rude and scandalous Pamphlets, like fire in great conflagrations, fly up
and down, to set all places on like flames.

11. It is no wonder if men, not fearing God, should not honor their King.

12. God has graven such Characters of divine Authority, and sacred Power,
upon Kings, as none may, without sin, seek to blot them out.

13. From God alone, are all traditions of true Glory and Majesty that is in
Kings.

14. No news to have all Innovations ushered in with the name of Reformations
in Church and State.

15. The pride of those that study novelties, can hardly allow any share or
degree of wisdom or godliness to former times.

16. For set and prescribed forms of public prayer, there is no doubt but that
wholesome words being known and fitted to men's understandings, are soonest
received into their hearts, and aptest to excite and carry along with them,
judicious and fervent affections.

17. Constant forms of Prayers are not more likely to slat and hinder the
Spirit of Prayer and Devotion, than unpraemeditated and confused variety to
distract and lose it.

18. Slight and easy Legerdemain will serve to delude the Vulgar.

19. No men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exactors upon
others to conform to their illegal novelties, than such whose pride was
formerly least disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions, and whose
licentious humors most pretended Conscientious liberties.

21. It is impossible for a Prince to preserve the State in quiet, unless he
has such an influence upon Churchmen, and they such a dependence on him, as
may best restrain the seditious exorbitancies of Ministers tongues, who with
the keys of Heaven, have so far the keys of the Peoples hearts, as they
prevail much by the Oratory to let in, or shut out both Peace and Loyalty.

21. The want of Government is that which the Church can no more dispense with
in point of well-being, than the want of the Word and Sacrament in point of
being.

22. Scripture is the best rule, and the Church's universal practice the best
Commentary of Religion.

23. No frame of Church Government is more agreeable both to Reason and
Religion, than that which is Paternal not Magisterial.

24. Faction and Confusion, Emulations and Contempts, are prone to arise among
equals in power and function.

25. Inconstancy is a great prejudice against Novelty.

26. The stream of times, and the prevalency of parties, overpowreth the
judgments of some men.

27. Ministers may find as great a difference, in point of thriving, between
the favor of the People, and of Princes, as Plants do between being watered by
hand, or by the sweet and liberal dews of heaven.

28. The tenuity and contempt of Clergymen will soon let them see, what a poor
carcass they are when parted from the influence of that Head, to whose
Supremacy they have been sworn.

29. A little moderation may prevent great mischiefs.

30. Discretion, without Passion, might easily reform whatever the rust of
times, or indulgence of laws or corruption of manners may have brought upon
the government of the Church.

31. It is a gross vulgar error, to impute, or revenge upon, functions, the
faults of times or persons.

32. Respect and observance, even in peaceful times, is hardly paid to any
Governors by the measure of their virtues, so much as by that of their Estates.

33. Poverty and meanness expose men in Authority to the contempt of licentious
minds and manners.

34. There is an innate principle of vicious oppression in all men, against
those that seem to reprove, or restrain them.

34. No design or passion is to be gratified with the least perverting of truth.

36. Devout minds restore to God in giving to his Church and Prophets, through
whose hands he graciously accepts even a cup of cold water, as a libation to
himself.

37. That oath may be with judgment broken, which erroneously was taken.

38. What a King thinks in his judgment best, he may not think so absolutely
necessary for all places, and at all times.

39. It is far better to hold to Primitive and uniform Antiquity, than to
comply with divided Novelty.

40. The way of Treaties is as a retiring from fighting like Beasts, to arguing
like men, whose strength should be more in their understandings than in their
limbs.

41. A King may have greater confidence of his Reason, than his Sword.

42. It is no diminution of a King to prevent [arming] Subjects with expresses
of his desires, and importunities to Treat.

43. It is an office not only of Humanity, rather to use Reason than Force, but
also of Christianity, to seek peace and ensue it.

44. The events of all War, by the Sword, are very dubious, and of a Civil War
uncomfortable; the end hardly recompensing, and late repairing, the mischief of
the means.

45. A Monarch cannot part with his honor, as a King, nor with his Conscience,
as a Christian.

46. Jealousies are not so easily allayed, as they are raised.

47. Some men are more afraid to retreat from violent engagements, than to
engage.

48. What is wanting in equity, must be made up in pertinacy.

49. Such as have little to enjoy in peace, or to lose in war [if ill-disposed]
study to render the very name of peace odious and suspected.

50. In Church affairs, a King having so many strict ties of Conscience upon
him, has least liberty of prudence.

51. It argues much softness and infirmity of mind in a King, rather to part
with Gods Truth, than man's Peace; and rather to lose the Church's honor, than
cross some men's factious humors.

52. Some men have that height, as to interpret all fair condescendings as
arguments of feebleness, and glory most in an unflexible stifness, when they
see others most supple, and inclinable to them.

53. It is a grand Maxim with some men, always to ask their King something
which in reason and honor must be denied, that they may have some color to
refuse all that is in other things granted, setting Peace at as high a rate as
the worst effects of War.

54. Some men endeavor first to make their King destroy himself by
dishonorable Concessions, that so they may have the less to do.

55. The highest tide of success should not set a King above a Treaty with his
Subjects, nor the lowest ebb below a fight.

56. It is no sign of true valor, to be prodigal of men's lives, rather than be
drawn to produce our own Reasons, or subscribe to other men's.

57. What Kings cannot get by their Treaties, they may gain by their prayers.

58. The various successes of Civil War, should afford a King variety of good
meditations.

59. A Kings sins sometimes prevail against the justice of his cause.

60. Rebels may be punished by the prosperity which hardens them to continue
that injustice by open hostility, which was begun by riotous tumults.

61. Personal and private sins, may oftimes overbalance the justice of
public engagements.

62. God accounts not every gallant man (in the Worlds esteem) a fit instrument
to assert in the way of War, a righteous cause.

63. The more men are prone to arrogate to their own skill, valor and strength,
the less does God ordinarily work by them for his own glory.

64. Event of success, can never state the justice of any cause* nor the peace
of men's consciences, nor the eternal fate of their souls.

65. The ties of Subjects to God, the Church, and their King, lie upon their
Souls, both for obedience to, and just assistance of their Sovereign.

66. They who lose their lives in a just cause, have the destruction of their
bodies sanctified as a means to save their Souls.

67. Rebels are more afraid to encounter the many pregnant Reasons, which
conflict with, and accuse them in, their own thoughts, than they often are in a
desperate bravery to fight against the forces given by God to their King.

68. It is far more honorable and comfortable, to suffer for good Laws, than
to prosper in their ruin and subversion.

69. The defects of piety may blast the endeavors of Loyalty, when men are not
as faithful to God and their own Souls, as to their King.

70. A good King, in a Civil War, should never have any victory on his
Subjects, without his sorrow, nor, when he suffers a defeat, despair of Gods
mercy and defense.

71. A King should never desire such victories, as may seem to conquer, but
only restore, the Laws and Liberties of his People.

72. A King should wish no greater advantages by a Civil War, than to bring his
enemies to moderation, and his friends to peace.

73. A King should be afraid of the temptation of an absolute conquest; and
never pray more for victory over his Subjects, than over himself.

74. The different events of a Civil War, are but the methods of divine
justice, by contrary winds to winnow us: That by punishing our sins, he might
purge them from us; and by deferring peace, he might prepare us more to prize,
and better to use so great a blessing.

75. A Kings conscience of his Innocence may forbid him to fear a War, but the
love of his Kingdoms command him (if possible) to avoid it.

76. A King may commit an error in giving advantages to some men, by
confirming their power, which they know not to use with that modesty and
gratitude as becomes their loyalty, and his confidence.

77. A King sometimes by yielding less may be opposed less, and by denying
more, be more obeyed.

78. When we conquer Gods patience by our sins, we are condemned by mutual
conquerings to destroy one another in a Civil War, where the most prosperous
successes on either side impair the welfare of the whole.

79. Those Victories are still miserable, that leave our sins nnsubdued,
flushing our pride, and animating to continue injuries.

80. Peace it self is not desirable, til repentance have prepared us for it.

81. When we fight more against our selves, and less against God, we shall
cease fighting against one another.

82. No glory is more to be envied, than that of due reforming either Church or
State, when deformities are such, that the perturbation and novelty are not
like to exceed the benefit of reforming.

83. The settling of Religion ought to be the first rule and standard of
reforming.

84. It is a great miscariage, when popular clamours and fury are allowed the
reputation of zeal and the public sense.

85. Freedom, Moderation, and Impartiality, are the best tempers of reforming
counsels and endeavors.

86. What is acted by Factions, cannot but offend more than please.

87. Where the Scripture is not clear and punctual in precepts, there the
constant and universal practice of the Church, in things not contrary to
Reason, Faith, or Manners, or any positive Command, is the best Rule that
Christians can follow.

88. The Vulgar are taken with novelties as children with babies, very much,
but not very long.

89. If there were as much of Christ's Spirit, for meekness, wisdom and
charity in men's hearts, as there is of his Name used in the pretensions to
reform all to Christ's, it would certainly obtain more of Gods blessing, and
produce more of Christ's glory, the Churches good, the honor of Religion, and
the unity of Christians.

90. Public Reformers had need first act in private, and practice that on
their own hearts, which they purpose to try on others.

91. Deformities within will soon betray the Pretenders of public Reformations
to such private designs, as must needs hinder the public good.

92. The right methods of reforming the Church, cannot subsist with that of
perturbing the civil State.

93. Religion cannot be justly advanced by depressing Loyalty, which is one of
the chiefest ingredients and ornaments of true Religion: for, next to Fear God,
is Honor the King.

94. Christ's Kingdom may be set up, without pulling down the Kings; and men
will not in impartial times appear good Christians, that approve not themselves
good Subjects.

95. As good ends cannot justify evil means, so, nor will evil beginnings ever
bring forth good conclusions; unless God by a miracle of mercy, create Light
out of Darkness, Order out of Confusions, and Peace out of Passions.

96. The greatest experiments of Virtue and Nobleness are discovered in the
greatest advantages against an enemy, and the greatest obligations are those
which are put upon us by them, from whom we could least have expected them.

97. Bees will gather honey where the Spider sucks poison.

98. Subjects can hardly be happy, if their King be miserable; or enjoy their
peace and liberties, while he is oppressed.

99. A King should not only with patience bear indignities, but with charity
forgive them.

100. Subjects captivate their King, that allow him not the liberty of his own
thoughts, and are unwilling he should follow the light of his own conscience.

The Fifth Century.
1. IT is unreasonable for Subjects to expect the King should think their
Couns^ls good for him, who maintain a War against him.

2. Prosperity gains the greatest esteem and applause among the Vulgar, as
adversity exposes to their greatest slighting and disrespect.

3. Good Fortune is not always the shadow of Virtue and Justice; but oftener
attends vicious and injurious actions as to this world.

4. No secular advantages seem sufficient to that Cause, which begun with
Tumults, depends chiefly upon the reputation with the Vulgar.

5. Rebels think no Victories so effectual to their designs, as those that most
rout and wast their Kings credit with his people.

6. The taking away a Kings credit, is but a necessary preparation to the
taking away of his life and his kingdoms.

7. It is an exquisite method of Rebels cunning and cruel^y, To compel their
King first to follow the funerals of his honor, and then destroy him.

8. Few men's Consciences are so stupid, as not to inflict upon them some secret
impressions of that shame and dishonor which attends all unworthy actions,
have they never so much of public flattery and popular countenance.

9. Chams curse of being servant of servants, must needs be on them, who seek
by dishonorable actions to please the vulgar; and confirm by ignoble acts,
their dependence upon the people.

10. What Providence denies to Force, it may grant to Prudence.

11. When necessity is a King's Counselor, his confidence in a rebellious
people may disarm and overcome them; and the rendering his Person to them,
engage their affections to him.

12. God must be a Kings chiefest Guard; and his Conscience both his
Counselor, and his Comforter.

13. No necessities should compel a King to desert his ^^^^ur, or swerve from
his judg^^^^.

14. An univ^^sal confidence put in dissembling Subjects, may make them ashamed
not to be really such, as they ought and profess to be.

15. So various are all humane affairs, and so necessitous may the state of
Princes be, that their greatest danger may be in their supposed safety; and
their safety in their suposed danger.

16. A King ought not in rebellious times, to be less solicitous for his
friends safety, than his own; and he may choose to venture himself upon further
hazards, rather than expose their resolute loyalty to all extremity.

17. It is some skill in play, to know when a game is lost; better fairly to
give over, than to contest in vain.

18. A King that casts himself upon the kindness of Subjects that have fought
against him, must study to reinforce his judgment, and fortify his mind with
Reason and Religion; that he may not seem to offer up his souls liberty, or
make his Conscience their Captive.

19. No success should darken or disguise truth to a King, who in the greatest
necessity, should no less conform his words unto his inward dictates, than if
they had been, as the words of a King ought to be among Loyal Subjects, full of
power.

20. Reason is the divinest power: A King should never think himself weakened,
while he may make full and free use of that.

21. No Eclipse of outward fortune should rob a King of the light of Reason.

22. What God denies of outward strength to a distressed King, his grace may
supply with inward resolutions, not morosity to deny what is fit to be granted;
but not to grant any thing, which Reason and Religion bids him deny.

23. A King should never think himself less th^n himself, while he is able to
preserve the integrity of his Conscience, when the only jewel left him worth
keeping.

24. When Kings are deceived in their confidence, it is but an essay which God
will have them make of man's uncertainty, the more to fix them on himself, who
never fails them that trust in him.

25. Though the Reeds of Egypt break under the hand of him that leans on them;
yet the Rock of Israel will be an everlasting stay and defense.

26. When a King retires to God, he most enjoyes himself, which he loses while
he lets out his hopes to others.

27. Solitude and Captivity gives a King leisure enough to study the Worlds
vanity and inconstancy.

28. A King need not care much to be reckoned among the unfortunate, if he be
not in the black List of irreligious and sacrilegious Princes.

29. No restraint should ensnare a Kings soul in sin, nor gain that of him
which may make his Enemies more insolent, his friends ashamed, or his name
accursed.

30. They have no great cause to triumph, that have got a King's person into
their power, whose soul remains his own.

31. Should a King grant what unreasonable men desire, he should be such as
they wish him, not more a King, and far less both man and Christian.

32. Restraint ought not to obtain that of a King, which Tumults and Arms
could not, wherein though there be little safety, yet it has not more of
danger.

33. The fear of men should never be a Kings snare: nor should the love of any
liberty entangle his Soul.

34. Better others betray a King, than himself: and that the price of his
liberty should be his Conscience.

35. The greatest injuries a King's enemies seek to inflict upon him, cannot be
without his own consent.

36. While a King can deny with Reason, he shall defeat the greatest
impressions of Rebels malice, who neither know how to use worthily what is
already granted, nor what to require more of him but this, That he would seem
willing to help, then to destroy himself and his.

37. Although Rebels should destroy a King, yet let him give them no cause to
despise him.

38. Neither Liberty nor Life are so dear to a King, as the peace of his
Conscience, the honor of his Crowns, and the welfare of his People.

39. A King's word may more injure his People, than a War; while he gratifies a
few, to oppress all.

40. Laws may by God's blessing, revive with the Loyalty of Subjects, if a
distressed King bury them not by his consent, and cover them not in the grave
of dishonor and injustice, which some men's violence may have dug for them.

41. If Captivity or Death must be the price of the Laws redemption, a King
should not grudge to pay it.

42. No condition can make a King miserable, which carries not with it his
Souls, his Peoples, and Posterities thraldom.

43. A Monarch should rather hazard the ruin of one King, than confirm many
Tyrants over his people.

44 A distressed King may by the learning, piety and prayers of his Chaplains,
be either better enabled to sustain the want of all other enjoyments, or better
sitted for the recovery and use of them in God's good time.

45. A King may reap, by the pious help of his Chaplains, a spiritual harvest
of grace amidst the thorns, and after the plowings of temporal crosses.

46. When Rebels confine their King to solitude, they add a Wilderness of
Temptations, especialy if they obtrude company upon him more sad than solitude
it self.

47. The evil policy of men forbids all just restitution, lest they should
confess an injurous usurpation.

48. Though the justice of the Law deprive Prisoners of worldly comforts, yet
the mercy of Religion allows them the benefit of their Clergy, as not aiming
at once to destroy their Bodies, and to damn their Souls.

49. To deny a King the Ghostly comfort of his Chaplains, seems a greater
rigor and barbarity than is used to the meanest Prisoners, and greatest
Malefactors.

50. A Kings agony may be relieved by the presence of one good Angel, such as
is a learned, godly and discreet Divine.

51. Rebels, that envy the being a King, will incline to loathe his being a
Christian, and while they seek to deprive him of all things else, will be
afraid he should save his Soul.

52. Some remedies are worse than the disease, and some comforters more
miserable than misery it self; when like Jobs friends, they seek not to
fortify one's mind with patience, but persuade a man, by betraying his own
Innocence, to despair of God's mercy; and by justifying their injuries, to
strengthen the hands, and harden the hearts of insolent Enemies.

53. A King looking upon Clergymen as Orphans, and under the sacrilegious eyes
of many cruel and rapacious Reformers, ought in duty to appear as a Father, and
a Patron of them and the Church.

54. It is better to seem undevout, and to hear no men's prayers, than to be
forced, or seem to comply with those petitions, to which the heart cannot
consent, nor the tongue say Amen, without contradicting a man's own
understanding, or belying his own Soul.

55. In public devotions, a King should countenance neither profane boldness,
nor pious nonsense; but such an humble and judicious gravity, as shows the
speaker to be at once consideate both of God's Majesty, the Church's honor, and
his own vileness, both knowing what things God allows him to ask, and in what
manner it becomes a Sinner to supplicate the divine mercy for himself and others.

56. A King should equally be scandalized with all prayers that sound either
imperiously, or rudely and passionately; as either wanting humility to God, or
charity to men, or respect to the duty.

57. A King should better be pleased, as with studied and premeditated Sermons,
so with such public forms of Prayer as are fitted to the Church's and every
Christian's daily and common necessities; because he is better assured what he
may join his heart unto, than he can be of any man's extemporary sufficiency.

58. Extemporary sufficiency, as it need not wholely be excluded from public
occasions, so is it to be allowed its just liberty and use in private and
devout retirements; where neither the solemnity of the duty, nor the modest
regard to others, do require so great exactness, as to the outward manner of
performance.

59. The light of understanding, and the fervency of affection, are the main
and most necessary requisites both in constant and occasional, solitary and
social devotions.

60. A great part of some men's piety, hangs upon the popular pin of railing
against, and contemning the Liturgy of a Church.

61. A King should rather be condemned to the woe of Vae soli, than to that of
Vae vobis Hypocritis, by seeming to pray what he does not approve.

62. It is infinitely more glorious to convert Souls to Gods Church by the
Word, than to conquer men to a subjection by the Sword.

63. The gifts and prayers of the Clergy, are to be looked upon as more
praevalent than a King's, or other men's, by how much they flow from minds more
enlightened, and affections less distracted, than those which are encombred with
secular affairs.

64. A greater blessing and acceptableness attends those duties which are
rightly performed, as proper to, and within the limits of that calling, to
which God and the Church have especially designed and consecrated some men.

65. Confusion in Religion will as certainly follow every man's turning Priest
or Preacher, as it will in the State, where every man affects to rule as King.

66. A King may bear with more grief and impatience the want of his Chaplains,
than of any other his servants, and next (if not beyond in some things) to the
being sequestered from his Wife and Children; since from these, indeed more of
humane and temporary affections; but from those more of heavenly and eternal
improvements may be expected.

67. In the enforced (not neglected) want of ordinary means, God is wont to
afford extraordinary supplies of his gifts and graces.

68. A King that in solitude, has Gods Spirit to teach him and help his
infirmities in prayer, reading and meditation will need no other either Orator
or Instructor.

69. Some little practice will serve that man, who only seeks to represent a
part of honesty and honor.

70. A King cannot be so low, but He is considerable: adding weight to that
Party where he appears.

71. When the excentrique and irregular motion of the Times cannot well be
resisted, nor quieted; Better swim down such a stream, than in vain to strive
against it.

72. Impossible it is for lines to be drawn from the center, and not to divide
from each other, so much the wider, by how much they go farther from the point
of union.

73. Professed Patrons for the Peoples Liberties, cannot be utterly against the
Liberty of their King: what they demand for their own Conscience, they cannot
in reason deny to his.

74. Novel Injunctions cannot well be stamped with the authority of Laws,
without the Kings consent.

75. Men are hardly content with one sin, but add sin to sin, til the later
punish the former.

76. Power is above all Rule, Order and Law; where men look more to present
Advantages, than their Consciences, and the unchangeable rules of Justice;
while they are Judges of others, they are forced to condemn themselves.

77. Vengeance often pursues and overtakes them that thought to have escaped and
fortified themselves most impregnably against it, both by their multitude and
compliance.

78. Whom the Laws cannot, God will punish, by their own crimes and hands.

79. Fatal blindness frequently attends and punishes wilfullness, so that men
shall not be able at least to prevent their sorrows, who would not timely
repent of their sins, nor shall they be suffered to enjoy the comforts, who
securely neglect the counsels belonging to their peace.

80. Brethren in Iniquity, are not far from becoming insolent enemies, there
being nothing harder than to keep ill men long in one mind.

81. It is not possible to gain a ^air period for those motions which go rather
in a round and circle of fancy, than in a right line of reason tending to the
Law, the only center of public consistency.

82. Men are much more happy when subject to known Laws, than to the various
wills of any men, seem they never so plausible at first.

83. Vulgar compliance with any illegal and extravagant ways, like violent
motions in nature, soon grows weary of it self, and ends in a refractory
fullenness.

84. Peoples rebounds are often in their faces, who first put them upon those
violent strokes.

85. A King may so far esteem the valor and gallantry some time showed by an
Army which has fought against him, as to concur toward a just satisfying their
demands of pay and indemnity; and to wish he may never want such men to
maintain himself, his Laws and Kingdom in such a peace as wherein they may
enjoy their share and proportion so much as any men.

86. It is some kind of deceiving and lessening the injury of a Kings long
restraint, when he finds his leisure and solitude have produced something
worthy of himself, and useful to his Successor.

87. In Civil Wars, a Kings cause is not to be measured by the success, nor
his judgment of things by his misfortunes.

88. It is an advantage of wisdom to a young Prince, to have begun and spent
some years of discretion in the experience of troubles, and exercise of
patience.

89. In troubles Piety and all Virtues, both Moral and Political are commonly
better planted to a thriving (as Trees set in winter) than in the warmth and
serenity of times.

90. The delights which usually attend Princes Courts in time of Peace and
Plenty, are prone either to root up all Plants of true Virtue and Honor, or to
be contented only with some leaves and withering formalities of them.

91. Princes should always remember they are born, and by Providence designed
to the public good.

92. Flatteries are as unseparable from prosperous Princes, as Flies ate from
fruit in Summer, whom adversity, like cold weather, drives away.

93. Charles le Bon, a more glorious name for a Prince, than le Grand; Better
for him and his people he be good, than great.

94. The early exercise of Gods graces and gifts bestowed upon Princes may best
weed out all vicious inclinations, and dispose them to such Princely endowments
and employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those
over whom God may place them.

95. A Prince ought to begin and end with God, who is King of Kings, the
Sovereign disposer of the Kingdoms of the World.

96. The best Government, and highest Sovereignty a Prince can attain to is, to
be subject to God, that the Scepter of his Word and Spirit may rule in his
heart.

97. The true glory of Princes consists in advancing Gods Glory in the
maintenance of true Religion, and the Church's good; Also in the dispensation
of civil Power, with Justice and Honor to the public Peace.

98. Piety will make a Prince prosperous; at least it will keep him from being
miserable.

99. He is not much a loser, that loses all, yet saves his own soul at last.

100. A Kings affliction is Gods Physic, having that in healthfulness which it
wants in pleasure.

The Sixth Century.
1. A Prince at mature age, ought if satisfied in his own Judgment and Reason,
seal to that sacred bond which education has written, that it may be
judiciously his own Religion, and not other men's custom, or tradition, which he
professes.

2. A Princes fixation in matters of Religion, is not more necessary for his
souls, than his Kingdoms peace.

3. The Devil of Rebellion does commonly turn himself into an Angel of
Reformation, and the old Serpent can pretent new lights.

4. When some men's Consciences accuse them for sedition and faction, they stop
its mouth with the name and noise of Religion, When Piety pleads for peace and
patience, they cry out zeal.

5. Unless a King in point of Religion be well settled, he shall never want
temptations to destroy him and his under pretensions of Reforming.

6. Reforming matters of Religion seems even to the worst men as the best and
most auspicious beginning of their worst desfgns.

7. Some Reformers of Religion hope to cover their irreligious deformities
whereto they are conscious, by a severity of censuring other men's opinions or
actions.

8. A King ought to take heed of abetting any factions, or applying to any
public discriminations in matters of Religion, contrary to what is in his
judgment, and the Church well settled.

9. A King's partial adhering as head to any one side, gains him not so great
advantages in some men's hearts (who are prone to be of their Kings Religion) as
it loses them in others, who think themselves and their profession first
despised, than persecuted by him.

10. A King should take such a course, as may either with calmness and charity
quite remove seeming differeces in Religion, and offenses by impartiality, or
to order affairs in point of Power, that he shall not need to fear or flatter
any Faction.

11. If a King stand in need of any Faction, he may have flatterrd (that
affects him not) or must stand to their courtesy, he is undone; The Serpent
will devour the Dove.

12. A King may never expect less of loyalty, justice, or humanity, than from
those who engage into Religious Rebellion.

13. Religious Rebels make their interest always Gods.

14. Ambitious Policies march under the colors of Piety, not only with
greatest security, but applause, as to the populacy.

15. A King may hear Jacobs voice from such religious Reformers, but he will
feel they have Esau's hands.

16. As ill humors fall to the disaffected part, which causes inflammations;
so all affectors of novelties adhere to that side, which has the most
remarkable and specious note of difference in point of Religion.

17. Nothing ought to seem little or despicable to a King in matters which
concern Religion and the Church's peace, so as to neglect a speedy reformation,
and effectual suppression.

18. Errors and Schisms which seem at first but as a hand-breadth, by
seditious spirits, as by strong winds are soon made to cover and darken the
whole heaven.

19. A King should never charge his head with such a Crown, as shall by its
heaviness oppress the whole body, the weakness of whose parts cannot return any
thing of strength, honor or safety to the head, but a necessary debilitation
and ruin.

20. A Kings Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting rather than
exacting the rigor of the Laws; there being nothing worse than legal Tyranny.

21. Tumults, Armies and Prisons, are not the best arguments to convince the
testimony of a King's conscience.

22. It is not safe for a King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of
the Laws, in which is wrapped up the public Interest, and the good of the
Community.

23. A King should never repose so much upon any man's single counsel, fidelity
and discretion, in managing affairs of the first magnitude (that is, matters of
Religion and Justice) as to create in himself or others, a difference of his
own judgment, which is likely to be always more constant and impartial to the
interests of his Crown and Kingdom, than any man's.

24. A King should beware of exasperating any Factions by the crossness and
^^^^erity of some men's passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by him,
grounded only upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts
and suburbs of Religion.

25. A Charitable connivence and Christian toleration, often dissipates the
strength of Factions, which rougher opposition fortifies, and puts the despised
and opressed party into such combinations, as may most enable them to get a
full revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly assisted
by that vulgar commiseration, which attends all that are said to suffer under
the notion of Religion.

26. A King is not to connive at or tolerate any faction that amounts to an
insolent opposition of Laws and Government, or Religion established, as to the
essentials of them, such ^^^tions and minings are intolerab^e.

27. A King must always keep up solid Piety, and those fundamental Truths
(which mend both hearts and lives of men) with impartial favor and justice.

28. A King must take heed that outward circumstances and formalities of
Religion devour not all, or the best encouragements of Learning, industry and
piety.

29. A King ought with an equal eye and impartial hand, to distribute favors
and rewards to all men, as he finds them for their real goodness, both in
abilities and fidelities worthy and capable of them.

30. A King by rewarding men of best deserts, shall be sure to gain himself the
hearts of the best, and the most too, who though they be not good themselves,
yet are glad to see the severer ways of virtue at any time sweetened by
temporal rewards.

31. Combin^^ ^^actions have no sooner by force subdued what they counted their
common enemy, and are secured from that fear, but they are divided to so high a
rivalry, as sets them more at defiance against each other, than against their
first Antagonists.

32. Time will dissipate all Factions, when once the rough horns of private
men's covetous and ambitious designs shall discover themselves, which were at
first wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation and Liberty.

33. As the Wolf is not less cruel, so he will be more justly hated, when he
shall appear no better than a Wolf under Sheeps clothing.

34. To undeceive the seduced Vulgar, who in simplicity follow disguises, as a
King needs no palliations, if he study really to exceed in true and const^^^
demonstrations of goodness, piety, and virtue toward the People, even all
those men that make the greatest noise and ostentations of Religion: so shall
he neither fear any detection, as they do, who have but the face and mask of
goodness; nor shall he frustrate the just expectations of his people, who
cannot in reason promise themselves so much good from any Subjects novelties,
as from the virtuous constancy of their King.

35. None are greater Oppressors of Vulgar Estates, Liberties, and
Consciences, than those men that entitle themselves the Patrons and Vindicators
of them, only to usurp power over them.

36. No Passion should betray a Prince to any study of revenge upon those,
whose own sin and folly will sufficiently punish them in due time.

37. So soon as the forked arrow of factious emulations is drawn out, use all
princely arts and clemency to heal the wounds; that the smart of the cure, may
not equal the anguish of the hurt.

38. Acts of Indemnity and Oblivion, when desired and accepted, are to be
granted not only as Acts of State Policy and necessity, but of Christian
charity and choice.

39. They that deprive a King of all, cannot of a power to forgive them; and to
have a heart to do it, is a greater argument of Gods love to him, than any
prosperity can be.

40. None will be more loyal and faithful to an injured King, than those
Subjects, who, sensible of their errors and his sufferings, will feell in
their own souls most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to
make some reparations for their former defects.

41. As the quality of a King sets him beyond a Duel with any Subject; so the
Nobleness of his mind must raise him above the meditating any revenge, or
executing his anger upon the many.

42. The more conscious a King shall be to his own merits upon his people, the
more prone he will be to expect all love and loyalty from them, and to inflict
no punishment upon them for former miscariages.

43. An injured King will have more inward complacency in pardoning one, than
in punishing a thousand.

44. We cannot merit of God, but by his own mercy.

45. Counterfeit and disorderly zeal ought not to abate a King's value and
esteem of true piety: both of them are to be known by their fruits.

46. The sweetness of the Vine and Figtree is not to be despised, though the
Brambles and Thorns should pretend to bear Figs and Grapes, thereby to rule
over the Trees.

47. The public interest consists in the mutual and common good both of Prince
and People.

48. We must not sterve our selves, because some men have surfeited of wholesome
food.

49. God sometimes punishes Rebellious Subjects with continuance in their sin,
and suffers them to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness.

53. Gods grace may teach and enable an injured King to want, as well as to
wear a Crown, which is not worth taking up, or enjoying, upon sordid,
dishonorable, and irreligious terms.

51. Let a King keep himself to true principles of piety, virtue, and honor;
He shall never want a Kingdom.

52. It is a principal point of honor in a young King, to defer all respect,
love, and pretection to the Queen Dowager his mother, especially if with
magnanimity and patience she has sufferr'd for, and with, his Royal Father,
and himself.

53. A Captive King, in the midst of Rebellious Subjects, may be wrapped up and
fortified in his own innocence and God's grace.

54. The blood of a King destroyed by Rebels, will cry aloud for vengeance to
Heaven, and they who shed it, will have inward horror for their first
Tormenter, and not escape exemplary judgments.

55. They that repent of any defects in their duty toward the Royal Father, may
be found truly zealous to repay with interest, the loyalty and love which was
due to him, unto their King his son.

56. The mask of Religion on the face of Rebellion, will not long serve to hide
the men's deformities that use it.

57. Mislead Subjects may learn by their miseries, That Religion to their God,
and Loyalty to their King, cannot be parted without both their sin and their
infelicity.

58. God may honor a King, not only with the Scepter and government of Realms,
but also with the suffering many indignities, and an untimely death for them,
while he studies to preserve the rights of the Church, the power of his Laws,
the honor of his Crown, the privileges of Parliaments, the liberties of his
People, and his own Conscience, which is dearer to him than a thousand Kingdoms.

59. A Captive King has as much cause as leisure to meditate upon, and prepare
for his death; there being but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of
Princes.

60. It is Gods indulgence which gives him the space, but man's cruelty, that
gives him the sad occasions for those thoughts.

61. A King in the hands of Rebels, besides the common burden of mortality,
which lies upon him, as a man, bears the heavy load of other men's ambitions,
fears, jealousies, and cruel passions, whose envy or enmity against him, makes
their own lives seem deadly to them, while he enjoyes any part of his.

62. A Kings prosperity should not make him a stranger to the contemplations of
mortality.

63. The thoughts of death are never unseasonable, since prosperity always is
uncertain.

64. Death is an Eclipse, which often happens as well in clear as clowdy days.

65. A King by long and sharp adversity, may have so reconciled within himself
those natural Antipathies between Life and Death, which are in all men, that
the common terrors of the later may be dispelled, and the special horror of
it much allayed.

66. A King, to whom a violent death approaching is represented by the policy
of cruel and implacable enemies, with all terrible aggravations may look upon
those things as unpoysonous, though sharp, since his Redeemer has either
pulled them out, or given him the antidote of his death against them, which as
to the immaturity, unjustice, shame, scorn and cruelty of it, exceeded whatever
a threatened King can fear.

67. A pious King never finds so much the life of Religion, the feast of a good
Conscience, and the brazen wall of a judicious integrity and constancy, as when
he comes to a close conflict with the thoughts of Death.

68. Though a King be not so old, as to be weary of life, it is happy for him,
if he be not so bad as to be either afraid to dye, or ashamed to live.

69. It is the greatest glory of a Christians life to dye daily, in conquering
by a lively faith, and patient hope of a better life, those partial and
quotidian deaths, which kill by piece-meals, and make men over-live their own
fates, while we are deprived of health, honor, liberty, power, credit, safety,
or estate, and those other comforts of dearest relations, which are as the life
of our lives.

70. A King lives in nothing temporal so much, as in the love and good will of
his people.

71. A King should not think that life too long or tedious, wherein God gives
him any opportunities, if not to do, yet to suffer with such Christian patience
and magnanimity in a good cause, as are the greatest honor of his life, and
the best improvement of his death.

72. In point of true Christian valor, it argues pusillanimity to desire to
dye out of weariness of life, and a want of that heroike greatness of spirit
which becomes a Christian, in the patient and generous sustaining those
afflictions, which as shadows, necessarily attend us, while we are in this
body, and which are less'ned or enlarged as the Sun of our prosperity moves
higher or lower, whose total absence is best recompensed with the Dew of Heaven.

73. The assaults of affliction may be terrible, like Sampson's Lion, but they
yield much sweetness to those that dare encounter and overcome them, who know
how to over-live the witherings of their Gourds without discontent or
peevishness, while they may yet converse with God.

74. The life of a pious King is the Object of the Devils and wicked men's
malice, but yet under God's sole custody and disposal.

75. We must not by seeming prepared to dye, think to flatter God for longer
life.

76. Triumphing Enemies who are solemnly cruel, add (as those did who
crucified Christ) the mockery of justice to the cruelty of malice.

77. That a King may be destroyed, as with greater pomp and artifice, so with
less pity, it is but a necessary policy to make his death appear as an Act of
Justice, done by Subjects upon their Sovereign, who know that no Law of God or
Man invests them with any power of Judicature without him, much less against
him; and who being sworn and bound by all that is sacred before God and man, to
endeavor his preservation, must pretend justice to cover their perjury.

78. It is a sad fate for any man, to have his enemies to be Accusers, Parties
and Judges, but most desperate when this is acted by the insolence of Subjects
against their Sovereign, wherein those who have had the chiefest hand, and are
most guilty of contriving the public Troubles, must by shedding his blood,
seem to wash their own hands of that innocent blood, whereof they are most
evidently guilty before God and Man, if not in their own Consciences too, while
they carry on unreasonable demands, first by Tumults, after by Armies.

79. Nothing makes mean spirits more cowardly cruel in managing their usurped
power against their lawful Superiors, than the guilt of their unjust
usurpation.

80. Specious and popular pretensions of Justice against Delinquents are
applied only to disguize at first the monstrousness of their designs, who
despair of possessing the power and profits of the Vineyard, till the heir,
whose right it is, be cast out and slain.

81. It may be accounted by Rebels a Kings greatest fault, that he will not
either destroy himself with the Church and State by his word; or not suffer
them to do in unresisted by the sword, whose covetous Ambition, no Concessions
of his can either satisfy or abate.

82. Some men think that Kingdom of brambles which they seek to erect, not
likely to thrive, till watered with the Royal blood of those, whose right the
Kingdom is.

83. A King's Innocence will find him both his Protector, and his Advocate, who
is his only Judge.

84. The greatest Patrons of Law, Justice, Order, and Religion on earth, are
exposed to as many dangers, as there be either Men or Devils which love
confusion.

85. God will not suffer men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it with
the bones, and cement it with the blood of their Kings.

86. A King destined to death by Rebels, may be confident they will find
avengers of it among themselves; and that the injuries he has sustained from
them, shall be first punished by them, who agreed in nothing so much, as in
opposing him.

87. The impatience of Rebels to bear the loud cry of their Kings blood will
make them think no way better to expiate it, than by shedding theirs, who with
them most thirsted after his.

88. God will not suffer them to go unpunished, whose confoederacy in sin was
their only security.

89. A King's greatest conquest of Death, is from the power of the love of
Christ, who has swallowed up Death in the Victory of his Resurrection, and the
Glory of his Ascension.

90. Royal Charity is the noblest revenge upon, and victory over a King's
Destroyers.

91. The will of Rebels and Regicides seems to be their only rule, their power
the measure, and their success the Exactor of what they please to call Justice,
while they flatter themselves with the fancy of their own safety, by the Kings
danger, and the security of their lives-designs, by his death: forgetting, that
the greatest temptations to sin, are wrapped up in seeming prosperities; so the
severest vengeances of God are then most accomplished, when men are suffered to
complete their wicked purposes.

92. When the will of God has confined and concluded that of a devoted King,
he shall have the pleasure of dying without any pleasure of desired vengeance.

93. The glory attending the death of a King sacrificed to the will of his
revolted Subjects, surpasses all he could enjoy or conceive in life.

94. The sharp and necessary Tyrany of King-destroyers, sufficiently confute
the calumnies of Tyranny against him.

95. Subjects ought to know how to excuse their Sovereign's failings as a man,
and yet to retain and pay their duty to him as their King; there being no
religious necessity binding any Subjects by pretending to punish, infinitely to
exceed the faults and errors of their Princes.

96. Rebels may often see the proportions of their evil dealings against their
King in the measure of Gods retaliations upon them, who cannot hope long to
enjoy their own thumbs and to^s, having under pretense of paring his nails,
been so cruel as to cut off his chiefest strength.

97. The punishment of the more insolent and obstinate Rebels may be like Korah
and his Accomplices (at once mutining against both Prince and Priest) in such a
method of divine Justice, as is not ordinary; the earth of the lowest and
meanest people opening upon them, and swallowing them up in a just disdain of
their ill-gotten, and worse-used Authority; upon whose support and strength
they chiefly depended for their building and establishing their designs against
their King, the Church and State.

98. It is a fallacy in them who from worldly success (rather like Sophisters
than sound Christians) draw those popular conclusions for Gods approbation of
their actions, whose wise prudence often permits many events, which his revealed
Word, the only clear, safe and fixed rule of good actions and good
conveniences, in no sort approves.

99. A good King may be confident that the justice of his Cause, and clearness
of his Conscience, before God, and toward his people, will carry him as much
above Rebels in Gods decision, as their successes may have lifted them above
him in the Vulgar opinion.

100. Many times those undertakings of men, are lifted up to Heaven in the
prosperity and applause of the World, whose rise is from Hell, as to the
injuriousness and oppression of the design.

The Seventh Century.
1. THe prosperous winds which often fill the Sails of Pirates, does not justify
their piracy and rapine.

2. The prayers and patience of a King's friends and loving Subjects,
coutribute much to the sweetning of that bitter cup given him by them, whose
hands are unjustly and barbarously lifted up against him.

3. As to the last event, a murdered King may seem to owe more to his Enemies,
than his Friends, while those put a period to the sins and sorrows attending
this miserable life, wherewith these desire he might still contend.

4. If a good King suffer's a violent death with his Savior, it is but
Mortality crowned with Martyrdom, where the debt of death which he owes for sin
to Nature, shall be raised as a gift of faith and patience offered to God.

5. The Trophies of a King's charity will be more glorious and durable over
Rebels, than their illmanaged victories over him.

6. They whose sin is prosperous, had need be penitent, that they may be
pardoned.

7. We are to look upon the temporal destruction of the greatest King, as far
less deprecable, than the eternal damnation of the meanest Subject.

8. It is very strange, that Mariners can find no other means to appease the
storm themselves have raised, but by drowning their Pilate.

9. They who themselves seem, and teach others to despair of their King's
Salvation, only discover this, that they do not much desire it.

10. Uncharitable and cruel Restraints of a King from spiritual assistance of
Chaplains, may rather enlarge, than any way obstruct his access to the Throne
of Heaven.

11. When large pretenses prove but the shadows of weak performances, then the
greatest labors produce the smallest effects.

12. When a period is put to a work of great concernment, all men's ears do (as
it were) hunger till they are satisfied in their expectations.

13. No grants give satisfaction to them that pursue their own ambitious ends,
more than the welfare of a miserable Land.

14. It is an unutterable misery for him that has ruled like a King, to be
ruled like a Slave.

15. A King knows not what to grant, when after his concessions to Subjects
that have required all, they know not what to ask.

16. They who pretend zeal, when their thoughts are filled with blood, are but
Wolves in Sheeps clothing.

17. Rebels that endeavor to rule by the Sword, shall at last fall by it, for
Faction is the Mother of Ruin.

18. They that are of such a Weather-cock-like disposition, love nothing but
mutabilities.

19. Much variety does confound the senses, and makes them still hate one
folly, and fall in love with another.

20. Time is the best cure for Faction: for it will at length (like a spreading
leprosy) infect the whole body of the Kingdom, and make it so odious, that at
last they will hate themselves for love of that, and like a fish, for love of
the bait, be caught with the hook.

21. It is not expedient for an Army, to contradict the votes of a Kingdom,
endeavou^ing by pretending for Laws and Liberties, to subvert both.

22. The time will come, when the very Clouds shall drop down vengeance upon
the heads of those that barrocado themselves against the proceedings of peace.

23. A resolute King in captivity is armed against the fury of Rebellious
Subjects, having a breast to receive the arrows of their envy, and a heart
possessed with patience to sustain them.

24. To God nothing is so great that it may resist; nor so small, that it is
contemned.

25. A King may rather desire his faults should be corrected by the hand of
God, than that his ununjust enemies should be the Ministers of God's justice.

26. Let Calamity be the exercise, but not the overthrow of a Kings Virtue.

27. The permitting a wrong way of God's worship to be set up, to the injury of
the right before established and practiced, will bring shame and grief to a
King by his own confession, that he therein followed the persuasions of Worldly
wisdom, forsaking the Dictates of a right informed Conscience.

28. They who have been false to their King, to those that gave them power, and
in likelihood to their own souls, may be forgiven by him, but never trusted.

29. It is an humor becoming an impartial King, to be still partial for that
side which he imagines suffer for the weakness of those that maintain it.

30. A King should suffer a Divine who would rectify his supposed error, no
less than a Physician, to take his own way of cu^e.

31. As to the profession of Religion, the King is happy, who condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows.

32. He that changes for the better, ought to be sure it be better, before he
change.

33. Inconstancy in Religion, without cause and color, is both sin and shame.

34. There is much difference between permission and approbation.

35. If the practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal consent of the
Fathers be not a convincing argument, when the interpretation of the Scripture
is dou^^full, nothing is.

36. The Interpretation of private Spirits is the Mother of all sects, and will
bring, where permitted, Kingdoms to confusion.

37. Another man's will is as weak a ground for a King to build his faith on, as
his own education.

38. When a General Counce^ cannot be had, several Kingdoms may reform
themselves.

39. Rebels never wanted Wr^ters to maintain their unjust actions.

40. All popular Reformation is little better than Rebellion.

41. No Authority is lawful, but that which is either directly given, or at
least approved by God.

42. The Church having any Discipline not conformed to the Civil Policy, can
neither flouris^, nor be happy.

43. Church-Ambition does not at all terminate in seeking to be Pope, it being
no point of humility to endeavor to be independent of Kings.

44. Papacy in a multitude may be as dangerous, as in one.

45. Many things may be avowable upon necessity, which otherwise are unlawful.

46. In points not fit to be discussed, instances, as well as comparisons, are
odious.

47. Reason epitomized, weighs as much with wise men, as at large.

48. One may lean on another arm, who leans more on his judgment.

49. The soundness of Religion is not to be tried by dint of Sword, nor must we
judge of her Truths, by the prosperity of events.

50. When men sit down to discourse or argue, Reason should take her seat with
them, and, though she be no Judge, have her place, if not above their Faith, in
their arguments.

51. The envious man's seeds, are tares, although the husbandman knows not when
they were sown.

52. The child is not to be pour tractured greater than the Nurse, nor the
Bishops power made to outreach the King's, who is the Nursing Father of the
Church.

53. Unity may consist in this* when many sheaves lie in one man's field that
belong to him, or be carried into his barn, though they be not bundled up in a
rick with one cock-sheave above the rest.

54. A sum divided into several parcels is not broke, while the owner has all
in his possession.

55. Whilst Arguments do multiply, Time lessens.

56. The seed of the Word wherein is Gods holy Spirit, being sown in the
heart, inlivened by the heat of Faith, and watered with the tears of
Repentance, soon fructifies without any further circumstance.

57. It is no strange thing to see Error triumph in Antiquity, and flourish
fair Ensigns in the face of Truth.

58. It will do no good to keep possession of the keys, when the lock is
changed.

59. Though the Catholic Church is the white in that Butt of earth at which we
all must aim; yet the Scripture is the heart, center, or peg in the midst of
that white that holds it up, from whence we must measure.

60. That which must determine Truth, must not be fallible.

61. When a King fears affairs of Council will meet with some passion and
prejudice in other men, it is best for him to resolve they shall find least of
them in himself.

62. Men's well-meaning ^eal must be guided by such rules of moderation, as are
best both to preserve and restore the health of States and Kingdoms.

63. A King should intend not only to oblige his friends, but his enemies also,
exceeding even the desires of those that have been factiously discontented, if
they do but pretend to any modest and sober sense.

64. The Odium and o^fences which some men's rigor or remissness in Church and
State may have contracted upon a Kings Government, he should resolve to expiate
by such Laws and Regulations for the future, as may not only rectify what was
amiss in practice, but supply what was defective i^ the constitution.

65. No man should have a greater zeal to see Religion settled and preserved in
Truth, Unity and Order, than the King whom it most concerns both in piety and
policy.

66. A King's confidence in others may betray himself and his Kingdoms to
those advantages which some men seek for, who want nothing but power and
occasion to do mischief.

67. When our sins ar^ ripe, there is no preventing of God's Justice from
reaping that glory in our Calamities, which we robbed him of in our Prosperity.

68. Great abilities in a Minister of State, may be prone to create in him
great confidence of undertakings, and this is like enough to betray him to
great errors, and many enemies.

69. Though a King cannot in his Judgment approve all a Minister of State has
done, driven (it may be) by the necessity of Times and the Temper of that
People he is set over more than lead by his own disposition to any height and
rigor of actions; yet he may not be convinced of any such criminousness in
him, as willing to expose his life to the strokes of Justice, and malice of his
enemies.

70. When a King bears the touch of Conscience, with great regret, for any act
of so sinful frailty, as discovers more a fear of Man than of God, as a sign
of his repentance, he should often with sorrow confess the same both to God and
Men.

71. No man is worthy to bear the name and place of God on earth, who will not
avoid inconveniences of State by acts of so high injustice, as no public
convenience can expiate or compensate.

72. In all likelihood a King can never suffer with his People greater
calamities (yet with greater comfort) by vindicating the Innocence of his
Minister, at least by denying to sign any destructive Bill, according to that
Justice which his Conscience suggesteth to him; than he will do after he shall
have gratified some men's unthankful importunities with so cruel a favor.

73. It may be observed by a King, that those who counsel him to sign a
destructive Bill to an innocent Minister of State, are so far from receiving
the rewards of such ingratiatings with the People, that no me^ are harrassed
and crushed more than they; when he is least vexed by them, who counsels the
King not to consent against the vote of his own Conscience.

74. A King fully conscious to his Soul, of permitting an Innocent Minister of
State to be destroyed, may so much the more welcome those Judgments God has
pleased to send upon him, as he may hope them to be a means which his mercy
has sanctified so to him, as to repent of that unjust Act, and for the future
not to do the like.

75. Nothing should more fortify a King^s resolutions against al^ violent
importunities* which seek to gain consent from him to Acts wherein his
Conscience is unsatisfied, than the sharp touches he may have had for some such
he before has yielded to.

76. When a King's enemies, of his own People, load his Act of Justice, because
extraordinary in the method, with obloquies and exasperations, in touchy times
it will fill indifferent men with great jealousies and fears; yea, and many of
his friends will resent it as a motion rising rather from Passion, than Reason*
and not guided with such discretion as the Times require*

77. Though a King be furnished with just motives and pregnant grounds to
proceed against any Subjects, so that there needs nothing to the evidence he
can produce against those he charge, save a free and legal Trial; let that be
all he desires.

78. A King should not yield to any temptation of displeasure or revenge
against the persons of his Subjects, further than he has discovered the
unlawful correspondencies they have used, and engagements they have made to
embroyl his Kingdoms.

79. Probabilities may be sufficient to raise jealousies in any King's heart,
who is not wholely stupid and neglective of the public peace.

80. A fair and legal trial of men called in question by their King, can amount
to no worse effect, than either to do him and his Kingdom right in case they be
guilty; of else to clear their Innocence, and remove his suspicions.

81. When once People have learned to think hard thoughts against their King,
they will afterward abundantly vent them by words and deeds.

82. Not any thing (except our sins) more ominously presageth al^ the miseries
incident to a Kingdom by Civil War, then Tumults in the Capital City of it,
which, when at their height, are not like a storm at Sea, (which yet wants not
its terror) but like an Earthquake, shaking the very foundations of all; than
which nothing in the World has more of horror.

83. In Popular Tumults, a short sit, or two, of shaking, as an ague, may pass
away; but when once they become a quotidian fever, always increasing to
higher inflammations, impatient of any mitigation, restraint, or remission,
they threaten ruin.

84. An unsafe guard may too easily be entertained by such as scare themselves,
and others, with unnecessary fears.

85. Such great Demagogues, and Patrons of Tumults, as send for them to flatter
and embolden them, to direct and tune their clamorous importunities, God will
in his due time let them see, that those are no fit means to be used for
attaining his ends.

86. They are no wise Statesmen, who own people in Tumults to be their friends,
commending their Courage, Zeal, and Industry; which to sober men can seem no
better than that of the Devil, who goes about seeking whom he may deceive and
devour,

87. It is not always an effect of Pusillanimity in a man, for popular
terrors to deser^ his public station.

88. When Popular Tumults are become as the breaking in of a Sea; for a King to
resist at present, threatens imminent danger; but to withdraw, gives it space
to spend its fury, and gains him a sitter time to repair the breach.

89. A King, by all means to decline a Civil War, may in many particulars deny
himself, especially having no Army to fly unto for protetection, or
vindication.

90. A King should resolve to hear reason in all things, and to consent to it
so far as he can comprehend it.

91. When unquiet people with unpassionate representations reflect upon any,
not more Princely, than friendly contributions, which their King may have
granted toward the perpetuating of their happiness, he need not despair of
recovering their Love and Loyalty unto him.

92. The Loyal and cleared affections of misled People, will strive to return
such retributions of Honor and Love to their injured King, or his Posterity,
as may fully compensate both the acts of his confidence in and his sufferings
for them.

93. It is the injury of all injuries, wherewith some malicious people load
their King, while they calumniate him as a wilful and resolved occasioner, of
his own and his Subjects miseries.

94. A King ought not to repine at an establishment of his own making; nor
endeavor by force and open hostility to undo what by his Royal assent he has
done.

95. A King may have a sense of injuries from his Subjects, yet not such, as to
think them worth vindicating by a War.

96. A King is compelled ^^ injure himself by his Subjects, not using favors
with the same candor, wherewith they were conferred.

97. Tumults are prone to threaten to abuse all Acts of grace, and turn them
into wantonness.

98. Their own fears, whose black arts raise up turbulent Spirit^* may force
them to conjure them down again.

99. Though a King have justly resented any indignities put upon him, he may be
in no capacity to take just revenge in a hostile and warlike way upon those,
whom he knows to be well fortified in the love of the meaner sort of the
people.

100. A King should long for nothing more, than that himself and his Subjects
may quietly enjoy the fru^ts of his own condescendings.

The eighth Century.
1. A King that knows well the sincerity and uprightness of his own heart, in
passing from himself what may exceed the very thoughts of former times,
although he seem less a Politician to men, yet may need no secret distinctions
or evasions before God.

2. Though a King may be content, to recede much from his own interests and
Personal rights, of which he conceives himself to be Master; yet in what
concerns Truth, Justice, the Rights of the Church, and his Crown, together with
the general good of his Kindoms (all which he is bound to preserve as much as
morally lies in him) here he ought to be fixed and resolute.

3. A King, by no necessity, should be brought to affirm that to men, which in
his conscience he denied before God.

4. For Protestants to force their Queen, because of the Roman Religion, to
withdraw for her safety, as it will be little to the ador^ing of their
profession; so it may occasion a further alienation of mind, and divorce of
affections in her from it.

5. An Afflicted King can give no better instance of a steady affection unto
his Queen, than by professing himself content to be tossed, weather-beaten, and
shipwrackt, so as she may be safe in Harbor.

6. The policy of Rebels finds it sometimes necessary to their designs, by
scandalous articles, and all irreverent demeanor, to seek to drive their Queen
out of the Kingdom, lest by the influence of her example, eminent for love, as
a wife, and loyalty as a subject, she should convert to, or retein in their
love and loyalty to their King, all those, whom they have a purpose to pervert.

7. Some acts there are of so rude disloyalty, that a King's greatest enemies
have scarce confidence enough to abet, or own.

8. Rebels that design the destruction of their King, will first make overt
essays, by possessing themselves of Towns, how patiently he can bear the loss
of his Kingdoms.

9. A good King so injured, will be more affected with shame and sorrow for
others; then with anger for himself; nor will the affront done to him, trouble
him so much as their sin, which admits no color or excuse.

10. They who have effrontery enough to commit or countenance, will hardly
contein themselves within the compass of one unworthy act, but the hand of that
cloud will soon overspread the whole Kingdom, and cast all into disorder and
darkness.

11. One act of public Rebellion, may give a wise King to see clearly through
all the pious disguises, and soft palliations of some men, whose words, though
smoother than oil, will prove very swords.

12. Against the Swords point is the defense of a good Conscience.

13. Were it not that the excess of our impotent passions, gave our enemies
malice a full impression on our souls, it could not reach very far, nor do us
much hurt.

14. It is observable how God sometimes so pleades and avengeth the cause of an
injured King, in the eye of the world, that the most wilfully blind, cannot
avoid the displeasure to see it, and with some remorse and fear to own it, as a
mutable stroke and prediction of divine vengeance.

15. It has been known, that a leading Rebel, unreproached, unthreatned,
uncursed, by any language or secret imprecation of the King, only blasted with
the conscience of his own wickedness, and falling from one inconstancy to
another, no^ long after has paid his own and his eldest sons heads, as
forfeitures of their disloyalty, to those men, from whom he might have expected
another reward, than so to divide their heads from their bodies, whose hearts
with them were divided from their King.

16. A solitary vengeance will no^ always serve the turn; The cutting off one
head in a family, is not enough to expiate the asfront done to the head of a
Common weal.

17. The eldest son has been known to be involued in the punishment, as he was
infected with the sin of the Father against the Father of his Country: Root and
Branch God cuts off in one day.

18. A King ought not to rejoice in the ruin of any eminent Rebel, (though it
were such as could give the greatest thirst for revenge a full draught, as if
executed by them, who first employed him against his Sovereign) but rather pity
him, especially if he thinks he acted against the light of his Conscience.

19. Signal Rebels are not always suffered to accomplish their repentance,
when they begin to have inclinations toward it, and a reparation of their duty,
but fall unhap^ily sometimes into the hands of their Justice, who first
employed them, and not the Mercy of the King they have offended.

20. It is no fault in a King, to be as willing to forgive a Rebel, as he can
ask favor of him.

21. That Gentleman is to be pitied (even by the King he has offended) that
becomes a notable monument of unprosperous disloyalty, a sad and unfortunate
spectacle to the World.

22. A King should love the inward peace of his Conscience, before any outward
tranquillity.

23. Some miscariages in Government, may escape, rather through ill Counsel of
some men driving on their private ends, or the peevishness of others envying
the public should be managed without them, or the hidden and insuperable
necessities of State, than any propensity of the King himself, either to
injuriousness, or oppression.

24. Those Rebels must have more confidence in their Cannon, then in their
Gause, whom their King can freely ask, whose innocent blood during my Reign
have I shed, to satisfy my lust, anger, or covetousness? What Widows or
Orphans tears can witness against me, the just cry of which must now be avenged
with my own blood?

25. Some men are not willing to believe their King, lest they should condemn
themselves.

26. To allay the insolency of tumults, it may conduce, if the King withdraw.

27. A King is hardly treated, when urged with an Army, and constrained either
to hazard his own and his Kingdoms ruin by his defense, or prostrate his
Conscience to the blind obedience of those men, whose zealous superstition
thinks, or pretends, they cannot do God and the Church a greater service, than
utterly to destroy that Primitive, Apostolical, and anciently Universal
Government of the Church by Bishops.

28. It is no just occasion taken, to persecute with the injuries of an Army,
for not suffering tamely the injuries of Tumults.

29. It is no plausible design for importunate Subjects to raise an Army,
either to stop their Kings mouth, or force his cconsent.

30. A King should think his Innocence no whit prejudiced, or darkened, in the
midst of many unfortunate successes of a Civil War on his side.

31. How untruly a King is charged with the first raising an Army, and
beginning a Civil War, the eyes that only pity him, and the Loyal hearts that
dare only pray for him, may witness, especially when not so many are on his
side, as the men in Arms listed against him.

32. A Kings unpreparedness for a Civil War, though it may well dishearten
those that would help him, while it argues (truly) his unwillingness to fight;
yet it testifies for him, that he is set on the defensive part, having so
little hopes or power to offend others, that he has none to defend himself, or
to preserve what is his own for their proreption.

33. No man can doubt, but Rebbels prevent the King in their purposes, as well
as their injuries, who are much aforehand in their preparations against him,
and surprisals of his strength.

34. When men of Loyalty are over-awd by the numbers and terrors of the
Rebellious; such as are not for the Rebels, dare not be for the King.

35. When Rebels prevent their King by surprising his Castles, Forts, Arms and
Navy, with the Militia, it is so far best for him, that it may drive him from
putting his trust in the arm of flesh, and wholly to cast himself into the
protection of the living God, who can save by few, or none, as well as by many.

36. It is height of Charity and generosity of spirit in a disarmed King, to
reckon the want of the Militia not so much in reference to his own protection,
as his Peoples.

37. The many and sore opressions of Loyal Subjects may grieve an afflicted
King, when he is above his own.

38. It is a strange method the men must take, who will needs resolve their
riddle of making a glorious King, by taking away Kingly Power. Even as if he
should become a support to his Friends, and a terror to his Enemies, by being
unable to succor the one, or suppress the other.

39. It is a strange design some men have, who propose the newmodelling of
Sovereignty and Kingship, as without any reality of power, so without any
necessity of subjection and obedience.

40. A King should be much willing to bury all Jealousies in his people of him,
and to live above all Jealousies of them, as to himself.

41. No concession of the King's, how vast and large soever will be
satisfactory to those men who seem enemies not to him only, but to all
Monarchy, being resolved to transmit to Posterity such jealousies of the Crown,
as they should never permit it to enjoy its just and necessary rights, in point
of Power.

42. Civility and Duty (no less than Justice and Honor) should forbid Subjests
to ask of their King an alienation of power from himself and his Posterity.

43. A distressed King should by no Act of his prejudice or obstruct his
Successors just recovery of their Rights from unjust usurpations and
extorsions.

44. A King under restraint must not be prevailed with to leave his Subjects in
a condition wholly desperate for the future, so as by a Law to be ever
subjected to many factious distractions.

45. When men have tried the horrors and malignant in^luence which will
certainly follow their King's enforced darkness and Eclipse, they will at
length more esteem and welcome the restored glory and blessing of the Suns
light.

46. In the Conflicts of Civil War, and advantages of Power, the Peoples safety
and quiet cannot be effected, but by some side yielding; to which the greatest
love of the Public Peace, and the firmest assurance of God's Protection
(arising from a good Conscience) may more invite a just and pious King, than
can be expected from Rebellious men's fears, which arising from the injustice of
their actions, (though never so successful) yet dare not adventure their
Authors upon any other way of safty, than that of the Sword and Militia.

47. A good King in civil afflictions is not to think that he can want any
thing which providential necessity is pleased to take from him, in order to his
Peoples tranquillity, and God's glory, whose protection is sufficient for him.

48. Such unreasonable Propositions as are inconsistent with being either a
King, or a good Christian, while he has any mastery of his Reason, he cannot
consent unto.

49. For a distressed King to oblige himself by a general and implicit
consent, to what ever unreasonable Subjects shall desire, or propound, were as
if Sampson should have consented not only to bind his own hands, and cut off
his hair, but to put out his own eyes, that the Philistians might with the more
safety mock and abuse him, which they chose rather to do, than quite to destroy
him, when he was become so tame an object, and ^it occasion for their sport and
scorn.

50. They who pretend to make their addresses in an humble and loyal way of
petitioning, by that sufficiently confess their own inferiority, which obliges
them to rest if not satisfied, yet quieted with such an answer, as the will and
reason of their Superior thinks sit to give.

51. A freedom and power to consent, or dissent, belongs to a Monarch in
reason, as a Man, and in honor, as a Sovereign King.

52. For a King to trust to their moderation, who pretend to it, but have it
not, and abandon his own discretion, would be to verify what representations
they may have made of him to the World. That he is fitter to be their Pupil,
than their Prince.

53. A Prudent King should not be so confident of his own sufficiency, as not
willingly to admit the counsel of others; nor yet so diffident of himself, as
brutishly to submit to any men's dictates, and at once to betray the Sovereignty
of Reason in his Soul, and the Majesty of his own Crown to any of his Subjects.

54. A King ought to have one septenary, or seven years experience of young
Statesmen, how well they can govern themselves, before he trusts them with any
power to govern his people for him.

55. A King should be very foolish indeed, and unfaithful in his trust, to put
the reigns of both Reason and Government, wholly out of his own, into their
hands, whose driving is too much like Jehu's, and whose forwardness to ascend
the throne of Supremacy pretends more of Phaethon, than of Phoebus.

56. If Subjects will take the liberty of sending Propositions unto their
Sovereign, they ought to be such as these.

1. That any good Laws antiquated by the course of times, or overlay'd by the
corruption of manners, may be restored to their vigor and due execution.

2. That any evil customs praeterlegal, and abuses personal, may be removed,

3. That if any injuries have been done by the King and others to the
Commonweal, they may be repaired.

4. Such equable offertures should be tendered to him, wherein the advantages of
his Crown being considered by them, he may fairly be induced to condescend to
what tends to his Subjects good, without any great diminution of himself.

5. Such moderate desires of due Reformation, of what is indeed amiss in Church
and State, as may still preserve the foundation and essentials of Government in
both, not shake and quite overthrow either of them, without any regard to the
Laws in force, the wisdom and piety of their Ancestors, the ancient and
universal practice of Christian Churches, the rights and privileges of
particular men.

6. Some considerable thing should be offered in lieu or in the room of what
they would have destroyed, which may at once reach the good end of the others
institution, and also supply its pretended defects, reformits abuses, and
satisfy sober and wise men, not with soft and specious words, pretending zeal
and special piety, but with pregnant and solid reasons both divine and humane,
which may justify the abruptness and necessity of vast alterations.

57. A King cannot be well counseled by his Parliament, if in the Members of
it, there be not so much Learning, Reason, Religion, and just Moderation, as to
know how to sever betweem the use and the abuse of things, the institution, and
the corruption, the government, and the misgovernment, the Primitive Patterns
and the alterations or blottings of after-Copies.

58. Though Armies of Soldiers may prevail against a King's Person, yet Armies
of unreasonable Propositions which they would enforce, should never overcome
him further than he sees cause, it behoving him not to look at their number and
power, so much, as to weigh their reason and justic^.

59. It is hard at first either to discern the rise, or apply the remedy to a
precipitant Rebellion.

60. In Civil Wars and Massacres, the Sea of blood cruelly and barbarously
shed, is enough to drown any man in ete^nal both infamy and misery, whom God
finds the malicious Author or Instigatour of its effusion.

61. It is a most unhappy advantage to some men's malice against their King,
that when they bave impudence enough to lay any thing to his charge, any bloody
opportunity should be offered them, with which he must be aspersed, although
nothing can be more abhorred to him, than what is full of sin against God,
disloyalty to himself, and destructive to his Subjects.

62. The blame of bloody and Rebellious Protestants must needs he greater than
that of Papists, by how much their Principles are more for obedience to Princes.

63. The goodness of men's intentions will not excuse the scandal and contagion
of their Examples.

64. The King's interest ties as much in the common welfare of his Subjects, as
some men's does in their perturbations.

65. Although a King can with Truth wash his hands in Innocence as to any guilt
in a Commotion objected to him, yet he should wash them in his Tears, at the
sad apprehensions he ought to have, to see it spread so far, and make such
waste.

66. Distractions and Jealousies at home, make most men who are better
Politicians than Christians, rather intent to their own safety, or to the
designs they are driving, than to the relief of their fellow Subjects abroad,
though every day inhumanly butchered and massacred, whose tears and blood
might, if nothing else, quench, or at least for a time repress and smother any
sparks of Civil dissensions and jealousies, which some men industriously
scatter in the Kingdom where they are.

67. They who themselves have rebellious intentions or inclinations, are
unwilling to part with their King upon any hazardous expedition, though to the
suppressing that force which opposes their interest, being either afraid he
should have any one Kingdom quieted; or being loath to shoot at any mark less
than him; or that any should have the glory of his destruction but themselves.

68. Next to the sin of those who begin a Rebellion, theirs must needs be who
either hinder the speedy suppressing of it by Domestic dissentions, or divert
the Aids, or exasperate the Rebbels to the most desperate resolutions and
actions, by threatening all extremities not only to the known heads and chief
Incendiaries, but even to the whole community of a Nation, Resolving to destroy
root and branch, men, women, and children, without any regard to those usual
pleas for mercy, which Conquerours not wholly barbarous are wont to hear from
their own breasts, in behalf of those, whose opressive faces, rather than their
malice engaged them; or whose imbecility for sex and age was such, as they
could neither lift up a ^and against them, nor distinguish between their right
hand and their left.

69. Preposterous and unevangelical was that zeal of the rebuked Disciples, who
would go no lower in their revenge, than to call for fire from Heaven upon
whole Cities, for the repulse or neglect of a few; As was that of Jacobs sons,
whom the Father both blamed and cursed for it. And so is theirs who are for
utter extirpation of all, and more than all that have opposed them, that will
extinguish a Nation for the misdemeanors and injuries of a provoked and
incensed Party.

70. Even in the case of Rebellion, moderate remedies are rather to be applied
than extreme severity, such as may punish some with exemplary justice, yet
disarm others with tenders of mercy upon their submission, and the King's
protection of them from furious and factious persons, though met in Parliament,
who would soon drown them, if they refused to swim down the popular stream with
them.

71. A King has enough to do to look to his own conscience, and the faithful
discharge of his Trust. He has no leisure to make prolix Apologies against
injurious calumnies and reproaches.

72. A King that can hear with patience as bad as his worst enemies can falsely
say, may hope still to do better than they deserve or desire he should.

73. By great effusions of Subjects blood in Civil Wars, no man is so much
weakened as their King.

74. Which King may hope, though men's unsatiable cruelty never will, yet the
mercy of God will at length say to his justice, It is enough.

75. When God's merciful justice intends not the utter confusion, but the
cure; the abatement of men's sins, not the desolating of Nations, he will
command the Sword of Civil Wars to sheath it self.

76. A King of diverse Nations, may incur the the censure or misconstruction
of one, while he gratifies the active spirits among them of the other, so far
as that he seems to many, to prefer the desires of that party, before his own
interest and honor.

77. Religion and Liberty are common and vulgar flourishes, to disguise an
other errand of that Army, which invades their own Kings territories, to make
him and his Church to write after them and theirs, though it were in bloody
characters.

78. Presbytery seeks to suppress and render odious, under the names of Sects,
Schisms, or Heresies, several Parties, which if they can get but numbers,
strength and opportunity, may according to Presbyteries opinion and pattern set
up their ways by the like methods of violence, representing a wonderful
necessity thereof to avoid the further miseries of War, which they may first
begin, and engage themselves to continue, until they obtain their end.

79. When God has first taken us off from the folly of our opinions, and fury
of our passion, he has many ways to teach us those rules of true Reason, and
peaceable Wisdom, which is from above, tending most to his glory, and his
Church's good.

80. They that have any true touches of Conscience, will not endeavor to carry
on the best designs, (much less such as are, and will be daily more apparently
factious and ambitious) by any unlawful means, under the title of a Covenant.

81. Ties by Leagues and Covenants are either superfluous and vain, when men
were sufficiently tied before; or fraudulent and injurious, if by such
after-ligaments they find the Imposers really aiming to dissolve or suspend
their former just and necessary obligations.

82. Factious men, to whom it is enough if they get but the reputation of a
seeming increase to their Party, little romember, That God is not mocked.

83. Against the Church, the King, or the Public Peace, no man's lawful
Calling can engage him.

84. The so^^ and servile temper of some Divines, dispose them in alterations
of Religion and Government to sudden acting and compliance, contrary to their
former judgments, profession and practice.

85. No man should be more forward than a King himself to carry on all due
Reformation, with mature judgment, and a good Conscience in what things he
shall (after impartial advice) be by God's Word and right reason, convinced to
be amiss.

86. Crowns and Kingdoms have a period with the life of their King: but
Reputation and Honor may survive to a glorious kind of Immortality, when he is
dead and gone.

87. A King should never permit the malice of his enemies to deprive him of
that comfort, which his confidence in the generality of his people gives him.

88. What a King may bear from foreign enemies, he cannot so well from his own
Subjects, who next his children are dear unto him.

89. Nothing could give a King more cause to suspect and search his own
Innocence, than when he observes many who made great professions of singular
piety forward to engage against him.

90. When many Professors of singular Piety engage with persons that take arms
against their King, it gives to vulgar minds so bad a reflection upon Him and
his Cause, as if it had been impossible to adhere to Him, and not with all part
from God, to think or speak well of Him, and not to blaspheme God.

91. Truly Learned and Religious men will endeavor to be so well satisfied in
the Cause of their injured King's sufferings, as that they may chose rather to
suffer with Him, than forsake Him.

92. When Popular Preachers (though but in hypocrisy and falsehood) urge
Religious pretensions against their King, it is not strange that the same to
many well-minded men should be a great temptation to oppose Him.

93. When a King uses the assistance of Subjects of a different profession
from Him, they are most ready to interpret it a sighting against Religion, who
least of all men care whom they employ, or what they say and do, so they may
prevail.

94. So eager are some men in giving their Sovereign better counsel, than what
they pretend he has before heark'ned to, that they will not give Him leave to
take it with freedom, as a Man, nor honor, as a King.

95. No men should be more willing to complain, than the King be to redress
what he sees in Reason to have been either done, or advised amiss.

96. They who of pretended Sufferers become zealous Actors in persecution,
deprive themselves of the comfort and reward, whatsoever they before expected.

97. The noise and ostentation of Liberty, is the design and artifice some men
use to withdraw the peoples affections from their King.

98. A good King should be so far from desiring to oppress, as not to envy his
Subjects that liberty, which is all he ought desire to enjoy himself, viz. To
will nothing, but according to Reason, Laws and Religion.

99. Lords and Gentlemen which assist their King in a Civil War, would not be
so prodigal of their Liberties, if they suspected he would infringe them, as
with their Lives and Fortunes to help on the inslaving of themseves and their
Posterities.

100. As to civil Importunities none but such as desire to drive on their
ambitious and covetous design over the ruins of Church and State, Prince,
Peers, and People, will ever desire greater Freedom than good Laws allow.

The ninth Century.
1. SUch men as thirst after Novelties, or despair to relieve the necessities
of their fortunes, or satisfy their Ambition in peaceable times, become
principal impulsives to popular Commotions.

2. Rebels will blast the best Government of the best King with all the odious
reproaches which impotent malice can invent, and expose Him to all those
contempts, which may most diminish the Majesty of a King, and increase the
ungrateful insolences of his People.

3. A King who is well assured that his Innocence is clear before God, in point
of any calumnies rebellious Subjects do object, may prophecy, That his
reputation shall like the Sun (after Owls and Bats have had their freedom in
the night and darker times) rise and recover it self to such a degree of
spendour, as those feral birds shall be grieved to behold, and unable to bear.

4. A King cannot so much suffer in point of honor by rude and scandalous
pamphlets, as those men do, who having power, and pretending to so much piety,
are so forgetful of their duty to God and him, as not to vindicate the Majesty
of their King against any of those, who contrary to the precept of God, and
precedents of Angels, speak evil of dignities, and bring railing accusations
against those who are honored with the name of Gods.

5. They will easily contemn such shadows of God as Kings are, who reverence
not that Supreme and adorable Majesty, in comparison of whom all the glory of
Men and Angels is but obscurity.

6. They who seek to gain reputation with the vulgar for their extraordinary
parts and piety, must needs undo whatever was formerly settled never so well and
wisely.

7. I could never see any reason, why any Christian should abhor, or be
forbidden to use the same forms of Prayer, since he prays to the same God,
believes in the same Savior, professes the same Truths, reads the same
Scriptures, has the same Duties upon him, and feels the same daily wants, for
the most part both inward and outward, which are common to the whole Church.

8. A serious sense of that inconvenience in the Church which unavoidably
follows every man's several manner of officiating, no doubt, first occasioned
the wisdom and piety of the ancient Churches, to remedy those mischiefs by the
use of constant Liturgies of public composure.

9. It was either the tumultuariness of People, or the factiousness and pride
of Presbyters, or the covetousness of some States and Princes, that of late
years gave occasion to some men's wits to invent new models of
Church Government, and proposed them under the specious titles of Christ's
Government, Scepter and Kingdom, the better to serve their turns to whom the
change was beneficial.

10. As the full and constant Testimony of all Histories may sufficiently
convince unbiased men, That the Primitive Churches were undoubtedly governed by
the Apostles and their immediate Successors, the first and best Bishops: so it
cannot in reason or charity be supposed, that all Churches in the world should
either be ignorant of the rule by them prescribed, or so soon deviate from
their divine and holy pattern.

11. Since the first Age, for 1500 years, not one Example can be produced of
any settled Church wherein were many Ministers and Congrations, which had not
some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction and government they were.

12. Use is the great Arbitratour of words, and Master of language.

13. Not only in Religion, but also in right Reason, and the true nature of
Governments, it cannot be thought that an orderly Subordination among
Presbyters, or Ministers, should be any more against Christianity, than it is
in all secular and civil Governments, where Parity breeds Confusion and Faction.

14. I can no more believe that such order is inconsistent with true Religion,
than good features are with beauty, or numbers with harmony.

15. It is not likely, that God who appointed several orders, and a Prelacy, in
the Government of his Church, among the Jewish Priests, should abhor, or forbid
them, among Christian Ministers, who have as much of the Principles of Schism
and Division as other men.

16. I conceive it was not the favor of Princes, or ambition of Presbyters,
but the wisdom and piety of the Apostles, that first settled Bishops in the
Church; which Authority they constantly used, and enjoyed in those times which
were purest for Religion, though sharpest for Persecution.

17. Tyranny becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen.

18. The late Reformed Churches whose examples are obtruded for not retaining
Bishops, the necessity of times and affairs rather excuses, than commends
for their inconformity to all Antiquity.

19. I could never see any reason, why Churches orderly reformed and governed
by Bishops, should be forced to conform to those few, rather than to the
Catholic example of all Ancient Churches, which needed no Reformation.

20. It is no point of wisdom or charity, where Christians differ (as many do
in some points) there to widen the differences, and at once to give all the
Christian World (except a handful of some Protestants) so great a scandal in
point of Church Government, as to change it; whom though you may convince of
their Errors in some points of Doctrine, yet you shall never persuade them,
that to complete their Reformation, they must necessarily desert, and wholly
cast off, that Government, which they, and all before them, have ever owned as
Catholic, Primitive, and Apostolical.

21. Never Schismatics, nor Heretics, (except the Arians) have strayed from
the Unity and Conformity of the Church in point of Government, ever having
Bishops above Presbyters.

22. Among those that have endeavored or effected a change in the Government
of the Church, such as have rendered themselves guilty of inconstancy, cause a
great prejudice against their novelty in the opinion of their King, whose
consent they would have.

23. Their facility and levity is never to be excused, whose learning or
integrity cannot in charity be so far doubted, as if they understood not what
before they did, or as if they conformed to Episcopal Government contrary to
their consciences, and yet the same men, before ever the point had any free and
impartial debate, contrary to their former Oaths and practice, against their
obedience to their Laws in force, and against their Kings consent, have not
only quite cried down the Government by Bishops, but have approved and
encouraged the violent and most illegal stripping Bishops and other Churchmen
of all their due Authority and revenues, the selling away, and utter alienation
of those Church Lands from any Ecclesiastical uses.

24. The Desertors of Episcopacy will at last appear the greatest Enemies to,
and betrayers of, their own interest, whose folly will become a punishment unto
it self. for,

25. Presbytery is never so considerable or effectual, as when it is joined to,
and crowned with Episcopacy.

26. Those secular additamen^^ and ornaments of Authority, Civil Honor and
Estate, which Christian Princes in all Countries have annexed to Bishops and
Church men, are to be looked upon but as just reward^ of their learning and
piety, who are fit to be in any degree of Church Government; also enablements
to works of Charity and Hospitality, meet strenthnings of their Authority in
point of respect, and observance.

27. I would have such men Bishops, as are most worthy of those encouragements,
and be ablest to use them.

28. A Kings good intention, whose judgment faild at any time, makes his error
venial.

29. It is neither just for Subjects, nor pious for Christians, by violents and
indignities, with servile restraints to seek to force their King and Sovereign,
against the well-laid gounds of his judgment, to consent to any their weak and
divided novelties, touching the Government of the Church.

30. I could never see any probable show in true Reason and in Scripture for
the Government of the Church otherwise than by Bishops, the greatest Pretenders
of a different sense, either contenting themselves with the examples of some
Churches in their infancy and solitude, when one Presbyter might serve one
Congregation, in a City or Country; or else denying these most evident Truths:
1. That the Apostles were Bishops over those Presbyters they ordained, as well
as over the Churches they planted. 2. That Government being necessary for the
Churches wellbeing, when multiplied and sociated, must also necessarily descend
from the Apostles to others, after the example of that power and Superiority
they had above others, which could not end with their persons, since the use
and ends of such Government still continue.

31. Ignorance, Superstition, A^varice, Revenge, with other disorderly and
disloyal Passions, have so blown up some men's minds against Episcopal
Government in the Church, that what they want of Reasons or Primitive Patterns,
they supply with violence and oppression.

32. Some men's zeal for Bishops Lands, Houses, and Revenues, has set them on
work to eat up Episcopacy.

33. A King solemnly obliged by an Oath, agreeable to his judgment, to preserve
Episcopal Government, and the Rights of the Church, has a particular
engagement, above other men, so to do.

34. The said King being daily by the best disquisition of Truth, more
confirmed in the Reason and Religion of that to which he is sworn, no man that
wishes not his damnation, can persuade Him at once to so notorious and
combined sins, as those of Sacriledg and Perjury, in parting with Episcopacy.

35. Men of ambitious Covetousness and secrilegious Cruelty, will torture with
their King, both Church and State, in Civil dissentions, till (if he have not
an invincible resolution) he shall not be forced to consent and declare, that
he does approve what (God knows) he utterly dislikes, and in his Soul abhors.

36. Should a King, pressed by Imperious Subjects, shamefully and dishonouraly
give his consent to any bold demand, against Reason, Justice, and Religion; yet
should he not by so doing, satisfy the divided Interests and Opinions of those
Parties (if any such be among them) which contend with each other, as well as
both against Him.

37. The abuses of Episcopacy deserve to be extirpated as much as the use
retained.

38. A right Episcopacy does at once satisfy all just desires and interests of
good Bishops, humble Presbyters, and sober People; so as Church Affairs should
be managed neither with tyranny, parity, nor popularity; neither Bishops
ejected, nor Presbyters despised, nor People oppressed.

39. A King that can seldom get opportunities to Treat with Subjects in arms
against Him, should yet never want either desire or disposition to it, having
greater considence of his Reason than his Sword.

40. A King should very unwillingly be compelled to defend himself with Arms
against his Subjects, and very willingly embrace any thing tending unto Peace.

41. No success should ever enhaunce with a King the price of Peace between him
and his Subjects, which should be as earnestly desired by Him as any man,
though He be like to pay dearer than any man for it, so He reserve his Honor
and his Conscience.

42. A King should condescend to the desires of his Subjects as far as Reason,
Honor and Conscience will give Him leave, having special regard to those
differences that are essential to the security or prosperity of his People. To
deny some other demands, may be the greatest justice to Himself, and favor to
his Subjects.

43. A King willing to condescend to the settling of Church Affairs, so as he
may give satisfaction to all men, must have a care not to comply with such whom
faction, covetousness, or superstition, may have engaged more than any true
zeal, charity, or love of reformation.

44. Although a King may be content to yield to all that may seem to advance
true piety; yet He must seek to continue what is necessary in point of Order,
Maintenance, and Authority to the Church's Government, especially if He be
persuaded that it is most agreeable to the true principles of all Government
raised to its full stature and perfection, as also to the Primitive Apostolical
pattern, and the practice of the Universal Church conform thereto.

45. The King is very excusable both before God and all unpassionate men, for
the distance between Him and Subjects in Arms against Him, that in Treaties and
Transactions, endeavors no less the restoration of peace to his People,
than the preservation of his own Crowns to his posterity.

46. If such Treaties give occasion to any man's further restiveness, it is
imputable to their own depraved tempers, not to any Concessions or Negations of
their King, who has always the content of what He offered, and they the regret
and blame for what they refused.

47. A King may presage the unsuccessfulness of any Treaty with his Subjects,
among whom he finds an unwillingness to treat, that implying some things to be
gained by the Sword, whose unreasonableness they are loath to have fairly
scanned, being more proper to be acted by Soldiers, than by Counselors.

48. When God gives a King victory over his Subjects in Arms against him, it
is to try Him, that He may know how with moderation and thanks, to own and use
his power, who is the only true Lord of Hosts, able when he pleases, to repress
the confidence of those who fight against him, though with great advantage for
power and numbers.

49. A King, who for small beginnings on his part at length is attended on by
an Army, wherewith* He may encounter his rebellious Subjects, has this comfort,
that He is not wholly forsaken by his Peoples love, or Gods Protection.

50. When God at any time permits the same King to be worsted by his Enemies,
it is to exercise his patience, and teach Him not to trust in the arm of
Flesh, but in the living God.

51. They who fight against their King, are forced to sly to the shifts of
some pretended Fears, and wild fundamentals of State (as they use to call them)
which actually overthrow the present Fabric both of Church and State.

52. The imaginary Reasons which Rebels alledg for self defense, are commonly
most impertinent, and such as will fit any Faction that has but power and
confidence enough to second with the Sword all their demands against the
present Laws and Governors.

53. Laws and Governors can never be such as some side or other will not find
fault with, so as to urge what they call a Reformation of them to a Rebellion
against them.

54. They are Parasitick Preachers, that dare call those Martyrs, who died
fighting against their King, the Laws, their Oaths, and right Religion
established. For,

55. Sober Christians know, than the glorious Title of Martyr can with truth be
applied only to those who seriously prefer God's Truth and their duty, in all
the foresaid particulars, before their lives, and all that is dear to them in
this World.

56. The Wounds and temporal Ruins of those loyal Subjects who are slain in
Civil Wars, serve as a gracious opportunity for their eternal Health and
Happiness, while the evident approach of death, through God's grace,
effectually disposes their Hearts to such Humility, Faith and Repentance,
which together with the Rectitude of their engagement fully prepares them for a
better life than that which their enemies brutish and disloyal firceness can
deprive them of, or without repentance hope to enjoy.

57. Those Rebels who may have often the better against their King's side in
the Field, will never have so at the Bar of God's Tribunal, or their own
Consciences.

58. The condition of loyal Subjects (in a Civil War) though conquered, and
dying for their King, no question is infinitely more to be chosen by a sober
man (that duly values his duty, his soul, and eternity, beyond the enjoyments
of this present life) than the most triumphant glory, wherein their and their
Kings Enemies supervive, who can hardly avoid to be daily tormented by that
horrid guilt, wherewith their suspicious, or convicted Consciences do pursue
them.

59. In the safety and preservation of a King and good Laws established all
honest men, cannot but think the welfare of their Country to consist.

60. Not any shows, or truth of piety on their side who take arms against
their King, are sufficient to dispense with, or expiate, the defects of their
Duty and Loyalty to Him, which have so pregnant convictions on men's
Consciences, that even profaner men are moved by the sense of them to venture
their lives for Him.

61. When Providence gives a good King, or denies Him Victory, his desire
should be neither to boast of his power, nor to charge God foolishly; but to
believe that at last he will make all things to work together for his good.

62. A King's often messages for Peace with his Subjects, will show that he
delights not in War; as his gracious Concessions will sufficiently testify,
how willingly he would have prevented it; and his total unpreparedness for it,
how little he intended it.

63. When King and Subjects are once engaged in a Civil War, it may be too late
to review the occasions thereof, but not to wish a happy conclusion of so
unhapy beginnings; nor to believe that the inevitable fate of their sins was
such as would no longer suffer the divine justice to be quiet.

64. A King is not to desire that any man should be further subject to Him,
than He and all his People may be subject to God.

65. The Passions and Opinions of men, are not to be gratified with partiality,
and popular compliance to the detriment of the Public, and scandal of Religion.

66. It is a sad spectacle for all sober men and their Sovereign, to behold the
dissolutions of all Order and Government in a Church; many novelties, and
schisms, and corrupt opinions; many undecencies and confusions in sacred
administrations all sacrilegious invasions upon the Rights and Revenues of a
Church* much contempt and oppression of the Clergy; many injurious diminutions
and persecutings of the King, to follow (as showers do warm gleams) the talk of
Reformation, which yet has been a known artifice to disguise some men's
effecting all the forementioned mischief, who have pretended authority, and
been possessed of power to accomplish it.

67. The studies to please some parties, whose fury is accounted zeal, may
injure all.

68. A King may offer to put all differences in Church Affairs and Religion to
the free Consultation of a Synod or Convocation rightly chosen, the results of
whose counsels as they will include the votes of all; so its like they may give
most satisfaction to all.

69. An Assembly of Divines applied (though by a Parliament) in an unwonted
way, to advise of Church Affairs, being not legally convened and chosen, not
acting in the name of all the Clergy of a Kingdom; not doing any thing with
freedom and impartiality; being limited, and confined, if not overaw'd, to do
and declare what they do, is to be so far disliked, nor can it be accounted the
Representative of a Church.

70. Many men cried up for learning and piety, met together in an Assembly,
being not left to the liberty of their own suffrages, have been prevailed upon
by the influence of contrary factions, who made secret encroachments of hopes
and fears, to comply with great and dangerous Innovations in the Church,
without any regard to their own former judgment and practice, or to the common
interest and honor of the Clergy, and in them of Order, Learning, and
Religion, against examples of all Ancient Churches, the Laws in force, and
their Sovereign's consent.

71. A King's consent ought never to be gained in any point against a pregnant
light that shines in his understanding.

72. A due Reformation will easily follow moderate Counsels, and give content
even to many Divines who have been led on with much gravity and formality, to
carry on other men's designs, which they may discover, though they dare not but
smother their frustrations and discontents.

73. The specious and popular Titles of Christ's Government, Throne, Scepter
and Kingdom, also the noise of a through Reformation, may as easily be fined on
new models, as fair colors may be put to ill-favored Figures.

74. Christ's Kingdom certainly is not divided nor has two faces, as some
Reforming parties have had at least.

75. The breaking of Church-windows, which Time had sufficiently defaced:

2. The putting down of Crosses, which were but Civil, not Religious marks:

3. The defacing of Monuments, and Inscriptions of the dead, which served but
to put posterity in mind to thank God for that clearer light wherein they live:

4. The leaving of Ministers to their liberties, and private abilities in the
public service of God, where no Christian can tell to what he may say Amen,
nor what adventure he may make of seeming, at least, to consent to the Errors,
Blasphemies, and ridiculous Undecencies, which bold and ignorant men list to
vent in their prayers, preaching, and other Offices:

5. The setting forth of old Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith new-drest,
importing as much as if there had been no sound or clear doctrine of faith in
the Church, before a long consultation had matured their thoughts touching the
first Principles of Religion.

All these, and the like, are the effects of poular, specious, and deceitful
Reformations.

76. It were to be wished, that some most pretending Reformers had made it
their unanimous work, to do God's work, and not their own; they had not (as now
they have) left all things more deformed, than when they began, in point of
Piety, Morality, Charity, and good Order.

77. They who think that the Government of a Church and State, fixed by many
Laws and long Customs, will not run into their new molds, endeavor to melt it
first in the fire of a Civil War, by the advantages of which they resolve, if
they prevail, to make their King and all his Subjects fall down and worship the
Images they shall form and set up.

78. Christ's Government will confirm the King's, not overthrow it, if as He
owns his from Christ, so He desires to rule for his glory, and his Churches
good.

79. Had some men truly intended Christ's Government, or known what is meant in
their hearts, they could never have been so ill governed in their words and
actions, both against their King, and one another.

80. The freedom and secrecy of a King's private letters, especially unto his
Queen, commands a civility from all men, nor is there any thing more inhumane,
than to expose them (if taken) to public view.

81. The King that studies to approve his heart to God's omniscience, may be
content (if Providence will have it so) that even his private letters, if taken
by his Subjects in arms against Him, should be discovered to the World, though
without any those dresses, or popular captations which some of them use in
their speeches and expressions.

82. Unquiet Subjects, many times take Arms against a just, prudent, and
innocent King, into whose most retired thoughts, if they could by any means
have a clear sight, they might discover how they are divided between the love
and care He has, not more to preserve his own Rights, than to procure their
Peace and Happiness, and an extreme grief to see them both deceived and
destroyed.

83. No man can blame a King that by all fair and just correspondencies
endeavors to avoid the pressures of his Enemies, though his own Subjects.

84. Some men's design, like Absoloms, is by enormous actions to widen
differences between a King and his Subjects, and exasperate all sides to such
distances, as may make all Reconciliation desperate.

85. A King under the misfortune of having his letters taken by Subjects in
Arms against Him, has much quiet and satisfaction within Himself, when the
integrity of his intentions is not jealous of any injury his Expressions can do
them; For,

86. Although the confidence of privacy may admit of greater freedom in writing
letters, which may be liable to envious exceptions; yet it is best for a King,
when the Innocence of his chief purposes, cannot be so stained or
misinterpreted by his Enemies, as not to let all men see, That He wishes
nothing more than a happy composure of differences with Justice and Honor, not
more to his own than his Peoples content, who have any sparks of love, or
loyalty, left in them.

87. It repaireth somewhat a King's misfortune, that his private letters being
taken by his Subjects in arms against Him, cannot gratify their malice,
further than to let them see his constancy to his Wife, the Laws, and right
Religion he professes; as likewise to convince them, that He can both mind,
and act his own and his Kingdoms affairs, so as becomes a Prince; especially,
if his Enemies have before been very loath it should be believed of Him; as if
He were wholly confined to the Dictates and Directions of others, whom they
please to brand with the names of Evil Counselors.

88. It is the policy of Rebels, to seek by all means to smother and extinguish
all sparks of Love, Respect and Loyalty of the People to their King, that they
may never kindle again so as to recover His, the Laws, and the Kingdoms
Liberties, which they seek to overthrow.

89. God's unerring and impartial Justice can, and will overruled the most
perverse wills and designs of men. He is able, and will turn even the worst of
an innocent King's Enemies thoughts, and actions to his good.

90. Civility and Humanity most become such as pretend to Religion, which they
ought to pay to all men, beside that respect and honor they owe to their King.

91. They who do but remember how God blessed the modest respect, and filial
tenderness, which Noah's sons bare to their Father, can never expect the divine
approbation of any their undecent actions toward their King.

92. Their malicious intentions can never be either excusable, or prosperous,
who think by any unhandsome means to expose their King to the highest reproach
and contempt of his People, forgetting that duty of modest concealment; which
they owe to the Father of their Country, in case they should discover any real
uncomeliness.

93. They who by publishing their King's private letters think to render Him as
a vile Person, not fit to be trusted, or considered under any Notion of
Majesty, will see themselves mistaken, when God makes him, as he did David,
more respected in the hearts of many, who become better satisfied by knowing
what He writ, than by learning what they maliciously interpret and report.

94. Although God gives Kingdoms, yet sometimes his Providence permits that the
King has not any place left in them, where he may with safety and honor rest
his head: Showing him, that Himself is the safest Refuge, and the strongest
Tower of defense, in which he may put his Trust.

95. A King in extremities should look not to man so much as to God, who will
have it so, that he may wholly cast himself and his distressed affairs upon
God's mercy, who has both hearts and hands of all men in his dispose.

96. Necessity may sometimes command a King to withdraw from his chiefest
strength, and adventure upon their Loyalty, who first began his Troubles, whom
God happily may make a means honorably to compose them

97. When Necessity constrains a King to cast Himself upon them, who though
they besiege Him in his Garrison, and encounter Him in the field, yet profess,
They fight not against Him, but for Him; He puts Himself to resolve the riddle
of their Loyalty, and gives them opportunity to let the World see, they mean
not what they do, but what they say.

98. God sees it sometimes not enough to desert a King of all Military power to
defend himself, but to put him upon using their power, who seem to fight
against him, yet ought in duty to defend him.

99. When a King finds it necessary to leave those that have adhered to Him, He
may hope such a method of Peace may be more prosperous than that of War, both
to stop the effusion of blood, and the wounds that were made before.

100. A King should never trust any nation of his Subjects further than to men,
that if they betray Him, He may justify to all the World they have not
deceived Him: and if they sell Him at any dear rate, He should be only sorry
that his price should be so much above his Saviors.

The Tenth Century.
1. GOD sometimes sees it is fit to deprive a King of Wife, Children, Army,
Friends, and Freedom, that He may be wholly his, who alone is all.

2. A King should never permit them who have got his person, to gain his
consent against his conscience.

3. A King's denial of unjust demands made by Subjects in arms against Him,
which they call obstinacy, He may know God acounts honest constancy, which
Reason and Religion, as well a Honor, forbid Him to recede.

4. It is evident sometimes, that Subjects, who pretend to fight against evil
Counselors with their King,, fight indeed against a good Conscience within
Him: And whatsoever they may say of course, intend not to bring Him to his
Parliament, till they have brought his mind to their obedience.

5. Aftertimes may see what the blindness of that Age will not, wherein is
both practiced and countenanced Subjects fighting against their Sovereign,
whom, if they have a good King, God may at length show, that he chooses rather
to suffer for them, than with them.

6. When Providence is pleased to deprive a King of all other civil comforts,
and secular attendants, the absence of them all may best be supplied by the
attendance of such his Chaplains, whom for their functions He reverenceth, and
for their fidelity may have cause to love.

7. As a King never needs, so He should never desire more the service and
assistance of Clergymen judiciously pious, and soberly devout, than when by
misfortune sequesterd from civil comforts, and secular attendants.

8. A distressed King cannot think some Divines, though He respects them for
that worth and piety which may be in them, proper to be his present Comforters
and Physicions, who have had a great influence in occasioning the public
calamities in his Kingdoms, and inflicting the wounds He has upon Himself.

9. The spirits of those Divines, whose judgments stand at a distance from
their King, or in jealousy of Him, or in opposition against Him, cannot so
harmoniously accord with his, or his with theirs, either in Prayer, or other
holy duties, as is meet and most comfortable, whose golden rule, and bond of
perfection, consists in that of mutual Love and Charity.

10. The King, who is much a friend to all Churchmen, that have any thing in
them beseeming that sacred function, will, if there be cause, hazard his own
interest upon Conscience and Constancy to maintain their Rights.

11. Such Clergymen who so unhandsomely requite their King, as to desert Him
in his calamity, when their Loyalty and Constancy is most required, may live to
repent no less for his sufferings, than their own ungrateful errors, and that
injurious contempt and meanness which they bring upon their calling and persons.

12. An afflicted King, though he pities all Clergymen that desert Him, and
despises none of a different opinion from his, yet sure He may take leave to
make choice of some for his special Attendants, who are best approved in his
judgment, and most suitable to his affection.

13. A King imprisoned by his Subjects, to whom they will not permit the
attendance of his Chaplains, can make no more charitable construction of their
denial, than that they esteem Him sufficient Himself to discharge his duty to
God as a Priest, though not to Men as a Prince.

14. I think both Offices, Regal and Sacerdotal, might well become the same
Person, as anciently they were under one name, and the united rights of
primogeniture.

15. A King cannot follow better presidents, if He be able, than those two
eminent David and Solemon, not more famous for their Scepter and Crowns, than
one was for devout Psalms and Prayers; the other for his divine Parables and
Preaching; whence the one merited and assumed the name of a Prophet, the other
a Preacher, Titles of greater honor, where rightly placed, than any of those
the Roman Emperors affected from the Nations they subdued. But,

16. Since the order of God's Wisdom and Providence, has for the most part
always distinguished the gifts and offices of Kings and Priests; of Princes
and Preachers, both in the Jewish and Christian Churches, an imprisoned King
may be sorry to find Himself reduced to the necessity of being both, or
enjoying neither.

17. As a Sovereign owes his Clergy the protection of a Christian King; so He
should desire to enjoy from them the benefit of their gifts and prayers.

18. However, as the spiritual Government, by which the devout Soul is subject
to Christ, and through his merits daily offers it self and its services to God,
every private believer is a King and Priest, invested with the honor of a
Royal Priesthood, yet he is not thereby constituted Priest or Preacher, as to
the outward polity of the Church.

19. A King's consciousness to his spiritual defects, may make him more prize
and desire those pious assistances which, especially in any his exigencies,
holy and good Ministers, either Bishops or Presbyters, may afford him.

20. The King is reduced to great extremities, to whom by God's pleasure and
permission to his Subjects, nothing is left but his life for them to take from
Him; and nothing more to desire of them, which might little seem to provoke
their jealousies and offense to deny Him, (as some have done) than this of
having some means afforded Him, for his souls comfort and support.

21. When a King, reduced to extremity by his Subjects, makes choice of
Chaplains to assist Him, that are men no way scandalous, and every way eminent
for their learning and piety, no less than for their Loyalty, no exceptions
imaginable can be made against them, but only this, That they may seem too
able, and too well affected toward him and his service.

22. A King should count his misfortunes the greater by far, when they light
also upon the young Prince his son, and any others whom he may have cause to
love so well as Himself: and of whose unmerited sufferings He should have a
greater sense than of his own.

23. The different education of Princes, has different success when they come
to exercise their Government: the evidence of which Holy Writ affords us in the
contemplation of David and Rehoboam: The one prepared by many afflictions for a
flourishing Kingdom; The other softened by the unparalled prosperity of
Solomon's Court, and so by flatteries corrupted to the great diminution both of
Peace, Honor, and Kingdom.

24. A distressed King may trust, that God will graciously direct all the black
lines of Affliction, which he pleases to draw on him to the Center of true
happiness, if by them he be drawn nearer of God.

25. When a young Prince shall attain the Crown whereof his Father was
injuriously divested; He ought first to do justice to God, his own Soul, and
his Church, in the profession and prosecution both of truth and unity in
Religion; the next main hinge on which his prosperity will depend and move
being that of Civil Justice, He is to administer to his People.

26. When a good King is persecuted by his own Subjects for the preservation of
a right Religion and just Laws established, he may (without vanity) turn the
reproach of his Sufferings, as to the World's censure, into the honor of a
kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of his own Conscience.

27. Since a distressed King knows not how God will deal with Him, as to a
removal of the pressures and indignities which his justice, even by the very
unjust hands of some of his own Subjects may have been pleased to lay upon Him,
He should not be much solicitous, what wrong He suffers from man, while He
retains in his soul what He believes is right before God.

28. In civil dissentions between King and Subjects, though He offer all for
Reformation and safely that in Reason, Honor and Conscience He can; yet he
must reserve whatsoever He cannot consent unto, without an irreparable injury
to his own Soul, the Chruch, and his People, and the next undoubted Heir of his
Kingdoms.

29. No difficulties are insuperable to divine Providence.

30. When a young Prince, after his Fathers decease, comes to the government of
Kingdoms, which Tumults and Civil Wars had put into disorder, He ought
seriously to consider the former real or objected miscariages which might
occasion his troubles, that so he may avoid his own.

31. By the Sunshine of God's mercy, and the splendor of a Princes virtues,
whole mountains of congealed factions may be thawed and dissipated.

32. Acts of Indemnity and Oblivion should by an indulgent King be offered to
so great a latitude, as may include all that can but suspect themselves to be
any way obnoxious to the Laws, and which may serve to exclude all future
jealousies and insecurities.

33. If God see fit to restore an injured King to the enjoyment of his
Kingdoms, He ought then to let the Prince his son fully understand the things
that belong to God's glory, his own honor, and the Kingdoms peace.

34. A charitable King, though injured by his Subjects, for the future peace of
his Kingdoms, should encourage the Prince his Successor to be as confident as
Himself, That the most part of all sides, who have done amiss, have done so not
out of malice, but misinformation or misapprehension of things.

35. Whatsoever good the Royal Father intended to Church, or State, in times
incapable of it, should be performed by the Prince his Son, when possessed of
his Kingdom and Power.

36. It is a prayer and benediction worthy of an afflicted King That God would
after his decease so bless the Prince his Son and Successor, as to establish
his Kingdoms in Righteousness, his Soul in true Religion, and his Honor in the
love of God and his People.

37. Though God permit Disloyalty to be perfected by the destruction of a King;
yet He may make his memory and name live ever in his Son, as of his Father that
loved Him, and a King under whom his Kingdoms flourished for a time.

38. A King in affliction should believe God's power, and have hope of his will
to restore Him to his Rights, despairing neither of his mercy, nor of his
peoples love and pity.

39. Although a King's domestic Enemies use all the the poison of falsity, and
violence of hostility to destroy first the love and Loyalty which is in his
Subjects; and then all that content of life in him, which from these He chiefly
enjoyed; yet they may fail of their end, and after the many deaths the King
suffers for the good will of his People, He may not be wholly dead, till their
further malice and cruelty take that little of life too, the husk and shell (as
it were) which they had only left Him.

40. Although that a King must die as a man, is certain; That He may die a King
by the hands of his own Subjects, a violent, sudden, barbarous death, in the
strength of his years, in the midst of his Kingdoms, his friends and loving
Subjects being helpless Spectatours; his Enemies insolent Revilers and
Triumphers over Him, living, dying, and dead; may sometimes be probable in
humane reason, naught else being to be hoped for, as to man's cruelty; yet He is
not to despair of God's infinite mercy.

41. It is not easy for a depressed King to contend with those many horrors
of Death, wherewith God may suffer Him to be tempted; which may be equally
horrid, either in the suddenness of a barbarous Assasination, or in the solemn
cruelty of an unjust sentence, and public execution.

42. A King under such a sad apprehension, must humbly desire to depend upon
God, and to submit to his will both in life and death, in what order soever he
is pleased to lay them out to him.

43. All Sovereigns are obliged to own God as King of Kings, not only for the
eminency of his power and Majesty above them, but also for that singular care
and protection which he has over them, in the many dangers they are exposed
unto.

44. God many times so pleads the cause of that King which he permits to be in
the power of disloyal and bloudy-minded Subjects, that he shows him the sad
confusions following his destruction presaged and confirmed to Him, by those he
lives to see in his troubles; and God gives his Enemies cause to fear, that he
will both further divide, and by mutual vengeance afterward destroy them.

45. It may be the King's comfort who is wronged, and dethroned by his
Subjects, that God gives him not only the honor to imitate Christ's example in
suffering for Righteousness sake, though obscured by the foulest charges of
Tyranny and Injustice, but the charity both to forgive them, and pray for them,
that God would not impute his blood to them, further than to convince them what
need they have of Christ's blood to wash their souls from the guilt of shedding
his.

46. The unfortunate King that sees himself destined to be murdered by his
cruel Subjects, may bless God, if he has the heart to pray, not so much that
the bitter cup of a violent death may pass from Him, as that of his wrath may
pass from all those whose hands by deserting him are sprinkled, or by acting
and consenting to his death are embrued with his blood.

47. Rebellious Subjects cannot deprive a King of more than He may be content
to lose, when God sees fit by their hands, to take it from Him, whose mercy he
is to believe, will more than iufinitely recompense what ever by man's
injustice, He is pleased to deprive him of.

48. A miserable King shall not want the heavy and envied Crowns of this world,
when God has mercifully Crowned and Consummated his graces with Glory, and
exchanged the shadows of his earthly Kingdoms among men for the substance of
that Heavenly Kingdom with himself.

49. A good King overpowered by Rebbels, may notwithstanding be persuaded
within himself, that he is happy in the judicious love of the ablest and best
of his Subjects, who may not only pity and pray for him, but may be content
even to die with him, or for him.

50. No Subjects that pretend to punish, can reasonably therein exceed the
errors of their Princes, especially where more than sufficient satisfaction
has been made to the public, the enjoyment of which private ambitions may
have frustrated.

51. An injured King's chiefest comfort in death consists in his peace made
with God; before whose exact Tribunal he need not fear to appear, as to any
cause long-disputed by the Sword between Him and his causeless Enemies.

52. A good King may look upon it with infinite more content and quiet of Soul,
to have been worsted in his enforced contestation for, and vindication of the
just Laws of his Land, the freedom and honor of his Parliaments, the rights
of his Crown, the just liberty of his Subjects, and the true Christian Religion
in its Doctrines, Government, and due encouragements, than if He had with the
greatest advantages of success evercome them all.

53. The King that suffers for Christ, as he is the Author of Truth, Order,
and Peace, being forced to contend against Error, Faction and Confusion, shall
through Christ enabling Him, be more than Conqueror in the end.

54. Although any violent death of an unfortunate King be the wages of his own
sin, as from God, and the effect of others sins, as men, both against God and
Him; yet, as He may hope his own sins are so remitted, that they shall be no
ingredients to imbitter the cup of his death; so should He desire God to pardon
their sins who are most guilty of his destruction; or that his temporal death
unjustly inflicted by them, may not be revenged by God^s just inflicting
eternal death upon them.

55. An unfortunate King, though used like Jonas, should wish no other, than
the safe-bringing of the ship to shore, when they have cast Him overboard.

56. The cruelty of a devoted King's Enemies cannot prevent his preparation,
whose malice, by God's mercy, He may in this defeat, that they shall not have
the satisfaction to have destroyed his Soul with his body.

57. Conversation is the chief joy, or vexation, of a King's life.

58. The conversation a King has in his troubles can be no way satisfactory or
useful, when some about Him are too wise, others too foolish; some too busy,
others too reserved, many fantastic.

59. A King much delighted with the conversation of his virtuous Queen, is hard
to be pleased by any else about Him, when forced to part from her, but not less
to be pitied by her, who is the only cure for that disease.

60. A virtuous Queen's kindness is as necessary to comfort the heart of her
King who is separated from her by his troubles or misfortunes, as her
assistance is for his affairs.

61. A King full fraught with expectation, need pray God to send him a good
unlading, especially when some blow of importance is to be given between his
and the Rebels Army in the field.

62. Although a King cannot brag of store of money in his Wars; yet a sharp
sword always hinders starving at least.

63. In Civil Wars, the King may make as good a shift with an empty purse as
the Rebels.

64. A generous Queen whose affection to her King is truly grounded, will be in
as much (if not more) trouble to find his Reputation, as his Life in danger.

65. When distractions in Religion arise amongst Rebels, and General is set
against General in point of command, a Treaty with their King may be most
desirable, and not to be refused by Him, when all means used to procure it,
shall be consistent with his Royal Honor and safety, and all else
unquestionably councelable considered.

66. When Rebels, confident of their power, or obstinate in their purpose,
become somewhat difficult to be brought into a Treaty, the sound of their
King's coming to them may have some force of popular Rhetoric to obtain it;
of, if refused, it may bring much prejudice to them, and be advantageous to
their King.

67. When foolish or malicious Peope shall interpret their King's desire, to
treat with Rebels to proceed from fear or folly; He is to join such conditions
with the Proposition of it, as may be found to be most of the chief ingredients
of an honorable and safe Peace.

68. A King may prudently yield to a Treaty with Rebels in their quarters, so
that the conditions save any aspersion of dishonor, if factious Spirits about
Him are likely to infuse their malignity in his own.

69. When a King in some apprehension, expresses his inclination to treat with
Rebels, from whence false malicious rumors may give trouble to his absent
Queen; although He judge Himself secure in her thoughts from suspecting Him
guilty of any baseness; yet He may hold it necessary to send her some account,
to the end she may make others know as well as her self this, which ought to be
a certain truth, That no danger of death or misery (which He may think much
worse) should make Him do any thing unworthy of her love.

70. In times of Rebellion, when diverse men propose several recompenses to
themselves for their pains and hazard with their King, the recovery of the
company of a loyal and virtuous Queen, may be the only reward the said King
will expect and wish for Himself.

71. A King in no extremity, should make a peace with Rebels by abandoning his
friends, or such a one as will not stand with his honor and safety.

72. Although a King cannot part with the patrimony of the Church, yet
whatsoever shall be offered for rectifying abuses, if any has crept in, or yet
for the ease of tender Consciences (so that it endammage not the foundation) He
may be content to hear, and should be ready to give a gracious answer thereunto.

73. As it is the King's duty to protect the Church, so it is the Churches to
assist the King in the maintenance of his just authority.

74. A King should be always careful to keep the dependency of his Clergy
entirely upon his Crown, without which it will scarcely sit fast upon his head.

75. After Conscience, the Militia is certainly the fittest Subject for a
King's Quarrel, the Kingly power without it being but as a shadow, and
therefore upon no means in any Treaty to be quitted.

76. In the time of Civil War, news at home may be too good to be told in the
Court of a foreign Prince, though a friend to the King attacqued by his
Rebellious Subjects: there being certainly as much dexterity in publishing of
news, as in matters which at first sight may seem of greater difficulty; For,
as the engaged King would not have his friends think that all assistance
bestowed upon Him were in vain^^ so would He not have them believe that He
needed no help, least they should under hand assist any Rebels, to keep the
balance of dissension amongst them equal.

77. The good of ignorance of a friends danger by a storm is not known, before
certain assurance of his [or her] escape.

78. It is not the least of a King's misfortunes, that his virtuous Queen
should run much hazard for his sake.

79. Although a Queen have expressed so much love to her distressed King as he
may think impossible to be repaid by any thing He can do, much less by words:
yet his Royal heart being full of affection for her, admiration of her, and
impatient passion of gratitude unto her, He ought to say something, leaving the
rest to be read by her, out of her own noble heart.

80. When Rebels have once found means to build credit on the peoples opinion,
they can proceed under pretense of Reformation of Religion to dissolve the
Government of a Church.

81. Politic Rebels under pretense of ill Ministers and Councillors of
Estate, know how to invade the Majesty of their Sovereign in the Prerogatives
of his Crown, and by pretending to remove them, to invest in themselves the
Domination of all Ministries of Estate, withdraw their King's revenues into
their own hands, and confirm themselves in an absolute power of disposing all.

82. A King by his Declarations, setting forth the sinister proceedings of any
faction against Him, discovering their designs of innovating the Government,
and falsifying the scandals they had imputed to Him, has the advantage
generally to undeceive his people, and to draw to Him the Nobility and Gentry
of his Kingdom.

83. When a great sedition is raised in one Kingdom, the King may not
imprudently resolve [at adventure] to put Himself freely and clearly, on the
love and affections of his Subjects in any other, the honor and safety whereof
lies nearly at the Stake.

84. In Rebellious or Seditious times, the King may justly expect support from
the Loyal part of his Subjects, till the common safety be secured.

85. When People of one Kingdom invade their King in his other, two things are
chiefly considerable by his Great Council for the safety and security thereof.
1. The chasing out the Rebels. 2. His satisfying the just grievances of those
that adhere unto Him, wherein He should promise to concur heartily and clearly
with them, that all the World may see his intentions have ever been, and will
be, to make that a glorious and flourishing Kingdom.

86. The dishonor and mischief must needs be great, if for want of money, a
King's Army be disbanded before the Rebels be put out of his Kingdom they
invaded.

87. Some men, more moliciously than ignorantly will put no difference between
Reformation, and alteration of Government.

88. What part soever of a King's Revenue is found illegal, or heavy to the
Subjects, a King should be willing to lay down, trusting in their affections.

89. It is not fit for a King to argue the business of High Treason which
touches his principal Minister of State, though his Parliament countenance it,
if in his Conscience He cannot condemn him: Nor is a Parliament to expect, that
a positive Doctrine should best become the mouth of a Prince.

90. If a King cannot condemn (as a Parliament would have Him) his Minister of
State of High Treason, yet cannot say, He can clear Him of misdemeanors, the
said Parliament may find out a way to satisfy Justice, and their own fears,
and not press his Conscience.

91. Although a King to satisfy the People, would do great matters, yet in
that of Conscience, so tender a thing is it, neither fear, nor any other
respect whatsoever, should ever make Him go against it.

92. A King should omit no occasion, whereby he may show that affection to his
people, which He desires his people would show to Him.

93. It is but the mark of a King's confidence, to put himself wholly upon the
love and affection of his People, for his subsistence.

94. A King should never have other design, but to win the affections of his
People by his justice in his government.

95. A good King can do nothing with more cheerfullness, than to give his
people a general satisfaction, not offering to endeer himself unto them by word
(which should not be his way) but by Acts of settling their Religion and just
Liberties, before he proceeds to any other.

96. It is no prejudice for a King a little to misreckon in time, if not
deceived in his end to settle an unquiet Nation of his Subjects.

97. A King ought to seek his Peoples happiness, their flourishing being his
greatest glory, and their affections his greatest strength.

98. A Sovereign ought to take that care of his Son, which shall justify Him
to God as a Father, and to his Dominions as a King.

99. A King ought to assure upon his honor, that He has no thought but Peace
and Justice to his People, which He should by all fair means seek to preserve
and maintain, relying upon the goodness and providence of God for the
preservation of Himself and Rights.

100. In ambiguous Times, a Kings fears should be greater for the Religion He
professes, his People, and Laws, than for his own Rights and safety.

The Eleventh Century.
1. IT is a high thing to tax a King with breach of promise.

2. A Parliament may have worse informations, than the King Counsels, against
which they except.

3. The King of whom the Militia is demanded by his Parliament, is not to part
with it for an hour^ Nor should that be demanded of a King, wherewith his wife
and children are not to be trusted.

4. A King is not to punish or discourage his People for petitioning to Him in
an humble way, though the Subject do not agree with his sense.

5. A King sometimes cannot satisfy his People in a debt due to the Country,
when all the Water goes not to the right Mill.

6. When Laws are altered by any other Authority, than that by which they were
made, the foundations of the Peoples happiness are destroyed.

7. When the King is oppressed, and his just Kights taken from Him, it is
impossible for the Subjects Liberties and properties to be preserved.

8. Errors and mistakes among Loyal Subjects proceeding from misinformation,
are removed with more satisfaction and ease to them, than they were received.

9. A King should hold it a piece of his duty, to take the utmost pains He can,
fully to inform and undeceive his People; and rather to prevent crimes, than to
punish them.

10. Persons of ill dispositions take as great pains to do mischief, and to
bring confusion, as good men should for peace and happiness in a Kingdom.

11. When a good King sends such Propositions of Peace and Accommodation to his
Parliament that contested with Him, as to which He may expect they should with
alacrity submit, if the unexcusable enemies of Peace be not strong enough to
prevail, He may reasonably hope to have no other use of his Loyal Peoples
affections, but in their prayers, not needing their assistance, when He
requires nothing that with more justice can be denied Him, than his Crown or
Life be taken from Him.

12. When the Religion, Liberty-Lawes, which are good Subjects privilege and
protection, become the quarrel between a King and any his People in Rebellion,
the taking his Towns, Ships, Armies and money from Him, should not dishearten
Him; the concurrence and affection of his people with God's blessing will
supply and recover all.

13. In time of Rebellion, when any Country or Province have showed much
forwardness, and made great expressions of their affections to the King, He
should never be satisfied with Himself, till He have found some way to fix a
mark of favor and estimation upon the same, which may tell Posterity how good
Subjects, and how much Gentlemen they have been.

14. The memory of any signal Loyalty showed by Persons or Provinces to the
Royal Father, should grow up in a just acknowledgment with his Sons.

15. In times of distraction, unquiet Spirits will be abroad, and every day
throw in new accidents to disturb and confound the public Peace.

16. Rebellion that at first but fortifies it self in a Town, will at length
rise to that insolence, as not to be any longer confined within the Walls, but
make sallies out to exercise murder, cruelty and rapine upon the persons and
possessions of good Subjects.

17. The sad effects of counterfeit Fears and Jealousies in a Parliament are
such, as no men can tell the least good they do, nor the least evil they
prevent.

18. The King against whom all advantages will be taken by persons disaffected
to Him, should take heed where He comes, that no eminent disorder or damage
befall any Man by any person of his Train, or under his protection.

19. Where a Party of People have showed themselves eminently loyal to their
King, the fullest testimony of his affection to them, and to the peace of their
County may be this, to pass over the considerations of Honor and Reproach, and
not permit a provocation to provoke Him to make that place be the seat of his
War.

20. No honest man can imagine that his King will ever sit down under a bold
and unexcusable Treason.

21. A King wholly cast upon the affections of his People, having no hope but
in the blessing and assistance of God, the justness of his Cause, and the love
of his Subjects, to recover what is taken from Him and Them, may expect a good
issue, the rather in that they are equal losers with Him.

22. When a King desires nothing of his People, but what is necessary to be
done for the preservation of God's true Religion, the Laws of the Land, the
Liberty of the Subject, and the very being of his Kingdom, He has reason to
look for a speedy and effectual compliance with his demands.

23. A King has no reason to suspect the Courage and Resolution of those his
Subjects, whose Conscience and Loyalty have brought them to Him, to fight for
their Religion, their King, and the Laws of their Land, especially when they
are to meet with no Enemies but Traitors, Schismatics, and Atheists, such as
desire to destroy both Church and State, and who have before condemned them to
ruin for being loyal to their King.

24. It gives courage to the Soldier, when his King satisfies Him that the
cause is just, wherein He means to make use of his valor.

25. If the time of War, and the great necessity and straits a King is driven
to, beget any violation of those Laws to which He has consented, He may hope
it shall be imputed by God and Man to the Authors of the War, and not to Him,
if so He has earnestly labored for the preservation of the Peace of his
Kingdom.

26. The Residence of an Army is not usually pleasant to any place, and that of
a distressed King caries more fear with it, who, it may be thought, must only
live upon the aid and relief of his people.

27. It is not prudence in loyal Subjects, to suffer a good Cause to be lost,
for want of supplying their King with that which will be taken from them by
those who pursue Him with violence.

28. Whilst ill men sacrifice their Money, Plate, and utmost Industry to
destroy the Commonwealth, good men should be no less liberal to preserve it.

29. When it has pleased God to bless a King with success in a War, He should
remember the Assistance every particular man gave Him, to his advantage.

30. However a King succeeds in his Wars, it will be honor and comfort to his
loyal Subjects, that with some charge and trouble to themselves, they did their
part to support their King, and preserve the Kingdom.

31. The People that have been awed by a Rebellious Army, will be more prone to
express their affections to their King, with that courage which becomes them,
when his Residence shall be so near, that his Power shall have an influence
upon the Country for their protection.

32. No man should have more power to fright People from their Loyalty, than
their King have to restore them to it.

33. Loyal Subjects, in assisting their King, defend themselves, who may be
sure the Sword which is drawn against Him, will destroy them, if He defend them
not.

34. It will be a shame for People to venture nothing for their King, who
ventures his life for them.

35. In a Civil War, whatsoever good People shall be willing freely to
contribute, their King should take kindly from them: and whatsoever they lend
Him, he should, having passed the word of a King, see justly repayed to them.

36. A King should take especial notice, of such who are backward to contribute
in a time of visible necessity.

37. When a King considers the public interests and concernments of his
Parliament in the happiness and honor of the Nation, and their particular
sufferings in a Rebellion for their affection and Loyalty unto Him, He must
look upon them as the most competent Considerers, and Counselors, how to
manage and improve the condition all are in, his and their condition being so
equal that the same violence has oppressed them all.

38. It will be in vain for them who have informed the World by diverse set
Battles against their King* to boast how tender they have been for the safety
of his Person.

39. It will be hard for a King, who is to struggle with many defects and
necessities, to keep a strict discipline among his Soldiers.

40. Guilt and Despair make Rebels sometimes more wicked than they at first
intended to be.

41. A King should have no greater sadness for those who are his ill Subjects,
than He has joy and comfort in their affections and fidelities, who are his
good.

42. License and Disorder in an Army, will discredit, and may destroy the best
cause.

43. Subjects ought to remember, That moneys are the nerves of War, and
accordingly expedite supplies to their King, when He needs them.

44. There is no profession a King has made for the defense and maintenance of
right Religion, Laws and Liberties, which He should not inviolably observe.

45. A King's Opinion, wherein He differs from his Subjects in Parliament,
should not be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, being not
infallible.

46. Nothing should so much afflict a King, as the sense-and feeling He has of
the sufferings of his Subjects, and the miseries that hang over his Kingdoms,
when drawn upon them by those, who (upon pretenses of good) violently pursue
their own interests and ends.

47. Such men may be supposed most apt and likely to maintain their power by
blood and rapine, who have only got it by Oppression and Injustice.

48. Civil Dissentions that are desperate, may encourage and invite a foreign
Enemy to make a prey of the whole Nation where they are.

49. Plague, Pestilence and Famine, will be the inevitable attendants of
unnatural Contentions between a King and his People.

50. A Kingdom being infested with Civil War, so general a habit of
uncharitableness and cruelty is contracted throughout, that even Peace it self
will not restore the Peace to their old temper and security.

51. In the time of a Civil War, the King should be so deeply sensible of the
miseries and calamities of his Kingdom, and the grievous sufferings of his
Subjects, as most earnestly to desire that some expedient may be found out,
which by the blessing of God, may prevent the further effusion of blood, and
restore the Nation to Peace, from the earnest and constant endeavoring of
which, as no discouragement given Him on the contrary part should make Him
cease, so no success on his own should ever divert Him.

52. All men, who pretend to goodness, must desire peace: and all men know
Treaties to be the best and most Christian way to procure it.

53. A King can never condescend unto what is absolutely destructive to that
just power, which by the Laws of God, and the Land, He is born unto.

54. As a King should make no other demands but such as He believes confidently
to be just, and much conducing to the tranquillity of the People: so should He
be most willing to condescend to them in whatsoever shall be really for their
good and happiness.

55. Except a King and People have reciprocal care each of other, neither can
be happy.

56. A King should never dissemble, nor hide his Conscience, when his consent
is desired to the alteration of Religion, wherewith He is unsatisfied.

57. In times of Distraction and Division between King and People, if the King
be so unfortunate as to sall into their hands, it is ^it for Him to be attended
by some of his Chaplains, whose opinions as Clergymen, he ought to esteem and
reverence, not only for the exercise of his Conscience, but also for clearing
of his judgment concerning the emergent differences in Religion.

58. A restrained King, cannot, as He ought, take in consideration the
alterations in Religion, that may be offered Him, without the help of his
Chaplains or Divines, because He can never judge rightly of, or be altered in
any thing of his opinion, so long as any ordinary way of finding out the Truth
is denied Him; but when that is granted Him, He should not strive for victory
in Argument, but seek and submit to Truth (according to that judgment which God
has given Him) always holding it his best and greatest conquest, to give
contentment to his People in all things which He conceives not to be against
his Conscience or Honor.

59. A King under such restraint as he is not master of those ordinary actions,
which are the undoubted rights of any freeborn man, is not in case fit to make
Concessions, for give Answers to his revolted Subjects.

60. A King under what restraint soever, should not give his consent to any
Propositions made to Him by his revolted Subjects, that require the disclaiming
that reason which God has given Him to judge by, for the good of Him and his
People, and the putting a great violence upon his Conscience.

61. It were easy for a distressed King, who intended to wind Himself out of
Troubles by indirect means, readily to consent to whatsoever is proposed to
Him, and afterward choose his time to break all, alleging that forced
concessions are not to be kept: for which He would not incur a hard censure
from indifferent men.

62. Maxims of fallacy are not to be the guides of a King's Actions in
extremity.

63. It is held by some unlawful for any man, and most base in a King, to
recede from his promises, for having been obtained by force, or he under
restraint.

Note] According as the promises may be; which if unjust and injurious, are not
to be adhered to.

64. A general Act of Oblivion is the best bond of peace.

65. The Wisdom of several Kingdoms, has usually and happily in all ages
granted general Pardons, whereby the numerous discontentments of many persons
and families otherwise exposed to ruin, might not become fuel to new
disorders, or seeds to future troubles

66. Perpetual dishonor must cleve to that King, who to obtain liberty or
other advantage to Himself, shall abandon those persons of Condition and
Fortune, that out of a sense of duty have engaged themselves with and for Him
in his Civil Wars.

67. Liberty being that which in all times has been the common theme, and
desire of all men, common Reason shows, That Kings less than any should endure
Captivity.

68. A King may with patience endure a tedious restraint, so long as He has any
hope, that that sort of his suffering may conduce to the peace of his Kingdoms,
or the hindering of more effusion of blood.

69. A King under restraint, finding by too certain proofs, that his continued
patience would not only turn to his personal ruin, but likewise be of much
more prejudice than furtherance to the public good, is bound, as well by
natural; as political obligations, to seek his safety, by retiring Himself (if
He can) for some time from the public view both of his Friends and Enemies.

70. No indifferent man can judge but a King has just cause to free Himself from
the hands of those who change their principles with their condition, and who
are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of his Nobility, and with whom
the Levellers doctrine is rather countenanced than punished.

71. No reasonable man can think, that God will bless those, who refuse to hear
their own King when they have him under restraint.

72. Although a King may withdraw Himself from the ill usage of such his
Subjects as keep Him under restraint, and are deaf to the importunities of his
reasonable desires: yet when He may be heard with Freedom, Honor, and Safety,
He should instantly break forth through the cloud of his retirement, and show
Himself really to be Pater Patriae.

73. When a King is willing to give ease to the Consciences of others, there is
no reason why He alone, and those of his judgment, should be pressed to a
violation of theirs.

74. It is the definition, not names of things, which make them rightly known.

75. Without means to perform, no Propsition can take effect.

76. A King, to whom Honor, Freedom, and Safety is not allowed, can no more
treat with his Subjects that have usurped his power, than a blind man judge of
colors, or one run a race, who has both his feet tied together.

77. A King of two different Nations should yield to none in either Kingdom,
for being truly and zealously affected for the good and honor of both, and his
resolution should be never to be partial for either to the prejudice of the
other.

78. Mercy is as inherent and inseparable to a King as Justice.

79. A King should never abuse the love of his loyal Subjects, by any power
wherewith God shall enable Him, to the least violation of the least of their
liberties, or the diminution of those immunities which He before had granted
them, though they be beyond the Acts of his Predecessors.

80. In time of Civil War, whosoever behaves not Himself like a good Subject to
his King in his Kingdom, should not (if the King can help it) receive the
benefit, and advantage of being his Subject in any other; but all foreign
Princes should know, that as such a person has parted with his loyalty to his
King, so he must not hope for any security by Him, that some example may be
made, how easy it is for a King to punish their disloyalty abroad, who for a
time may avoid their own King's justice at home.

81. In time of Civil War, such who have by weakness and misunderstanding, or
through fear and apprehension of danger been so far transported, as to
contribute and consent to horrid intestine dissentions, should, by their free
and liberal assistance of their King, express, That their former errors
proceeded from weakness, not from malice.

82. The experience Subjects have of their King's Religion, Justice, and Love
of his People, should not suffer them to believe any horrid scandals laid upon
Him: And their Affection, Loyalty, and Jealousy of his Honor, should disdain
to be made instruments to oppress their Native Sovereign, by assisting an
odious Rebellion.

83. A King's obligation is both in Conscience and Honor, neither to abandon
God's Cause, injure his Successors, nor forsake his Friends.

84. A King so distressed in Civil Wars, as He cannot flatter Himself with
expectation of good success, may rest satisfied in this, to end his days with
Honor and a good Conscience, which obliges Him to continue his endeavors, in
not despairing that God may in due time avenge his own Cause.

85. A King in extremity, is not to be deserted by his friends, though He that
stays with Him, must expect and resolve, either to dye for a good cause, or
(which is worse) to live as miserable in maintaining it, as the violence of
insulting Rebels can make him.

86. As the best foundation of Loyalty is Christianity; so true Christianity
teaches perfect Loyalty: for, without this reciprocation, neither is truly what
they pretend to be.

87. A King should choose such Commissioners for any Treaty with Rebels, as will
neither be threatened nor disputed from the grounds He has given them.

88. Wherein Rebels strain to justify their breaking off Treaties with their
King, bare asseverations, without proofs, cannot, I am sure, satisfy any
judicious Reader.

89. The Penners of seditious Pamphlets, to justify the cause of Rebels, seek
more to take the ears of the ignorant multitude with big words, and bold
Assertions, than to satisfy rational men with real proofs or true arguments.

90. Bare Asseverations which bold Rebels often make even against what they
see, will not get credit with any, but such who abandon their judgments to an
implicit Faith.

91. The determinations of all the Parliaments in the World, cannot make a
thing just or necessary, if it be not so of it self.

92. When the reasons upon which the laying by of a King's authority is
grounded, are not particularly mentioned for the Worlds satisfaction (if
possible) but involved in general big words, it seems that it is their force of
arms, who do it, more than that of Reason which they trust to, for procuring
of obedience to their determinations, or belief to what they say.

93. It is evident, that the demands of bold Rebels have always increased with
their good fortune.

94. A King must in no extremity, howsoever pressed to it by Rebels, resolve to
live in quiet, without honor, and to give his people peace without safety, by
abandoning them to an arbitrary unlimited power.

95. Reason will hardly maintain those who are afraid of her.

96. Indifferent men may often judge of a King's innocence by their way of
accusation, who rebel against Him; For those who lay such high crimes to his
charge, as the breach of Oaths, Vows, Protestations, and Imprecations, would
not spare to bring their proofs if they had any.

97. It is a wrong to a King's Innocence, to seek to clear Him of such
slanders, for which there are no proofs alleged: for Malice being once
detected, is best answered with neglect and silence.

98. Although Affection should not so blind one, as to say that his King never
erred; yet, as when a just debt is paid, Bonds ought to be cancelled: so
Grievances, be they never so just, being once redressed, ought no more to be
objected as Errors: And it is no Paradox to affirm, That Truths, this way
told, are no better than slanders.

99. It is most certain by experience, That they who make no conscience of
Rebelling, will make less of Lying, when it is for their advantage.

100. It is the artifice of Rebels, not only to endeavor to make Fables pass
for current coin, but likewise to seek to blind men's judgments with false
inferences upon some truths.

The Twelfth Century.
1. IT cannot be warranted by Justice, that any man should be slandred, yet
denied the sight thereof, and so far from being permitted to answer, that if he
have erred, there should be no way left him to acknowledge, or mend it.

2. It cannot be made appear, that our Savior and the Apostles did so leave
the Church at liberty, as they might totally alter or change the Church
Government at their pleasure.

3. Men's conjectures can breed but a humane faith.

4. The Post-scripts of St. Paul's Epistles though we lay no great weight upon
them, yet they are to be held of great antiquity, and therefore such as in
question of fact, where there appears no strong evidence to weaken their
belief, ought not to be lightly rejected.

5. Although Faith, as it is an assent unto Truth supernatural, or of Divine
Revelation, reaches no further than the Scriptures; yet in matters of fact,
humane testimonies may beget a Faith, though humane, yet certain and infallible.

6. It is not to be conceived, that the accessions, or additions, granted by
the favor of Princes, for the enlarging of the power, or privileges of
Bishops, have made, or indeed can make, the Government really and substantially
to differ from what formerly it was, no more than the addition of Arms or
Ornaments can make a body really, and substantially, to differ from it self
naked or divested of the same: nor can it be thought either necessary, or yet
expedient, that the elections of the Bishops, and some other circumstantials
touching their Persons or Office, should be in all respects the same under
Christian Princes, as it was when Christians lived among Pagans, and under
persecution.

7. It is well worthy the studies and endeavors of Divines of both opinions,
laying aside emulation and private interests, to reduce Episcopacy, and
Presbytery, into such a well proportioned form of superiority and
subordination, as may best resemble the Apostolical and Primitive times, so far
forth as the different condition of the times, and the exigents of all
considerable circumstances will admit, so as the power of Church Government, in
the particular of Ordination, which is merely spiritual, may remain
authoritative in the Bishop, but that power not to be exercised without the
concurrence, or assistance, of the Presbytery.

8. Other powers of Government, which belong to jurisdiction, though they are
in the Bishops, yet the outward exercise of them may be ordered and disposed,
or limited by the Sovereign power, to which by the laws of the place, and the
acknowledgment of the Clergy, they are subordinate.

9. The Succession of Bishops is the best clue, the most certain and ready way
by which to find out their Original.

10. It has been often sound, that mutual returns of long answers and replies,
have rather multiplied disputes by starting new questions, than informed the
Conscience, by removing former scruples.

11. In former times, under Pagan Princes, the Church was a distinct Body of it
self, divided from the Commonwealth, and so was to be governed by its own
rules and Rulers. The Bishops therefore of those times, though they had no
outward coercive power over men's persons or estates, yet in as much as every
Christian man, when he became a Member of the Church, did ipso facto, and by
that his own voluntary act, put himself under their government, they exercised
a very large power of jurisdiction^ in spiritualibus, in making Ecclesiastical
Canons, receiving accusations, conventing the accused, examining of witnesses,
judging of crimes, excluding such as they found guilty of scandalous offenses
from the Lord's Supper, enjoining penances upon them, casting them out of the
Church, receiving them again upon their repentance, etc. And all this they
exercised as well over Presbyters, as others: but after that the Church, under
Christian Princes, began to be incorporated into the Commonwealth, whereupon
there must of necessity follow a complication of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
powers, the jurisdiction of Bishops (in the outward exercise of it) was
subordinate unto, and limited by the Supreme Civil power.

12. Although there be no cause to dislike their opinion, who derive the
Episcopal power originally from Christ himself, without whose warrant the
Apostles would not either have exercised it themselves, or derived it to others;
yet for that the practice in them is so clear and evident, and the warrant from
him expressed but in general terms, (As my Father sent me, so send I you, and
the like) we may choose rather to fix the claim of the power upon that practice
as the more evidential way, than upon the warrant, which by reason of the
generality of expression would bear more dispute.

13. Arguments drawn from Names, and Words, and conjectural Expositions of
Scripture, are subject to such frailties, as in debate will give little
satisfaction to his judgment and conscience, that requites it.

14. The testimonies of so many writers, ancient, and modern, as have been
produced for the Scripture-Original of Bishops, may be conceived of so great
importance in a question of this nature, that we are bound both in charity and
reason to believe, That so many men, of such quality, would not have asserted
the same with so much confidence, but upon very good ground.

15. One witness for the affirmative ought to be of more value, than ten for
the negative; and the testimony of one person that is not interessed, than of
an hundred that are.

16. A Prince to show the greatness of his mind, is rather to conquer his
enemies by pardoning, than by punishing.

17. A King may expect not to be ceusur'd for having parted with too much of
his right, when the price and commodity is so great, such as security to
Himself, and peace to his People.

18. A prudent Parliament ought to remember how useful a King's power is to a
Peoples liberty.

19. A Prince is never to affect more greatness or prerogative, than what is
really and intrinsecally for the good of his Subjects, not satisfaction of
Favorites.

20. A Prince that so uses his Prerogative, will never want means to be a
Father to all, and a bountiful Prince to any he would be extraordinarily
gracious unto.

21. All men trust their treasure where it returns them interest.

22. If Princes like the Sea, receive, and repay, all the fresh streams and
rivers trust them with, they will not grudge, but pride themselves, to make
them up an Ocean.

23. Subjects, who have learnt, that Victories over their Princes, are but
triumphs over themselves, will be more unwilling to hearken to changes
afterward.

24. A distressed King may best learn to own Himself, by retiring into Himself,
and therefore can the better digest what befalls Him, not doubting but God can
restrain his Enemies malice, and turn their fierceness unto his praise.

25. If God give an injured King success against Rebels, He ought to use it
humbly, and far from revenge*

26. If God restore an exiled King to his right upon hard conditions,
whatsoever He promises, He ought to keep.

27. Those men who have forced Laws, which they were bound to observe, will
find their triumphs full of troubles.

28. A Prince is not to think any thing in this world worth obtaining by foul
and unjust means.

29. No Earthly power can justly call a King in question as a Delinquent.

30. A good King will not without showing a reason seek to impose a belief upon
his Subjects.

31. There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either
by God's Laws, or the municipal Laws of the Country where he lives.

32. The true Liberty of Subjects consists not in the power of Government, but
in living under such Laws, such a Government, as may give themselves the best
assurance of their lives, and propriety of their goods.

33. The King who has a Trust committed to Him by God, by old and lawful
descent, must not betray it, to answer to a new unlawful Authority.

34. It is a great sin for Subjects, to withstand lawful Authority, as it is
to submit to an Authority Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful.

35. A hasty sentence once past, may be sooner repented, than recalled*

36. It is in vain, for a King to be a Sceptick, by denying the power Rebels
have, when greater than He can resist.

37. A hasty Judgment, passed upon the Life of a King, may bring on that
trouble and perpetual inconveniency to a Kingdom, that the child which is then
unborn may repent it.

38. God many times does pay Justice by an unjust Sentence.

39. Conquest is never just, except there be a good just cause, either for
matter of wrong of just Title, and then they that go beyond it, the first
quarrel that they have to it, is it that makes unjust at the end what was just
at first.

40. Sole matter of Conquest is a great Robbery.

41. Those Magistrates or Officers will never be right, nor will God ever
prosper them, who give not God his due, their King his due, and the People
their due.

42. The regulating a Church rightly, according to Holy Scripture, is, To give
God his due, A National Synod, freely called, freely debating among themselves,
must settle the Church, if out of order, when that every Opinion is freely, and
clearly heard.

43. A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things; and a share in
Government is nothing pertaining to the People.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
Friend,
THis Century may be complete, and others added, when more of His Sacred
Majesty's Writings shall be Published. Which advertisement I pray take with
you, as you proceed to the other Titles, under which you may apprehend the like
defect at the end.

Icon Animae Basilicae: THE POURTRAITURE OF A ROYAL SOUL, Drawn from The
Transcendent MEDITATIONS OF King CHARLES I. By RICHARD WATSON.

Habebat perfectum animum ad summam sui adductus, supra quam nihil est nis^
men's Dei, ex qua pars and in hoc pectus mortale de fluxit, quod nunquam magis
divinum est, quam ubi mortalitatem suam cogitat, and scit in hoc natum hominem,
ut vita defungeretur. Senec. Epist. 120. London, Printed for Robert Horn, 1661.

To the Reader.
Friend,
PHilo the Jew tells us, That Tharra among the Hebrews, and Socrates among the
Greeks, were men so noted for meditation and retirement within themselves, that
whosoever in aftertime, by such a reflex knowledge, could give an exact
Character of his Soul, had that name as a title of hon^r in each Nation. If you
do right to this Piece, apart presented unto your view, you must needs
acknowledge that not any of our Britannike Kings has done a Design, by which he
merited to have his name transmitted to posterity with that advantage, as
Charles the First; who in a time of such distraction, when most of his Subjects
acted by a very uncertain light; some of them mistook themselves, and others
took great pains to disguise and lay counterfeit colors upon their Conscience,
drew so exquisite a Pourtraicture of a pious and prudent Prince, as it appears
most evident, He then took not first the pencil in hand to practice, but began
to exercise, in the very dawn of his Reason, what skill He perfected in the
glory and luster of his Reign, though He copied it not for his Royal
Successors, and Religious Subjects, until the approaching twilight, or setting
of his Sun in blood. The Picture is not here exposed, to be only looked upon by
a curious eye, to have the hand commended, and then the curtain drawn; What
more is meant, will best be known by such as seriously intend to imitate, and
have a devout ambition, by a like looking into their Souls, and meditating on
their duties, in their several capacities, to deserve the honor of that great
name, which ought to be held venerable among us in all succeeding ages. Of
which number I wish you one, and my self likewise,

Your humble servant, RICHARD WATSON.

Cent. 1 begins Page 217 Cent. 2 begins Page 241 Cent. 3 begins Page
265 Cent. 4 begins Page 294


ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to mend the following Escapes, and whomsoever he
censures, to impute neither mistake nor negligence to the Collectour.

Title page read Basilicae.

Epistle Dedicatory.
Page 1 r. recognize. p. 24 r. i^ after some few years revolution, etc.

Effata Regalia.
Century 1. number. 2. r. allay. n 6 r the grounds. n 30 r stupidity. n 73 r
conscious. n 77 r Savior. n 79 r merits. n 82 r though they should be
satiated. n 86 r soul of a Queen. Century 2. n ^ r praie^^. n 28 r ^ay serve n
49 r propound. n 75 r streightness. n 90 r false and evil. Century 3 n 5 r with
prejud^ces. n 20 r considerations, nor designs n 81 r oblequie. Cent. 4 n 31 r
upon functions. n 89 r to Christ's rule. Cent. 5 n 22 r not ^orosely. Cent. 6 n
10 r differences in Religion, and offenses, by etc. n 23 r a di^^^dence o^ his
own judgment n 66 r aggravations, n 91 r that as the greatest temptations, etc.
Cent. 7 n 8 r their Pilot. n 71 r who will avoid. Cent. 8. n 32 r from their
pr^reption. n 49 r Philistims. n 55 r portends. Cent. 9 n 11 r congregations. n
35 r he shall be forced to consent, etc. n 73 r fixed on new models. Cent. 10 n
3 r from which reason etc. Cent. 11, n 7 r Rights n 50 r will not restore the
people, etc.

Icon Auimae Basilicae.
Century 2. number. 64 ^ shall be. n 88 r to a happy, etc n 93 ^ inclined. n 97 ^
We ^ad need, etc Cent. 3 n 54 r the handful of ^eal. Cent. 4 n 18 ^ finds.

Monita, etc Britannica.
Cent. 1. n 13 r of differing, etc. n 35 r unto the King. n 48 r he may
suspect. n 81 r spirit of prayer. n 91 r lest being n 941 of sound. Cent. 2 n
22 r the draught.

Icon Animae Basilicae. THE POUR TRAICTURE OF A ROYAL SOUL.
The First Century.
1. REsolutions of future Reforming, do not always satisfy Gods Justice, nor
prevent his Vengeance for former miscariages.

2. When out Sins have overlai'd our Hopes, we are taught to depend on Gods
mercies to forgive, not on our purpose to amend.

3. God often vindicates his glory by his judgments, and shows us how unsafe it
is to offend him, upon presumptions afterward to please him.

4. For want of timely repentance of our sins, God gives us cause to repent of
those remedies we too late apply.

5. When God gives us the benefit of our afflictions and his chastisements, we
may dare account them the strokes not of an Enemy, but a Father, whose rod, as
well as his staf, may comfort us.

6. Gods grace is infinitely better with our sufferings, than our peace could
be with our sins.

7. When God that overrules our Counsels, overrules also our hearts, the
worse things we suffer by his Justice, the better we may be by his Mercy.

8. Sin may turn our Antidotes into Poison; and Grace return our Poison into
Antidotes.

9. An act of sinful compliance, has greater aggravations in a King, than any
man; especially when without the least temptation of envy or malice, he
consents to the destruction of a Peer, or meaner Subject, whom by his place he
ought to have preserved.

10. God sees the contradiction between a King's heart and his hand, against
whom the sin is more immediate, when he signs any man's death, unsatisfied that
he has deserved it.

11. A King may learn Righteousness by God's Judgments, and see his own frailty
in God's justice.

12. A King ought to prefer Justice, which is the will of God, before all
contrary clamours, which do but discover the injurious will of man.

13. It is once too much, that a King has once been overcome, to please his
Subjects by displeasing of God.

14. A King by divine permission, going against his Reason of Conscience, for
any Reason of State, highly sins against the God of Reason, and Judge of
Consciences.

15. God's free Spirit supports the Will of a King, and subjects it to none but
the divine light of Reason, Justice and Religion, which shine in his Soul.

16. God desires Truth in the inward parts of Kings, and Integrity in their
outward expressions.

17. When God hears the voice of our Savior's blood before the cry of others
undeservedly shed, he speaks to King and People, in the voice of Joy and
Gladness, which makes the bones he had broken rejoice in his Salvation

18. A King purposing violence or oppression against the Innocent, may expect
the Enemy to persecute his Soul, to tread his life to the ground, and to lay
his honor in the dust.

19. God that sees not as man sees, looks beyond all popular appearances,
searches the heart, and tryes the reins, and brings to light things hidden in
the dark.

20. A Kings afflictions cannot be esteemed by wise and godly men any argument
of his sin, in shedding blood he would have saved, more than their impunity
among good men is any sure token of their innocence that forced him to it.

21. A King may expect God's Protection from the privy conspiracies, and open
violence of bloody and unreasonable men, according to the uprightness of his
heart, and the innocence of his hands in the matter of blood, or destruction of
his Subjects.

22. In time of civil dissensions, a King may most safely fly to God as his
refuge and defense, who rules the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the
People.

23. A King should look upon his own sins, and the sins of his People (which
are the tumults of their Souls against God) as the just cause of popular
inundations, permitted by God to over-bear all the banks of Loyalty, Modesty,
Laws, Justice and Religion.

24. God can rebuke the rebellious beasts of the People, and deliver his King
from the rudeness and strivings of the multitude.

25. It becomes King and People, as Men and Christians, unpassionately to see
the light of Reason and Religion; and with all due order and gravity to follow
it.

26. A Charitable King will wish his rebellious People a timely sense and
sorrow, that shame here, and not suffering hereafter, may be the punishment of
their Sin.

27. When God shall set bounds to our Passions by Reason, to our Errors by
Truth, to our Seditions by Laws duly executed, and to our Schisms by Charity,
then we may be as Jerusalem, a City at unity in it self.

28. A King in distress, should still appeal to his God, whose all-discerning
Justice sees through all the disguises of men's pretensions, and deceitful
darknesses of their hearts.

29. A King to whom God gave a heart to grant much to his Subjects, may need a
heart fitted to suffer much from them.

30. Gods Grace may teach a King, wisely to enjoy as well the frustratings as
the fullfillings of his best hopes, and most specious desires.

31. A King sometimes, while he thinks to allay others fears, may raise his
own; and by settling them, unsettle himself.

32. Evil for good is a bad requital; and hatred for the good will of a King to
his People.

33. A King needs God for his Pilot in such a dark and dangerous storm, as
neither admits his return to the Port whence he set out, nor his making any
other with that safety and honor which he designed.

34. It is easy for God, to keep a King safe in the love and confidence of his
people.

35. A King needs God for his Guardian amidst the unjust hatred and jealousies
of them whom he suffers so far to prevail, as to pervert and abuse his acts of
greatest Indulgence to, and assurance of them.

36. A penitent King ought to know no favors of his can make others more
guilty than himself may be in abusing those many and great ones which God had
conferred upon him.

37. A King in time of public calamity by civil dissensions, should ask of God
such Repentance for himself and his people as he will accept, and such Grace as
they may not abuse.

38. The King is happy, who can make a right use of others abuses, and by their
failings of him, reflect with a reforming displeasure, upon his own offemces
against God.

39. Although a King for his own sins, be by other men's sins deprived of
temporal blessings, yet he may be happy to enjoy the comfort of God's mercies,
which often raise the greatest sufferers, to be the most glorious Saints.

40. It is God's will a King should preserve a Native, Rational, and Religious
freedom.

41. God requires of Kings, to submit their understandings and wills unto his,
whose wisdom and goodness can neither err, nor misguide them.

42. God requires of Kings, so far to deny their carnal reason, in order to his
sacred Mysteries and Commands, that they should believe and obey, rather than
dispute them.

43. God expects from Kings only such a reasonable service of him, as not to do
any thing for him against their Consciences.

44. As to the desires of men, God enjoins Kings to try all things by the
touchstone of Reason and Laws, which are the rules of civil Justice, and to
declare their consents to that only which their judgments approve.

45. Kings should be very unwilling to desert that place in which God has set
them, and whereto the affairs of their Kingdoms do call them.

46. A King may be content, for his Peoples good, to deny himself, in what God
has subjected to his disposal.

47. The unthankful importunities, and tumultuary violence of some men's
immoderate demands, should never betray a King to that dangerous and unmanly
slavery, as to make him strengthen them by his consent in those things, which
he thinks in his Conscience to be against God's glory, the good of his
Subjects, and the discharge of his own duty to Reason and Justice.

48. A King should be willing to suffer the greatest indignities and injuries
Rebellious people press upon him, rather than commit the least sin against his
Conscience.

49. The just liberties of People may well be preserved in fair and equal
ways, without the slavery of their King's Soul.

50. He whom God has invested by his favors in the power of a Christian King,
should not subject his Reason to other men's Passions and Designs, which seem
unreasonable, unjust and irreligious unto him.

51. The way of Truth and Justice, will bring a distressed King at last to
peace and happiness with God, though for them he has much trouble among men.

52. A King and Queen scattered on earth by their despightfull and deadly
enemies, may be prepared by their sufferings for God's presence.

53. Though a King's difference from his Queen in some things, as to Religion,
may be his greatest temporal infelicity; yet the sincerity of their affections,
which desire to seek, find, and to embrace every Truth, given by God, may be
acceptable unto him.

54. It is happy for King and Queen different in Religion, when either
ignorance of what is necessary to be known, or unbelief, or disobedience to
what they know, becomes their misery, or their wilful default.

55. The great scandal of Subjects professing the same true Religion with their
King, may be an hinderance to the dissenting Queen, in the love of some Truth
God would have her to learn; or may harden her in some error he would have
cleared to her.

56. A King's own and his Parties constancy, is the best antidote against the
poison of their example that gave such scandal.

57. The Truth of that Religion the King propfesseth represented with all the
beauties of Humility, Loyalty, Charity and Peaceableness, as the proper fruits
and ornaments thereof, may prevail much upon the judgment of his dissenting
Queen; as the odious disguises of Levity, Schism, Heresy, Novelty, Cruelty and
Disloyalty, which any men's practices put upon it, may intend her aversion from
it.

58. God's sacred and saving Truths, cleared from all rust and dross of humane
mixtures, gain belief, love, and obedience to them, as his.

59. God beheld in the glass of his Truth, in those mercies which he has
offered unto us in his only Son and our Savior, inviteth us to serve him in
all those holy duties, which most agree with his holy doctrine, and most
imitable example.

60. The experience a King and Queen separated by Rebels, have of the vanity
and uncertainty of all humane glory and greatness, in their scatterings and
Eclipses, should make them both so much the more ambitious to be invested in
those durable honors and perfections, which are only to be found in God, and
obtained through Christ.

61. A King ought not to gratify his passion by any secret pleasure in his
death or destruction, who has thereby satisfied the injury he did him, lest he
make divine vengeance his, and consider the affront against himself more than
the sin against God.

62. God often pleads the cause of Kings before the sons of men, by making
without their desire and endeavors, the mischief of Rebels return on their own
heads, and their violent dealing come down on their own pates.

63. An injured King in charity should pray that God's justice prevent not the
objects and opportunities of his mercy, but that they who have most offended
him may live and be forgiven by him, in that their offenses bear a proportion
with his trespasses, for which he hopes forgiveness from God.

64. A King should pray for his Rebellious Subjects, that God lay not their
sins to their charge for condemnation, but to their Conscience for amendment.

65. God's exemplary vengeance showed in the destruction of any eminent Rebel,
is as the lighting of a thunderbolt, which by so severe a punishment of one,
should be a terror to all.

66. It may be wished, that they who know not they have done amiss, might have
their sin discovered to them; and that they who sin of malicious wickedness,
might be scared.

67. They who prevent Gods judgments by their true repentance, shall escape the
strokes of his eternal vengeance.

68. Mercy and Truth met together, are the best supporters of a Royal Throne:
as Righteousness and Peace kissing each other the chief Ornaments of a
flo^rishing Crown.

69. God sees clearly through all the cloudings of humane affairs, and judges
without prejudice, his unerrable judgment having eternally his omniscience for
its guide.

70. It is time for a King to call upon God, when the proud rise against him,
and the Assemblies of violent men seek after his Soul, who have not set God
before their eyes.

71. A King should have no passion, nor design, to embroyl his Kingdom in a
Civil War, to which he has the least temptation, as knowing he must adventure
more than any, and gain least of any by it.

72. A King ought to deplore and study to divert the necessity of a Civil War,
unless he will be thought so prodigally thirsty of his Subjects blood, as to
venture his own life, which were better spent to save, than to destroy his
People.

73. A King in time of Rebellion, needs much of Gods grace with patience to
bear the afflictions, but much more to sustain the reproaches of men,
especially if they make the War his, which they have raised themselves.

74. The confidence of some men's false tongues is such, that they would make a
King almost suspect his own Innocence.

75. A King whose innocence is known unto God, may be content (at least by his
silence) to take upon him the imputed guilt before men, if by that he can allay
the malice of his Enemies, and redeem his people from the miseries of War.

76. God will find out bloody and deceitful men, many of whom live not half
their days, in which they promised themselves the enjoyment of the fruits of
their violent and wicked Counsels.

77. God will save a King that is his servant, and in due time scatter the
people that delight in War.

78. It is time for God to arise and lift up himself, when the King's enemies
rage and increase, conceiving mischief, travailing with iniquity, and bringing
forth falsehood.

79. The design of a Civil War is either to destroy the King's person, or force
his judgment, and to make him renege his Conscience, and Gods Truth.

80. A King may be driven to cross David's choice, and desire rather to fall
into the hands of Men, by denying them (though their mercies be cruel) than
into the hands of God, by sinning against his Conscience, and in that against
him who is a consuming fire: It being better they destroy him, than God damn
him.

81. If nothing but a King's blood will satisfy his Enemies, or quench the
flames of his Kingdom, or God's temporal Justice, he should be content, if it
be Gods Will, that it be shed by the hands of his Subjects.

82. When the blood of a King, though a sinner, is washed with the blood of his
innocent and peace-maing Redeemer, Gods justice will therein find not only a
temporary expiation, but an eternal plenary satisfaction, both for the King's
sins, and his Peoples.

83. A King that has God on his side, has more with him than can be against
him.

84. None in Heaven or Earth is desirable by a King in comparison of God, who
in the loss of all, may be more than all to him.

85. When people are encouraged to fight against their King under the pretense
of sighting for him, he may cast his eyes up to Heaven, he has no other power
to oppose them.

86. God needs no help, nor the King, having his, if not to conquer, at least
to suffer,

87. If God delights not in a King's safety and prosperity, he ought to render
himself up to be reduced to what God will have him, whose judgments often begin
with his own Children.

88. A King should be content to be nothing, that God may be all.

89. God, who teaches, That no King can be saved by the multitude of an Host,
can yet save him by the multitude of his mercies, being Lord of Hosts, and the
Father of Mercies.

90. A King distressed on every side, having God on his side, need not fear
what man can do unto him.

91. A King ought to give God's Justice the glory of his distress

92. Gods mercy must have the glory of a King's deliverance from them that
persecute his Soul.

93. Any King that has fought against God (whose Subject he is) by his sins,
and robbed him of his glory, God may justly strip of his strength by his own
Subjects, and eclipse his glory likewise.

94. The King whose hope and only refuge fails him, shall to his grief, hear
his Enemies soon say, There is no help for him in his God.

95. The King's footsteps will slip, whose goings God holds not up in his paths.

96. A King favored by God, is kept as the apple of his eye, and hid under the
shadow of his wings.

97. God has marveilous loving kindness to show, and a right hand by which to
save a King that puts his trust in him, from those that rise up against him;
from the wicked that oppress him; from his deadly enemies that compass him
about.

98. The path of life leads to God's presence, where is fullness of joy, and at
his right hand are pleasures for evermore.

99. God is the first and eternal Reason, whose wisdom is fortified with
omnipotency.

100. God's method of Grace to a King his servant is, first to furnish him with
clear discoveries of Truth, Reason, and Justice in his Understanding, then so
to confirm his will and resolution to adhere to them, that no terrors,
injuries, or oppressions of his Enemies, may ever enforce him against those
rules which God by them has planted in his Conscience.

The Second Century.
1. GOd never made a King that should be less than a Man and not dare to say
Yea, or Nay, as he sees cause; which freedom is not denied to the meanest
creature that has the use of reason, and liberty of speech.

2. That cannot be blameable in a King, which is commendable veracity and
constancy in others.

3. It is open partiality and injustice, for seditious Subjects to deny that
freedom to their King, which God has given to all men, and which themselves
pertinaciously challenge to themselves.

4. God can guide a distressed King by an unerring rule, through the perplexed
Lubyrinths of his own thoughts and other men's proposals, which he may have some
cause to suspect, are purposely cast as snares, that by his granting or denying
them, he might be more entangled in those difficulties, wherewith they lie in
wait to afflict him.

5. A Kings own sinful passions may cloud or divert Gods sacred suggestions.

6. A King should propund to himself Gods Glory for his end, Gods Word for his
rule, and then resign himself to Gods Will.

7. A King can hardly please all, he need not care to please some men; If he
may be happy to please God, he need not fear whom he displeases.

8. God makes the wisdom of the World foolishness, and takes in their own
devises, such as are wise in their own conceits.

9. A King made wise by God's Truth, for God's honor, his Kingdoms general
good, and his own Souls salvation, need not much regard the Worlds opinion, or
diminution of him.

10. The less wisdom ill-affected Subjects are willing to impute to their King,
the more they shall be convinced of God's wisdom directing him, while he denies
nothing sit to be granted, out of crossness, or humor; nor grants any thing
which is to be denied out of any fear or flattery of men.

11. A King ought to take care he become not guilty, or unhappy, by willing or
inconsiderate advancing any men's designs which are injurious to the public
good, while he confirms them by his consent; Nor must he be any occasion to
hinder or defraud the public of what is best, by any morose or perverse
dissentings.

12. A King ought to be so humbly charitable, as to follow their advice, when
it appears to be for the public good, of whose affections to him he may have
but few evidences to assure him.

13. God can as well bless honest errors, as blast fraudulent counsels.

14. Since Kings themselves must give an account of every evil and idle word in
private, at God's Tribunal; they ought to be much more caresull of those solemn
Declarations of their mind, which are like to have the greatest influence upon
the Public, either for woe, or weal.

15. The less unreasonable Subjects consider what they ask, the more solicitous
should a King be what he answers.

16. In time of Civil War, though a King's own and his People's pressures are
grievous, and peace would be very pleasing; yet should he not avoid the one,
nor purchase the other with the least expense or wast of his Conscience,
whereof God alone is deservedly more Master than himself.

17. So much cruelty among Christians is acted under the color of Religion, as
if we could not be Christians, unless we crucify one another.

18. If a King and his People love not God's Truth as they ought, and practice
it in charity, God may justly suffer a Spirit of error and bitterness, of
mutual and mortal hatred to rise among them.

19. God who forgives wherein we sin, may sanctify what we suffer.

20. Repentance must be our recovery (by God's mercy) when our great sins have
been our ruin.

21. The miseries a King and his Kingdom have suffered being great, they may
desire God so to account them, but withal, that their sins may appear to then
Consciences, as they are represented in the glass of God's judgments; for God
never punishes small failings with severe afflictions.

22. They should farther desire, that their sins may be ever more grievous to
them than God's judgments; and be more willing to repent, than to be relieved:
first asking of God the peace of penitent Consciences, and then the
tranquillity of united Kingdoms.

23. God can drown the sins of a King and People at Civil Wars in the Sea of
our Saviors blood, and through the Red Sea of their own blood bring them at
last to a State of Piety, Peace, and Plenty.

24. A King's public relations to all, make him share in all his Subjects
sufferings; of which he ought to have such a pious sense, as becomes a
Christian King, and a loving Father of his People.

25. God can make the scandalous and unjust reproaches cast upon a good King be
as a breath, more to kindle his compassion, and give him grace to heap
charitable coals of fire upon their heads to melt them, whose malice or cruel
zeal has kindled, or hindered the quenching of those flames, which may have
much wasted his Kingdoms.

26. Ignorance or Error may sill men with rebellious and destructive
Principles, which they act under an opinion, That they do God good service. For
these a King ought to pray God to lead them in the ways of his saving Truths.

27. A King may pray for the hand of God's justice to be against those, who
maliciously and despightfully have raised, or fomented, cruel and desperate
Wars against him.

28. God is far from destroying the innocent with the guilty, and erroneous
with the malicious.

29. God that had pity on Nineveh for the many children that were therein, will
not easily give over the whole stock of a populous and seduced Nation, to the
wrath of those whose covetousness makes them cruel; nor to their anger, which
is too fierce, and therefore justly cursed.

30. God many times is pleased, in the midst of the furnace of his severe
justice, to preserve a Posterity, which may praise him for his mercy.

31. God will not deal with his King, according to man's unjust reproaches, but
according to the iunocency of his hands in his sight.

32. If a King have desired or delighted in the woeful day of his Kingdoms
calamities; If he have not earnestly studied, and faithfully endeavored, the
preventing and composing of the bloody distractions in his Kingdom, It is just
that God's hand be against him and his fathers house.

33. A King that has enemies enough of men, if his Conscience do witness his
integrity, may conditionally dare to imprecate God's curse upon him and his, to
gain the World's opinion of his innocence, which God himself knows right well;
provided that he trust not to his own merit, but Gods mercies.

34. When the troubles of a King's Soul are enlarged, it is the Lord that must
bring him out of his distress.

35. Pious simpliciy is the best policy in a King.

36. They who have too much of the Serpents subtilty, forget the Doves
innocence.

37. Though hand join in hand, a King (by Gods assistance) should never let
them prevail against his Soul, to the betraying of his Conscience and Honor.

38. God having turned the hearts of the men of Judah and Israel, they restored
David with as much loyal zeal, as they did with inconstancy, and eargerness,
pursue him.

39. A depressed King, in whom God preserves the love of his truth and
uprightness, need not despair of his Subjects affections returning toward him.

40. God can soon cause the overflowing Seas to ebb, and retire back again to
the bounds which he has appointed for them.

41. He can as soon make them ashamed who trangress without a cause, and turn
them back that persecute the Soul of their King.

42. Integrity and uprightness will preserve a King in distress, that waits
upon the Lord.

43. From just, moral, and indispensable bonds, which God's Word in the Laws
of a Kingdom, have laid upon the Consciences of men, no pretensions of Piety
and Reformation are sufficient to absolve them, or engage them to any contrary
practices.

44. Nothing violent and injurious, can be religious.

45. God allows no man's committing Sacriledg, under the zeal of abhorring
Idols.

46. Sacrilegious designs have sometimes the countenance of religious ties.

47. The wisest of Kings has taught all his Successors, That it is a snare to
take things that are holy, and after vows to make enquiry.

48. A King ought never to consent to perjurious and sacriligious rapines,
which set upon him the brand and curse to all posterity, of robbing God and his
Church of what his divine bounty had given, and his clemency had accepted,
wherewith to encourage Learning and Religion.

49. Though a King's Treasures be exhausted, his Revenues diminished, and his
debts increased; yet should he never be tempted to use profane Reparations,
least a coal from God's Altar set such a fire on his Throne and Conscience, as
will be hardly quenched,

50. Though the State recover by God's blessing of peace, yet the Church is not
likely in times where the Charity of most men is grown cold, and their Religion
illiberal.

51. When God continues to those that serve him and his Church all those
encouragements, which by the will of pious Donors, and the justice of the Laws
are due unto them, they ought to deserve and use them aright to God's glory and
the relief of the poor; That his Priests may be clothed with righteousness,
and the poor may be satisfied with bread.

52. Rather than holy things should be given to Swine, or the Church's bread to
Dogs; Let them go about the City, grin like a Dog, and grudg that they are not
satisfied.

53. Let those sacred morsels, which some men have by violence devoured,
neither digest with them, nor theirs: Let them be as Naboth's Vineyard to Ahab,
gall in their mouths, rottenness to their names, a moth to their Families, and
a sting to their Consciences.

54. Break in sunder, o Lord, all violent and sacrilegious Confederations to do
wickedly and injuriously.

55. Divide their hearts and tongues who have bandyed together against the
Church and State, that the folly of such may be manifest to all men, and
proceed no farther.

56. A King whose righteous dealing is favored by God, in the mercies of the
most High never shall miscary.

57. A King who is made the object of popular reproach, has his soul among
Lions, among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

58. Those sons of men, that turn their Kings glory into shame, love vanity,
and seek after lies.

59. When wicked men on every side are set to reproach their King, if God hold
his peace, the Kings Enemies will prevail against him, and lay his honor in
the dust.

60. God shall destroy them that speak lies against their King; and will abhor
both the bloodthirsty and deceitful men.

61. God can make the Kings righteousness appear as the light; and his
innocence to shine forth as the Sun at noonday.

62. A good King should pray, that God would not suffer his silence to betray
his innocence, nor his displeasure his patience; but that after his Savior's
example, being reviled, he may not revile again; and being cursed by his
enemies, he may bless them.

63. God would not suffer Shemei's tongue to go unpunished, whose judgments on
David might seem to justify his disdainful reproaches.

64. Hot burning coals of eternal fire should be the reward of false, and lying
tongues against their King.

65. A King's prayer and patience should be as water to cool and quench their
tongues, who are set on fire with the fire of Hell, and tormented with those
malicious flames.

66. The King is happy that can refute and put to silence men's evil speaking,
by well-doing; praying that they may not enjoy the fruit of their lips, but of
his prayer, for their repentance, and God's pardon.

67. A King ought to learn David's patience and Hezekia's devotion, that he may
look to God's mercy through men's malice, and see his justice in their sin.

68. Even Sheba's seditious speeches, Rabshekah's railing, and Shemei's
cursing, may provoke as a King's humble prayer to God, so God's renewed
blessing toward him.

69. Though men curse, God may bless, and the afflicted King shall be blessed,
and made a blessing to his people: and so the stone which some builders refuse,
may become the head-stone of the corner.

70. If God look not down from heaven and save, the reproach of some men would
swallow up their King.

71. God can hide the King in the secret of his Presence from the pride of men,
and keep him from the strife of tongues.

72. God's mercies are full of variety, and yet of constancy.

73. God denies us not a new and fresh sense of our old and daily wants, nor
despises renewed affections joined to constant expressions.

74. The matters of our prayers ought to be agreeable to God's Will, which is
always the same; and the fervency of our spirits, to the motions of his holy
Spirit in us.

75. God's Spiritual perfections are such, as he is neither to be pleased with
affected Novelties for matter or manner, nor offended with the pious constancy
of our petitions in them both.

76. A pious moderation of men's judgments is most commendable in matters of
Religion, that their ignorance may not offend others, nor their opinion of
their own abilities tempt them to deprive others of what they may lawfully and
devoutly use to help their infirmities.

77. The advantage of Error consists in novelty and variety; as of Truth, in
unity and constancy.

78. The Church is sometimes pest'red with errors, and deformed with
undecencies in God's service, nnder the pretense of variety and novelty; as
deprived of truth, unity, and order, under this fallacy, That Constancy is the
cause of formality.

79. If God keep us from formal Hypocrisy in our hearts, we know that praying
to him, or praising of him (with David and other holy men) in the same forms,
cannot hurt us.

80. If God gives us wisdom to amend what is amiss within us there will be less
to amend without us.

81. The effects of blind zeal, and over-bold devotion, are such as God
evermore defend, and deliver his Church from them.

82. Such should be the uprightness and tenderness of a King, whom God has set
to be a Defender of the Faith, and a Protector of his Church, as by no violence
to be overborn against his Conscience.

83. The Deformation of the Church, as to that Government which derived from
the Apostles, had been retained in purest and primitive times, began when the
Revenues of the Church became the object of secular envy, which still seeks to
rob it of the encouragements of Learning and Religion.

84. A Christian King should be as the good Samaritan, compassionate and
helpful to God's afflicted Church, which when some men have wounded and
robbed, others pass by without regard either to pity, or relieve.

85. As the Kings power is from God, so should he use it for God.

86. Though a Sovereign be not suffered to be Master of his other rights as a
King, yet should he preserve that liberty of Reason, love of Religion, and the
Churches welfare, which are fixed in his Conscience as a Christian.

87. Sacriledg invades those temporal blessings which God's Providence has
bestowed on his Church for his glory.

88. Some men's sins and errors deserve God's just permission to let in the
wild Boar, and the subtle Foxes, to wast and deform his Vineyard, which his
right hand has planted, and the dew of heaven so long watered a happy and
flourishing estate.

89. His memory is cursed who bears the infamous brand to all Posterity of
being the first Christian King in his Kingdom who consented to the oppression
of God's Church, and the Fathers of it; whose errors he should rather, like
Constantine, cover with silence, and reform with meekness, than expose their
persons and sacred functions to vulgar contempt.

90. Their Counsels bring forth and continue violent Confusions, by a
precipitant destroying the ancient boundaries of the Churches Peace, who mean
to let in all manner of errors, schisms and disorders.

91. The God of Order and of Truth, does in his own good time abate the malice,
assuage the rage, and confound all the mischievous devices of his, the King's,
and his Churches enemies.

92. The God of Reason, and of Peace, disdains not to treat with sinners,
preventing them with offers of atonement, and beseeching them to be reconciled
with himself; abounding in mercy to save them, whom he wants not power or
justice to destroy.

93. When God softens our hearts by the blood of our Redeemer, and persuades us
to accept of peace with him; then, as Men and Christians, are we enclied to
procure and preserve peace among our selves.

94. A King should be content to be overcome, when God will have it so.

95. The noblest victory is over a man's self and his enemies by Patience;
which was Christ's conquest, and may well become a Christian King.

96. God between both his Hands, the right sometimes supporting, and the left
afflicting, fashioneth us to that frame of Piety he likes best.

97. When had need ask God forgiveness for the Pride that attends our
prosperous, and the repinings which follow our disastrous events.

98. When we go forth in our own strength, God withdraws his, and goes not
forth with our Armies.

99. Let God be all, when we are something, and when we are nothing, that he
may have the glory when we are in a victorious or inglorious condition.

100. It is hard measure, for a King to suffer evil from his Subjects to whom
he intends nothing but good; and he cannot but suffer in those evils which they
compel him to inflict upon them, punishing himself in their punishments.

The Third Century.
1. A King, against whom his Subjects take up arms, both in conquering, and
being conquered, is still a sufferer; in which case he needs a double portion
of God's Spirit, which only can be sufficient for him.

2. A King, in time of Civil War, as he is most afflicted, so ought he to be
most reformed, that he may be not only happy to see an end of the civil
distractions, but a chief instrument to restore and establish a firm and
blessed Peace to his Kingdoms.

3. The pious ambitions of all divided Parties, should be, to overcome each
other with reason, moderation, and such self denial, as becomes those, who
consider that their mutual divisions are their common distractions, and the
Union of all is every good man's chiefest interest.

4. God for the sins of our peace, brings upon us the miseries of Civil War,
and for the sins of War, sometimes thinks fit to deny us the blessing of peace,
so keeping us in a circulation of miseries; yet even then he gives the King, if
his servant, and all Loyal, though afflicted Subjects, to enjoy that peace,
which the World can neither give to them, nor take from them.

5. God will not impute to a good King the blood of his own Subjects, which
with infinite unwillingness and grief may have been shed by him, in his just
and necessary defense, but will wash him in that precious blood which has been
shed for him by his great Peacemaker, Jesus Christ, who will redeem him out of
all his troubles. For,

6. The triumphing of the Wicked is but short, and the joy of Hypocrites is but
for a moment.

7. God who alone can give us beauty for ashes, and Truth for Hypocrisy, will
not suffer us to be miserably deluded with Pharisaical washings, instead of
Christian reformings.

8. Our great deformities being within, we ought to be the severest Censurers,
and first Reformers of our own Souls.

9. Rash and cruel Reformers bring deformities upon Church and State.

10. Factions kindle fires under the pretense of Reforming.

11. God shows the World by some men's divisions and confusions, what is the
pravity of their intentions, and weakeness of their judgments.

12. They whom God's Providence shall entrust with so great, good, and
necessary a work, as is a Christian and Charitable Reformation, ought to use
such methods as wherein nothing of ambition, revenge, covetousness, or
sacriledg, may have any influence upon their Counsels.

13. Inward Piety may best teach King and people how to use the blessing of
outward Peace.

14. God whose wise and all-disposing Providence orders the greatest
contingencies of humane affairs, may make a King see the constancy of his
mercies to him, in the greatest advantages God seems to* give the malice of a
King's enemies against him.

15. As God did blast the Counsel of Achitophel, turning it to David's good and
his own ruin; so can he defeat their design who intend by publishing ought
they intercept of their King's, nothing else but to render him more odious and
contemptible to his people.

16. God can make the evil men imagine, and displeasure they intend against
their King, so to return on their own heads, that they may be ashamed and
covered with their own confusion, as with a cloak.

17. When the King's enemies use all means to cloud his honor, to pervert his
purposes, and to slander the footsteps of God's Anointed, God can give the King
an heart content to be dishonored for his sake, and his Church's good.

18. When a King has a fixed purpose to honor God, then God will honor him,
either by restoring to him the enjoyment of that power and Majesty which he had
suffered some men to seek to deprive him of; or by bestowing on him that Crown
of Christian Patience, which knows how to serve him in honor, or dishonor;
in good report, or evil.

19. If God, who is the fountain of goodness and honor, clothed with
excellent Majesty, make the King to partake of his Excellency for Wisdom,
Justice and Mercy; he shall not want that degree of Honor and Majesty which
becomes the Place, in which God has set him, who is the lifter up of his head,
and his salvation.

20. When a King knows not what to do, his eyes must be toward God, who is the
Sovereign of our Souls, and the only Commander of our Consciences; to the
protection of whose mercy, he must still commend himself.

21. God who has preserved a King in the day of Battle, can afterward show his
strength in his weakness.

22. God will be to a good King in his darkest night, a pillar of fire to
enlighten and direct him; in the day of his hottest affliction a pillar of
cloud to overshadow and protect him; he will be to him both a Sun and a Shield.

23. A King must not by any perverseness of will, but through just persuasions
of Honor, Reason and Religion, hazard his Person, Peace and Safety, against
those that by force seek to wrest them from him.

24. A King's resolutions should not abate with his outward Forces, having a
good Conscience to accompany him in his solitude and desertions.

25. A King must not betray the powers of Reason, and that fortress of his
Soul, which he is entrusted to keep for God.

26. The King whom God leads in the paths of his righteousness, he will show
his salvation.

27. When a Kings ways please God, God will make his enemies to be at peace
with him.

28. When God who is infinitely good and great, is with the King, his presence
is better than life; and his service is perfect freedom.

29. The Sovereign whom God ownes for his servant, shall never have cause to
complain for want of that liberty which becomes a Man, a Christian, and a King.

30. A Sovereign should desire to be blessed by God with Reason, as a Man; with
Religion, as a Christian; and with constancy in justice, as a King.

31. Though God suffer a King to be stripped of all outward ornaments, yet he may
preserve him ever in those enjoyments, wherein he may enjoy himself, and which
cannot be taken from him against his will.

32. No fire of affliction should boil over a King's passion to any impatience,
or sordid fears.

33. Though many say of an afflicted King, There is no help for him; yet if God
lift up the light of his Countenance upon him, he shall neither want safety,
liberty, nor Majesty.

34. When a King's strength is scattered, his expectation from men defeated,
his person restrained: if God be not far from him, his enemies shall not
prevail too much against him.

35. When a King is become a wonder, and a scorn to many, God may be his Helper
and Defender.

36. When God shows any token upon an injured King for good, then they that
hate him are ashamed, because the Lord has helped and comforted him.

37. When God establishes a King with his free Spirit, he may do and suffer
God's Will, as he would have him.

38. God will be merciful to that King, whose Soul trusts in him, and who
makes his refuge in the shadow of God's wings, until all calamities be overpast.

39. A good King, though God kill him, will trust in his mercy, and his
Saviors merits.

40. So long as an afflicted King knows that his Redeemer lives, though God
lead him through the vail and shadow of death, yet shall he fear no ill.

41. When a Captive King is restrained to solitary prayers, what he wants of
his Chaplains help, God can supply with the more immediate assistances of his
Spirit, which alone will both enlighten his darkness, and quicken his dullness.

42. God who is the Sun of Righteousness, the sacred fountain of heavenly light
and heat, can at once clear and warm the King's heart, both by instructing of
him, and interceding for him.

43. God is all fullness; From God is all sufficiency; By God is all
acceptance; God is company enough, and comfort enough; God is King of the King;
God can be also his Prophet, and his Priest; Rule him; teach him, pray in him,
for him, and be ever with him.

44. The single wrestlings of Jacob prevailed with God in that sacred Duel,
when he had none to second him but God himself; who did assist Jacob with power
to overcome him, and by a welcome violence to wrest a blessing from him. The
same assistance and success can God give, as he pleases, to the solitary
prayers and devout contentions of a Captive King.

45. The joint and sociated Devotions of others, is a blessing unto a King,
their fervency inflaming the coldness of his affections toward God, when they
go up to, or meet in God's House with the voice of joy and gladness, worshipping
God in the Unity of Spirits, and with the Bond of Peace.

46. A King ought to ask God forgiveness if guilty of neglect, and not
improving the happy opportunities he had to meet Priest and People in God's
Church.

47. A King sequestered from the opportunities of public worship, and private
ass^stance of his Chaplains, is as a Pelican in the Wilderness, a Sparrow on
the House top, and as a coal scattered from all those pious glowings, and
devout reflections, which might best kindle, preserve and increase the holy
fire of divine graces, on the Altar of his heart, whence the sacrifice of
prayers, and incense of praises might be duly offered up to God.

48. God that breaks not the bruised Reed, nor qu^ncheth the smoking Flax,
will not despise the weakness of a King's prayers, nor the smotherings of his
Soul in an uncomfortable loneness, to which he is constrained by some men's
uncharitable denials of those helps, which he may much want, and no less desire.

49. The hardness of Rebels hearts should occasion the softnings of a Captive
King's to God, and for them; Their hatred should kindle his love; Their
unreasonable denials of his Religious desires, should the more excite his
prayers unto God; Their inexorable deafness may incline God's ear to him, who
is a God easy to be entreated.

50. God's ear is not heavy, that it cannot, nor his heart hard, that it will
not hear; nor his hand shortened that it cannot help a King, his Suppliant in a
desolate condition.

51. Though God permit men to deprive a King of those outward means which he
has appointed in his Church; yet they cannot debar him from the communion of
that inward grace which God alone breaths into humble hearts.

52. When God has once made a King humble, he will teach him, he will hear
him, he will help him; for, The broken and contrite heart, God will not despise.

53. God can make a King in solitude, at once, his Temple, his Priest, his
Sacrifice, and his Altar; while from an humble heart he (alone) daily offers
up, in holy meditations, fervent prayers, and unfeigned tears to God, who
prepares him for himself, dwells in him, and accepts of him.

54. God who did cause by secret supplies, and miraculous infusions, that the
handful of meat in the vessel should not spend, nor the little oil in the
cruise fail the Widow, during the time of drought and dearth, will look on a
good King's Soul, when as a Widow, it is desolate and forsaken, will not permit
those saving Truths he had formerly learned, then to fail his memory; nor the
sweet effusions of his Spirit, which he had sometime felt, then to be wanting
to his heart, in the famine of ordinary and wholesome food, for the refreshing
of his Soul.

55. A Captive King in solitude, may rather choose to want the memory of the
saving Truths he had learned, or the sense of Spiritual comforts he had
formerly felt, than to feed from those hands, who mingle his bread with ashes,
and his wine with gall, rather tormenting, than teaching him, whose mouths are
proner to bitter reproaches of him, then to hearty prayers for him.

56. They who wrest the holy Scriptures to their Kings destruction, (which are
clear for their Subjection, and his preservation) hazard their Souls damnation.

57. Some men (under the color of long prayers) have sought to devour the
houses of their Brethren, their King, and their God.

58. A distressed King may pray against their wickedness, whose very balms
break his head, and their cordials oppress his heart, That he may be delivered
from the poison under their tongues, from the snares of their lips; from the
fire and the swords of their words; and all those Loyal and Religious hearts,
who desire and delight in the prosperity of his Soul, and who seek by their
prayers to relieve the sadness and solitude of their King.

59. Though a distressed King may chance to say in his have, That he is cast
out of the sight of God's eyes; nevertheless God may hear the voice of his
supplication, when he cries unto him.

60. If the Lord would be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who could abide
it? But there is mercy with him, that he may be feared, and therefore it is
that sinners fly unto him.

61. A King, in the acknowledgment of his sins before God, should reflect upon
the aggravation of his condition, the eminency of his place adding weight to
his offenses.

62. A King ought to beseech God to forgive as his Personal, so his Peoples
sins, which are so far his, as he has not improved the power that God gave him
to his glory, and his Subjects good.

63. God may justly, as to his overruling hand, bring a Sovereign, who in many
things has rebelled against him, from the glory and freedom of a King, to be a
Prisoner to his own Subjects.

64. Though God may permit a King's Person to be restrained, yet he may enlarge
his heart to himself, and his grace toward him.

65. God may give the comforts and the sure mercies of David to the King, who
comes far short of David's piety, yet equals David in afflictions.

66. God may make the penitent sense a King has of his sins, become an evidence
to him, that he has pardoned them.

67. The evils which at any time a King and his Kingdom has suffered, should
not seem little to him, though God punishes them not according to their sins.

68. When the sorrows of a King's heart are enlarged, in the importunity of
his prayers, if God bring him not out of his troubles, he may expostulate with
him, as having forgotten to be gracious, and to have shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure.

69. An Afflicted King may utterly faint, if he believe not to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

70. The sins of our prosperity many times deprive us of the benefit of our
afflictions.

71. It is happy for us, if the fiery trial of affliction consume the dross
which in long peace, and plenty, we have contracted.

72. Though God continue our miseries, yet if he withdraw not his grace, what
is wanting of prosperity, may be made up in patience and repentance.

73. An afflicted King, from whom God's anger is not yet to be turned away, but
his hand of justice must be stretched out still, in the exuberance of charity,
and self-condemnation, will beseech God, it may be against him, and his fathers
house, pleading the innocence of his People, and asking, What those sheep have
done.

74. Though the sufferings of a King satiate not the malice of his and the
Church's enemies, yet should their cruelty never exceed the measure of his
charity.

75. An injured King should ask grace to banish all thoughts of revenge, that
he may not lose the reward, nor God the glory of his patience.

76. A King to whom God has given a heart to forgive such as have rebelled
against him, should beseech God to forgive them what they have done against
both God and King.

77. An afflicted King, whom God in mercy remembers, and his Kingdoms,

1. In continuing the light of his Gospel, and settling his true Religion among
them.

2. In restoring to them the benefit of the Laws, and the due execution of
justice.

3. In suppressing the many Schisms in Church, and Factions in State.

4. In restoring him and his to the Ancient Rights, and glory of his
Predecessors.

5. In turning the hearts of the People to God in Piety, to the King in
loyalty, and to one another in charity.

6. In quenching the flames, and withdrawing the fuel of Civil Wars.

7. In blessing King and People with the freedom of Public Councels, and
delivering the Honor of Parliament from the insolency of the vulgar.

8. In keeping the King from the great offense of exacting any thing against
his Conscience, and especially from consenting to sacrilegious rapines, and
spoilings of God's Church.

9. In restoring him to a capacity to glorify God in doing good both to the
Church and State.

10. In bringing him again with peace, safety, and honor, to his chiefest City
and Parliament, if chased from them.

11. In putting again the sword of Justice into his hand, to punish and protect.

1. The Soul of the said King ought to praise God, and magnify his name before
his People.

2. To hold God's glory dearer to him than his Crowns.

3. To make the advancement of true Religion both in purity and power to be his
chiefest care.

4. To rule his People with justice, and his Kingdoms with equity.

5. To own ever to God's more immediate hand, as the rightful succession, so
the merciful restoration of his Kingdoms, and the glory of them.

6. To make all the World see this, and his very Enemies enjoy the benefit
hereof.

78. A restored King, as he should freely pardon, for Christ's sake, those that
have offended him in any kind: so his hand should never be against any man to
revenge what is past in regard of any particular injury done to him.

79. When a King and People have been mutually punished in their unnatural
divisions, the King should, for God's sake, and for the love of his Redeemer,
purpose this in his heart; That he will use all means in the ways of amnesty
and indemnity, which may most fully remove all fears, and bury all jealousies
in forgetfullness.

80. As a King's resolutions of Truth and Peace are toward his People: so may
he expect God's mercies to be toward him and his.

81. God will hear the King's prayer, which goes not out of feigned lips.

82. If a King commit the way of his Soul to the Lord, and trust in him, he
shall bring his desire to pass.

83. A King ought not to charge God foolishly, who will not restore him and
his; but to bless his Name, who has given and taken away; praying to God that
his People and the Church may be happy, if not by him, yet without him.

84. God, who is perfect Unity in a Sacred Trinity, will in mercy behold King
and People, whom his Justice may have divided.

85. They who at any time have agreed to fight against their King, may as much
need his prayers and pity, as he deliverance from their strivings, when ready
to fight against one another to the continuance of the distractions of his
Kingdoms.

86. The ways of Peace consist not in the divided wills of Parties, but in the
point and due observation of the Laws.

87. A King should be willing to go whither God will lead him by his
Providence, desiring God to be ever with him, that he may see God's constancy
in the Worlds variety and changes.

88. The King whom God makes such as he would have him, may at last enjoy the
safety and tranquillity which God alone can give him.

89. God's heavy wrath hangs justly over those populous Cities, whose plenty
adds fuel to their luxury; whose wealth makes them wanton; whose multitudes
tempt them to security; and their security exposes them to unexpected miseries.

90. To whom God gives not eyes to see, hearts to consider, nor wills to
embrace, and courage to act those things which belong to his glory and the
public Peace; their calamity comes upon them as an armed man.

91. Rebellious Cities and P^^^^ cannot want enemies who ab^^^^ in sin; nor
shall they be long undisarmed and undestroyed, who with a high hand persisting
to fight against God, and the clear convictions of their own Consciences, fight
more against themselves, than ever they did against their King; their sins
exposing them to Gods Justice, their riches to others injuries, their number to
Tumults, and their Tumults to Confusion.

92. A depressed King should have so much charity as to pray, That his fall be
not their ruin who have with much forwardness helped to destroy him.

93. An injured King should not so much consider either what Rebellious People
have done, or he has suffered, as to forget to imitate his crucified Redeemer;
to plead their ignorance for their pardon, and, in his dying extremities, to
pray to God his father to forgive them who know not what they did.

94. They who have denied tears to their King in his saddest condition, may
need his prayers for God's grace to bestow them upon themselves, who the less
they weep for him, the more cause they have to weep for themselves.

95. A King should pray that his blood may not be upon them and their children,
whom the fraud and faction of some, not the malice of all, have excited to
crucify him.

96. God can, and will, both exalt, and perfect, a good King by his sufferings,
which have more in them of God's mercy, than of man's cruelty, or God's own
justice.

97. God that is King of Kings, who fills Heaven and Earth, who is the
fountain of eternal life, in whom is no shadow of death, is both the just
afflicter of death upon us, and the merciful Savior of us in it, and from it.

98. It is better for us to be dead to our selves, and live in God, than by
living in our selves, to be deprived of God.

99. God can make the many bitter aggravations of a Sovereign's violent death,
as a Man, and a King, the opportunities and advantages of his special graces
and comforts in his Soul, as a Christian.

100. If God will be with the King, he shall neither fear, nor feel, any evil,
though he walk through the valley of the shadow of death.

The Fourth Century.
1. TO contend with Death, is the work of a weak and mortal man, to overcome
it, is the grace of him alone who is the Almighty and immortal God.

2. Our Savior, who knows what it is to dye with a King, as a Man, can make
the King to know what it is to pass through death to life with him his God.

3. Let a distressed King say, Though I dye, yet I know that thou my Redeemer
live for ever: though thou slayest me, yet thou have encouraged me to trust
in thee for eternal life.

4. God's favor is better to a distressed King than life.

5. As God's Omniscience discovers, so his Omnipotence can defeat the designs
of those, who have, or shall conspire the destruction of their King.

6. God can show an injured King the goodness of his will through the
wickedness of theirs that would destroy him.

7. God gives a distr^ssed King leave, as a man, to pray, that the cup [of
death] may pass from him; but he has taught him, as a Christian, by the example
of Christ, to add, Not my will, but thine be done.

8. God, by resolving the King's will into his own, can make them both become
one.

9. The desire of life should not be so great in a distressed King, as that of
doing or suffering God's Will in either life, or death.

10. God can make a King content to leave the Worlds nothing, that he may come
really to enjoy all in him, who has made Christ unto him, in life gain, and in
death advantage.

11. Though the Destroyers of their King forget their duty to God and him, yet
he ought to beseech God not to forget to be merciful to them.

12. There is no profit in a King's blood, nor in gaining his Kingdoms from
him, if they lose their own souls that do it.

13. An injured King ought to pray for such as have not only resisted his just
power, but wholely usurped and turned it against ^im, That though they may have
d^served, yet that they may not rece^ve, damnation to themselves.

14. God that made his Son a Savior to many that crucifi^d him, while at once
he suffered violently by them, and yet willingly for them, will at the instance
of a devoted King, hear the voice of Christ's blood call louder for Regicides,
than the cry of the King's blood against them.

15. Let a King pray for his murderers, That God would prepare them for his
mercy by due convictions of their sin, and not let them at once deceive and
damn their own Souls by fallacious p^etensions of Justice in destroying him,
while the conscience of their unjust usurpation of their King's power chiefly
tempts them to use all extremities against him.

16. The mercies of Regicides are very false, and so very cruel unto their
King, who, while they pretend to preserve him, meditate nothing but his ruin.

17. God can deal with bloodthirsty and deceitful men otherwise than they
deserve, by overcoming their cruelty with his compassion, and the charity of
their devoted King.

18. When God makes inquisition for Royal blood, the Souls which he sindeth
penitent, though polluted, he can sprinkle with the blood of his Son, and then
the destroying Angel shall pass over them.

19. Though Regicides in design think any Kingdom on earth too little to
entertain at once both themselves and their King; yet he ought to pray that the
capacious Kingdom of God's infinite Mercy may at last receive them both.

20. When King and People be reconciled in the blood of the same Redeemer, they
shall come at last to live far above the ambitious desires which begat mortal
enmities between them.

21. When the hands of Regicides shall be heaviest and cruellest upon their
King, if he fall into the arms of God's tender and eternal mercies, he shall
be safe.

22. What is cut off of a King's life in the miserable moment of a violent
death, may be repayed in God's ever-blessed eternity.

23. The King, whose eyes have seen Gods salvation, shall depart in peace.

FINIS.
CAROLI Imi Monita and Observata Britannica. The Prudential ADVICE AND
OBSERVATIONS OF King CHARLES I. Relating To the POLICY OF HIS Britannike
Kingdoms. Collected and Published BY RICHARD WATSON.

Homer Odys: ^. -- (...)
(...) --.
London, Printed for Robert Horn, 1661.

To the Reader.
Friend,
ALthough the Aphorisms, in the two former divisions, are made general, to
serve the good purpose of any Prince, and his People, to whom the like
calamities are incident, as were the sad experiments of our own, which prompted
the Spirit of Wisdom to their production; yet the guilt of our sins, and
remembrance of our sufferings, will make us easily sensible of their more
peculiar reflection upon our selves.

This Century, with the Surplusage, points so directly upon our Kingdom, as we
have no way to avoid the seasonable importunity of the Counsel and Instruction;
and, knowing what it cost His Majesty that left it, are inexcusably miserable,
if we put not the best value upon it by our observance. We hear much of
Book-Cases, and precedents, in contests and pleadings for men's personal
propriety; I know no reason, why such rules, and instances, as these, should
not be alike positive, and prevalent for Public Interest, the Prerogative of
the King, and Privileges of the Church. One calls the Sword, (...), that the
Soldier should ever have ready and at hand; I could wish this might be (...),
the King-and Parliament-mans Manual, not so much to reproach him with the
unworthiness of some of his factious predecessors, as to instruct him, by the
fatality of such examples, to a future sobriety in his votes, and moderation in
his public desires, or demands. If you and I cannot help the extravagant
deviations, that may yet hereafter wilfully be made from the assured
steadiness of this Royal Canon; we may at least be satisfied in our own
aversion from the Ordinances of men, that imagine mischief for Law, and betray
their trust, to the second ruin of their Country, a Dieu.

Your servant, RICHARD WATSON.

C. I. Monita, etc. Britannica.
The First Century.
1. THe Kings of England should call their Parliaments, not more by others
advice, and the necessity of their affairs, than by their own choice and
inclination.

2. The right way of Parliaments is most safe for the Crown, and best pleasing
to the People.

3. When some men's distempers study to kindle sparks in Parliaments, the King
may hope to extinguish them by forbearing to convene for some years.

4. The King resolving with himself to give all just satisfaction to modest and
sober desires, and to redress all public grievances in Church and State, may
hope by his freedom, and the Members moderation, to prevent all
misunderstandings, and miscariages in the Parliament he calls.

5. Elections of Parliament men, are many times carried in many places with
partiality and popular heat.

6. The King knowing best the largeness of his own heart toward his Peoples
good and just contentment, may please himself in the hopes of a good and firm
understanding, which by a Parliament may grow between him and them.

7. The King should resolve to reform what by free and full advice in
Parliament he is convinced to be amiss; and to grant what ever his Reason and
Conscience tells him is sit to be desired.

8. Though the King resolve not to employ in his affairs a questiond Minister
of State against the advice of his Parliament; yet he should not have any hand
in his death, of whose guiltlesness he is better assured, than any man living
can be.

9. The Peoples clamours for Justice in exorbitance of fury is not to be
regarded, when they mean thereby the King and Two Houses of Parliament should
Vote as they would have them.

10. A Tumultuous Parliaments after-Act vacating the Authority of the precedent
for future imitation [in case of bloud] sufficiently tells the World, that some
remorse touches them that are most implacable against the person, as if
knowing he had hard measure, and such as they would be very loath should be
repeted to themselves.

11. The tenderness and regret the King may find in his soul, for having had
any hand though very unwillingly) in shedding one man's blood unjustly (though
under the color and formalities of Justice, and pretenses of avoiding public
mischief) may be hoped to be some evidence before God and Man to all Posterity;
that he is far from bearing justly the vast load and guilt of all the blood
shed in an unhappy Civil War, as his Rebels charge upon him.

To overawe the freedom of the Houses of Parliament, or to weaken their just
Authority by any violent impressions upon them, is a design unworthy of the
King, who shall not need so rough assistance, if he have Justice and Reason on
his side.

13. Popular Tumults are not the best removers of obstructions in Parliaments,
which rather infringe all freedom or differing in Votes, and debating matters
with reason and candor.

14. When the obstinacy of Men in Parliament, resolved to discharge their
Consciences, must be subdued by Tumults, it may be feared, that by the same all
factious, seditious, and scismatical proposals against Government
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, will be backed and abetted till they prevail.

15. The riot and impatience of popular Tumults is such, that they will not
stay the ripening and season of Counsels, or fair production of Acts, in the
order, gravity, and deliberateness, besitting a Parliament; but will rip up
with barbarous cruelty, and forcibly cut out abortive Votes, such as their
Inviters, and Incouragers most fancy.

16. When Tumults are become so insolent, that there is no securing of the
King's freedom in Parliament, nor of his very person in the streets, he is not
bound by his presence to provoke them to higher boldness and contempts.

17. When, and only when, Parliaments, in their first Election, and
Constitution, sit full and free, as in all reason, honor, and Religion, they
ought to be, things may be so carried, as will give no less content to all good
men, than they wish or expect.

18. It may prove unhappy to convene a Parliament, where the Place affords the
greatest Confluence of various and vicious humors.

19. The King, when he calls a Parliament, should purpose to contribute what in
Justice, Reason, Honor, and Conscience, he can, to the happy success of it;
nor should it have any other design in him, but the General good of his
Kingdoms.

20. Triennial Parliaments, in a Kingdom, as gentle and seasonable Physic,
might (if well applied) prevent any distempers from getting head, or
prevailing, especially if the remedy prove not a disease beyond all remedy.

21. Some men, when they meet in Parliament, occasion more work than they find
to do, by undoing so much as they find well done to their hands.

22. The perpetuating a Parliament is an Act of highest confidence, whereby a
King hopes to shut out and lock the door, upon all present jealousies, and
future mistakes, but intends not thereby to exclude himself, as some may
requite him.

23. Those Subjects are unworthy of an indulgent King, who deceive his extreme
confidence by ill using any Act of Grace wherein he declares so much to trust
them, as to deny himself in a high point of his Prerogative.

24. A continual Parliament by preserving Laws in their due execution and
vigor (but no otherwise) may be thought, until Experiment show a fallacy, the
best means to keep the Commonweal in tune.

25. The agreeing Votes of the major part in both Houses of Parliament are not,
by any Law, or Reason, conclusive to the judgment of their King; nor do they
carry with them his consent, whom they in no kind represent.

26. The King is not further bound to agree with the Votes of both Houses, then
he sees them agree with the will of God, with his just Rights, as a King, and
the general good of his People.

27. The Members of Parliament, as many men, are seldom of one mind; and it is
often seen, that the major part of them are not the right.

28. The Majesty of the Crown of England is not bound by any Coronation Oath to
consent to whatever its* Subjects in Parliament shall require.

29. The Coronation Oath is discharged by the King's governing by such Laws as
his People with the House of Peers have chosen, and himself has consented unto.

30. The King should give no ear to the importunity of his Parliament, when,
instead of Reason and Public concernments, they obtrude nothing but what makes
for the interest of parties, and flows from the partialities of private wills
and passions.

31. Every Subject is bound to stand to the sentence of Parliament according to
Law.

32. Where an orderly guard is granted unto the Parliament, no account in
reason can be given for the not suppressing Tumults, but only to oppress both
the King's and the Two Houses freedom of declaring and voting according to
every man's Conscience.

33. The King should not by power protect any against the Justice of Parliament.

34. It is justifiable for men in Parliament to withdraw, who fear the
partiality of their trial (warned by any sad president) while the Vulgar
threaten to be their Oppressors, and Judgers of their Judges.

35. When Factious Tumults overbear not the Freedom and Honor of the two
Houses; but they assert their Justice against them, and make the way open for
all the Members quietly to come and declare their Consciences, no man should be
so dear unto their King, as whom he should have the least inclination to advise
either to withdraw himself, or deny appearing upon their summons.

36. Though the King may approve (in some cases) men's generous constancy and
cautiousness; yet further than that he should never allow any man's
refractoriness against the Privileges and Orders of the Houses, to whom he
ought to wish nothing more than Safety, Fullness, and Freedom.

37. Those men that despair in fair and Parliamentary ways by free
deliberations, and Votes, to gain the concurrence of the Major part of Lords
and Commons, betake themselves (when they have interest) by the desperate
activity of factious Tumults, to sift and terrify away all those Members, whom
they see to be of contrary minds to their purposes.

28. Bishops ought to enjoy their Ancient places, and undoubted Privileges in
the House of Peers.

39. Bills in Parliament are not to be brought on by tumultuary clamours and
schismatical Terrors, and passed when both Houses are sufficiently thinned and
overawed.

40. The King, beside the grounds he may have in his own judgment, has also a
most strickt and indispensable Oath upon his Conscience, to preserve the Order
of Bishops, and the Rights of the Church; to which most Sacrilegious and
abhorred Perjury, most unbeseeming a Christian King, should he ever, by giving
his Consent, be betrayed, he might account it infinitely greater misery, than
any had, or could befall him

41. The King puts much to the adventure, who by satisfying the fears and
importunities of unquiet Subjects, both to secure his friends, and overcome his
Enemies, to gain the peace of all, deprives himself of a sole power to help or
hurt any, yielding the Militia to be disposed of as the two Houses shall think
sit.

42. The Militia is the King's undoubted right, no less than the Crown.

43. The King should not desire to be safer than he wishes the Parliament and
his People.

44. The new modelling of Sovereignty and Kingship, makes the Majesty of the
Kings of England hang like Mahomet's Tomb, by a magnetique Charm, between the
power and privileges of the two Houses, in an ayery imagination of Regality.

45. The Body of Parliament, as the Moon from the Sun, receives its chiefest
light from the King.

46. Parliament Men may remember that they sit there as their Kings Subjects,
not Superiors, called to be his Counselors not Dictatours: Their summons
extends to recommend their advice, not to command his duty.

47. When the two Houses have once been in the Wardship of Tumults, their
Propositions are not to be hearkened to, until they shall have sued out their
livery, and effectually redeemed themselves.

48. When the King's judgment tells him, that any propositions sent to him are
the results of the Major part of their votes, who exercise their freedom, as
well as they have right to sit in Parliament, (and not before) he may expect
his own judgment for not speedily and fully concurring with every one of them.

49. The King cannot allow the Wisdom of his Parliament such a completeness and
inerrability as to exclude himself.

50. A Parliament, without the concurrent reason of the King, cannot beget, or
bring forth, any one complete and authoritative Act of public Wisdom which
makes the Laws.

51. A King may satisfy his Parliament and his People; but for fear or
flattery to gratify any Faction, how potent soever, were to nourish the
disease, and oppress the body.

52. The end of calling a Parliament, being to use their advice that sit, the
King ought to have charity enough to think there are wise men among them, and
humility enough to think it fit he should in some things hearken to them, whose
counsel he may want.

53. The Suns influence is not more necessary in all Natures productions, then
the King's concurrence in all Laws.

54. We are to take heed of, and beware the old leaven of Innovations masked
under the name of Reformation, which heaved at, and sometime threatened, both
Prince and Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's and King James's days.

55. Reason, Honor, and Safety, both of Church and State, command the King to
chew such morsels as a factious Parliament may present him with, before he lets
them down.

56. The King has not any ground of credulity to induce him fully to submit to
all the desires of those men, who will not admit, or do refuse, and neglect to
vindicate the freedom of their own and others sitting and voting in Parliament.

57. I know not any such tough and malignant humors in the constitution of the
English Church, which gentler Applications, than those of an Army, raised by
their Scotch fellow Subjects, might not easily remove.

58. If the Scotch sole Presbytery were proved to be the only Institution of
Jesus Christ; yet were it hard to prove, that Christ had given Subjects
commission by the Sword to set it up in any Kingdom, without the Sovereigns
consent.

59. If Presbytery in the Supremacy of Subjects be an Institution of Christ, it
is the first and only point of Christianity that was to be planted and watered
with Christian blood.

60. The many learned and pious Churchmen in England, who have been always
bred up in, and conformable to the Government of Episcopacy, cannot so soon
renounce both their former opinion and practice, only because a Party of the
Scots will needs by force assist a like Party of English, either to drive all
Ministers as sheep into the common fold of ^resbytery, or destroy them, at
least fleece them, by depriving them of the benefit of their flock.

61. What respect and obedience Christ and his Apostles paid to the chief
Governors of States, where they lived, is very clear in the Gospel; but that
He or they ever commanded to set such a parity of Presbyters, and in such a way
as some Scots endeavor, is not very disputable.

62. The Effusions of blood shed for the advancement of Scotch Presbitery runs
in a stream contrary to that of the Primitive Planters both of Christianity and
Episcopacy, which was with patient sheding of their own blood, not violent
drawing other men's.

63. Wise and learned men think, that nothing has more marks of Schism and
Sectarism than the Presbyterian way.

64. The Presbyterian Scots are not to be hired at the ordinary rate of
Auxiliaries; nothing will induce them to engage, till those that call them in
have pawned their Souls to them, by a Solemn League and Covenant

65. Some pretenders, of late, to Reformation, have intended mainly the abasing
of Episcopacy into Presbytery, and the robbing the Church of its Lands and
Revenues.

66. The Bishops and Churchmen, as the fattest Deer, must be destroyed, when
the other Rascalherd of Schisms, Heresies, etc. being lean may (by these men)
enjoy the benefit of Toleration.

67. If the poverty of Scotland might, yet the plenty of England cannot excuse
the envy and rapine of the Churches Rights and Revenues.

68. There is not any exception to which the best Kings may be so liable in the
opinion of them who are resolved to oppose them, as too great a fixedness in
that Religion, whose judicious and solid grounds, both from Scripture and
Antiquity, will not give his Conscience leave to approve, or consent to, those
many dangerous and divided Innovations which their bold Ignorance would needs
obtrude upon Him and His People.

69. There is not such an Oglio or medley of various Religions in the World
again, as those men entertain in their service, who find most fault with the
King that adheres to the establishment of the Church without any scruple as to
the diversity of their Sects and Opinions

70. It has been a foul and indeleble shame for such as would be counted
Protestants, to enforce their Lord and King, a declared Protestant, to a
necessary use of Papists or any other, who did but their duty to help Him to
defend Himself.

71. The Papists have had a greater sense of their Allegiance than many
Protestant Professors; who seem to have learned, and to practice, the worst
principles of the worst Papists.

72. The King is not to justify beyond humane errors and frailties Himself,
or his Councillors, who may have been subject to some miscarriages, yet such
as were far more reparable by second and better thoughts, than those enormous
extravagances, wherewith some men have wildred and almost quite lost both
Church and State.

73. The event of things may make evident to the People, That should the King
follow the worst Counsels that his worst Counselors might have the boldness
to offer Him, or Himself any inclination to use, He could not bring both Church
and State in three flourishing Kingdoms to such a Chaos of confusions, and Hell
of miseries, as some have done, who most clamor against his Counsels, out of
which they can not, or will not, in the midst of their many great advantages,
redeem either Him or his Subjects.

74. Some men's unsatiable desires of revenge upon the King, his Court, and his
Clergy may wholely beguile both Church and State of the benefit of any either
Retractations or Concessions He may have made.

75. Some men being conscious to their own formality in the use of our Public
Liturgy, have thought they fully expiated their sin of not using it aright, by
laying all the blame upon it, and a total rejection of it as a dead letter,
thereby to excuse the deadness of their hearts.

76. I do not see any reason, why Christians should be weary of a well-composed
Liturgy (as I hold ours to be) more than of all other things, wherein the
Constancy abates nothing of the excellency and usefullness.

77. Sure, we may as well before hand know what we pray, as to whom we pray,
and in what words, as to what sense; when we desire the same things, what
hinders we may not use the same words.

78. I ever thought, that the proud oftentations of men's abilities for
invention, and the vain affectations of ^ariety for expression^ in public
prayer, or any sacred administrations, merits a greater brand of sin, than that
which they call coldness and barrenness: nor are men in those novelties less
subject to formal and superficial tempers (as to their hearts) than in the use
of constant forms, where not the words, but men's hearts, are to blame.

79. I make no doubt but a man may be very formal in the most extemporary
variety, and very fervently devout in the most wonted expressions. Nor is God
more a God of variety than of constancy.

80. I am not against a grave, modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers
gifts, even in public, the better to fit and excite their own and the Peoples
affections to the present occasions.

81. I know no necessity why private and single abilities should quite justle
out and deprive the Church of the joint abilities and concurrent gifts of many
learned and godly men, such as the Composers of the Service Book were, who may
in all reason be thought to have more gifts and graces enabling them to compose
with serious deliberation and concurrent advice such Forms of prayers, as may
best fit the Churches common wants, inform the Hearers understanding, and stir
up that siduciciary and fervent application of their spirits (wherein consists
the very life and soul of prayer, and that so much pretended spirits of prayer)
than any private man by his solitary abilities can be presumed to have.

82. What such men's solitary abilities are many times (even there where they
make a great noise and show) the affectations* emptiness, impertinency,
^udeness, confusions, flatness, levity, obscurity, vain and ridulous
repetitions, the senseless and ofttimes blasphemous expressions, all these
burdened with a most tedious and intolerable length, do fufficiently convince
all men, but those who glory in that Pharisaical way.

83. Men must be strangely impudent and flatterers of themselves not to have an
infinite shame of what they so do and say, in things of so sacred a nature,
before God and the Church, after so ridiculous and indeed profane a manner.

84. In Sacramental administrations, Ministers own forms, to be used
constantly, are not like to be so sound or comprehensive of the nature of the
duty, as forms of public composure.

85. In Sacramental administrations and the like, every time to affect new
expressions, when the subject is the same, can hardly be presumed in any man's
greatest sufficiences not to want (many times) much of that compleatness,
order, and gravity, becoming those duties, which by the mean, are exposed at
every celebration to every Ministers private infirmities, indispositions,
errors, disorders, and defects, both for judgment and expression.

86. The want of a constant Liturgy of public composure this Church will
sufficiently feel, when the unhappy fruits of many men's ungoverned ignorance
and confident defects shall be discovered in a multitude of errors, schisms,
disorders, and uncharitable distractions in Religion.

87. The Innovations which Law, Reason, and Religion forbids, must not be
brought in and abetted, much less so obtruded as wholly to justle out the
public Liturgy of the Church.

88. The severity of those men is partial and inexcusable, who cried out of the
rigor of Laws and Bishops, which suffered them not to use the liberty of
Conscience, which they deny others, having the power in their hands.

89. They who suddenly changed the Liturgy into a Directory, seem to have
thought that the Spirit needed help for invention, though not for expressions.

90. Matter prescribed does as much stint and obstruct the Spirit, as if it
were clothed in and confined to fit words.

91. This matter of the public Liturgy is of so popular a nature, as some men
knew it would not bear learned and sober debates, least being convinced by the
evidence of Reason, as well as Laws, they should have been driven either to
sin more against their knowledge, by taking it away, or to displease some
faction of the people, by continuing the use of it.

92. They that use such severity as not to suffer, without penalty, any to use
the Common Prayer Book publicly, although their Consciences bind them to it,
as a duty of piety to God, and obedience to the Laws, I believe have offended
more considerable men* not only for their numbers and estates, but for their
weighty and judicious piety, than those are, whose weakness or giddiness they
sought to gratify by taking it away.

93. One of the greatest faults some men found with the Common prayer book, I
believe was this, That it taught them to pray so often for their King; to which
Petitions they had not Loyalty enough to say Amen, nor yet Charity enough to
forbear Reproaches, and even Cursings of Him in their own Forms, instead of
praying for Him.

94. I wish their R^pentance may be their only punishment, that seeing the
mischiess which the disuse of publ^ck Liturgies has produced, they may restore
that credit, use, and reverence to them, which by the ancient Churches were
given to Set Forms if sound and wholesome words.

95. To such as have any jealousy, that the King is earnest and resolute to
maintain the Church Government by Bishops, not so much out of piety as policy
and reason of State, this may be said, That He being (as King) entrusted by God
and the Laws with the good both of Church and State, there is no reason He
should give up, or weaken, by any change, that power and influence which in
right and reason He ought to have over both.

96. As the King is not to incline to Bishops for any use to be made of their
Votes in State Affairs; so neither should He think any Bishops worthy to sit in
the House of Peers, who would not vote according to his Conscience.

97. The King must in Charity be thought desirous to preserve that Government
in its right constitution, as a matter of Religion, wherein his judgment is
fully satisfied, that it has of all other both the fullest Scripture-grounds,
and, until the last Century, the constant practice of all Christian Churches.

98. The King that has no temptation to invite Him to alter the Government of
Bishops (that He may have a title to their Estates) will not easily believe
their pretended grounds to any new ways, who desire a change.

99. Some there are, who by popular heaps of weak light, and unlearned
Teachers, seek to overlay and smother the pregnancy and authority of that power
of Episcopal Government, which beyond all equivocation and vulgar fallacy of
names, is most convincingly set forth, both by Scripture, and all
after-Histories of the Church.

100. The King should have fair grounds both from Scripture, Canons and
Ecclesiastical examples, whereon to state his judgment for Episcopal
Government, and not permit any policy of State, or obstinacy of Will, or
partiality of Affection either to the Men, or their Function, to fix Him.

The Second Century.
1. ALL the Churches in the Christian World, which Presbyterians, or
Independants, can pretend to, are by so much fewer than others governed by
Bishops, as those in my three Kingdoms will equalize (I think) if not exceed.

2. Oppression will necessarily follow both the Presbyterian parity, which
makes all Ministers equal; and the Independent inferiority, which sets their
Pastors below the People.

3. The Britannike Bishops are as legally invested in their Estates, as any who
seek to deprive them: and they having by no Law been convicted of those crimes
which might forfeit their Estates and Livelihoods, the King, without many
personal injustices to many worthy men, can give up neither their Order, nor
Revenue.

4. Those Subjects in vain pretend to tenderness of Conscience and Reformation,
who can at once tell the King, That his Coronation Oath binds Him to consent to
whatsoever they shall propound to Him, though contrary to all the Rational and
Religious freedom which every man ought to preserve; and at the same time
persuade Him, That He must, and ought to dispense with, and roundly break, that
part of his oath which binds Him ^ agreeable to the best light of Reason and
Religion He has) to maintain the Government and Legal Rights of the Church.

5. It were strange, the King's oath should be valid in that part which both
Himself and all men in their own case esteem injurious and unreasonable, as
being against the very natural and essential liberty of their Souls, yet it
should be invalid and to be broken in another clause, wherein He thinks Himself
justly obliged both to God and Man.

6. I cannot find that in any Reformed Churches (whose patterns are so cried up
and obtruded upon the Churches under my Dominions) that either Learning or
Religion, works of Piety or Charity, have so flourished, beyond what they have
done in my Kingdoms, by God's blessing, which might make Me believe either
Presbytery, or Independancy, have a more benign influence upon the Church and
men's hearts and lives, than Episcopacy in its right constitution.

7. They who take part with the King in a Civil War, have clearly, and
undoubtedly, for their Justification, the Word of God, and the Laws of the
Land, together with their own Oaths; all requiring obedience to his just
Commands; but to none other under Heaven without Him, or against Him, in the
point of raising Arms.

8. The King should be well pleased with his Parliaments intentions, to reform
what the Indulgence of Times and corruption of Manners may have depraved.

9. The King may be willing to grant, or restore to Presbytery what with Reason
or Discretion it can pretend to in a conjuncture with Episcopacy: but, for that
wholly to invade the power, and by the Sword to arrogate, and quite abrogate
the Authority of Episcopacy, is neither just, as to that ancient Order, nor
safe for Presbytery, nor yet any way convenient for this Church or State.

10. The contentions between the Presbyterians and Independants in the
Britannike Churches, have been the struglings of those twins which one womb
enclosed, the younger striving to prevail against the elder; What the
Presbyterians hunted after, the Independants sought, and caught for themselves.

11. That the Builders of Babel should from division fall to confusion, is no
wonder: but for those that pretend to build Jerusalem to divide their tongues
and hands, is but an ill Omen, and sounds too like the fury of those Zelots,
whose intestine bitterness and divisions, were the greatest occasion of the
last fatal destruction of that City.

12. The Independants in this seemd more ingenuous than the Presbyterian
rigor, who sometimes complaining of exacting their conformity to laws became
the greatest exactors of other men's submission to their novel injunctions.

13. The King should always wish so well to Parliament and City, that He
should be sorry to see them do, or suffer, any thing unworthy such great and
considerable bodies in this Kingdom.

14. When such Bodies become restive and refractory against Sovereignty, the
King may be glad to see them scared and humbled, by Tumults or otherwise, but
not broken by that shaking; of whom He should never have so ill a thought, as
to despair of their Loyalty to Him, which mistakes may eclipse, but He should
never believe Malice can quite put out.

15. When Parliament or City are not only divided, and separated from the King,
but brought to intestine confusion within themselves, He should look upon them
as Christ did sometime over Jerusalem, as objects of his prayers, and tears,
with compassionate grief, as foreseeing those severer scatterings which will
certainly befall such as wantonly refuse to be gathered to their duty.

16. The best profession of Religion I have ever esteemed that of the Church of
England, as coming nearest to Gods Word for Doctrine, and to the Primitive
examples for Government, with some little amendment, which I have often
offered, though in vain.

17. All the lesser Factions at first were officious servants to Presbytery,
their great Master: till time, and military success, discovering to each their
peculiar advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the joint stock
of uniform Religion, pretended each to drive for their Party the trade of
profits and preferments, to the breaking and undoing, not only of the Church
and State, but even of Presbytery it self, which seemed, and hoped, at first,
to have engrossed all.

18. In the administration of Justice, the settled Laws of the Britannike
Kingdoms are the most excellent rules the King can govern by, which by an
admirable temperament give very much to Subjects industry, liberty and
happiness* and yet reserve enough to the Majesty and Prerogative of any King,
who owns his People as Subjects, not as Slaves; whose subjection, as it
preserves their property, peace and safety, so it will never diminish his
Rights, nor their ingenuous Liberties, which consist in the enjoyment of the
fruits of their industry, and the benefit of those Laws, to which themselves
have consented.

19. No Subjects can, without an high degree of guilt, and sin, divest the King
of those enjoyments, which the Laws have assigned to Him.

20. The King, in uncertain times, is to require and entreat the Prince his
Son, as his Father, and his King, that He never suffer his heart to receive the
least check against, or disaffection from, the true Religion established in the
Church of England.

21. After trial, much search, and many disputes, I conclude the Religion of
the Church of England to be the best in the World, not only in the Community,
as Christian, but also in the special notion, as Reformed, keeping the middle
way between the pomp of superstitious Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastic
Anarchy.

22. The drought being excellent, as to the main, both for Doctrine, and
Government in the Church of England, some lines (as in very good figures) may
happily need some sweetning, or polishing, which might have easily been done by
a safe and gentle hand, if some men's precipitancy had not violently demanded
such rude alterations, as would have quite destroyed all the beauty, and
proportions of the whole.

23. The King is not to entertain any aversation or dislike of Parliaments,
which in their right constitution with Freedom, and Honor, will never injure,
or diminish, his greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of love,
loyalty, and confidence between a Prince, and his People.

24. The sad effects that have issued from the insolences of popular dictates,
and tumultuary impressions, should make Parliaments more cautious to preserve
that Freedom and Honor, which belong to such Assemblies.

25. Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave, and honorable
ways, to contribute their Councels in Common, enacting all things by public
consent, without Tyranny, or Tumults.

26. After the storm of Civil dissension and War, wherein the folly and
wickedness of some men have so far ruined, as to leave nothing entire in Church
or State, to the Crown, the Nobility, the Clergy, or the Commons, either as to
Laws, Liberties, Estates, Order, Honor, Conscience or Lives, the young Prince
that succeeds, should be an Anchor, or Harbor rather to the tossed and
weather-beaten Kingdoms, a Repairer of the ruins by his wisdom, justice,
piety, and valor.

27. The King cannot (in what extremity soever) suffer any diminution of the
Churches patrimony, or alienation of it, it being without paradventure
Sacriledg* and likewise contrary to his Coronation Oath.

28. The Government of the Church, according to its constitution in England, is
a chief column, and support, to the Monarchy and Crown.

29. The greatest means to make a Parliament happy is, That the King on his
part, and the Members thereof on theirs, lay aside all suspicion one of another.

30. The Navy, and Forts, are the walls and defense of this Kingdom, which if
out of Order, all men may easily judge what encouragement it will be to our
Enemies, and what disheartning to our Friends.

31. The King can no way consent that the voices of Bishops in Parliament
should be taken away, which they have enjoyed since, and before, the Conquest,
and is one of the fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom.

32. Often Parliaments is the fittest mean to keep correspondency between the
King and his People.

33. Neither Queen Elizabeth, nor [my Father] King James did ever avow, that
any Priest, in their time, was executed merely for Religion: the inconveniences
that by this severity may fall to the King's Subjects, and other Protestants
abroad, ought to be considered by any Parliament that presses it.

34. The Parliament that takes the Government all in pieces, must do like a
skillfull Watchmaker, to make clean his Watch, who takes it asunder, puts it
again together, but leaves not out one pin, if he means to have it go better.

35. The Parliament ought not to wish more, than they can show the King the way
how conveniently it may be done.

36. It is the great expression of Trust the King has in the affections of his
Parliament unto Him, when before they do any thing for Him, He puts a
confidence in them by his gracious concessions.

37. If any person durst be so impudent as to move the King to alter the Laws,
He ought to put such a mark upon him, as from which all posterity might know
his intention was ever to govern by the Law, and no otherwise.

38. That Parliament is not to alledg against the King his deceiving their
expectation in the time of his return (having departed with their consent) who
as much, and more, have deceived Him in the condition, for proceeding in his
affairs.

39. When the King sends a Sergeant at Arms to His Parliament; He may expect
obedience, not a message.

40. In cases of Treason, no person has a privilege by being a Member of the
Parliament.

41. The King should always be as tender of any thing which may advance the
true Protestant Religion, protect, and preserve, the Laws of the Land, and
defend the just privilege and freedom of Parliaments, as of his Life, or his
Crown.

42. When the King calls his Parliament together to be witnesses of his
Actions, and privy to his Intentions, it may be certainly believed, He has not
the least thought, disagreeing with the happiness, and security of his Kingdom.

43. A loyal Parliaments concurrence with the King, it may be hoped, will so
far prevail over the hearts and understandings of the whole Kingdom (who must
look upon the Members, as persons naturally, and originally, trusted by and for
them) that it will be above the reach and malice of those, who sometimes have
too great an influence upon the People, to discredit the King's most entire
Actions, and sincere Promises, the Members being the best witnesses for the
one, and security for the other.

44. When the King, and his Parliament, have both the same ends, there will be
no other differences in the way, than what upon debate, and right
understanding, will be easily adjusted.

45. Let right Religion (in which all are most nearly concerned, and, without
care of which, they must not look for God's blessing) be vindicated and
preserved; Let the King's honor, and Rights (which have an inseparable
relation with the Subjects interests) be vindicated, and if ravished from Him,
restored; Let the Subjects Liberties, Properties, Privileges, (without which a
good man should not desire to be a King) be secured, and confirmed, and there
is nothing the Parliament can advise the King to, wherein He should not meet
them, that together they may inform Posterity, how much their trust and
confidence in each other, is a better expedient for the Peace and Preservation
of the Kingdom, than Fears and Jealousies.

46. During any Session of Parliament, the King may expect (as most proper for
the duty of Subjects) that Propositions for the remedies of evils ought rather
to come to Him, than from Him; yet such should be his Fatherly care of his
People, that He should rather lay by any particular respect of his own dignity,
than that any time should be lost for the preventing of those threatening evils,
which cannot admit the delays of the ordinary proceedings in Parliament.

47. That the Subjects cannot be obliged to obey an Act, Order, or Injunction
of Parliament, to which the King has not given consent, is the King's known
and unquestionable Privilege, and, being so, is a Privilege of the Kingdoms.

48. The Kings power is invested in Him by the Law, and by that only He should
desire to maintain it.

49. The King that gives away the Militia, parts with the power of the Sword,
entrusted to Him by God, and the Laws of the Land, for the protection and
government of his People, thereby at once devesting Himself, and dis-inheriting
his Posterity of that right and Prerogative of the Crown, which is absolutely
necessary to the Kingly Office, and so weakens Monarchy in his Kingdom, that
little more than the name and shadow of it will remain.

50. For the abolishing Archbishops, Bishops, etc. a Britannike Sovereign
cannot give his consent, as He is a Christian, and a King.

51. The Britannike Kings have so inseparably woven the right of the Church
into the liberties of the rest of the Subjects, as the Government by
Archbishops, and Bishops, cannot be abolished.

52. The King cannot consent to the alienation of Church Lands, because it
cannot be denied to be a sin of the highest Sacriledg; as also, that it
subverts the intentions of so many pious Donors, who have laid a heavy curse
upon all such profane violations. Beside which matter of Conscience, it will
be a prejudice to the public good, many of the Subjects having the benefit of
renewing Leases at much easier Rates, than if those possessions were in the
hands of private men: Nor is it to be omitted, the discouragement which it will
be to all learning and industry, when such eminent rewards shall be taken away,
which now lie open to the Children of meanest persons.

53. The exercise of mercy should be no more pleasing to the King, than to see
both Houses of Parliament consent for his sake, that He should moderate the
severity of the Law, in an important case.

54. No Freeborn Subject of England can call Life, or any thing he possesses
his own, if Power, without Right, daily make new, and abrogate the old
fundamental Law of the Land.

55. I am confident no learned Lawyer will afirm, that an impeachment can lie
against the King, all the Laws going in his Name, and one of their Maxims
being, that The King can do no wrong.

56. The Commons of England was never a Court of Judicature.


