THE DOOR OF TRVTH OPENED: OR, A brief and true Narrative of the occasion how
Mr Henry Burton came to shut himself out of the Church-doors of Aldermanbury:

Published in Answer to a Paper, called, TRVTH SHVT OVT OF DOORS:

For the Vindication of the Minister and People of Aldermanbury, who are in
this paper most wrongfully and unjustly charged; and also for the undeceiving
of the Vnderwriters, and of all those that are misinformed about this business.

In the Name, and with the consent of the whole Church of Aldermanburie.

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

1 Cor. 11.16. But if any man seem to be contentions, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.

1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Pauls-Church-yard,
1645.

THE Door of Truth opened.
IT has pleased M. Burton in the later end of his Paper, to call his Narrative
an unpleasing discourse. A fit Epithete for such a paper. Unpleasing we believe
to God himself; unpleasing to all meek, humble and peaceable Christians;
unpleasing to his quondam loving neighbors and friends of Aldermanbury;
unpleasing to most of the underwriters; and we conceive it will at last become
an unpleasing discourse to M. Burton himself, when the judicious and impartial
Reader shall clearly and fully understand the true grounds and causes of his
discontinuing to preach his Catechisticall Lecture in Aldermanbury; which
before we come to declare, we desire the Reader to take notice of the Title of
the Narrative, which is, Truth shut out of doors: or, A brief and true
Narrative of the occasion and manner of proceeding of some of Aldermanbury
Parish, in shutting their Church-doors against me.

In which Title M. Burton does seem to assume to himself the name of Truth
(which is a very high and sacred Title) and to make the shutting of him out of
doors, to be the shutting of Truth out of doors: which how fit it is for any
humble and self-denying Minister to speak of himself, we leave it to the Reader
to judge.

And besides, This Title lays a very heavy charge upon the Churchwardens
and others of Aldermanbury, as if they were now become enemies to the truth, as
if they had shut the Church-doors upon truth, insomuch as that it is cried up
and down the streets of the City, Truth shut out of the doors of Aldermanbury,
to the great disparagement and defamation of us all; so great, as that we
conceive it to be a high breach of the ninth Commandment, and we expect
Reparation. And as he hopes in this his Narative that M. Calamy will find just
cause publicly to confess at his next day of humiliation, Let us be ashamed
and confounded, so he must give us leave to say, that we expect, and that more
justly the like from him.

Especially, if the Reader will be pleased to consider the Texts of Scripture
that are subjoyned to the Title page. In which he does secretly seem to
insinuate (for to what purpose else are they there put?) That because he is not
suffered to preach any longer at Aldermanbury (upon just causes hereafter to be
mentioned) That therefore, Truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot
enter. That therefore, We are a rebellious people, lying children, that will
not hear the Word of the Lord, who say to the Prophets, Prophecy not right
things. And like to the Scribes and Pharisees, who commanded Peter, James and
John not to teach in the Name of Christ. Now whether this be not a perverting
of Scripture, and an unparalled affront to Aldermanbury, we leave it unto the
unbiassed Reader to determine. In the last text he justifies himself, in the
words of Paul, Act. 20.27. which puts us in mind of a Book written by him of
his life and sufferings, wherein he is pleased to compare his sufferings with
the sufferings of St Paul, and in many things to prefer his sufferings above
Paul's sufferings. And yet we do not write this, as if we would any ways
undervalue M. Burtons great sufferings, for which we bless God, and for which
we shall always honor him, and we do believe that therein he did great
service to the Churches of Jesus Christ. But howsoever we would desire him to
remember what Epist. 11. Epist. 13.
Cyprian says of many Confessors (especially of one Lucianus) that had
endured much for Christ's cause in times of persecution, and yet afterward in
times of peace, presuming upon their former sufferings, did venture to do many
things which did much tend to the great disturbance of the Church. And what he
writes to Maximus and Nicostrat^^, and other Confessors, that after their
glorious sufferings for Christ, made a schism in the Church, and fell away to
the Novation heresy. Cypr. epist. 44. And what Eusebius says of one Natalius,
that had endured much for the truth, and yet afterward fell into a grievous
error, till God was pleased by his Argels to whip him into the truth again
Eusebius. l 5 cult.


But leaving the Title page, let us come to the Narrative it self.

In which there are diverse things supposed, and taken for granted, which are
not to be supposed; and many things misreported and misrepresented. And
therefore that the Reader may have the whole matter set before them in the
right colors, we are necessitated to show what those false suppositions and
false representations are. And M. Burton must not be offended with us for
speaking the truth. We profess that we write these things with grief of heart.
For we know that the common enemy will take advantage by our differences; but
woe be to him by whom those offenses come. For our parts we declare to all the
world, that had it not been that Truth would have been quite shut out of doors
by our silence, we would not have answered this Narrative of Truth shut out of
doors. But to come to the matter it self.

1. First, It is taken for granted thorowout the whole Narrative, That the
shutting of Independency out of doors, is the shutting of truth out of doors.
And that the desiring of M. Burton to forbear to preach his Congregationall
way, is to desire him to refrain from preaching the truth of God. And that if
M. Burton should balk this controversy, he should balk a necessary truth of
God, and should shut up truth close prisoner. And many such like expressions,
which will not we hope any whit move a wise and judicious Reader. For an
opinion is not therefore a truth, because M. Burton says it is. Bold and
confident assertions may work upon those that have men's persons in admiration:
but a wise and understanding Christian will consider not so much who speaks,
nor the confidence of him that speaks, as the weight and strength of the
arguments upon which his confidence is grounded. There was an Athenian that
laid confident claim to every ship that came to the haven, and yet he had no
true right to any, and was accounted a mad man for his labor. The reformed
Churches know no such truths of God. An he himself (we believe) has not been
many years of this judgment. But howsoever let not M. Burton assume such a
high measure of confidence to himself, as to make his judgment, and the truths
of God to be terms convertible. The world is too wise to believe any such
thing. And many will say that this is self worship and self-idolatry.

2. Secondly, M. Burton does take it for granted, That he is bound to preach
every truth of God that comes in his way, in this his Catechisticall Lecture;
and that he is not to shut up any truth close prisoner (as his phrase is) And
he blesses God that the Committee when they met together, not one of them did
use a word of persuasion to him to balk any one truth in opening and plowing up
the Scriptures. But we are informed by some of the Committee, that upon his
first admission to this Lecture, he was desired not to meddle with the points
in controversy (which he is pleased to call the truths of God) And that he did
promise so to do, or at least by his silence gave his consent. And we can upon
certain grounds assure the Reader, that M. Burtons meddling with the points in
difference is much displeasing to most of them, who profess that they will not
countenance him, nor maintain him in it. And that they sent one of their
Committee to M. Burton, since his said Lecture ceased, to persuade him to
desist from preaching his Independent opinions amongst us. And therefore we
wonder that M. Burton durst write after such a manner concerning the Committee.
Howsoever, if M. Burton will yet persevere in this his resolution, and this be
also the judgment of his brethren (as we hope it is not) mark the mischiefs
that must necessarily follow hereupon.

1 All underwriters, that are not Independents in their judgments, must be
forced to study this case of conscience, Whether they can with a safe
conscience contribute to the maintenance of that Lecturer, which is engaged in
his conscience to preach up that opinion which they think disagreeable to the
Word of God, whenever it comes in his way?

2. This mischief also will follow, That all Presbyterian Ministers, in whose
Churches these our brethren preach, with such a resolution made known, must
either by their silence be accessory to the misguiding of their people, or by
confuting them, make their Pulpits places of strife and contention, to the
great disturbance of piety and peace, or do a third thing which will not be
very pleasing to them or us.

But it seems strange to us, that M. Burton should think himself bound to
preach his particular opinion in every Congregation: And that all truths (as he
calls them) are to be preached at all times, in all places. Is it not sufficient
to preach his private judgment to his own gathered Church, but he must think
himself bound in conscience to come to infect (for so we judge it) all
Congregations wheresoever he comes? If this should be the principle likewise
(which God forbid) of all his brethren, let the wise Reader consider what a
City-devouring fire this principle would quickly kindle.

3. Thirdly, M. Burton does take it for granted, that he did preach no
otherwise, Sept. 23. 1645. then is set down in the Narrative. But certainly, if
he had preached only, as he says, against man worship, and will worship,
blind obedience and resting finally upon men's determinations in matters of
religion, without looking into the rule of the Word; those of us that heard
him, would not have taken the least offense at it: For we have often, and often
heard the same doctrine from our own Minister. And therefore we think it very
rashly done of him, to charge M. Calamy, That he should in the face of God, and
of the Congregation, bring this truth as a grievous sin to be bewailed: for he
cannot but know that this is very unlikely, if not impossible to be true.

But there are diverse others besides the Parish Clerk (as M. Burton by way of
scorn calls him) that are ready to depose, that he did preach otherwise then is
set down in his Narrative. And here we cannot but take notice how Bishop-like
he lords it over the poor Parish Clerk, telling us of a garment of many pieces
patched together. But surely it does ill become his gravity to jest at a man's
calling, and worse become his goodness to trample a poor godly man thus under
his foot. And let the Reader judge, whether this discourse of the Parish Clerk
were not sewed into the Narrative, as an old patch into a new garment, for it
comes in very abruptly. But to the business. There are those amongst us, that
will depose that M. Burton said, That for a people to wait upon man for a form
to worship God by, was Idolatry. Nay, For a people to wait upon Parliament or
Assembly, for a form to worship God by, was worse then corporal Idolatry.

Ob. But, says M. Burton in his conference with M. Calamy, Will you not give
credit to me, as well as to those that informed against me?

Answ. If he says, That these things are not in his notes, or that he intended
not to preach thus, we will believe him. But if M. Burton says directly, He
did not preach thus; We conceive it a very unsafe thing for a man to affirm a
Negative, when three or four will witness the Affirmative. One that heard him
at that time, tells, that when he said, Mistake me not, he added presently, I
scorn mistakes. And the party perceived he began a little to be angry. And a
man in a passion may say that which was not in his Notes. But if he thinks this
harsh dealing, let him but review his Narrative, and consider how he deals with
M. Calamy, believing and publishing to all the world what he collected out of
his Sermon, but from one man, who is one, as we hear, of his own Congregation;
whereas we have witness, more then one, for what we say. And also not
believing that M. Calamy was not acquainted with his shutting out (as he calls
it) though the Churchwardens came on purpose to certify him of it. And though
he himself affirmed it to him: (...) the conference he had with him, and though
he has no witness to prove the contrary. So great is his uncharitableness.

4. Fourthly, It is taken for granted, that M. Calamy in his Fast Sermon,
September. 24, 1645. did call upon his people to be ashamed and confounded, as
for diverse other things, so amongst the rest for this, That whilst the
Parliament is sitting, and laboring to settle things, and while the Assembly
of Ministers are studying to settle Religion, and laboring to heal our
breaches, should be separating from us; Thus much he confesses he said. But
now whereas it is added he should say, And that you may be sure your Scribe did
mistake M. Calamies Sermon, consider that one passage, though of no great
consequence. M. Calamie said, Is not this to crowd people into separated
Congregations? And your Notary has it, Into secret Congregations.
That this is a sin to be ashamed for, That while a house is a purging, men
should separate from the defilements, and not wait to see what the purging
will be. He conceives this to be either the wilful, or ignorant mistake of his
Notary. And he desires M. Burton would name another witness, if he can: For
the Apostle says, Receive not an accusation against an Elder, under two or
three witnesses. He never thought, much less preached, that we should join
with a defiled Church in her defilements. It is one thing to join with a
Church in her corruptions: Another thing to separate from a true Church,
because of some defilements that may be in it. And this is that for which we
think people ought to be ashamed and confounded; Because for some few, (and
those but supposed) defilements they separate not only from defilements, but
from the true Churches of Jesus Christ, and engage themselves into separated
Congregations, and do not wait and tarry to see what Reformation the
Parliament will make. And this is no more then five (as we remember) of your
brethren have written, as their judgment in print. And therefore what M.
Burton writes in his margin, to prove that every one ought to day, before to
morrow, to separate from present defilements, is but to fight with his own
shadow. For though we must separate from the defilements of a Church, yet we
are not to separate from a Church, for every defilement that is in it. The
Church of Corinth had many defilements in it, as many we believe as the Church
of Alderman-bury; And so had diverse of the Churches to which Christ wrote. And
yet neither Christ, nor his Apostles does persuade the people to separate from
those Churches, because of the defilements. And if this doctrine were true
doctrine, we believe men will soon find cause to separate from some of their
Churches, A letter written by M John Bachelor.
as well as ours. The time was when in print, the Church of Alderman-bury was
accounted a true Church, even by one of his own way. And we can assure him,
That it is much purer now, then it was then.

But he adds in his Margin. That each man in his place, and each Minister in
his place, must forthwithfall to a purging out the defilements, not knowing,
what others purging may prove to be, and how long we may wait, when in the
interim we and our house may perish in our defilements. But to this we answer.

First, That we would gladly know what these defilements are, that he says are
still in our Churches.

Secondly, How will he prove that these defilements are of such a
soul-destroying nature, that they that live in them, must necessarily perish?

Thirdly, Does he not directly tell us in this passage, That we must not wait
to see what Reformation the Parliament will make? And is not this an
unexpressible prejudice to their proceedings?

Fourthly, It is our opinion, That every Minister, and every man ought so to
administer, and so to partake of Gods ordinances, as not to sin in the
administration, and participation of them. And this they ought to do to day,
before to morrow. But we conceive, and, if it were a fit opportunity, would
prove, that this may be done without separation from us. It is one thing to
keep our selves pure from pollution, another thing to gather Churches out of
Churches, and to set up a new frame of Government, according to the private
judgment of the Minister and people of every particular Church. This we
conceive to be his practice, and of dangerous consequence; and for this we
think he has no warrant in the Word, but that he ought to wait yet longer
upon the Magistrates establishment. The Scripture gives much power to
Magistrates, in purging of Churches, when corrupted: As we may perceive by the
examples of Asa, Hezekiah, and Josiah.

But we are very glad to read in his Margin, that he makes mention of our
solemn League and Covenant. And we hope he will remember that he has sworn
to endeavor the extirpation of Heresy, Schism, and profaneness, and to bring
the Churches of God, in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity, etc.

M. Burton goes on in repeating M. Calamies sermon, according as his one only
witness did dictate unto him. And he says, That he preached that we should
likewise be ashamed and confounded, that any should preach, That it is Idolatry
to wait upon the Parliament or Assembly, and that it is above all corporal
Idolatry, to wait upon them till they settle a Government. And here he
triumphs exceedingly, and insults, (such is his spirit) as much over M. Calamy,
as he did before over the Parish Clerk. He says, he hopes that M. Calamy will
in his next solemn day of Humiliation, find just cause publicly to confess,
Let us be ashamed and confounded. And in another part of his Narrative,
speaking of the same thing, he says, O that I might hear a second voice in
Alderman-bury pulpit, and that on the like solemn Fast day; Let us be ashamed
and confounded, that we have bin ashamed of the truth, more precious then our
lives, and have shut it ourt of doors, etc.

But let M. Burton tell us, whether he be in jest or in good earnest. Does he
think that any meek, or humble Christian, will approve of this language? For
our parts we will not censure him, but mourn for him. Does he not think that
this is a sin to be bewailed, that it should be preached, That it is worse
then corporal Idolatry, to wait upon the Parliament, to see what Government
they will settle? Is this Doctrine a Truth more precious then our lives? Is
this doctrine a clear and undoubted truth? For so much he seems to say in
express terms in his Narrative, in these words --; And being at the very
worst, a clear and undoubted truth: which words we cannot but wonder at, and we
believe when the Reader ponders them, he will stand amazed at them.

Object. But M. Burton says, That he did not preach as it is here set down.

Answ. But to this it is answered. 1. That now he owns it as it is here set
down as a clear and an undoubted truth. 2. That M. Calamy did not name him by
name. But to this he replieth in his conference with M. Calamy, That he needed
not to name you, for all that heard both you and me, understand plainly enough,
you did mean me, so fresh it is in memory. But in this answer of his he does
seem ingenuously to confess, that he said the words he denied he said. For if
he said no such thing, and spoke nothing in derogation either of Parliament or
Assembly, but made honorable mention of both; How is it possible that they
that heard him, and M. Calamy, should suppose that M. Calamy meant him? This
very answer of his, does seem to confess a guiltiness. But to put him out of
doubt, it is answered. 3. That M. Calamy has good proof of others that have
preached to this effect, though he had not. And therefore had just cause to say
so, although he had not preached at all the day before. It is no wonder to
hear men preach up their own practice. No wonder to hear those men preach
against peoples tarrying to gather into separated Churches, who daily gather
people into separated Churches.

But he deeply charge M. Calamy in diverse places of his Narrative, because he
did not send to him to know the truth of those things, whether he preached them
or no, before he spoke of them in the pulpit.

But it is answered. That if indeed no other had ever preached to the same
effect, or if he had named M. Burton by name, or if he had said it had bin
preached in that pulpit the day before, or if it had bin preached in another
Church before other people, then indeed there might be some ground and reason
for this accusation.

But seeing that others have preached the like, and M. Burton was not named,
and that it was about a sermon preached in his own Church, before some of his
own people, of whose faithfulness he had no reason to doubt: And seeing it was
only spoken in a general way, M. Burtons applying of it to himself, does give
us just cause to think that he was guilty of it.

Fifthly, It is taken for granted, that the Churchwardens said unto M. Burton,
That they were sorry for what they had done, if they had done amiss. But they
say that they did not say, that they were sorry for the thing they had done,
but only for some circumstances about the manner of doing of it. And they do
now further tell him, that upon diligent search made, they cannot find out by
whose authority and allowance he first came to preach his Catechisticall
lecture amongst them. M. Calamy says, That none ever spoke to him, to desire
his consent. And our former Churchwardens deny, that ever they gave their
approbation. And therefore they suppose, he has no such cause to take it ill,
if they upon just grounds forbid him to do that which he never had warrant,
nor authority from them to do at all.

Sixthly, And especially M. Burton takes it as a thing supposed, that his
sermon preached Sept. 23. 1645. was the cause, and the only cause why he was
desired to forbear preaching at Aldermanbury. Whereas this sermon was rather an
occasion then a cause; And if a cause, yet not the only nor chief cause. The
Reader must know, that M. Burton has often and often preached his own private
opinion of Independency, in his Lecture at Alderman bury, to the great offense
and scandal of some of us, that have hereupon resolved never to hear him
more, because we heard such things, which as we thought, were contrary to
truth. And therefore M. Burton need not wonder what spirit haunted those walls
and thresholds, that so few people came to hear him in that place. Surely it
was the spirit of error that haunted them, and drove them away. For sometimes
(as we are informed by those of our own Congregation that heard him) he would
urge a necessity of entering into a Church Way, and that there is no expectation
of salvation without it. And that it was as necessary to be joined in
Church Fellowship, as with Christ the head. Another time, That a member that
walks out of Church Fellowship is unusefull to it self, as if a foot and a leg
be out of joint, it is unuseful: for any that walks singly and alone, without
being in Communion and in a Church Way, He is out of the body of Christ, and so
is unusefull to himself and others. Again, You complain you grow not in grace:
but join in a Church Way, here is growth in grace. A member out of his proper
place grows not. Another time, That none ought to be admitted to the Supper of
the Lord, but such as were entered into a Church Way, and had covenanted in a
Congregationall-way. And that none could receive the Sacrament aright, that had
not first taken the Church Covenant. And that to join in a Church Way, is more
then to be a Protestant at large, because they ought to watch over one another,
and those that refused to join, were as Cain, that are ready to say, Am I my
brothers keeper? They that wrote his Sermons do also tell us, That he made
sundry Sermons to press the necessity of gathering Churches, and covenanting
together. They tell us likewise that he showed how dangerous it was for men to
set up Churches Provincial, National, or Parochial. This was Antichristian
and Babylonish, set up by the Pope, that all in a Parish might come to Mass.
Another time he spoke against paying of Tithes, as Popish, etc. Such things as
these he often and often, as occasion served, did not spare to preach and urge
with great vehemence: Insomuch as many of us, and others of the City did resort
to M. Calamy, and told him that they wondered how he could with a safe
conscience suffer such things to be preached, which they knew to be so contrary
to his judgment. Upon this M. Calamy at one time got a reverend Minister of M.
Burtons acquaintance to go to him, and to deal mildly with him about these
things, and to represent the scandal of the people. But all the answer, as he
remembers, returned was, that M. Burton thought himself engaged to preach the
kingdom of Christ. Upon another time M. Calamy did likewise speak to one of his
brethren of that way about it, and all the answer to his utmost remembrance
that he had, was this, M. Calamy, you know the man, and of what nature he is,
it is in vain to speak to him, he will do what he list: And it may be he
preaches thus to see whether you will cast him out, or no. At another time M.
Calamy spoke with another of the brethren of that way; and his advice was, To
get a meeting of M. Burton, and the rest of his brethren, and they would see if
they could persuade him to desist from preaching his Church Way in
Aldermanbury. But notwithstanding all this, M. Burton continued in his Tuesday
Lecture, upon all occasions promoting his Congregationalway, till at last, upon
occasion of his Sermon, September. 23. 1645. The Churchwardens sent to him the
day before he was to preach, to forbear preaching any more at Aldermanbury. And
this they did without acquainting M. Calamy with it, whatsoever M. Burton
thinks to the contrary. Of which, as soon as M. Calamy heard, he sent for the
Churchwardens, and obtained of them upon the Tuesday morning (which was the
next day after) to go to M. Burton, and to declare the whole truth to him, how
it stood, That M. Calamy was a stranger to the business: That upon M. Calamies
entreaty they came to him, assuring of him that if he would be pleased to
forbear the points in difference, and to preach Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, the doctrines of faith, repentance, etc. they would willingly and
cheerfully suffer him to preach. But he answered, as it is set down in the
Narrative, That he was not to be restrained from preaching any truth of God.
Now let all indifferent Readers judge, whether M. Burton by his former
practices, and his last answer does not willingly and wilfully shut himself out
of the Church doors of Aldermanbury.

For though he supposes his Congregationall-way to be the truth of God, yet it
is never the more the truth of God, because he supposes it. And if he think
it his duty to preach those truths (which we think errors) in Aldermanbury:
The same consciences that obliges him to preach those truths, will oblige M.
Calamy, who thinks them errors, to preach against them. And by this means the
course and fruits of his Ministry will be much hindered, and the Pulpit made a
stage of contention, and to speak uncertain sounds; one thing upon the Tuesday,
another upon the Lords day. We appeal to M. Burton, whether ever he did, or
ever will give leave to a Presbyterian Minister to preach his Presbyterian
opinions to his people, that he has gathered? Or if any should occasionally
preach them to his people, whether he would not think himself bound in
conscience to confute them? We demand further, Whether he does not think it
his duty, to hinder (as far as he can) that a Presbyterian Minister,
resolving to preach his way (as supposing it the truth of Christ) should be
suffered to preach once a fortnight to his people. And whether, if he should be
a means to hinder it, he can be said to shut Truth out of doors? Let M. Burton
seriously study these questions, and not think it hard measure, that he is not
suffered to do that in Aldermanbury, which he would not suffer to be done in
his own Congregation.

But further, we would have him to know, that they that are for the
Presbyterian government, do firmly believe that that which they hold has clear
light out of the Scriptures, and that they are able to prove it: and that the
Congregational-way is an invention of man: and that there is no Word of God for
a Church Covenant: for gathering Churches out of Churches; for assuming all
Church power within themselves independently: And that this is a way and means
to divide the body of Christ into as many schisms, as there be Congregations.
And he must not think that the Presbyterian Ministers are so void of a good
conscience, so cruel to the souls of their people, so ashamed of the truths
they hold, as to suffer them to be trampled under feet, and their people to be
seduced by one that shall preach in their own Pulpits, with a profession to
preach down the Presbyteriall government, and they in the mean time sit quiet,
and betray the truth, and their people by their wicked silence.

Add to this what was said before about the Committee, and diverse other things
forementioned, and then it will appear to all peaceable and unprejudiced
Readers, that there is just cause that M. Burton, continuing in this mind and
judgment, should not continue his Lecture at Aldermanbury.

7. The seventh thing that is misrepresented and mis-stated, is, the
conference that was between M. Burton and M. Calamy in private. Of which that
there may be a right and full representation, the Reader must know, That when
M. Calamy perceived by M. Burtons answer upon the Tuesday, that he was resolved
not to cease preaching the points in difference (and as one very near him, told
some of us, that M. Burton would not be muzled up) he sadly weighed all things
that might happen hereupon.

On the one side he considered, that in this uncharitable age, even good people
would be ready to censure him very deeply (though never so innocent) and charge
him as the chief, if not the sole anthour of what was done, and that the times
were too too full of divisions already, and that there was little need of new
rents and schisms. And therefore he concluded with himself to do all that he
could with a safe conscience for M. Burtons readmission.

On the other side, he considered, That this was done without his privity or
knowledge, and that the hand of God was in it, and that if now he should be
isntrumental for his readmission without a promise, or at least a fair
overture upon good ground (for he did not expect a formal promise) That M.
Burton would preach only such things wherein they did both agree, he should for
the time to come be accessory to all the mischiefs that might happen, if any of
his people should either be led away, or if not quite led away, yet puzzled and
ensnared by what M. Burton should preach. And this his scruple was the more
increased, because M. Burton had already taken one of his Congregation into his
Church, without ever acquainting him with it (which is surely a great injury to
M. Calamy, and so great, as that we have good cause to believe, that few of his
brethren would have done the like.) By this he perceived that M. Burton was
resolved to catch (we will not say, to steal) as many as he could from his
Church. Now here was the case of conscience, How far he might be active in M.
Burtons readmission. He consulted with godly, learned. He was told, That as
things then stood, he could not with a safe conscience entreat for his
readmission, unless he had some ground to believe that M. Burton would not
preach his Congregationall-way amongst his people. Upon this the Wednesday
after this Tuesday, M. Francis Shute coming to visit M. Calamy, who was sick,
M. Calamy communicated the whole business to him, and desired him to relate it
to the Committee, that they might have a right understanding of it, and to
endeavor that the Committee might use their interest in M. Burton to prevail
with him to forbear the points in difference, that so he might bear admitted.
How far M. Francis Shute did manifest his dislike of M. Burtons meddling with
his Congregationall way in his preaching at Aldermanbury, we will not relate.
But as M. Calamy conceives, upon M. Shutes applying himself to the Committee,
proceeded the conference spoken of in the Narrative. For M. Shute came
afterward and told him that M. Burton would come to him. But he replied, That
as soon as he was well he would go to M. Burton. But M. Burton prevented him.

Little did M. Calamy think that such a private conference should have been
made public, and cried up and down the City, and therefore he had no witness
on his side to attest what he said. But seeing it is the will of God to have it
so, and to suffer the fire of contention to kindle more and more, let the pious
and peaceable Reader read over the conference, and then tell us.

1. Whether most of the conference be not already answered: Whether it does not
mis-represent the whole business, and take the six things before named for
granted, which we have abundantly proved to be far otherwise.

2. Whether in this conference M. Burton does not discover an Episcopal
spirit, rather then M. Calamy. Indeed M. Calamy did not enumerate the
particular things, for which we took offense at some of M. Burtons Sermons: but
the reason was, because he was desirous to accommodate and reconcile
differences, and not to increase them. And this was the reason likewise, why
his Clerk was not sent for, because, as M. Francis Shute then said, it would
but increase the contest between M. Burton and him, and make the breach wider.

Add further, That M. Calamy thinks that M. Burton has misplaced many of his
Questions, putting one before another, to the great prejudice of the
conference, and interlaced many things, which (as he remembers) M. Burton did
not say at the conference, and has left out many things that M. Calamy did say.

One thing M. Calamy charge him withal, of which we will give the Reader a
fuller account. M. Calamy had preached many Sermons out of Matthew. 7.6.
concerning brotherly reproof, and the duty of watching over one another, and
had showed that this duty did belong to a Christian, as a Christian; not only
as he was a member of a Church; and had likewise showed how far they that
were members of the same Church, were to watch over one another. Hereupon he
came to justify an equal and prudent division and bounding of Congregations
by Parishes, that so by their near living together, they might the better watch
over one another. And then he came to answer that Question, Whether the living
in the same Parish did make a man a member of that Church to which his house
belongs? It would be too long to repeat what was answered. But the next Tuesday
M. Burton preached directly against bounding of Congregations by Parishes,
saying, it was Popish and Antichristian, or to that effect, as those that heard
him relate. Upon this M. Calamy when he came again to preach of this subject,
amongst other things wished that all controversies amongst brethren might be
laid aside, and that we would agree to preach Faith and Repentance. Then comes
M. Burton, and calls upon all Ministers to set up Christ's Kingdom, and
adds, But some will say, we must not meddle with these things, but only
preach faith and repentance. He answered, we must not leave out faith and
repentance, but we must preach Christ's Kingdom, for we have liberty now to
speak, etc. In reference to this story, M. Calamy not naming the story, charged
M. Burton for preaching point blanke against him. And his answer is, It is
possible I might casually do so, yet without reference to you. Whether this
answer be satisfactory, let the Reader judge. We are sure that if it be
sufficient, it will quit M. Calamy of most of the accusations that are brought
against him in the Narrative.

As for that concerning M. Lockier, we spoke since with the Pastor of the
place where he Lectures, and he assures us, that it is true that M. Lockier
has engaged himself by promise, not to meddle with the point in difference
between the Independents and Presbyterians.

And for M. Francis Shute, because we love and honor him, we will forbear to
write what we know. M. Calamy remembers not that M. Hartford should say. The
Committee thought very hard that these things should be so carried, before M.
Calamy had first spoken with M. Burton. The Committee surely are wiser, then to
condemn a man before he be heard. We believe the Committee will not own this
speech, much less thank him for it.

Whereas in the later end of the conference M. Burton says, that he was sent
home, without any hope of having the doors unlocked, we leaving him without
hope of our keeping any truth close prisoner. If these words were well weighed,
they would give a key to the Reader to unlock the whole business. M. Burton
resolves, wheresoever he preaches, to let all truths out of prison, and
whosoever will open the doors of their Church to him, must open their doors to
all his Independent opinions also. How far the Committee and the rest of the
Vnderwriters, and others whom it concerns will approve of this, we know not.
But sure we are, that whosoever reads the conference, and this answer to it,
will confess that M. Burtons high language against M. Calamy, does savor more
of self-conceitednesse then of just accusation.

8. The eighth particular which is mis-related in this Narrative, is about a
second conference, which, as M. Burton says, he procured out of love to
Aldermanbury, There were two of the Committee sent to M. Calamy, to know of
him, whether he would be pleased to suffer me to exercise there still: His
final answer to them, was; That he could not in conscience suffer me any
longer to preach there, because his people were of a contrary judgment. Thus
far M. Burton. Now that the Reader may understand how far this Relation is
from truth, we will set down M. Calamies answer, as it was written, word for
word, by one of those two, who were sent to him, and it is this,

November the first, 1645. M. James Storey, and M. Robert Dolman were sent by
the Committee to M. Calamy, about M. Burtons preaching in that Church. And his
answer was,

1. That he had no hand, directly or indirectly, in keeping of him out, and
that that business lay in the Churchwardens and Parishioners.

2. That if the Committee will send under their hands, that they are confident
upon good grounds that M. Burton will preach the truths of Christ, and not
meddle with the controversy, he will be a means to the Churchwardens, and the
Parishioners for his readmission.

By this answer it may appear to all the world how desirous M. Calamy is that
M. Burton may be restored to his Lecture amongst us. And we can further
evidence to all that are willing to receive satisfaction, that M. Calamy has
dealt with many of the Committee, and has made use of one of them in especial
manner to deal with M. Burton, to see whether he could obtain of him to join
with M. Calamy in a way of peace and unity. But M. Burton will either preach
all his mind at his Church, or not preach at all. Now whether M Burton, or M.
Calamy be in the fault, let the world judge. And that all men may likewise be
fully convinced of Aldermanburies love, and good affections toward M. Burton,
we do here profess to all that read these lines, That if M. Burton will be
pleased to forbear preaching his Congregationall way amongst us, and preach
such things, wherein both sides agree, we will re-admit him with all readiness
and cheerfulness, and will promise to endeavor upon all occasions to come and
hear him. Which offer, if M. Burton refuses, let the world judge, whether M.
Burton shuts himself, or be shut out of the Church-doores of Aldermanbury.

And thus we have given an Answer to this unpleasing Narrative, so far as it
concerns us. And it may be the answer will be as unpleasing as the Narrative.
But our Apology is, That ours is forced, his is voluntary. It is a sad thing
that Aldermanbury, that has had so much truth preached unto it, and has had
so many famous Preachers of truth, should now be cried up and down the streets
of the City, as a people that shut Truth out of Doors. Who would not rise up to
wipe off such an aspersion? Truth it is the purchase of the blood of Jesus
Christ: It is that which Christ brought into the world with him: For grace and
truth comes by Jesus Christ. Christ Jesus came into the world to bear witness
of the Truth. Truth it is the light and life of the soul, the Spouse of the
understanding, the food and sustenance of the soul: It is to be preferred
before gold and silver; pearls and precious stones are but dung and dross in
comparison of it. And therefore if we contend earnestly for the truth, and make
it appear to all men, that we are far from shutting Truth out of Doors. We
hope that all that are moderate and sober Christians will not only not accuse
us, but commend us for it. We have done. The Lord open all the doors of our
hearts, that we may receive peace and truth as unseparable guests to lodge
within us for ever. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THere is one thing that M. Burton mentions in the Narrative, which though it
concerns not Aldermanbury, yet we must not wholly bury it in silence, and that
is concerning the late large Petition for the speedy establishment of Religion.
Of which he speaks very dishonourably, as also of the Petitioners, as of men
led with blind obedience, and pinning their souls upon the Priests sleeve. We
leave it to the Petitioners to answer for themselves. For our parts we conceive
that no Reader, unless blinded with prejudice, can charge them with blind
obedience. For the Petitioners do not desire to have the Model of the
reverend Assembly established, but the government of Christ established, A
Model whereof, etc. These words, A Model whereof, etc. come in with a
parenthesis, and the sentence is complete without them. All that they affirm
about the Model is, That the Reverend Assembly has framed a Model of the
government of Christ, according to their ability, and presented it to the
Parliament. And who but he that has pinned his faith upon an Independents
sleeve, can except against this? But if M. Burton be displeased with the Model
of the Reverend Assembly, we would entreat him that he at last, after so long
expectation, would set forth his Model.

FINIS.

