His MAJESTJES DEMANDS AND PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED By His Majesty, to the
Major, Knights, and Gentry; To the City of Chester, accompaned with the Prince,
Sir Edward Dering, and 2. Regiments of Horse and Foot, together with their
inditious Answer thereunto.

Likewise the Prince his desire to the Earl of Essex, with the true
d^scription of the Bataile fought by the Trained Band of Chester, and the Earl
of Newcastle, Lord Rivers, Earl of Bristoll, and the Earl of Lindsey, who
came to take possession of the said City, September 26. with the Number of them
that were Slain on both sides

As it was sent in a Letter from a Gentleman of note, to a special friend of
his in LONDON

London, Printed for Thomas Rider Sept. 29. 1642.

The Kings Majesty's Demands, and Propositions, propounded by his Majesty, to
the Major, Knights and Gentry, to the City of CHESTER, Sept. 24. 1642.
Upon Satterday last, His Majesty withdrew Himself from Shrewsbery, and took
His Journey toward Chester, accompanied with the Prince and the Duke of Lenox
his troop, and presently after came the Lord Chomleyes Regiment, together
with 22. pecces of Ordnance, when His Majesty came to the Gates of the City he
propounded these ensuing Propositions to the Knights and Gentry that were
within the City, Viz.

1. That His Majesty out of the Princely care and affection that he bore to
this City of Chester, has and is Resolved to make it his chief place of
Residence, and therefore desires the Knights and Gentry that are inhabitants
thereof to give him admittance.

2. That since his Majestyes coming from London he could find no place so
convenient and meet to entertain His Royal Person and posterity, as Chester,
and that he hoped that they would prove as loyal to him as he has been
merciful unto them.

3. That his desire is, That they would be pleased to resign up the Magazine
to his royal Majesty, and withal to deliver the keys of the Gates of that
City, and that they would condescend unto these his Demands, as to let the
Trained Bands to go alone with him toward Shrewesbury, but unto these
Propositions and Demands of his Majesty they would by no means condesend,
alleging that if the trained bands were gone and the Magazine resigned up,
wherein consists the strength of the county, they should he left naked and
exposed to the hazard of what dangers might befall in these trouble some times,
and so would not by any means give consent to those his requests.

THE COPY OF THE LETTER.
Worthy Sir
AFter my best respects recommended unto you and to my loving Cozen your Wife,
according to your desire and expectation, J emboldned my self to write unto
you, the newest occurrances that have, happened in these parts, viz. Upon the
25. of this instant month of Sept. the Lord Strange and the Earl of Lindsey,
came to the City of Worcester, with about the number of some 600. Mountiners,
together with diverse others of the ragged regiment, acounted and esteemed of
us, the scume of the Northern Counties, they were also accompanied with the
Lord Rivers, the Earl of Newcastle, and the Earl of Bristoll; and came
toward the City of Chester, in a Warlike manner, with about 1300. Horse and
foot, but they found there as Noble and undaunted spirits as they have done in
other places.

For at their first approach near unto the City, the Earl of Lindsey rod
foremost upon a fair and comely Steed, which made some of the Inhabitants of
the City of Chester thirst after him, to bring him a little lower, and indeed
happily might it have been so, had he not retreated so suddenly, for no sooner
had he given the onset upon the Town, but he fell back, then the Earl
Rivers, with his Venomous spleen and envy brought up his foot, thinking to
have beought his Divillish desires to perfection, and to have fired the Town
with wildfire, but by Gods providence and helping hand, all their hopes were
foustrated, and their devices and Plots could take no effect, for their
success was as bad as their causes, and well worse, these Commissioners of
Array having performed what they could and sound all was but labor in vain,
they about 2. of the cloak in the afternoon, with drew their forces from
Chester and march toward the borders of Wales, and it is supposed togea her
more power and strength, but all this while the Inhabitants of Chester and the
Trained bands took example by the men of Coventry, Resolving either to loose
their Lives, in the defense of the King and Parliament, and Gods true Religion,
then to yield and lie at the mercy of the Enemy, (the hell bred Cavaleers)
There are now some forces come from London to us, which do much encourage the
adjoining Counties, for since their coming, diverse of the Cavaleers have
revolted from his Majesty, and have proffered their Service to us.

Likewise from the adjoining Counties they come in daily, but this City stands
in much hazard and danger, for the aforenamed crew, has vowed revenge upon us,
Sir William Berington does very good Service here, and is a great encourage to
all the young Soldiers.

It is credibly reported that the Lord Brooks has given the Cavaleers a great
overthrow in Shropshire or else near Worcester, and has killed many of them,
the Earl of Essex is now at Worcester, with 22000. men, and has had some
opposition there by the Cavaleers, who have entrenched themselves about the
said City; but as yet has not made any attempt against the City, by reason
that the Kings Majesty is resolved to meet him there, and to treat upon these
present affairs, His Majesty is now going from worcester towares Chester, but
it is thought he will return very suddenly again, this week will be a week
of some sorrow or joy, for both Armies are resolved to meet.

FJNJS.

