The Kings MAJESTY'S DESIRES TO His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax;

CONCERNING His Majesty's Royal Person, and the proceedings of the Army in
their present Design.

Together with Ten Propositions propounded to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, by his Excellency, in behalf of the whole Army; wherein is set
forth, their Resolution in this present Design, their determination conc^rning
the Kings Majesty and his Royal Posterity, and their desires about the vast
sums of the Kingdom.

Likewise the Resolution of both Houses for disposal of the Kings Majesty's
Royal Person.

London, Printed for G. Wilkinson. June 17. 1647.

The Kings MAJESTY'S Desires and Propositions To His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, concerning the preservation and safety of His Majesty's Royal Person.
Worthy Sir,
HAving by my last intimated unto you the resolution and desires of the Army,
being the chiefest particulars upon which we then insisted, I shall breviate my
self (at this instant) in those occurrents, and (briefly) instance the late
actions and proceedings of the Army, touching their just Rights and
Fundamental Liberties of themselves and the Kingdom, to the Honorable Houses
of Parli^ment assembled at westminster; but before I proceed to the main
branch, be pleased to take notice of one thing very remarkable, which I will
remonstrate unto you, as follows.

On Monday night about eight of the clock, we were advertised, that his Majesty
had lately sent a message to the General, desiring, First, that He may reside
at Newmarket Secondly, That all differences may be composed in love, without
any more bloodshed. And thirdly, that His Royal Person may be preserved with
honor and safety.

His Majesty remains (as yet) at Newmarket, under the same command as
formerly, Col Whalley commanding in chief, but some flying rumors, with
unfortunate wings, does daily make their approach within our Camp, insomuch
that diverse of the Souldierie (both Horse and Foot) are much perplexed, to see
and behold the incre^se of division and discord, in the hearts of those, who
formerly were united as one man, with one heart and one mind, For some part of
the Soldiery desires that all things may be composed in love, and that his
Majesty may reside and be disposed of, according to the will and pleasure of
both houses of Parliament. But the major part are likely to prevail in that
particular. God grant that all differences may be speedily composed, and the
Kingdom set, that so Peace and Truth may flourish within this distressed and
languishing Kingdom.

But to be brief (Time drawing to a period) I shall now insist upon the
Resolution and Representation of the Army, drawn up into eight Heads, and to
be communicated to the Honorable Houses of Parliament which are as follows:

The last Propositions, proposed by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to both
houses of Parliament.
I. THat the Houses may be speedily purged of such members, as for their
Delinquencie, or for Corruptions, or abuse to the State, or undue elections,
ought not to sit there; whereof the late elections in Cornwall Wales, and other
parts of the Kingdom afford to many examples, to the great prejudice of the
peoples freedom in the said Elections.

II. That those persons who have in the unjust and high proceedings against the
Army appeared to have the will, the confidence, credit, and power, to abuse the
Parliament and Army, and endanger the Kingdom in carrying on such things
against us (while an Army) may be some way speedily disabled from doing the
like or worse to us (when disbanded, and dispier^ed, and in the condition of
private men) or to other the free born people of England in the same condition
with us, and that for that purpose, the same persons may not continue in the
same power (especially as our and the Kingdoms Ju ges in the highest trust)
but may be made incapable thereof for future.

III. That some determinate period of time may be set, for the continuance of
this and future Parliaments, beyond which, none shall continue, and upon which
new writs may of course issue out, and new elections successi^ely take place,
according to the intent of the Bill for Triennall Parliaments.

IV. That secure provision may be made for the continuance of future
Parliaments: so that they may not be adjournable or dissolvable at the Kings
pleasure, or any other ways, then by their own consent during their respective
periods, b^^ at those periods each Parliament to determina of course as before.
This we desire may be ^ow provided for (if it may be) so as to put it out of
all dispute for future, though we think of right it ought not to have been
otherwise before. And thus a firm foundation being laid in the authority and
constitution of Parliaments for the hopes, at least, of common and equal
right, and freedom to our selves, and all the free born people of this Land,
we shall hereby for our parts freely and cheerfully commit our stock or share
of interest in this Kingdom, into this common bottom of Parliaments. And
though it may (for our particulars) go ill with us in the voyage, yet we shall
thus hope (if right be with us) to fare better in another.

V. That these things may be provided for by Bill, or Ordinance of Parliament,
to which the Royal ascent may be desired, and when his Majesty in these things,
and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament necessary for securing the
rights and liberties of the people and for settling the Militia and peace of the
Kingdom, shall have given his concurrence to put them past dispute we shall
then desire that the Rights of his Majesty and his Posterity may be considered
of, and settled in all things, so far as may consist with the right and
freedom of the Subject, and with the security of the same for future.

VI. We desire that the right and freedom of the people to represent to the
Parl by way of humble petition, their grievances (in such things as cannot
otherwise be remedied then by Parliament) be cleared and vindicated: That all
such grievances of ^he people may be received, and admitted into consideration,
and put into an equitable and speedy way, to be heard, examined, and redressed
(if they appear real) and that in such things for which men have remedy by
law, they may be freely left to the benefit of Law, and the regulated course of
Justice without interruption or check from the Parliament, except in case of
things done upon the exigency of war, or for the service and benefit of the
Parliament and Kingdom in relation to the war, or otherwise in due pursuance,
and execution of Ordinances, or Orders of Parliament.

VII. More particularly we desire, that all such as are imprisoned, for any
preten^ed misdemeanour, may be put into a speedy way for a just hearing and
trial, and such as shall appear to have been unjustly, and unduly imprisoned,
may (with their liberty) have some reasonable reparation according to their
sufferings, and the demerit of their oppressors.

VIII. That the large pow^rs given to Committees, or Deputy Lieutenants during
the late times of war and destraction, may be speedily taken into consideration.

IX. We could wish that the Kingdom might both be righted and publicly
satisfied in point of accounts for the vast sums that have been levied and
paid, as also in diverse other things, wherein the Commonwealth may be
conceived to have been wronged or abusen; but we are loath to press any
thing, that may tend to lengthen our future disputes or contestations: but
rather such as may tend to a speedy and general composure, and quieting of
men's minds, in order to peace, for which purpose we further propose.

X. That public Justice being first satisfied by some few examples to
posterity, out of the worst of excepted persons, some course may be taken by a
general act of oblivion, etc. Thus (for the present) I remain

Yours, W. BVRCH.
Redburn, June 15.
It is ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parl. That the General be
required to deliver the person of the King to such persons as both houses shall
appoint, to be placed at Richmond, under such guards, and in such manner, as
they shall think fit, to the intent that the Propositions agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, may be speedily presented unto his Majesty for the settling of a safe
and well grounded Peace.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the persons to
whom the General is required to deliver the Person of the King to be placed at
Richmond, shall be the Commissioners formerly appointed to receive the Person
of the King at Newcastle, or any three of them.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Guards
appointed ^o r^ceive the Orders and directions of the Commissi^ners in
attending and guarding the Person of the King, shall be Col. Rosstter and his
Regiment.

These are the desires of both houses of Parliament, which if effected, its
hoped will prove a speedy way to compose all differences whatsoever.

FINIS.

