His Majesty's Demands TO THE GENTRY OF YORKSHIRE, Concerning the Town of
HVLL, Answered by two several PARTIES.
WE conceive that the substance of his Majesty's proposition unto us the 30.
of April consisted in these two particulars, First, to know, Whether we would
defend his Majesty's Royal Person from violence, or no, according to our
duties. Secondly, To have our advice concerning his Majesty not being admitted
into his Town of Hull, and how his Majesty may be vindicated in his honor
for that affront, and how he may be put into the possession of his own.

The humble Answer of those who Petitioned your Majesty the thirtieth of
April, and diverse other Knights and Gentlemen.
May it please your most Excellent MAJESTY,
WE shall be ready to defend his Majesty's person from violence, by all such
ways, as the Law and our duties binds us. And for the means to vindicate your
Majesty's honor, and to put you into the possession of your own, We conceive
that the best advice, that we can offer unto Your Majesty is, humbly to desire
you to harken to the Councels of your Parliament, who (we assure our selves
will be careful of your Majesty's person and honor, and to whom your Majesty
has already been pleased to direct a message to that purpose.

The humble Answer of the Gentry of the County of YORK.
ACcording to Your Majesty's command to Your Majesty's proposition, we profess
our willingness, as in duty we are bound to defend Your Majesty's Sacred
person against all Foreign and Domestic attempts, to the uttermost of our
power, and as our allegiance binds us, And for the keeping of Your Majesty's
honor, touching the business of Hull, Your Majesty being pleased to commend it
to Your Parliament, the high Council of Your Kingdom, we do humbly crave
pardon that we do not interpose, But forasmuch as Your Majesty may look for
a particular satisfaction at our hands, we humbly and heartily profess that we
shall be ready to serve Your Majesty in the same and all other occasions, with
our lives and fortunes as far as your Majesty shall be pleased legally to
enable and command us.

London, Printed for Richard Lowndes, and are to be sold at his Shop next
without Ludgate. 1642.


