BY THE KING.
His Majesty's Declaration whereby to Repeal and make void, all Licenses, by
Himself granted f(...) bringing any Goods or Commodities, from the Cities of
London and Westminster, and other pl(...)ces, in rebellion against His Majesty,
contrary to His late Proclamation, prohibiting Trade and Commerce, with the
said Cities and Places.
WHereas since His Majesty's late Proclamation, prohibiting Trade with the
C(...)ties of London and Westminster, at the earnest and humble suit of
certain H(...) Majesty's faithful Subjects of this City of Oxford, and other
places, and fo(...) reasons by them proposed, which appeared to be very
pressing, some few licenses and dispensations have bin granted, under His
Royal Signature, for bringin(...) some certain quantities of sundry sorts of
Goods and Commodities from th(...) said Cities of London and Westminster. And
whereas his Majesty has since found, that by color of such Licenses, there is
a great Trade of almost all Commodities still continued with those Cities, to
the enerving and frustrating the scope and intent of his said Proclamation,
which in his Royal Wisdom he has Judged most necessary to prevent: his
Majesty has therefore thought fit hereby to declare, that from henceforth, and
from the date hereof, all such licenses by him granted as aforesaid, shall be
void, and no more put in use, even although the same, or any of them may have
bin obtained with intent only to provide supplies of such things, as might be
needful for his own Royal Person, or his dear Consort the Queens Majesty or
for the Persons of the Prince or Duke of York, their highnesses, straightly
charging and commanding all Persons whosoever have obtained, or are possessed
of any such Licenses as aforesaid, and all other Persons whatsoever, that they
presume not to bring, or cause to be brought any Goods or Commodities, from the
said Cities of London and Westminster, or any oath(...) Town or Place in
Rebellion against his Majesty, directly or indirectly, mediately or
immediately, unto this his City of Oxford, or any other place in obedience unto
his Majesty, upon(...) such pains as are expressed in his Majesty's said
Proclamation, and such farther punishment a(...) may Justly be inflicted on
them for contemning and infringing this his Royal Pleasure and Command.

Given at Oxford under his Majesty's sign Manual, the tenth day of December,
in the nineteenth Year of his Reign. 1643.
God save the KING.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.


