The Kings Majesty's DECLARATION FOR PEACE, to all His Subjects of England, to
be published and obeyed throughout the Kingdom, by all Judges, Justices of the
peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, and all other His Majesty's liege people,
to the great terror of those who object against the Treaty.

Published by Authority.

Also, the Scots Declaration to Lieu. Genesis Crumwel, touching the Independent
party, and a Message to Major Genesis Lambert, and his admission into that
Kingdom. With a dangerous Fight, and the number killed and wounded.

Royal blazon of Charles II C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

September. 28. Printed for Joseph Hunter. 1648.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS DECLARATION TO His Subjects of England, Wherein is
declared His Royal Sense and Resolution, to settle the distractions of this
bleeding Kingdom.
Right Honored,
AFter much time spent in debate upon the first Proposition for recalling and
making null all Declarations and Proclamations published against either or both
Houses of Parliament, His Majesty was graciously pleased to declare his sense
and resolution touching the said Bill, and to give his Royal assent thereunto,
promising on his Royal Word to pasle an Act for justifying for justifying the
proceedings of Parliament in the late war; a Copy whereof, I have sent you here
enclosed.

A Copy of the Act and Declaration, agreed upon by his Majesty, and the
Commissioners, at the Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wight.
Whereas the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have been necessitated
to make and prosecute a war in their just and lawful defense; and thereupon
Oaths, Declaration, and proclamations have been made against them, and their
Ordinances and proceedings, and against others for adhering unto them, and for
executing offices, places, and charges by authority derived from them; and
Judgments, Inditements, Outlaries, Attainders, and Inquisitions, for the
causes aforesaid, have been had and made against some of the Members of the
Houses of parliament, and other his Majesty's good Subjects, and Grants have
been made of their Lands and Goods.

Be it therefore declared, and hereby enacted, by the Kings Majesty, and by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same,

That all Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had or made against
both or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any the Members of either of
them, for the causes aforesaid, or against their Orninances or proceedings, or
against any for adhering unto them, or for doing or executing any office,
place, or charge, by any Authority derived from the said Houses, or either of
them, And all Judgments, Inditements, Outlaries, Attainders, Inquisitions and
Grants thereupon made, and all other proceedings for any the causes aforesaid,
had, made, done or executed, or to be had made done or executed, whether the
same be done by the King or any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Ministers or any
others, are void and of no effect, and are contrary to and against the Laws of
this Realm.

And be it further Enacted and hereby Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Judges, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, and other
Officers and Ministers shall take notice hereof, and are hereby prohibited and
discharged in all time to come from awarding any Writ, process, oa Summons,
and from pronouncing or executing any Judgment Sentence or Decree, or any way
proceeding against, or molesting any of the said Members of the two Houses of
Parliament, or against any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, for any the causes
aforesaid.

The Commissioners proceed on to the rest of their Propositions, according to
their Instructions, and it his hoped there will be a mutual concurrence
thereunto.

His Majesty shows great willingness to comply with them in all things
propounded, so far as it may tend to the safety and preservation of the Laws of
the Land, the Discipline of the Church, and the peace and tranquillity of his
languishing, and distressed Kingdom

Newport 26. Septem. 1648.
SIR
SInce my last of the 14. instant, here has happened some action in these
parts, Col. Ashton with his Lancashire Forces has lately fallen upon a party
of Royalists near Kendall in Westmerland, and routed and dispersed most of
them: from thence he is marching toward Carlisle with a very considerable
party of Horse and Foot, to keep the Birds close up there, or clip their wings
from flying any further.

Lieut. Genesis Crumwell is upon the Confines of Scotland, and it is thought will
croffe the River Tweed, if Barwick be not suddenly surrendered.

We hear that Col. Genesis Lambert has admission into that Kingdom, being sent
for by the General Assembly, and others, to treat upon the affairs of both
Kingdoms to remove all differences and jealousies, and to have a mutual
coerespondency between the subjects of both Nations.

The Scots cannot endure to hear of the name of Crumwell, but says, That if
ever he invades that Nation they will rise as one man against him: this is only
the saying of the vanting Leards, who by experience has felt the heavy hand of
the Lieutenant General, and his noble Heroes.

Monro is joined with the Earl of Lanerick, and lies forty miles on this side
Edinburgh, their head quarters are about twenty miles distant from the Confines
of England, whose Army consists of eight thousand horse and foot.

By Letters from Holland it is advertized as follows:

SIR,
Here has lately happened some disputations between his Highness the Prince
of Wales, and the Royal party with him, in relation how to dispose of the
Navy, and the Grandees have had some consultation thereupon, in order thereunto
for disposing of the said Fleet, not thinking themselves or ships in so good a
posture, or useful a way where they are, because, they conceive, if they
should plunder the London Merchants, they should incur the displeasure of the
Metropolis, and for the future receive no succor or relief from thence, but
receive gratification by a power of opposition.

Besides, the Lord high Admiral at Sea may be upon the back of them before
they be aware, the wind erving now to carry them from the Downs.


This business took up some time in debate thereof and at last came to these
results.

Diverse of the Council, as Prince Maurice, and others, declared at the
Council table, That they conceived it most necessary and requisite, to weigh
anchor, and steer toward the kingdom of France, delivering several reasons,
wherein it tended most for the safety of the Navy, and the advancement of their
Sovereigns Cause, if the Treaty took not effect.

Brill 24 September. 1648.
Other Letters from the North say, That the Commons of Scotland appears visible
for defense of their own Country, as they say; but its conceived they have some
private grudge against England: some of them which were lately taken prisoners,
have declared to Lieut. Genesis Crumwell, That their Design was to have banished
and killed all those which they call Sectaries, or any others, that would not
comply and adhere to them.

A party of the Lieutenant Generals horse crossed Tweed 12 miles above Barwick,
marched 8 miles into the Country, where they met with some opposition by
Monro's Forces, both parties engaged, and disputed the place with great
galantry, but after three lesperate charges, the Jockies retreated, leaving
five of their men dead upon the place. The conflict being ended, the English
wheeled about, and made good their retreat with the loss of two men.

FINIS.

