A DECLARATION FOR PEACE From the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Dukes,
Marquesses, Bishops, Earls, Lords, Knights, and the rest of His Commissioners
at Newport; to be published throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales; Containing, their unanimous Resolutions for an Agreement with both
Houses of Parliament, within the time (of 40 days) limited for the Treaty; And
His Gracious and Final Answer to the paper of Ireland, presented to the
Commissioners on Friday last. With their happy and joyful Agreement therein.

Dated at Newport 14 Octobe 1648. Subscribed CHARLES REX.

The Treaty at Newport. Peace be amongst you.
throned man (from context, Charles I) on platform, with notaries, and
surrounded by male listeners

Imprinted at London, for R. Smith, near Temple Bar, 1648.

A DECLARATION FOR PEACE, From the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Dukes,
Marquesses, Bishops, Earls, Lords, Knights, and the rest of the Commissioners
for the Treaty.
Enclosed in a Letter from the Isle of Wight, to be forthwith printed, and
published throughout the several respective Counties within the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales.
Right Honorable,
THis present Treaty is conceived to be the main Object of the whole Kingdom,
whose eyes are fixed thereupon, expecting the happy tidings of Peace, to be
sent forth by the blessed Dove with an Olive branch in her mouth, throughout
all the corners of the Nation; and (in all probability) they are now ready to
issue forth in streams of joy, to water the Plants of this late flourishing
and fruitful Island.

For his Majesty (upon a conference with the Dukes Marquesses; Bishops, Earls,
Lords, and the rest of the Commissioners on his part) has declared his
unanimous Resolution for a mutual agreement and compliance with his two Houses
of Parliament, to all things by them desired, which may tend to the peace and
safety of all his liege people throughout his Realms and Dominions.

And upon Thursday last delivered his gracious answer and Royal Assent to the
Commissioners at the Treaty, to the paper of Ireland, in all things by them
desired, which was as follows.

That his Majesty does condescend, That an Act of Parliament be passed, to
declare and make void the Cessation of Ireland, and all treaties and conclusion
of peace, or any articles thereupon with the Rebels, without consent of both
Houses.

And that according to their Desire, He is pleased to settle the prosecution of
the war in that Kingdom in his two Houses, to be managed by them: and that He
is willing to assist and adhere to them therein, promising upon his Royal Word
to do no Act to discountendance or molest them.

To the second clause therein inserted, His Majesty does agree, That
Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled in that Kingdom by
Act of Parliament, in such manner as both his two Houses have agreed, or shall
agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines sitting at
Westminster.

To the third Clause, His Majesty gives this Answer, That he will give His
Consent that the Deputy Governor or Governors, and the Presidents of the
several provinces of that Kingdom, be nominated by his two Houses of the
Parliament of England; as also all other Offices whatsoever; being limited for
twenty years from the 1 of July 1648.

This Answer seemed very satisfactory, and upon receipt thereof the
Commissioners presented a paper to his Majesty for payment of the public
Debts of the Kingdom, which caused a large ^ebate upon Friday; and after
several Arguments laid down by the Commissioners on both sides, the King
promised to give a final Answer the next day.

And for the rest of the Propositions, there is no doubt but a speedy
concurrence will be given to them all; for the Nobility and Clergy on the Kings
side have declared to his Majesty for peace; his Majesty concurs with them
therein and has promised to dispense with Episcopacy, and to settle the
Directory, rather then to leave his people unsatisfied, or involve them in a
further effusion, or streams of blood.

And the Parliament Commissioners go hand in hand with them, promising to
leave no means unattempted that may conduce to the peace and safety of all his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

Newport 14. October. 1648.

By Letters from the Isle of Wight October. 14. it is said. That his Majesty has
had some further consultation with the Commissioners of both Houses, and
desires that all obstructions may be removed; that may retard so blessed a
work, promising to leave no means unattempted, for the settling of a firm and
lasting peace throughout his Realms and Dominion; and the better to satisfy
his two Houses of Parliament, he has been graciously pleased to pass the Bill
for recalling all his Decclarations and Proclamations, published against either
or both Houses of Parliament; as also, the Bill for confirming the Militia in
the power of Parliament for 20 years; promising upon his Royal word to enact
the same, and all other Bills or Propositions whatsoever, that shall be agreed
upon by his Majesty, and the Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament, etc.

And it is reported at Court, that the King has sent a Letter to the Lord Genesis
Fairfax, and Lieut. General Cromwell, viz.

Desiring them to use all means possible for the propagating of this present
Treaty, and to endeavor the settling of a firm and lasting peace throughout his
bleeding and dis^racted Kingdoms; that so all his liege people of what sect or
sort soever, may no longer feel the cruelty and oppression of a most bloody and
intestine war, but (after a seven years Pilgrimage in desolation and confusion)
for the future, enjoy a true and evelasting peace.

And truly, I am confident, that no man desires peace more then his Majesty,
but yet scruples at the Directory, and argues stiffly for Episcopacy; as
appears by his ensuing answer to the Proposition touching the Church of England
as follows.

As to the Exceptions that his Maj. said nothing to the consenting to a Bill
for the abolishing of Archbishops, etc, nor that the Ordinance for abolishing
them be confirmed by Act of Parl. the Form of Church government and Directory
for worship which you presented to him, and thereby has established the
actual possession, and public exercise of these Forms, and has suspended the
present Government and Form of worship established by law, but desired a
cosultation with Divines in the mean time for a future settlement, is in that
paper is expressed: His Maj. therefore declares, that the reason why he did not
answer to that part of your Proposition was, because he was not satisfied in
his conscience; He can be content to the utter abolishing of Episcopacy: the
substance whereof he conceives to consist in the power of Ordination and
Jurisdictio^, as they were exercised by the Apostles themselves, and others, by
authority derived from them, superior to Presbyters and Deaco^s in the
primitive times: but because he acknowledges that Bishops were to have council
and assistance of Presbyters in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and in the last
were, and are limited by the Civil power, his Maj. Desired the consultation
with the Divines, to the end that he and his two Houses might determine in what
manner Ordination and Jurisdiction might be moderated and regulated for the
future government of the Church, His Majesty's Resolution being to comply with
his two houses for the alteration and regulating of his present Hierarchy and
Government, so as Episcopacy reduced to the Primitive usage may be settled and
continued in this Church: and therefore his Maj. heartily desires their
concurrence in the one, that he may with more freedom give his assent to the
other.

As to the Exception, that his Maj. has not expressed his consent for settling
of Bishops Lands upon trustees, and for the sale of those lands, its true, he
has not to alienate the Inheritance of those lands, and herein he believes he
has concurrent opinions of many Divines, that in order points differ much
among themselves but his former answer containing a large offer of satisfaction
to al those that have purchased, or disbursed moneys upon those lands, he hopes
that answer, to which he now refers, will be satisfactory to his two houses.

His Maj. will confirm the public use of the Directory in all Churches and
Chapels, and will consent to the repeal of so much of all statutes, as only
concerns the Book of Common Prayer, and also to the taking the same away out of
all Churches and Chapels; provided that the use thereof may be continued in his
Maj. Chapel, for himself and his Household.

Subscribed CHARLES REX.
Monday October. 16.
Letters from the Isle of Wight say, That his Majesty is (in part) convinced of
the Errors of Episcopacy, and will speedily give His Royal assent for the
settling of the Presbyterian Government, throughout the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, and Principality of Wales; so that there is no doubt, but before the
40 days limited for the Treaty are expired, there will be a final end and
agreement between the King and Parliament.



FINIS.

