royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


CHARLES R.

FOr a final Answer to your Proposition of the 13. of this instant concerning
Delinquents, etc. His Majesty will consent, That all persons who have had any
hand in the Plotting, designing, or assisting the Rebellion of Ireland, shall
expect no Pardon, as is expressed in the first branch of this Proposition.

As to all the rest of the Propositions, His Majesty cannot consent thereunto,
as is proposed, otherwise then is here afterward expressed, viz.

As for all other persons comprised in the said first Branch, His Majesty for
satisfaction of His two Houses will give way, That they may moderately compound
for their Estates, and desires they may be admitted to the same. And for
removing of distrust, and interruptions of the public settlement, His
Majesty will consent as follows.

That such of them as the two Houses, of Parliament will insist on shall not be
admitted to His Councels, and be restrained from coming to the Court, at such
distance, as both Houses shall think fit, and shall not have any Office and
Employment in the Commonwealth, without the consent of both Houses of
Parliament, or shall absent themselves out of the Kingdom for some time, if
both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

That all other persons in this Proposition shall submit to a moderate
Composition, and for the space of three years shall not fit, or serve as
Members, or assistants in either House of Parliament, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

Tuseday, October 17. 1648.
His MAJESTY'S Propositions.
1. THat His Majesty be put into a condition of Honor, Freedom and Safety. 2.
That safely He may be restored to His Lands, and Revenues. 3. That he may have
Composition for the court of Wards, and such of His Revenues, as He shall part
with. 4. That there may be an Act of Oblivion and Indemnity.
Mr. Vines gave in a Paper in Answer to His Majesty's, to satisfy His
Majesty's Conscience touching Bishops: then the Commons delivered a Paper,
desiring a more satisfactory Answer to the business of the Church.

Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON, 1648.


