royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

HIS MAJESTY'S FINAL ANSWER Concerning EPISCOPACIE.

Delivered in to the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT the first of November. 1648.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Best, dwelling at Grayes-Inne gate. 1648.

His Majesty's Final Answer concerning Episcopacy, November the first, 1648.
WHat you have offered by way of Reply to His Majesty's Second Paper, of
October 6. in yours of October. 17. in Order to the further satisfaction of his
Conscience in the point of Episcopacie, His Majesty heard, when it was
publicly read by you, with diligent attention, and has since (so far as his
leisure would permit) taken the same into his private and serious
Consideration; Wherein his Majesty not only acknowledges your great pains
and Endeavors to inform his Judgment, according to such persuasions as your
selves have in the matter in debate, But also takes special Notice of the
Civility of your applications to him both in the Body and Conclusion of your
Reply: yet he cannot but observe withal, that in very many things you either
mistake his meaning and purpose in that Paper, or at least come not up fully
enough thereunto in this Reply. Which to have shown, will sufficiently
remonstrate your present Reply to be unsatisfactory in that behalf, without
making a particular Answer to every Passage in it, which to a Paper of that
length would require more time than his Majesty can think fit (amidst the
present weighty affairs) to allow unto a debate of this Nature, Especially
since his Majesty has often found mutual returns of long Answers, and
Replies, to have rather multiplied disputes by starting new Questions, than
informed the Conscience by removing former Scruples.

1. Reply. Sect 1. 2. As to the Scriptures cited in the Margin of his Majestres
first Paper.
It being granted by you, that those Scriptures did prove the Apostles, and
others being single Persons to have exercised respectively the several points
in the Paper specified, Which powers (by your own confessions in this Reply)
(Sect. 7.) a single person who is but a mere Presbyter has no right to
exercise; And it being withal evident, that a Bishop in the Ecclesiastical
sense, and as distinct from a Presbyter, lays claim to no more than to a
peculiar right in the exercise of some, or all of the said Powers, which a mere
Presbyter has not; the Conclusion seems natural and evident, that such a
Power of Church Government as we usually call Episcopal is sufficiently
proved by those Scriptures.

2. Reply. Sect. 3. 5. As to the Bishops Challenge.
First, when you speak of a Writ of partition, you seem to take his Majesty's
words, as if he had shared, and cantoned out the Episcopal Office, One part to
the Bishops alone, Another to the Presbyters alone, And you fall upon the same
again afterward (Sect. 6.) whereas his Majesty's meaning was, and by his words
appears so to have been, that one part of the Office (That of Teaching, etc.)
was to be common to both alike; But the other part (That of Governing Churches)
peculiar to the Bishop alone.

Secondly, you infer from his Majesty's words, That the Bishops Challenge
appears to be grown to more than was formerly pretended to. Which inference
his Majesty's words by you truly cited, if rightly understood, will not bear.
For having proved from Scripture the power of Church Government, in all the
three mentioned Particulars to have been exercised by the Apostles, and others;
His Majesty said but this only, That the Bishops challenge no more or other
power to belong unto them, in respect of their Episcopell Office, than what
properly falls under one of these three. The words are true; for he that
believes they challenge not so much, might safely say, they challenge no more.
But the Inference is not good; For he that says they challenge no more, does
not necessarily imply they challenge all that. In the power of Ordination which
is purely spiritual, his Majesty conceives the Bishops challenge to have been
much-what the same in all times of the Church; And therefore it is, that the
matter of Ordination is most insisted on, as the most constant and most evident
difference between Bishops and Presbyters, especially after the Times of
Constantine, which his Majesty by your relating to Chrysostom and Hierome
takes to be the same you call the times of Grown Episcopacy. But his Majesty
sees no necessity, that the Bishops challenge to the power of Jurisdiction
should be at all times as large as the Exercise thereof appears at some
times to have been; the exercise thereof being variable according to the
various condition of the Church in different times. And therefore his Majesty
does not believe that the Bishops under Christian Princes do challenge such an
amplitude of Jurisdiction to belong unto them in respect of their Episcopal
Office precisely, as was exercised in the Primitive times by Bishops before the
days of Constantine. The reason of the difference being evident, That in those
former times under Pagan Princes the Church was a distinct Body of it self,
divided from the Commonwealth, and so was to be governed by its own Rules, and
Rulers. The Bishops therefore of those times, though they had no outward
coercive power over men's persons, or Estates, yet inasmuch as every Christian
man when he became a Member of the Church, did ipso facto, and by that his own
voluntary Act, put himself under their Government, they exercised a very large
power of Jurisdiction in Spiritualibus, in making Ecclesiastical Canons,
receiving accusations, conventing the accused, examining Witnesses, judging of
Crimes, exc^uding such as they found guilty of scandalous offenses from the
Lords Supper, Enjoining Pennances upon them, casting them out of the Church,
Receiving them again upon their Repentance, etc* And all this they exercised as
well over Presbyters as others: But after that the Church under Christian
Princes began to be incorporated into the Commonwealth, whereupon there must
of necessity follow a complication of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers,
the Jurisdiction of Bishops (in the outward exercise of it) was subordinate
unto, and limit able by the Supreme Civil power, and has been, and is at this
day, so acknowledged by the Bishops of this Realm.

Thirdly, you seem to affirm in a Parenthesis, as if nothing were confessed to
have been extraordinary in the Apostles but their gifts, and Enablements only,
whereas his Majesty in that Paper has in express words named as
Extraordinaries also, the Extent of their charge, and the Infallibility of
their Doctrine, without any meaning to exclude those not named, as their
immediate Calling, and if there be any other of like reason.

Fourthly for the Claim to a jus Divinum, His Majesty was willing to decline
both the Term (as being by reason of the different acception of it subject to
misconstruction) and the dispute whether by Christ or his Apostles. Nevertheles
although His Majesty sees no cause to dislike their opinion who derive the
Episcopal power originally from Christ himself, without whose warrant the
Apostles would not either have exercised it themselves, or derived it to
others; Yet for that the practice in them is so clear, and evident, and the
warrant from him expressed but in general Terms (As my Father sent me, so send I
you, and the like) His Majesty chose rather (as others have done) to fix the
claim of the power upon that practice, as the more evidentiall way, than upon
the warrant, which by reason of the generality of expression would bear more
dispute.

3. Reply. Sect. 6. As to the Definition of Episcopacy.
First, whereas you except against it, for that it is competent to
Archiepiscopall and Patriarchall Government as well as Episcopal, His Majesty
thinks you might have excepted more justly against it if it had been
otherwise.

Secondly. His Majesty believes that even in the persons by you named
(Timothy, Titus, and the Angels) the definition in all the parts of it is to
be found, viz. That they had each their several peculiar Charges; and that
within their several precincts, they had authority over Presbyters as well as
others.

Neither Thirdly, does his Majesty think it needful that any word be added to
the Genus in the definition, or that the Scripture should any where put all the
parts of the definition together; It would be a hard matter to give such a
definition of an Apostle, or a Prophet, or an Evangelist, or a Presbyter, or a
Deacon, or indeed almost of any thing, as that the parts thereof should be
sound in any place of Scripture put altogether.

Fourthly, His Majesty consents with you, that the point in issue, is not the
Name or Work merely, but the Office, and that it were a Fallacy to argue a
particular Office, from a General, or Common work: But judges withal it can
be no Fallacy to argue a Particular Office from such a work as is peculiar to
that Office, and is as it were the formalis ratio thereof, and therefore no
fallacy from a work done by a single person, which a single Presbyter has no
right to do, to infer an office in that person distinct from the Office of a
Presbyter.

4. Reply Sect. 7. As to the Scriptures cited by you viz. Tit. 1. Acts 20. 2
Peter 5.
First when you say you take his Majesty's Concession, That in those times of
the Church, and places of Scripture, there was no distinct Office of Bishops
and Presbyters, If you take it so, truly you take it gratis, (His Majesty
never gave it you:) and you mistake it too, more ways than one, for to speak
properly, His Majesty made no Concession at all. It was rather a Preterition in
order to the present business, and to avoid unnecessary disputes, which ought
not to be interpreted as an acknowledgement of the Truth of your Expositions of
those places. For his own express words are, Although his Majesty be not sure
that the Proof will reach so far in each of those Places, which words plainly
evidence, that which you call his Majesty's Concession to be indeed no
Concession; but to have been meant according to that form of Speech very
usual in disputations, Dato, non concesso. But in that Concession, such as it
is, his Majesty is not able to imagine what you could find whereon to ground
those words, That in those times of the Church there was no distinct, etc.
there being not any thing in the whole passage that carries the least sound
that way, or that has relation to any particular times of the Church. Neither
is the Concession such as you take it, as it relates to those places of
Scripture. What his Majesty said is confessed on all sides (which are the words
you take for a Concession) was but this, That supposing (but not granting) the
word Bishop to be used in all those places to signify a Presbyter, the Office
and Work in those places mentioned as the Office and Work of a Bishop are
(upon that supposall) the Office and Work of a Presbyter, which is so manifest
a Truth, that no man without admitting Contradictions can say the contrary. But
how wide or short that is from what you make to be his Majesty's Concession,
your selves by comparing his words with yours may easily judge. But your selves
a little after make a Concession, which his Majesty (warned by your Example how
soon another meaning may be mistaken when his words are altered) is willing
to take in the same words you give it, viz. When you say and you bring reasons
also to prove it, That it seems manifest that Ordination and Censures are not
to be exercised by a single Presbyter.

Secordly you repeat your Arguments formerly drawn from those places, and
press the same from the force of the words (...) and (...), and from the
Circumstances of the Text, and otherwise adding withal that his Majesty has
waved the notice or answer of something by you alleged therein. Hereunto His
Majesty says, that he waved not any thing in your former Paper, f^r any great
difficulty he conceived of answering it; but being desirous to contract his
answer, and knowing to what frailties, Arguments drawn from Names and Words and
Conjectural Expositions of Scripture are subject, he passed by such things as
he deemed to be of least Consideration in order to the end of the whole debate;
to wit the satisfaction of his Judgment and Conscience in the main business.
Otherwise his Majesty could have then told you, That there are, who by the like
Conjectures, grounded (as seems to them) upon some probabilities in the Text,
interpret those places in the Acts and in St. Peter of Bishops properly so
called, and in the restrained Ecclesiastical sense, rather than of Ordinary
Presbyters; That supposing them both meant of Ordinary Presbyters, the words
(...) and (...) (which signify to feed and to oversee) might not unfitly be
applied to them as inferior Pastors, in relation to their Flocks under their
charge and over sight (the Flock being in both the places expressly mentioned)
which hinders not, but the same words may in a more peculiar manner be
appropriated to Bishops in respect of that Authority and oversight they have
even over Presbyters themselves also; That still granting your own
interpretation of the word Bishop in that place to Titus, it can prove no more
than that the two names in that place are given to the same Function; That from
all the premises in your Paper there laid together, and supposed true his
Majesty does not conceive it justly proved, That the Office of a Bishop and
Presbyter is wholly the same but at the most, that the Offices were not in those
places distinguished by those Names.

Thirdly, if the Assignement of any Particular Qualification work or duty,
unto a Bishop, distinct from a Presbyter, by the Scripture, would (as you say)
put this question near to an issue; His Majesty should well have hoped, that it
might soon be brought to a near point, and that from the evidence of the
Epistles only of Saint Paul to Timothy, Wherein as he particularly expresse^h
the Qualification, work, and duty of Presbyters and Deacons, that Timothy might
know what persons were fit to be ordained unto those Offices: So in the
directions given to Timothy throughout those Epistles, he sufficiently
describes the Qualification, work, and duty of a Bishop, that Timothy might
know how to behave himself in the exercise of his Episcopal Office, as well in
ordaining as in Governing the Church.

5. Reply. Sect. 8.
As to the signification of the word Episcopus, the primary signification
thereof, and the application of it to Church Officers, you acknowledge: and
that the same was after by Ecclesiastical usage appropriated to Bishops you
deny not, But the distinction of Episcopus Gregis, and Episcopus Pastorum, you
do not allow. If you disallow it for the unfitness of the word as may seem by
that passage, where you say That His Majesty has said that Episcopus
signifies a Keeper of Shepherds; His Majesty thinks you might very well have
spared that exception, For if there be a person that has the oversight of many
Shepherds under him, there is no more impropriety in giving such a person the
style of Episcopus Pastorum, than there is in using of the word (...), or in
calling Doeg the Master of Saul's Herdmen. And for the thing it self, it cannot
be denied, but that the Apostles, and Timothy and Titus (by what clam ordinary,
or extraordinary, as to the present business it matters not) had the oversight
and authority over many Pastors, and were therefore truly and really Episcopi
Pastorum.

The appropriation of the names of Episcopus and Presbyter to these distinct
Offices, considering that it was done so early, and received so universally in
the Church as by the writings of Clemens, Ignatius, the Canons commonly called
of the Apostles, and other ancient evidences does appear. His Majesty has
great reason to believe that it was done by consent of the Primitive Bishops,
merely in honor of the Apostles, out of their respect and reverence to whose
persons, and personal Prerogatives, they chose to call themselves Bishops
rather than Apostles in common usage, although they made no scruple to maintain
their succession from the Apostles, when they spoke of things proper to the
Episcopal Function, nor to use upon occasion the terms of Apostle and
Apostolical in that sense, the truth of all which is to be see^e frequently*
in the writings of the Ancients.

The Testimonies of so many writers, ancient and modern, as have been produc^d
for the Scripture-originall of Bishops, His Majesty conceives to be o^ so
great importance in a question of this nature, that he thinks himself bound
both in Charity and Reason to believe, that so many men of such quality would
not have asserted the same with so much confidence but upon very good ground.
The men respectively of high estimation and reverend authority in the Church,
worthily re-renowned for their Learning and Piety, of moderate and even
Passions, of Orthodox belief* sundry of them uninteressed in the Quarrel, and
some of them of later times by interest and education biased rather the other
way. Their assertions positive, peremptory and full of assurances (Constat and
ne^no ignorant, it is clear, none can be ignorant, and other such like
expressions.) Namely that Christ constituted Bishops in the Apostles, That it
was founded upon a divine Law, That Episcopacy is (...) The Ordinance of God,
That it seemed good to the holy Ghost so to order it, etc. Insomuch as they
accounted Aerius an Heretic for holding the Contrary And this their judgment
they delivered as led there into by divine evidence of Scripture ((...), Gods
word teaches it, apertis Scripturae testimoniis, it appears by plain
testimonies of Scripture, discimus, ex hoc loco, From this place we learn, and
the like) which testimonies should they be encountered (as His Majesty does not
yet believe they can be) with a cloud of Witnesses to the Contrary: for number,
and in every other respect equal thereunto, Yet, should not the Authority of
their evidence in reason be much lessened thereby: inasmuch as one witness for
the Affirmative ought to be of more value, than ten for the Negative; and the
testimony of one person that is not interressed, than of an hundred that are.

And whereas you seem in this Question to decline this kind of trial, because
matter of right is properly triable by Scripture; His Majesty conceives this
present Question, in what terms soever proposed, to be yet in the true stating
of it, and in the last Resolution, clearly a Question of Fact and not of Right;
For what right soever the Bishops have, or pretend to have, must be derived
from the fact of Christ, or his Apostles. Which matter of Fact, if it be not in
the most plain historical manner that may be related in the Scriptures, but is
to be deduced thence by topical remote inferences, and probability of
conjectures, the most rational, and proper expedient for the finding out of
the Right, is to have recourse to the Judgment, but especially to the
Practice, of the nearest and subsequent times; according to the received
Maxims, Lex currit cum Praxi, and Consuetudo optimus interpres Legum. Now he
that shall find by all the best Records extant, that the distinction of Bishops
from, and the Superiority over Presbyters was so universally, and speedily
spread over the face of the whole world, and their Government submitted unto so
unanimously by the Presbyters, that there never was any considerable opposition
made there against before Aerius (and that cried down as an Heresy) Nor since
till this last Age, And shall duly consider with all, that if Episcopal
Government had not had an indubitable institution from the Authority of Christ
and his Apostles, or if any other Form of Church Government could have
pretended to such institution, had been the most impossible thing in the world,
when there neither was any outward certain power to enforce it, nor could be
any General Council to establish it, to have introduced such a Form of
Government so suddenly and quietly, into all Christian Churches, and not the
Spirit of any one Presbyter for ought that appears for above three hundred
years, to have been provoked either through zeal, ambition or other motive, to
stand up in the just defense of their own and the Churches liberty against such
an usurpation His Majesty believes that whosoever shall consider the premises,
together with the Scripture evidences that are brought for that Government,
will see reason enough to conclude the same to have something of divine
institution in it, notwithstanding all the evasions and objections that the
subtle wit of man can devise to persuade the contrary. And therefore His
Majesty thinks it fit, plainly to tell you, that such Conjectura^l
Interpretations of Scripture, as he has yet met with in this Argument, how
handsomely soever set off, are not Engines of strength enough to remove him
from that judgment wherein he has been settled from his Childhood, and finds
so consonant to the Judgment of Antiquity, and to the constant practice of the
Christian Church for so many 100 years; which in a matter of this nature ought
to weigh more than mere Conjecturall Inferences from Scripture Texts that are
not so attested. Which having now once told you, his Majesty thinks himself
discharged from the necessity of making so large and particular an Answer to
every Allegation in the sequel of your Reply as hither he has done.

6. Reply. Sect. 9,
As to the Apostles Mission and Succession. To make his Answer the shorter to
so long a discourse, His Majesty declares that his meaning was not by
distinguishing the Mission and Unction of the Apostles, so to confine them as
if they should relate precisely and exclusively, the one to the office, the
other to the abilities, but that they did more especially and eminently so
relate: For the Apostles after their last Mission, (Matthew. 28 19. 20.) whereby
they were further warranted to their Office, and Work, were yet to wait for
that promised anointing, (Luke 24. 49. Acts 1. 4.) the special effect whereof
was the enduing them with Gifts of the Holy Ghost, for the better and more
effectual performing of that their Work and Office. Not was it His Ma^esties
meaning to restrain the Extraordinaries in the Apostolical Office to those
Gifts only: (for His Majesty afterward in the same paper mentions other
Extr^ordinaries also, as before is said) but only to instance in those Gifts,
as one sort of Extraordinaries, wherein the Apostles we^e to have no
Successors. But His Majesty's full meaning was, that the whole Apostolical
Office (setting aside all and only what was personal, and extraordinary in
them) consisted in the work of Teaching and Governing, which being both of
necessary and perpetual use in the Church to the Worlds end, the Office
therefore was also to continue* and consequently, the persons of the Apostles
being mortal, to be transmitted and derived to others in succession: And that
the Ordinary Successors of the Apostles immediately, and into the whole Office,
both of Teaching and Governing, are pro^erly the Bishops, the Presbyters
succee^i^g them also, but in part, and into the Office of Teaching only, and
that mediatly and subordinatly to the Bishops, by whom they are to be ordained
and authorized there^n^o, which His Majesty takes not to be, as you call it, a
dissolving of the Apostolical Office.

Now the ground of what His Majesty has said concerning the manner of
Succession to the Apostles, that it may appear not to have been said ^^atis,
is this, The things which the Scriptures record to have been done by Christ, or
his Apostles, or by others at their appointment, are of three sorts some acts
of Power merely extraordinary; others acts of an ordinary power, but of
necessary and perpetual use; oth^rsome lastly, and those not a few,
Occasional and Prudentiall, ^itted to the present condition of the Church in
several times: To the Apostles in matters of the first sort none pretends
succession, nor are either the Examples of what the Apostles themselves did, or
the directions that they gave to others what they should do in matters of the
third sort, to be drawn into consequence so far as to be made necessary
Rules, binding all succeeding Church Officers in all Times to perpetual
observation. So that there remain the things of the middle sort only, which we
may call Substantials, into which the Apostles are to have ordinary, and
standing successors. But then the difference will be, by what certain marks,
Extraordinaries, Substantials, and Prudentials may be known, and distinguished
each from other. Evident it is, the Scriptures do not afford any particular
discriminating Characters whereby to discern them, the Acts of all the three
sorts being related in the like narrative forms, and the directions of all the
three sorts expressed in the like preceptive forms. Recourse therefore must of
necessity be had to those two more general Criterians [the Laws of all humane
actions] Reason and Common Usage. Our own Reason will tell us, that instructing
the People of God in the Christian Faith, exhorting them to Piety, and good
Works, administering the Sacraments, etc. which belong to the Office of
Teaching: That ordaining of Ministers* Inspection over their lives, and
Doctrines, and orher Administrations of Ecclesiastical Affairs belonging to
the Office of Governing, are matters of great importance, and necessary
concernment to the Church in all Ages, and Times; and therefore were to be
concredited to standing Officers in a Line of succession, and accordingly were
^udged, and the continuance of them preserved in the constant usage of the
Churches of Christ: But that on the other side the decrees concerning
Abstinence from Blood, and strangled, Acts the 15. The Directions given for the
ordering some things in the Church Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. For making Provisions
for the Poor, 1 Cor. 16. 1. For the choice and maintenance of Widows, 1 Timothy
5. For the enoyling of the sick, James 5. 14. and other like, were but
Occasional, Prudentiall, and temporary, and were so esteemed by the Churches,
and the practice of them accordingly laid aside. So for the succession into the
Apostolic^ll office, we find in the Scriptures Evidence clear enough, that the
Apostles committed to others, as namely to Timothy and Titus, the power both of
Teaching and Governing the Churches. And common Reason, and Prudence dictating
to us, that it is good for the edifying of the Church, that there should be
many Teachers* within a competent precinct, but not so that there should be
many Governors, And the difference of Bishops and Presbyters to the purposes
aforesaid, having been by continual usage received, and preserved in the
Christian Church, down from the Apostles to the present times; His Majesty
conceives the succcession of Bishops to the Apostles into so much of their
Office as was ordinary, and perpetual, and such a distinction of Bishops and
Presbyters as His Majesty has formerly expressed, needs no further
Confirmation from Scripture (to such as are willing to make use of their Reason
also, which in interpreting Scripture upon all other occasions they are
enforced to do nor any thing by you produced in this Paragraph, any further
Answer; only that distinction of Eminently and Formally, because you illustrate
it by instancing in himself, His Majesty could not but take notice of, which
he either understands not, or thinks your Illustration thereof not to be
very opposite: For Actions, and Operations flow from the Forms of things, and
demonstrate the same as effects do their causes. The Apostles therefore acting
in the ordinary exercise of Church Government, did act not Eminently only, but
formally also, as Bishops rather than Apostles.

7. R^ply. Sect. 10-15 As Concerning Timothy and Titus.
First whether they were Evangelists or no, His Majesty never meant to dispute:
Only, because you often call for Scripture proof, His Majesty thought fit to
admonish you, that in your Answer you take two things for Granted (viz. that
Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, and that Evangelists were such Officers as
you described) Neither of which if it should be denied, you could clearly prove
from Scripture alone, without calling in the help of other Writers to attest
it, as in your Reply you have now done Master Hookers; Neither have you indeed
brought any thing in this Reply out of Scripture to prove either of both
sufficient to convince him that were of a contrary m^^d.

Secondly, you seem (Sect. 12.) to mistake that which was the third Point in
that part of His Majesty's Paper, which was not Whether Timothy and Titus were
Evangelists, or no; (concerning which, His Majesty neither did, nor does
contend) But whether in the Church Government they exercised, they acted as
Evangelists (as you affirm) and so only as extraordinary Officers, or not?
Zuinglius (having said that the Name of a Bishop and Evangelist is the same
thing) proves it from 2 Timothy 4. and concludes, Constat idem fuisse officium
utriusque, Bishop and Evangelist the same Office both. Gerrard says, the word
Evangelist in that place is taken generally, and not in the special sense; that
is to say, for a Minister of the Gospel at large (and the Context there indeed
seems to import to more) and not for an Evangelist by peculiar Office. And
Scultetus not only affirms, That S. Paul appointed Timothy and Titus to
Ephesus and Crete, not as Evangelists, but as Church-Governors; but says
further, That the Epistles written to them both do evince it, and also brings
Reasons to prove it. Upon what particular Reasons Gillespy, etc. reject the
conceit of their acting as Evangelists, his Majesty certainly knows not: But if
this be one of their Arguments (as to their best remembrance from whom His
Majesty had the Information it is) That if whatsoever is alleged from the
Scripture to have been done by the Apostles, and by Timothy and Titus, in point
of Ordination, Discipline and Government, may be eluded by this, that they
acted therein as extraordinary Officers, There will be no proof at all from
Scripture of any power left in any ordinary Church Officer to the purposes
aforesaid: His Majesty then recommendeth to your most sober thoughts to
consider, First, how this conceit of their acting as extraordinary Ministers
only, tends to the subversion of all Ministers, as well as of the Bishops
(since upon this very ground, especially the Socinians deny all Mission and
Ordination of Ministers in the Church.) And secondly, If the contrary be proved
by Gillespy, etc. by good Arguments, That they acted as ordinary Officers in
the Church, then, Whether they have not thereby laid a better foundation for
the claim of Bishops viz. of Governing the Churches as single persons in
ordinary Office) then either they or you are willing to acknowledge.

Thirdly, His Majesty thinks it a great liberty which you take in rendering
the sense of his Reply, as you have done; viz. The Scriptures never call them
Bishops, but the Fathers do: Whereas if you had followed his sense in that
Paper, you might rather have delivered thus, The Scripture describes them as
Bishops, and the Fathers call them so For that of yours, The Scripture calls
Timothy an Evangelist; some of late have refuted it, and rejected it with
scorn: You should have said rather, The Scripture does not any where affirm of
Titus, nor clearly prove of Timothy, that they were (by peculiar Office)
Evangelists; but that in governing the Churches they acted as Evangelists, or
extraordinary Officers, is by sundry late Writers (the Evasion it self having
been but of late minted) refuted and rejected. For that of yours, The Scripture
relates their motion from Church to Church; but some affirm them to be fixed at
Ephesus and in Crete: It should have been, Neither does their motion from
Church to Church hinder, but that they might afterward be fixed at Ephesus and
in Crete: Neither does their being Bishops of Ephesus and Crete hinder, but
they might afterward, for propagation of the Gospel, be by the Apostles
appointment often employed other where. For that of yours, The Scripture makes
distinction of Evangelists and Pastors, but some say, that Timothy and Titus
were both: It should have been, The Scripture makes no such distinction of
Evangelists and Pastors, but that the same persons might not only successively
be both, but even at the same time also be called by both Names.

Fourthly, though you say, You do not undervalue the Testimonies and Cat^logues
mentioned, yet you endeavor (which comes not far short of undervaluing) to
lessen the reputation of both but too much; Of those Testimonies, by putting
them off, as if when they report Timothy and Titus and others to have been
Bishops, they speak but vulgarly, or by way of allusion, and not exactly as to
the point in Debate. But of Hierom, upon whom you chiefly rely in this Cause,
the contrary is evident, who in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers,
wherein he was to deliver things Fide Historica, and to describe the persons of
such as are Registered in that Catalogue by their proper and known distinctive
Titles and Styles, he expressly styles Timothy, Titus, Mark, Polycarp and
others, Bishops of such and such places; and such on the other side as were but
mere Presbyters Ecclesiae Antio henae, or Alexandrinae Presbyter, etc.
observing the difference so constantly and exactly throughout the whole Book,
that nothing can be more clear, then that he understood the word Episcopus no
otherwise, then in the ordinary Ecclesiastical sense, and as a Bishop is
distinct from a Presbyter. As for that passage you allege out of him, by
custom in the judgment of learned men, he must mean the practice of the
Apostolic times; and by Dominica dispositio, the express Precept of Christ,
unless you will have him contradict what himself has written in sundry other
places; Whose Testimonies in the behalf of Episcopal Superiority, are so clear
and frequent in his Writings, that (although he of all the Ancients be least
suspected to favor that Function overmuch) yet the Bishops would not refuse to
make him Arbitrator in the whole Business: As for the Catalogues, there will be
more convenient place to speak of them afterward.

Fifthly, your long Discourse concerning the several stations and removes of
Timothy and Titus (13, 14.) and their being called away from Ephesus and Crete
(15.) His Majesty neither has time to examine, nor thinks it much needful
(in respect of what he has said already) so to do. It is sufficient to make
His Majesty at least suspend his Assent to your conjectures and inferences;
First, that he finds other learned, from the like conjectures to have made
other inferences; as namely, That Timothy and Titus having accompanied Paul in
many journeys, Postea and tandem, were by him constituted Bishops of Ephesus
and Crete. Secondly, that supposing they were, after the times of the several
Epistles written to them, sent by the Apostles to other places, or did
accompany them in some of their journeys, even for a long time together, it
cannot be concluded thence, that they were not then Bishops of those Churches,
or that the Government of those Churches was not committed to their peculiar
charge: If it be supposed withal (which is not reasonable) that their absence
was commanded by the Apostle, and that they left their Churches cum animo
revertendi. Thirdly, that the places which you press again of 1 Timothy 1. 3. and
Tit. 1. 5. weigh so little to the purpose intended by you, even in your own
judgments (for you say only They put fair to prove it) that you cannot expect
they should weigh so much in his, as to need any further Answer; save only,
That His Majesty knows not what great need or use there should be of leaving
Timothy at Ephesus, or Titus in Crete, for ordaining Presbyters and Deacons,
with such particular directions and admonitions to them for their care therein,
if they were not sent thither as Bishops: For either there were Colleges of
Presbyters in those places before their coming thither, or there were not; if
there were, and that such Colleges had power to ordain Presbyters and Deacons
without a Bishop, Then was there little need of sending Timothy and Titus so
solemnly thither about the work; if there were none, then had Timothy and Titus
power of sole ordination, which is a thing by you very much disliked. Those
inconveniences His Majesty thinks it will be hard wholly to avoid upon your
Principles.

That Discourse you conclude with this Observation, That in the same very
Epistle to Timothy, out of which he is endeavored to be proved a Bishop, there
is clear evidence both for Presbyters imposing hands in Ordination, and for
their Ruling: Yet His Majesty presumes you cannot be ignorant, that the
evidence is not so clear in either particular, but that in the former very many
of the Latin Fathers especially, and sundry later Writers, as Calvin and
others, refer the word (...) to the remoter Substantive Grace or Gift, and not
to that of Imposition of hands; and so understand it as meant of the Office of
Presbytery, or as we were wont to call it in English, by derivation from that
Greek word of Priesthood in Timothy himself, and not of a College or Company
of Presbyters collectively imposing hands on him: And that the Greek Fathers,
who take the word collectively, do yet understand by (...) there, a Company of
Apostles or Bishops who laid hands on Timothy in his Ordination to the Office
of a Bishop (as was ordinarily done by three joining in that act in the
Primitive and succeeding times) and not of a College of mere Presbyters. And
that in the latter particular, to wit, that of Ruling, The place whereon His
Majesty conceives your Observation to be grounded, has been by the
Adversaries of Episcopal Government generally and mainly insisted upon, as the
only clear proof for the establishing of Ruling-Lay-Elders, which
interpretation His Majesty knows not how far you will admit of.

VIII. Reply, 16. As to the Angels of the Churches,
HIs Majesty's purpose of naming these Angels in his first Paper, sufficiently
declared in his second, required no more to be granted for the proving of what
he intended, but these two things only: first, That they were Personae
singulares; and then that they had a Superiority in their respective Churches,
as well over Presbyters as others, which two being the Periphrasis or definition
of a Bishop, His Majesty conceived it would follow of it self, That they were
Bishops: That the Epistles directed to them in the respective Reproofs,
Precepts, Threatenings and other the contents thereof, did concern their fellow
Presbyters also, and indeed the whole Churches (which in your last you again
remember) His Majesty did then and does still believe, finding it agreeable
both to the tenor of the Epistles themselves, and to the consentient judgment
of Interpreters. Only His Majesty said and still does, That that hinders not,
but that the Angels to whom the Epistles were directed, were Personae
singulares still: This His Majesty illustrated by a Similitude, which though it
do not hold in some other respects, and namely those by you observed (for His
Majesty never dreamt of a four-footed Similitude) yet it perfectly illustrates
the thing it was then intended for, as is evident enough, so that there needs
no more to be said about it.

That which you insist upon to prove the contrary from Revel. 2. 24. But I say
to you ((...) plurally) and to the rest in Thyatira, is plainly of no force, if
those Copies in which the copalative conjunction is wanting, be true; for then
the Reading would be this, But I say to you the rest in Thyatira: But following
the ordinary Copies, the difficulty is not great, such manner of Apostrophes by
changing the number, or turning the speech to another person, being very usual
both in Prophetique Writings, such as this Book of Revelation is, and in
Epistles of this nature written to one, but with reference to many others
therein concerned. Beza expounds it, (...) to you, (that is, the Angel as
President, and his colleagues the other Presbyters) and to the rest, that is,
to the whole flock or people; which manner of speaking might be illustrated by
the like forms of speech to be used in a Letter written to a Corporation,
wherein the Major and Aldermen especially, but yet the whole Town generally
were concerned, but directed to the Major alone; or from a Lord, containing
some Orders for his own household especially, and generally for the whole
Township, but by the Inscription directed to his Steward only, or the like.

The consent of ancient and later Writers was produced by His Majesty for the
proof of the two things before named only, but especially of the first, viz.
That the Angels were Personae singulares: (For the latter, viz. That they were
superior to Presbyters also, had been confessed by your selves in your first
Grant before) but was not produced to prove the Conclusion it self immediately,
viz. That they were Bishops in distinct sense, although sundry of their
Testimonies come up even to that also. But to the first point, That they were
Single persons, the concurrence is so general, that His Majesty remembers not
to have heard of any one single Interpreter, before Brightman, that ever
expounded them otherwise: And yet the same man (as His Majesty is informed) in
his whole Commentary upon the Revelation, does scarce, if at all, any where
else, save in these Seven Epistles, expound the word Angel collectively, but
still of one single person or other, insomuch as he makes one Angel to be
Gregory the Great, another Queen Elizabeth, another Cranmer, another
Chemnitius, and the like; but generally both the Fathers and Protestant Divines
agree in this, That the Angel was a Single person, some affirming plainly, and
that in terminis, he was the Bishop; some naming the very persons of some of
them, as of Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, and others, some calling him the chief
Pastor or Superintendent of that Church; and those that speak least, and were
more or less disaffected to Bishops, as Beza, Doctor Reynolds, the Geneva Noto,
and even Cartwright himself, the (...) President or chief among the Presbyters.
And this they do sundry of them, not crudely delivering their Opinions only,
and then no more, but they give Reasons for it, and after examination of the
several Opinions, prefer this before the rest, affirming, That Doctissimi
quique interpretes; all the best learned Interpreters so understand it, and
that they cannot understand it otherwise vim nisi facere Textui velint, unless
they will offer violence to the Text.

That which His Majesty said concerning the Subdivision of those that had
divided themselves from the common judgment of this Church, was meant by His
Majesty, as to the Subdivision in respect of this particular of the Angels,
wherein they differ one from another, as to the division in respect of their
dislike of Bishops, wherein they all agree: And truly His Majesty does not yet
see, how either their differences can be possibly reconciled in the former (no
accommodation in the world being able to make all the people of the whole
Church, nor yet a College consisting of many Presbyters, to be one single
person) or their recess wholly excused in the latter, their dissenting from the
common and received judgment, practice of the Christian Church, in the matter
of Episcopacy, and the evil consequents thereof, having in His Majesty's
opinion, brought a greater reproach upon the Protestant Religion, and given
more advantage (or color at least) to the Romish party, to asperse the
Reformed Churches in such sort as we see they do, then their disagreement from
the Church of Rome in any one controverted point whatsoever besides has done.

IX. Reply, 17, 18. As to the Apostles Successors,
HEre little is said, the substance whereof has not been Answered before; His
Majesty therefore briefly declares His meaning herein, That the Apostles were
to have no necessary Successors in any thing that was extraordinary, either in
their Mission or Unction; That His Majesty spoke not of Succession into
Abilities otherwise then by instance, mentioning other particulars withal,
which thing he thinks needs not to have been now the third time by you
mentioned; That in the Apostles Mission or Commission (for His Majesty under
the name of Mission comprehended both) and consequently in the Apostolical
Office, as there was something extraordinary, so there was something ordinary,
wherein they were to have Successors; That Bishops are properly their
Successors in the whole Apostolical Office, so far as it was ordinary, and to
have Successors; That therefore the Bishops Office may in regard of that
Succession, be said to be Apostolical; That yet it does not follow that they
must needs be called Apostles, taking the Denomination from the Office, in as
much as the Denomination of the Apostles, peculiarly so called, was not given
them from the Office whereunto they were sent, but (as the word it self rather
imports) from the immediateness of their Mission, being sent immediately by
Christ himself; in respect whereof for distinction sake, and in honor to their
persons, it was thought fitter by those that succeeded in common usage, to
abstain from that Denomination, and to be styled rather by the Name of Bishops;
That if the Apostles had no Successors, the Presbyters (who are their
Successors in part, immediately and subordinately to the Bishops) will be very
hard set to prove the warrant of their own Office and Mission; which if not
derived from the Apostles (who only received power of Mission from Christ) by
a continued line of Succession, His Majesty sees not upon what other bottom it
can stand.

X. Reply, 19-23. As to the standing Officers of the Church,
YOu insisted upon two places of Scripture, Phil. 1. 1. and 1 Timothy 3. to prove
that there were to be no more standing Officers in the Church, then the two in
those places mentioned (viz.) Presbyters (who are there called Bishops) and
Deacons; whereunto His Majesty's answer was, That there might be other, though
not mentioned in those places: which Answer, though it were alone sufficient,
yet ex abundanti, His Majesty showed withal, that supposing your interpretation
of the word Bishop in both the places (viz. to denote the Office of Presbyter
only) there might yet be given some probable conjectures, which (likewise
supposed true) might satisfy us, why that of Bishop in the distinct sense,
should not be needful or proper to be named in those places.

His Majesty's former Reason, though in Hypothesi, and as applied to the Church
of Philippi, it be but conjectural, yet upon the credit of all Ecclesiastical
Histories and consideration of the condition of those times, as it is set forth
in the Scriptures also, it will appear in Thesi, to be undoubtedly true (viz.)
That the Apostles themselves first planted Churches; that they were perpetual
Governors, and in chief of all the Churches whilst they lived; that as the
burden grew greater by the propagation of the Gospel, they assumed others in
partem curae, committing to their charge the peculiar oversight of the Churches
in some principal Cities, and the Towns and Villages adjacent, as James at
Jerusalem, and others in other places sooner or later, as they saw it expedient
for the service of the Church: That the persons so by them appointed, to such
peculiar charges, did exercise the powers of Ordination, and other Government,
under the Apostles, and are therefore in the Church Stories, called Bishops of
those places in a distinct sense; That in some places where the Apostles were
themselves more frequently conversant, they did for some while govern the
Churches immediately by themselves, before they set Bishops there; and that
after the Apostles times, Bishops only were the ordinary Governors of the
Churches of Christ: And His Majesty believes, it cannot be proved either from
clear evidence of Scripture, or credible testimonies of Antiquity, that ever
any Presbyter or Presbytery exercised the power either of Ordination at all
without a Bishop, or of that which they call Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
ordinary, and by their own sole Authority, or otherwise, then as it was
delogated unto them upon occasion, and for the time by Apostles or Bishops.

For that place of Phil. 1. 1. in particular, His Majesty's purpose being, not
to interpret the place (a work fitter for Divines) but to manifest the
inconsequence of the Argument, whereby you would conclude but two standing
Officers only, because but two there named, gave this as one probable
conjecture why there might be no Bishop in distinct sense there mentioned,
because possibly the Apostles had not as yet set any Bishops over that Church,
which His Majesty did not propose as the only, no, nor yet as the most
probable conjecture (for which cause He delivered it so cautiously, saying
only, It might be probable) but as that which for the present came first into
his thoughts, and was sufficient for his purpose, without the least meaning
thereby to prejudice other interpretations; as namely, of those Expositors who
take the words (with the Bishops and Deacons) as belonging to the persons
saluting, and not to the persons saluted; to this sense Paul and Timotheus the
servants of Jesus Christ, with the Bishops and Deacons, to the Saints at
Philipi, etc. or of those who affirm, and that with great probability to, That
Epaphroditus was then actually Bishop of Philippi, but not to be mentioned in
the Inscription of the Epistle, because he was not then at Philippi, but with
St. Paul at Rome when that Epistle was written: Any of which conjectures, if
they be true (as there is none of them utterly improbable) that place of Phil.
1. 1. will not do you much service in this Question.

In the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, the Apostle directs and admonishes
them as Bishops, particularly concerning Ordination of Ministers, that they do
it advisedly, and Ordain none but such as are meetly qualified for the Service
of the Church; which Directions and Admonitions, His Majesty believes for the
substance to belong to all Bishops of after times* as well as unto them: But His
Majesty sees no necessity why in those Epistles there should be any particular
Directions given concerning the Ordination of Bishops, at least unless it could
be made appear, That they were to ordain some such in those places, nor perhaps
if that could be made to appear, in as much as in those Epistles there is not
the least signification of any difference at all between Presbyters and Deacons
in the manner of their Ordination, both being to be performed by the Bishop, and
by Imposition of Hands, and to both comprehended under that general Rule (Lay
hands suddenly on no man) but only, and that very little, and scarce
considerable (as to the making of distinct Offices) in the qualification of
their persons.

The Ordination therefore of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, being to be
performed in the same manner, and the same qualifications after a sort, saving
such differences as the importance of their several Offices make (which is more
in the degree then in the things) being required in both, it had been
sufficient if in those Epistles there had been direction given concerning the
Ordination and Qualification of but one sort of Church Officers only; as in
the Epistle to Titus, we see there are of Presbyters only, and no mention made
of Deacons in the whole Epistle: whence it may be as well concluded, That there
was to be no other standing Officer in the Church of Crete but Presbyters
only, because S. Paul gives no directions to Titus concerning any other, as
it can be concluded, That there were to be no other Officers in the Church of
Ephesus, but Presbyters and Deacons only, because S. Paul gives no directions
to Timothy concerning any other.

XI. Reply, 23, 27. As to the Ages succeeding the Apostles,
COncerning the judgment of Ecclesiastical Writers about the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, His Majesty conceives the difference to be more in their
Expressions then in their Meaning, some calling it Divine, others Apostolical,
and some (but not many) Ecclesiastical; but that the Superiority of Bishops
above Presbyters began in the Apostles times, and had its foundation in the
Institution either of Christ himself or of his Apostles, His Majesty has not
heard (Aerius excepted) that any till these latter Ages have denied.

For that which you touch upon concerning the word Infallible, His Majesty
supposes you knew his meaning, and he delights not to contend about words.

As for the Catalogues, some uncertainties in a few (a frailty which all humane
Histories are subject to) His Majesty takes to be insufficient to discredit
all differences there are in Historiographers, in reciting the Succession of
the Babylonian, Persian, and Macedonian Kings, and of the Saxon Kings in
England: And we find far more inextricable intricacies in the Fasti
Consulares, the Catalogues of the Roman Consuls (notwithstanding their great
care in keeping the public Records, and the exactness of the Roman Histories)
then are to be found in Episcopal Catalogues, those especially of the chiefest
Cities, as Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus, etc. yet as all men
believe there were Kings in those Countries, and Consuls in Rome in those
times, so (as you might well foresee would be answered) the discrediting of the
Catalogues of Bishops, in respect of some uncertainties (although His Majesty
doubts not, but many of the differences you instance in, may be fairly
reconciled) tends rather to the confirming of the thing it self.

That which you say in Answer hereunto, That the Ecclesiastical Writers called
them Bishops, incomplyance to the Language of their own times, afte the names
of Presbyters and Bishops were distinguished, but that they were not indeed
Bishops in the proper sense now in Question: His Majesty who believes the
distinction of those names, to have begun presently after the Apostles times
(if not rather whilst some of them were living) does consequently believe,
that as they were called, so they were indeed Bishops in that proper sense. It
appears by Ignatius his Epistles every where, how wide the difference was in
his time between a Bishop and a mere Presbyter: If Hierom only and some a
little ancienter then he, had applied the name Bishop to persons that lived
some ages before them, there might have been the more color to have attributed
it to such a compliance as you speak of; but that they received both the name
and the truth of their relations from unquestionable Testimonies and Records,
His Majesty thinks it may be made good by many instances: For example, to
instance in one only, Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, who is thought to be the
Angel of that Church in the Revelation; Ignatius, who was contemporary with
him, wrote one Epistle to him, and sends salutation to him in another as Bishop
of Smyrna; Many years after Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, (whose Writings
were never yet called in question by any) not only affirms him to have been
constituted Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles, but says, That he himself when
he was a boy, had seen him a very old man; Tertullian next, a very ancient
Writer, affirms, That he was Bishop of Smyrna, there placed by St. John.
After comes Eusebius, who in his Ecclesicastical History not only
Historically reports of his being Bishop there, as he does of other Bishops;
but cites also for it the Testimonies both of Ignatius and Irenaeus (which by
the way gives good credit to Ignatius his Epistles too.) Then Hierom also and
others lastly attest the same. And it cannot be doubted, but Eusebius and
Hierom had in their times the like certain Testimonies and Grounds for sundry
others, whom they report to have been Bishops; which Testimonies and Records
are not all come to our hands.

For the Testimonies of Clemens and Ignatius, His Majesty says, First, That
though it be not reasonable that the Testimony of one single Epistle should be
so made the adequate measure of Clemens his Opinion, as to exclude all other
proofs from his Example, or otherwise; yet His Majesty, since Clemens was first
named by you, and the weight of the main Cause lies not much upon it, is
content also for that matter to refer himself to that Epistle. Secondly, That
His Majesty could not but use some earnestness of expression in the cause of
Ignatius against some who have rejected the whole volumn of his Epistles, but
upon such Arguments as have more lessened the rephtation of their own Learning,
then the Authority of those Epistles, in the opinion of moderate and judicious
men: And yet Blendellus, la very learned man, though he reject those Epistles,
confesses notwithstanding the Ancient Fathers gave full Credence thereunto.

The Apostles, you say, did not ordain themselves Bishops of any particular
places; and yet the Bishops of some particular places are reported in the
Catalogues to have been Successors to such or such of the Apostles, and even
the Names of such Apostles are entered into the Catalogues: To this his Majesty
says, That the Apostles were formally Bishops by virtue of them Mission) from
Christ, as has been already declared, but did neither ordain themselves, nor
could be ordained by others, Bishops of such or such particular Cities:
Although His Majesty knows not, but that they might, without prej^dice to
their Apostleship, and by mutual consent, make choice of their several quarters
wherein to exercise that Function, as well as St. Peter and St. Paul by consent
went the one to the Circumcision, the other to the Gentiles: But such
apportionments did not entitle them to be properly called Bishops of those
places, unless any of them by such Agreement did fixedly reside in some City;
of which there is not in the History of the Church any clear unquestionable
Example: If James the Lords Brother (who was certainly Bishop of Jerusalem)
were not one of the Twelve Apostles, as the more general opinion is that he was
not; yet did the Churches of succeeding times, for the greater honor of their
Sees, and the memory of so great Benefactors, enter the head of the Lists or
Catalogues of their Bishops, the Names of such of the Apostles as had either
first pianted the Faith, or placed Bishops, or made any long abode and
continuance, or ended their days among them: yet does not the true Title of
being Successors to the Apostles thereby accrue to the Bishops of those places,
more then to other Bishops, but all Bishops are equally Successors to the
Apostles in two other respects; The one, for that they derive their Ordination
by a continued Line of Succession from the Apostles: The other, for that they
succeed into the same Apostolical Power and Function, which the Apostles as
ordinary Pastors had.

Your motion to reduce this whole Dispute to Scripture alone, were the more
reasonable, if the matter in question were properly a point of Faith: And yet
even in points of Faith (as the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Canon of
Scripture, and sundry other) the uniform judgment of the Church has been ever
held of very considerable regard; but being a matter of Fact, as before was
said, which the Scriptures do not deliver entirely and perspiscuously in any
one place together, but obscurely, and by parts; so that the understanding
thereof depends merely upon conjectural Interpretations, and uncertain
probabillities, nor assure any certain distinguishing Characters, whereby to
discern what therein is extraordinary, what Prudential, and what of necessary
and perpetual Obligation, there seems to his Majesty to be a necessity of
admitting the subsequent Judgment and Practice of the Christian Churches into
the Trial.

XII. Reply, 29, etc. As to the three Questions proposed by His Majesty,
HIs Majesty rests very much unsatisfied, That you have now again wholly
declined the answering of those three Questions so clearly proposed by him,
which your selves also confess to be of great importance, upon this only
pretense, That the whole volumn of Ecclesiastical Policy is contained in them:
Whereas His Majesty did neither expect nor require from you any large or
Polemical Discourse concerning those QUESTIONS; but yet did conceive you were
(in order to His Satisfaction and your own Undertaking) in some sort obliged to
have declared in few words what your judgment was therein, with the grounds
thereof, that so His Majesty might have taken the same into His further
consideration, then which nothing could have more condued to the informing of
his judgment, and the satisfaction of his Conscience; which His Majesty also
further conceives you might have done, with the tenth part of that pains you
have hitherto bestowed to other purpose, and therein have given full as much
satisfaction to His desires, as he expected, and in all likelihood better
satisfaction to His judgment then he yet finds, or can hope to find from
you, so long as you hold off from declaring your opinions concerning those
Questions: For certainly until one of these three things can be clearly
evidenced unto His Majesty (viz.) Either that there is no certain form of
Church Government at all prescribed in the Word, or if therebe, that the Civil
power may change the same as they see cause; or if it be unchangeable, that it
was not Episcopal, but some other, His Majesty thinks himself excuseable in the
judgment of all reasonable men, if he cannot as yet be induced to give his
consent to the utter Abolition of that Government in the Church, which he found
here settled to his hands, which has continued all over the Christian world,
from the times of the Apostles, until this last age, and in this Realm ever
since the first Plantation of Christianity, as well since the Reformation as
before, which has been confirmed by so many Acts of Parliament, approved as
consonant to the holy Word of God, in the Articles of our Religion, and by all
the Ministers of the Church of England, as well by their personal
subscriptions, as otherwise, so attested and declared, and which himself in his
judgment and conscience, has for these many years been, and yet is persuaded
to be at least of Apostolical Institution and Practice: Truly, His Majesty
cannot but wonder what should be the reason of your great shyness and
unwillingness to discover your minds in a matter of so great and necessary
consequence: and for a final conclusion of this whole dispute (which His
Majesty thinks fit to shut up with this Paper) he must plainly tell you, That
your endeavors to have given him satisfaction in the Questions proposed, would
have added much in his opinion to the reputation of your ingenuity in the whole
undertaking; it being not probable you should work much upon his judgment,
whilst you are fearful to declare your own, nor possible to relieve his
Conscience, but by a free declaring of yours.

Nevertheless, His Majesty likes well of your Prayer in the close of your
Paper, and thinks you should do very well to join therewith your utmost
possible endeavors toward the settling of Truth, and a happy Peace in this
unsettled Church and Kingdom.

FINIS.

