The City Remembrancer. OR, A SERMON PREACHED To the NATIVE-CITIZENS, OF
LONDON, At their solemn Assembly in PAUL'S on Tuesday, the 23 of June, A. D.
MDCLVII.

By EDM. CALAMY B. D. and Pastor of the Church at ALDERMANBVRY.

Psalm. 87. 4, 5, 6. -- This man was born there, And of Zion it shall be said,
This and that man was born in her; and the Highest himself shall establish her.

The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, That this man was born
there. Selah.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John Baker, at the Sign of the Peacock in Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

TO THE Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and all other Citizens of London,
who received their first birth in so renowned a Metropolis, and were of late
Assembled together for the acknowledgement of this Passage of Divine Providence
toward them.
Much honored and beloved in Christ,
IT cannot be denied, but that GOD has blessed this City above most Cities in
the world with blessings of all kinds, and more especially, with the blessing
of the Gospel. And although our sins are many, and great, and such sins may be
found amongst us, for which God has destroyed other great Cities; yet
notwithstanding he has hitherto preserved us, and dealt with us, not according
to Rule, but according to Prerogative. He has made London an exception from
his general way of proceeding with other Cities, and has spared us upon the
account alone of free grace; Even so Father, Mat. 11: 26
for so it seems good in thy sight.

O that this extraordinaryand distinguishing love of God, might at last lead us
to Repentance! Luc. 19. 42.
And that in this our day we might know those things which belong unto our
peace, before they be hid from our eyes; That our Preservationsfrom former
judgments,may not prove Reservationsunto greater, And that we may not (by
reason of our unthankfulness, and unfruitfulness)drink the dregs of Gods wrath,
and at last be be made a spectacle of divine indignation, and an exampleto
others, because we would not learn righteousnessby their Examples.

The chief design of this ensuing Sermon (now made public by your entreaty)
is, to persuade the Citizensborn in this famous City, by their Prayers, Unity,
Piety, Verity, and Charity, to seek the welfare and happinessof it; And to be
so holy and heavenly in their lives, that they may be accounted able,and worthy
to stand in the gap, to hinder the Judgments of God from falling upon it.

It is not only not contrary,but very suitable to Christian Religion to seek
the good (in an especial manner) of the Place where we were born,or bred up.
Luc. 4. 16.
Because Jesus Christ was bred in Nazareththerefore he preached first in that
place. Elton upon Romans 9.
This he did (says one) as a recompense for his education.Because Paul was
bred, Act 22. 3. (...).
and brought up in Jerusalem,and of the stock of Israel,therefore he was in
great heaviness, and continual sorrow of heart; and could have wished himself
accursed from Christ for his brethren, Romans 9. 2, 3.
his kinsmen according to the flesh.

Religion does not take away natural affection, but perfects it, it does not
extinguish,but order and regulateit. It is your great Dutyto study to be
blessings and Mercies, as to the placeswhere you were brought up,so also to the
places where you were born. Aristotelem hand minus quam Patrem suum initio
dilexit, quod a Patre, ut viveret, a Praeceptore, ut been viveret, accepisset
Pezelius.
It is reported of Alexander the great, that he loved his Master Aristostle,as
much as he did his Father Philip; because (as he said) from his Father he
received his being, and from his Master his wel-being.I will not dispute,
whether we owe more to the place where we were born, or to the place where we
were bred, Sure I am. We owe much to both; and it is our duty to endeavor to
be blessings both to the one, and to the other.

It is a Providence not to be slighted, that you are Citizens of no mean City,
but this will little avail, if you be not a credit and an ornament to it. The
excellency of a Cityconsisteth in the excellencyof the Citizens; without which
an excellent City is rather a Bethaven, than a Bethel, rather an Hell, than a
Heaven. Human storiesrelate what great blessings some Persons have been to the
places, Ejus gratia Lacedaemonii in reliquam Baeotiam saevientes Thebanis
pepercerunt. Ita and Alexander quum Thebas everteret, and in omnes saeviret
sine discrimine, Pindari Vatis penatibus familiaeque parci jussit. Cicero
contra Verrem.
where they received their first Breath. The Lacedaemonianswhen they laid
waste all Baeotia, spared Thebes, because Pindar (that famous Poet) was born
there; And when Alexander destroyed it, he commanded his Soldiers to spare
Pindars Family, etc.

The Persians when they waged War withal Grecia, would not hurt the Isle of
Delos, because it was the place where Apollo was born, etc. O let it be your
care, that you may be Noah's, Abraham's, Lots, and Daniels to the place where
you were born; That God by your prayers and tears may be moved to spare this
great city* and multiply his blessing upon it.

For this end and purpose, your great study must be to walk worthy of the
Gospel,which you enjoy with much purity, power, plenty,and liberty; You must
not only have it with you,but in you; not only be Professors,but practisers
of it; not only be fellow-Citizens of London, but of the Saints, and of the
household of God. Ephesians. 2. 19.
You must labor to be Citizens and Freemen of that City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Heb. 11. 10
For you cannot sin at so cheap a rate in London, as some may do in other
places. When you sin, you sin against greater light, and love, against greater
means, and mercies than others do. And therefore your sins will more provoke
the Almighty, and bring down greater, and more sudden desolations upon you; You
are Capernaum-like, lifted up to heaven, Mat. 11. 23
and if you slight the Gospel as she did, you shall be brought down to hell,
and it shall be easier for Capernaum at the great day than for you. The great
God expects, that you should be like Hananiah who feared God above many. Neh.
7. 2.
That you should be in the highest for me of Christ's School, taller by the head
in gracethan men in other places. He looks that you should do (...),something
singular and extraordinary; Mat 5. 47.
He has given you more than he has given to others, and he requires more from
you, the Lord grant you may return more!

There were many eyes upon you, beholding what you would do (after this
following Sermon was preached, in which you were earnestly excited unto good
works) at your Public Dinner. Give me leave to tell you freely and plainly;
You have not as yet sufficiently answered the expectation,either of others, or
of many of your own Company;There were some little spots (this year also) in
your Feast of Charity; (I mean) some defects, and blemishes,not (I hope) for
want of affection, but of observing a due Method; howsoever; Thus much I must
publish to the World both for the Honor of God, and for your honor; I received
a Note of these particulars from the worthy Stewards of the late Feast.
you have doubled your Charity this year, above what it was the last year; You
have bound out 30. Boys to be Apprentices;You have given considerable sums
to Ministers born in London, and Ministers Widows, in distress, and to poor
Scholars in the Universities; And my hope is, That the next year you will
double the sum above what you have given this year.

I am verily persuaded, that, what God said of Corinth,is very true of London,
He has much people in this City; Act. 18. 10.
Though there are many wicked amongst us, yet there are many, yea, very many,
both born, and brought up in London,who truly fear God; and for their sakes*
God has hitherto spared us. My prayers is, that God would increasetheir
number; That this City may be a City of Refuge, Zeph. 3. 1.
for distressed Christians; Nah. 3. 1.
not an oppressing,or a bloody City; but a faithful and holy Citywherein* God
may delight to dwell, and that Salvation may be appointed to her for Walls and
Bulwarks. Isa. 26. 1.
So prays*

Your (...) and fellow servant in promoting the common good, Edm. Calamy.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Native CITIZENS OF LONDON.
The City Remembrancer.
Act. 21. 39. But Paul said, I am a Man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a City in
Cilicia, a Citizen of no mean City.


WE are here met this day, not only as Christians, but as fellow Citizens, to
bless the name of the Lord, that we were born not only in England, but in
London; That we are Native-Citizens of no mean City. For the better Celebrating
of this mercy, I have chosen this suitable Text, which contains Saint Paul's
just and necessary defense of himself against the unjust accusation of the
Chief Captain of the Roman Band. The chief Captain accuses him for being an
Egyptian, a Seducer, and a Murderer. Art not thou Verse. 38.
that Egyptian which before these days made an uprore, and leddest out to
the wilderness four thousand men that were Murderers? In this verse Saint Paul
makes his Apology, which consists of three parts.

1. First
He describes his Original; He was (...), I am (says he) a man which am a Jew,
I am not that wicked and cursed Egyptian you speak on, but I am a Jew, of a
religious and noble extraction. For though the Jews are at this day the scorn
and contempt of the world, justly odious to all good Christians, because of
their murdering of Christ; yet the time was when they were the only people God
had upon earth, when they were a Holy Nation, when they were naturally holy, as
it is, Gal. 2. 15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.
They were not sinners by nature, as the Gentiles, but holy by nature (I do not
mean with the holiness of regeneration, but with a federall holiness) They were
all in Covenant with God, and their very Land was holy, It was Immanuels Land.
Isa. 8. 8.
The time was when they were not only a holy, but a noble people: The
honourablest Nation under the whole heavens. Romans 9.
For to them, as the Apostles, says pertained the adoption, and the glory, and
the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
promises. Whose are the Fathers ( those noble and honorable Patriarcks) and of
whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all God blessed for
ever. Jesus Christ was not only the Son of man, but the Seed of Abraham. This
is the first part of Paul's Apology. He was a Jew, of a godly and noble original.

Country where he was born; He was not only a Jew as to his original, but as to
his Country, he was a Cilician, which is a Province in Anatolia, or Asia minor,
a Country says Ammianus Marcellinus, dives omnibus bonis, wealthy and
fruitful of all necessaries. He was born in a rich and fruitful Country.

Native City, and the dignity and excellency of it; He was a Jew of Tarsus,
that is, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, so called, in opposition (says Cajetan) to
another Tarsus in Bythinia. Cajetan. in locum.
He was a Citizen of no mean City, Vbi minus dicitur and plus intelligitur.
(...). In these words, there is a (...), where more is to be understood, than
is expressed. He was a Citizen of no mean City, that is, He was a Citizen of a
Famous City. Josephus calls it (...), Stephanus, (...). It was urbs
celebratissima, a most renowned and celebrious City. It was the Metropolis of
all Cilicia. Ciliciae totius Princeps and Caput.
Solinus says, it was matter urbium, The Mother of Cities, Diodorus Siculus
says, That for the kindness it shew-to Julius Caesar, and after him to
Augustus Caesar, it was called Juliopolis. In this famous City was Paul born.

The words may be handled two ways.
The words thus expounded, may be handled two manner of ways.

Relatively
1. Relatively, as they are purely Apologetical, and satissactory answers to the
unjust accusations laid to Paul's charge, by the chief Captain. I shall not
meddle with them in this sense, because it would lead me to a discourse.
Heterogeneal to the occasion of this days meeting.

Absolutely.
2. Absolutely, as they are an Historical Narraration of Paul's extraction,
Country, and native City. In this sense I shall speak to them. I shall sum up
all that I have to say into this Doctrinal conclusion.

Doctrine.
Doct. That to be descended from religious and noble ancestors, and to be born
in a famous Country and City, are considerable privileges, and passages of
Divine Providence not to be slighted or disregarded. This proposition
consists of four branches, of which I shall speak in order.

1. The first branch of the Proposition.
To be descended from godly and religious Ancestors is a desirable privilege,
and no small honor. This was Paul's prerogative. He was a Jew descended from
the holy Patriarcks. It is a great happiness when a man can truly say, O God,
thou art my God, and my Fathers God, as it is, Exodus 15. 2. Genesis 32. 9.
And with Jacob, O God of my Father Abraham, Genesis 17, 7.
and my Father Isaac. For God has promised not only to be the God of the
righteous, but of their Seed; and David says, That the generation of the
righteous shall be blessed. Psalm. 112. 2.
There is a saying amongst some men, Happy is the Child whose Father goes to
the Devil. But this is a wicked and cursed Speech, For God punishes the sins
of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate him. But I rather say, Happy is the child whose Father goes to
Heaven. For God shows mercy unto thousands of them that love him and keep his
Commandments. God promises to bless Isaac, and to multiply his seed as the
Stars of heaven, because that Abraham his Father obeyed his voice, and kept his
Statutes and Laws, Genesis 26. Col. 4. 10.
3, 4, 5. And the Apostle commends Marcus to the Colosstans to be regarded and
respected by them, because he was Barnabas Sisters Son; he was the Sisters Son
of a godly man.

2. The second branch the Proposition Phil. 3. 5.
To be descended from noble and illustrious Progenitors is a considerable
privilege. This was also Paul's Prerogative, He was of the stock of Israel, of
the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Eccl. 10. 17.
The wiseman says, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of
Nobles, etc. Gaspar Streso in locum.
To be nobly born, is natural medium and stimulus ad virtutem and gloriam (as
one says,) it is a natural help, and a singular incitation and provocation to
riches and glory. When Bathshebah would dissuade Solomon her Son from
intemperancy in drinking, she brings an Argument from the nobleness of his
birth, Prove. 31. 4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, It is not for Kings to drink
Wine, nor for Princes strong drink. It is not fit for any to drink
immoderately, much less for Kings and Princes. Alexander scorned to run a Race
with any who were not Kings, because he himself was a Kings Son. Et tu ea tibi
accepe non es enim Themistocles.
And because Themistocles was a great General, therefore he would not stoop to
take up a rich Booty, but bids a common Soldier do it. Nobility is a great
spur to virtue. The very Heathen could say, Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis,
Virtue when it is joined with Nobility is much more glorious and illustrious,
than when joined with poverty. It is like a Diamond in a Golden Ring: It is
much more beautiful, and much more useful and serviceable. And therefore it is
reckoned as a great judgment, when the Nobles are cut off from a Nation,
Isaiah 39. 12. They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom, but none
shall be there, and all their Princes shall be nothing.

3. The third branch of the Proposition.
To be born in a rich, fruitful and religious Nation is no inconsiderable
privilege. For that God which sets bounds to our lives which we cannot pass,
does also set bounds to our habitations, Act. 17. 26. And has made of one
blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. That
one man is born in Spain, another in France, Streso in Acta etc.
another in Turks, non fit Casu sed a Deo desinitur. It is not by Chance and
Fortune, but by the wise ordering of God. Genesis 11.
When God first scattered men over the face of the earth, it was divino ductu
and distributione, by divine guidance, and distribution, and as some think
(says Streso) by the Ministry of Angels. As Joshua distributed the Land of
Canaan by a divine lot: So does God by his Providence, appoint in what places
of the world every man shall dwell. It is no little happiness to us, that are
now assembled this day, In Panegyric Orat. to Constantius.
that we are by Nation Englishmen. When Julius Caesar first came into Britain
(which we now call England,) Speed.
he thought he had found out another world. Aristides a Greek Author calls it
by way of excellency, The great Island. Charles the Great styles it* The
granary and Storehouse for the Western world. Matthew. Parisiensis calls it,
hortus deliciarum, puteus inexhaustus etc. A Paradise of pleasures, This saying
of Josephus is quoted by Speed in his History of great Britain.
a well which can never be drawn dry. Josephus says, That if God had made the
world round like a Ring, as he has done like a Globe, Britain might most
worthily have been the gem of it.

If all the world were made into a Ring.
Britain the Gem, and grace thereto should bring.
4. things in commendation of England.
There are four other considerations may be added in commendation of this
fortunate Island (as it has anciently been called) of great Britain.

1. It was one of the first Nations that were converted from heathenism unto
Christianity; De Britanni carum Eccle^^arum primordiis.
the learned Archbishop of Armagh proves by undeniable Arguments, that Joseph
of Arimathea Preached and Planted the Gospel in Britain. The Apostle 2 Timothy 4.
21. makes mention of Claudia, and Pudens her Husband, That this Claudia was of
the British Nation, the same Author proves by an Epigram in Martial, Claudia
caeruleis cum sit Ruffina Britannis,
Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet? etc.


2. The first King that ever professed Christian Religion, was King Lucius born
here in this Nation.

3. The first Emperor that ever owned Christ and his Gospel, was Constantine
the great, born in England.

4. The first King that ever renounced the Popes Supremacy, was King Henry the
Eight; and the first King that ever wrote against the Pope, to prove him to be
the Antichrist, and the whore of Babylon, was King James of famous memory. And
therefore I may safely say, That it is a providence not to be slighted and
disregarded, that we are by Nation Englishmen.

The 4th branch of the Proposition.
Fourthly, to be born in a Noble and famous City is a desirable privilege. Paul
reckons it as a mercy that he was born in Tarsus, and that he was a Citizen
of no mean City. There is (I confess) some contention amongst learned men,
about the place of Paul's birth. As seven Cities strove about Homers birth, so
there are many places which challenge an interest in this holy Apostle. Hierome
brings it as the common opinion of his time, Libr. de Scriptor. Eccl. in Paulo.
that he was born in Giscalis a Town in Iudaea, and bred up in Tarsus. But in
another place he recants this opinion and yet it is revived by Beda, In ep. ad
Philem. Beda in c. 21. Act. Masius in c. 19. Josh. Arias Montanus, in Apparatu
etc. Ebionaei apud Epiphan. haeres. 30.
Masius, and Arias Montanus. Some say he was born in Graecia, others that he
was a Citizen of Rome. But (as Lorinus well says) Paulo ipsi natale suum
prodenti solum credendum est, We must believe Paul above all other witnesses,
He says expressly, That he was (...) Born in Tarsus, Act. 22. 3. Act. 22. 27.
indeed he says of himself that he was a Roman, But how? Not by birth* but
because Tarsus was invested with the Roman privileges. There was a time when it
was a singular Prerogative to be a Cicero.
Citizen of Rome, Haec vox civis Romanus sum, saepe in ultimis Terris, etc.
This word, I am a Roman Citizen, relieved and rescued many in the utmost parts
of the Earth. It was terror mundi, says Cicero. It was not lawful to bind or
scourge a Roman Citizen; the chief Captain paid dear for this freedom; Acts 22.
28.
but Paul was freeborn, because born in Tarsus, which was a Roman Colony, and
made free of Rome by M. Antonius.

It is no contemptible Prerogative to us here present, that we were born in
London; a City famous in Nero's time (which is almost 1600. years ago) for
concourse of Merchants, Speed.
and of great renown for provision of all things necessary. Ammianus
Marcellinus gives it a glorious Title, calling it, Augusta, a stately and
magnificent City. This was 1200* years ago. Cornelius Tacitus 300. years before
him, says, that it was, valde celebre copia negotiatorum and commeatu, very
renowned for commerce, and multitude of Merchants. It is the Metropolis and
Mother-City of the Nation. If England be a Paradise of pleasure, London is as
the Tree of life in this Paradise. And surely if Plato accounted it a great
honor that he was a Grecian born and not a Barbarian, and that he was not
only a Grecian, but an Athenian, it must needs be an honor to us here
assembled, not only that we are Englishmen, but Englishmen born in the Noble
and famous City of London, That we are Citizens of no mean City. If any here
desire to be farther informed of the excellency of this City, let me entreat
him to peruse a Book printed this year, and composed by Mr. James Howel,
called Londinopolis. Thus you have the Proposition explained in all the four
Branches of it.

But now I must add, That though the things forementioned be considerable
Privileges, yet they are but outward and temporal privileges, common to the
worst, as well as the best of men; Cateline was born in Rome, as well as
Caesar; Caligula and Nero, as well as Augustus and Trajan. They are but fleshly
and carnal prerogatives, which a man may enjoy, and yet be under the wrath of
God, and guilt of eternal damnation. They are the Privileges of Paul a
Pharisee, and of Paul a Persecutor; they are such Privileges, which after he
was converted, he accounted but as dung and dross in comparison of, and
competition with, the Lord Jesus Christ. But yet howsoever, they are
privileges, and passages of Divine Providence, not to be slighted. And
therefore in the Application, I shall first improve this Proposition, as it is
a desirable privilege; and secondly, as it is but an outward, common, and
temporal privilege.

Use 1.
First, As it is a considerable and desirable privilege; and upon this account
alone it will afford us three profitable and seasonable Exhortations.

Exh. 1.
Let us this day bless the Lord for this mercy, that we are Englishmen and
Londoners born; and especially, that we were born in England since it became
Christian, and since it was reformed from Popish Superstition. Cambden.
There was a time when Britain was tristissimum superstitionum chaos, Act. 17.
16
when London was (...) (as Paul says of Athens) a City wholly given to
idolatry; when we offered our sons and daughters alive in Sacrifice to those
that were no Gods, Cambden.
non ad honorem sed ad injuria^s religionis, not as an honor, but as a shame
to Religion. The time was, when we were drowned in popish superstition, when
England was the Popes Vassail, Matthew: Parisiens.
and the Popes Ass (as it was called) to bear all his burdens; but God out of
his infinite mercy, has freed us of those burdens, and we have enjoyed the
Protestant reformed Religion, for an hundred years together. O let us bless God
that we were born in England since it was reformed from Heathenism and Popery;
that we were born, not in Egypt, but in Goshen; not in a valley of darkness,
but in a valley of vision; not in Babylon, but in Sion; (as you heard
excellently the last year) Le^ us bless God that we were born in London, not
only because of the excellency of the situation of it, and the many outward
accommodations to be found in it above other Cities; but because of the
abundance of the Gospel of salvation herein dispensed. Nulla digs tam nubilis
in quasol in hac insula non conspiciatur. Solinus.
It is said of the Isle of Rhodes, that it is fo happy an Island, that there is
not one day in the year, in which the Sun does not shine upon it; this is true
of London in a spiritual sense; there is not one day in the year, in which you
do not enjoy the sun^shine of the Gospel. This is the glory of London; without
this, London is no more than Ligorn, or Constantinople, or Paris, or any other
City. And this is one main end of our meeting this day, to praise the Lord for
this happy providence, that we were born in London, where we enjoy more of the
purity, plenty, power and liberty of the Gospel, than any other City in the
world. Besides this;

Let us this day bless God that London is yet a City, and that it has not long
ago been made like unto Sodom and Gomorrha. It is most certain, Isa. 1. 4.
that we are a sinful City, a City laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
children that are corrupters, that are miserably apostatised, both in doctrine,
worship, and conversation: as the sins of Niniveh cried aloud to God for
vengeance: so do the sins of London; the pride, the hypocrisy, the
covetousness, the injustice, the contempt of the Gospel, the profanation of the
Sabbath, the drunkenness, perjury and whoredoms of London; these and such like
sins, cry to God for vengeance. Now that God should not only not destroy us,
but multiply his blessings upon us (as appears by our meeting this day;) That
God should preserve us so many years from the man devouring plague; and that in
all the time of the late unhappy wars, God should preserve us from being
plundered, from popular tumults and insurrections, from being burnt with fire,
and turned into an heap of ashes; this heightens the mercy of God, and makes it
a blessing in folio. Let us praise God exceedingly for it. This is a Duty
belonging to all that live in the City, but more especially to us who are
Native Citizens.

2. Exh. 2.
Let us labor to be a credit, and an ornament to the place where we were born;
as we are Citizens of no mean City, so let not our conversation be low, and
mean, but holy and honorable; this was Paul's commendation, he was a greater
credit to Tarsus, than Tarsus was to him: Therefore Ignatius writing (in one of
his Epistles) to the Tarsenses, calls them, Pauli cines and discipulos, Paul's
fellow-Citizens and Disciples, as accounting it a great honor to them, that so
famous a man, as Paul, was born in their City; Thus Austin was a greater credit
to Hippo, than Hippo was to him, and Hippocrates was a greater blessing to the
Island Co^ where he was born, than the Island was to him. I here are some men
who are curses, and Plague* soars, to the places where they receive their first
breath, who Viper*like tear in pieces the bowels of the Mother that bare them:
such a one was Nero, who set his own City on fire, and rejoiced to behold the
flames of it; such another was Caligula, who wished, that all Rome had but one
neck, that he might cut it off at once: Many such Monsters there are in most
Cities, who are vomicae and carcinomata civitatis, diseases, impostumations,
stains, and blemishes to the places where they are born; who are Citizens, but
drunken Citizens; Citizens, but adulterous Citizens; Citizens, but covetous,
and oppressing Citizens; but I hope better things of you here present this day.

Two things are to be done that we may be a credit, and an ornament to London.
What must we do, that we may be ornaments to the place where we were born?

You must do two things: You must be just in your words, and actions toward
men, and holy in your carriage toward God; these are the two Poles upon which
the happiness of London turns; then is a City happy, when Justice and holiness
meet together, when the men thereof make Conscience of their duty to God, as
well as to their Neighbor; and of their duty to their Neighbor, as well as of
their duty toward God, when there is a conjunction of holiness and
righteousness; blessed is that Land, and blessed is that City, which is in such
a condition; happy London, if a Minister could rationally pray Jeremies prayer
over it, The Lord bless thee O habitation of justice, Jer. 31. 23.
and mountain of holiness.

1. You must be just in your words and actions toward men. There is a great
complaint throughout the whole Nation, against diverse men professing godliness
in this City, that they are false to their trust, unfaithful in their promises,
unjust in their buying and selling: That they are very religious in the
public Congregation, but very unconscienceable in their private Shops; That
the faithful City is become an Harlot, It was full of judgment, and
righteousness lodged in it, but now her silver is become dross, and her wine
mixed with water; Now it is full of unrighteousness and un^ustice. This is a
bloody charge, and if true, renders y^u Traitors and Rebels, to the City of
your Nativity. Remember this day, that God hates holiness if it be not joined
with righteousness; That an unjust holy man is an abomination to the Lord;
That holiness without righteousness is not holiness, but hypocrisy.

2. You must be holy in your carriage toward God; you must not only give man
his due, but God his due; you must not only have the Gospel, but obey the
Gospel; you must not only be good Citizens, but good Christians. Justice
without holiness may make you good Heathens, but will never make you good
Christians: Heb. 12. 14
An unholy justice is as odious to God, as an unjust holiness. Remember the
words of the Apostle, Without holiness no man shall see God; Though you be
never so just toward your Neighbors, if you be not also holy toward God, you
shall never go to heaven.

Let us sincerely desire, Exhort.
and earnestly endeavor, 3.
and seek the good of the City wherein we were born. This was the great
commendation of Mordecah, Fster 10. 3. He sought the wealth of his people; Not
his own wealth, but the wealth of his people: Such another was Nehemiah, Neh 2.
10.
he sought the welfare of the children of Israel; he was a man of a public
spirit, he did not Monopolize, and ingrosse all to himself; he was a true
Commonwealth's man, not a Private-wealth's man, he sought the good of the
people of God, more than his own: Such another was Augustus Caesar, Invenit
late retia^ reliquit marmoream.
It is said of him, That he found the City of Rome weak and in rubbish, and
left it adamantine and invincible: such must you be, you must seek the good of
the place of your nativity, you must not only labor to enrich, enoble, and
greaten your selves, to make your selves happy; But you must labor to enrich,
enoble, greaten, and make London happy and blessed; this you must do six manner
of ways,

1. Six ways to make London happy.
By your prayers; you must pray for the peace of this our Jerusalem, that peace
may be within her Walls, and prosperity within her Palaces: For your Brethren,
and Companions sake, you must say, and pray peace be within thee: For in the
peace of London is your peace wrapped up, in the happiness of London, your
happiness is involved. Pray that the name of London, from this day may be
Jehovah Shammai, Ezekiel. 48. 35.
the Lord is there; that the Lord would make it an habitation of Justice, and a
Mountain of Holiness: Pray that the Sun of the Gospel may not set in our days,
but that it may be continued to us, and our posterities for evermore.

2. The 2d. way to make London happy.
By living together in love and union; behold Psalm. 133.
how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! it
is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even
Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments; as the dew of
Herm^n, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Sion; for there the
Lord commanded the blessing, even life for ever. Psalm. 122 3.
As long as Jerusalem was a City compact together, and at unity within it self,
so long it prospered; But when it came to be divided into two sticks, into
Judah, and Ephraim (the two Tribes and the Ten Tribes) these two sticks never
left beating one another, till they were at last both of them destroyed. It is
observed by Learned men, That all Englands enemies from without, were brought
into the Land by divisions from within; Intestine divisions brought in the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans. Tacitus says, that the Britains (when
Caesar came in) factionibus trahebantur, and dunt singuli pugnabant universi
vincuntur, etc. The divisions of London at this day are very many, and very
great. O that this days meeting might be some ways isntrumental for the
healing of them. That our feasting together may not only in name, but in
reality prove to be a Love-Feast. That he^^eforth we would cease striving one
against another; and strive together for the Faith of the Gospel. That we
would abstain from all dividing names, principles, and practices. That
Magistrates and Ministers would join together for the public good. That Aaron
and Huz would hold up (not weaken) the hands of Moses. Always remembering that
sad speech of Jesus Christ, Mat. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self,
is brought to desolation, and every City or House divided against it self,
shall not stand.

Thirdly, 3. The third way to make London happy.
By your holy lives and conversations; For Holiness will not only preserve your
own persons from Hell, but the City wherein you live from ruin and
destruction. Here are assembled this day at least a thousand persons born in
London; Now if all you were really holy, what a wall of Brass would it be for
the defense of the City? For if God would have spared five Cities, if there had
been but ten righteous persons in them, How much more will he spare one City,
wherein there are a thousand righteous men? Sin and iniquity brings down the
judgments of God upon Cities and Kingdoms. There is a story of two men riding
through a Town in Germany, burnt down by Soldiers; The one said to the other,
Hic fuit hostilitas, Here the enemy has been; but the other wisely and
Christianly answered, Hic fuit iniquitas, Here sin has been; It was the sin of
this place, which made way for the Soldiers to come to destroy it. When Phocas
the Murderer of the Emperor Mauritius had built a high and strong Wall for his
safety and defense, he heard a voice from heaven saying to him, Though thou
buildest thy Wall, as high as Heaven, (...).
sin is within, and this will easily expose it to destruction. It is sin which
causes God to burn up Cities; and therefore you must by a holy life, seek the
good of this City.

Fourthly, The 4th way to make London happy.
By your love to the godly, learned, and painful Ministry of the City;
Contempt of the Ministry is a City-ruinating-sin, It is a sin which brings
destruction without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. They mocked the Messengers of God,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of God arose against his people,
till there was no remedy. When Hanun the Ammonite abused David's Ambassadors,
this affront made him to stink before David (as it is expressly said, 2 Samuel 10.
6.) and brought destruction upon him and all his people: Ministers rightly
called and ordained, are the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; when you despise
them, you despise Christ; Luc. 20. 16.
when you starve them for want of maintenance, Christ takes it as an injury
against himself, and he will revenge their quarrel. One great reason, Luc. 13.
34.
why God destroyed Jerusalem, was, because she killed the Prophets, and stoned
them that were sent to her. And the reason why Heidelberg that famous City was
laid wast, was (as I was told by a Reverend and learned Scultetus, who
afterward came over into England.
Minister there dwelling) for the contempt of the Ministry. O Let not this be
your sin, lest you also perish as they have done.

5. The fifth way to make London happy.
By your constancy in the faith in these Apostatizing days; It will not, it
cannot be denied, but that London is miserably infected and beleapred with
errors and heresies; And what is said of Poland, and Amsterdam, may be as truly
said of this City, That if a man had lost his Religion, he should be sure to
find it (be it what it will be) amongst as here. We are a Cage of unclean
Birds; A receptacle for Heretics of all kinds; Heresy is gone forth from
London, into all parts of the Land. Now you must know, That Heresy will
quickly bring ruin upon a City. Pezelius upon Sleidan, tells us, that the
dissentions of the Christians in the East, brought in the Saracens and
Mahumetans: They were divided into ten several Religions; and their divisions
did armare Saracenos in ecclesiae perniciem, did Arm the Saracens to destroy
the Christians; and therefore if you would seek the good of the place of your
Nativity, you must be valiant for the truth, Jer. 9. 3.
you must endeavor, according to the station in which God has set you, to
purge the City of these Augaean stables, to hinder the growth of Heresy: You
must not be like Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
You must in malice be children, but in understanding be men. You must be
steadfast and immovable in the truth, that so at last God who is a God of
truth, may delight to dwell in the midst of us; and this City may be called as
Jerusalem was, A City of Truth. Zech 8. 3.


6. By your Charity and Liberality; This does especially concern such of you,
The sixth way to make London happy.
upon whom God has bestowed the Riches of this World. A poor Citizen may do
good to his native-City, by his prayers and holy life, but you must also do
good to it, by your bounty and liberality. Charity is the Queen of Graces,
without which all other graces are but ciphers and shadows; Faith without
charity is nothing worth; Jam. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 13. 3.
if a man gives his body to be burnt, and has not charity, it profite^h him
nothing. The Protestant Religion, as it teaches us not to trust to good works,
so also it teaches us to be full of good works; you have often heard us say,
that though faith alone justifies, yet the faith that justifies, is never
alone; though faith justifies separatim a bonis operibus, yet not separata a
bonis operibus; though good works be not necessary in the act of justification,
yet they are necessary in the person justified; though good works be not the
cause, why we go to heaven, yet they are the way to heaven. Thus we Preach*
Let it appear this day, that you are real Protestants by pract^sing this
Doctrine. Let the proud Papists trust to the merit of their works, but let us
Protestants trust in Christ only and his righteousness, and let us manifest
the truth of our faith in Christ, by our good works to the members of Christ,
always remembering that laying of Christ, Mat. 25. 40
Whatsoever you do to any of the least of my Brethren, you do unto me. You have
many glorious precedents and put ternes left you by your predecessors, whose
hearts God has stirred up to build many famous Hospitalls, and to endow them
with large revenews, and to erect Free-Schools for the education of Youth, and
herein they become examples to you to follow their steps, and as you inherit
their Estates, so also to inherit their virtues.

But I shall not press you any farther to charity in general; I shall confine
my Discourse to one little piece and parcel of charity toward your
fellow-Citizens, that are in want and necessity. You are this day to dine
together; my hearts desire is, that this dinner may be a Feast of Charity. In
the Primitive times the Christians had their (...), their Love Feasts, on
purpose to maintain Brotherly love; Jude 12.
these Feasts Jude calls (according to our translation) Feasts of Charity,
because in such Feasts the poor were always remembered; my humble suit is, that
this dinner may be a Feast of Love and Charity, that some real good may be done
at it, that you may not only feast as good Citizens, but as good Christians;
and therefore you have a Sermon here this morning, on purpose to prepare you
for this Feast, that so it may not only be a civil, but a religious meeting.
The Apostle Jude tells us of spots that were in the Primitive Feasts of
Charity, Jude 12.
these spots were certain wicked and heretical persons, which crept into their
Feasts, and defiled and polluted them; I hope their will be no such spots
amongst us this day. The last year there were spots in our Feast of Charity,
mistake me not, I do not mean it in Judes sense, I am far from thinking, that
there were wicked and heretical men amongst us, my meaning only is, that there
were defects and blemishes in our last years meeting. Dr. Horton.
The Reverend Brother that Preached here the last year, has told the World
thus much in Print; But he adds very wisely and discreetly, and (I hope)
truly, that this was not for want of affection, but of contrivance; not for
want of liquor, but vent, not matter, but method, not conception, but
obstetrication; you did not want a fountain of charity, but only a chanel cut
out wherein your charity might stream it self; This channel is now cut out for
you, there are indeed four channels, four glorious designs proposed by the
Stewards, for to draw out your charity and liberality, toward your
fellow-Citizens; give me leave to read them to you, Four several sorts of
persons upon whom the Charity gathered at the Londoners meeting is to be
bestowed.
as they were sent me in writing.

1. For the relief of Ministers in distress, born in the freedom ofLondon.

2. For relief of Ministers Widows in want, whose husbands were born in the
freedom of London.

3. For putting forth of poor Children to be Apprentises, whose Fathers are or
were freemen, and which Children were born in the City of London, or Liberties
thereof.

4. That relief may be made for poor Scholars, Students in the University, and
there resident, who are unable to subsist of themselves, and who were Sons of
freemen, and have been horn in London, or the Liberties thereof.

Here are four famous Channels for your Charity to stream in; four Excellent
materials to build your Liberality upon. And let me tell you, That you are
obliged this day, both in Conscience, and Honor, and you can neither sasisfie
God or Man, unless you do something worthy your selves. To move you, consider,

1. That you miscarried the last year, and therefore you are the more engaged
this year. When I say you miscarried, I do not mean as to the faithfulness of
the Stewards, who were very careful and exactly diligent in laying out the
Money that was gathered, (in Testimony whereof you have 32. poor Youths here
before you whom they bound out Apprentises.) But I mean in regard of the
littleness of the sum that was gathered. And this miscarriage was not for want
of affection, (as is said of you in print) but for want of contrivance, not for
want of liquor, but Vent, of matter, but method, etc. Behold now a Method
propounded! Behold a Vent for your charity! Let it appear this day, that that
which is said of you in print is true. Let the Fountain of your liberality
stream out in these four Channels.

2. You have most of you got your Estates here in this City; Here is the place
where God has blessed you; And therefore the light of Nature teaches you to
seek the good of this City, where God has prospered you in the first and chief
place. And there are many of you whom God has blessed with great estates. As
you are Citizens of no mean City, so you are no mean Citizens. Now God requires
of you, not only to be charitable, but a suitable proportion of charity
according as he has blessed you. You that are rich in Estate must not only do
good works, but be rich in good works, always remembering that saying of
Christ, Luc. 12. 46.
To whom much is given, of them much is required.

3. Your charity will be a pattern and president to other persons and places.
For though you must not do good works to be seen of men, yet you must do good
works, which men may see, according as Christ says, Let your light so shine
before men, Matthew. 5. 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father w^h is in Heaven.

4. I might here take occasion to tell you what the Kentish men have done
lately in their Meeting, and what the Warwickshire men have done; but this
would be too much to undervalue you; you are the Mother city, and it is not fit
that the Daughters should be examples to the Mother, but the Mother to her
Daughters. I persuade my self, that you will this day exceed all former
patterns, and be your selves a pattern to all others.

5. I might also here take occasion to put you in mind of one of the last years
Stewards, whom God has suddenly taken out of this world. He was a godly man,
and of good esteem; His name was Mr. John Wallington. The Egyptians in all
their great feasts were wont to have a Death's head served in as one dish, that
thereby they might be put in mind of their Mortality; and learn to be sober and
temperate in eating and drinking. I could heartily wish, that the death of this
precious Christian might serve this day instead of a Death's Head to stir up
your Charity, and Liberality, forasmuch as you know not how soon God may take
you from your Estates, or your Estates from you, how soon God may call you to
give an account of your Stewardships; or whether ever you shall live to have
such another public occasion, to testify the greatness of your love to
Christ, by your Charity to his fellow members. And therefore while you have
opportunity, Gal. 6. 10.
do good to all, but especially to the Household of Faith.

But why should I use any more Arguments? For the City of London has always
been one of the best places in the world, for Deeds of Charity. Let me speak it
to the Honor of God, and of this City, that even at this very day, the City of
London is a Sanctuary for all the distressed Christians of the Nation; and a
man may sooner get a 100 l. at a Collection in London; than an hundred pence in
many other places. As God has given you large estates, so also has he given
to many of you large hearts. And therefore why should not believe, and
confidently conclude, that you will this day answer expectation; and that you
will be charitable, though not to be seen of men, yet so, as that men may see
it, and bless God for you.

I shall add only this one word more. You are Citizens of no mean City, and
no mean Citizens of this City; And therefore let not your Charity this day be
low and mean, but transcendent, and superlative, suitable to the place where
you were born, and to such persons born in such a place. So much for the use of
this Proposition, as it is a considerable and desirable Privilege.

Use 2.
Use 2. I shall now further improve it as it is but an outward, temporal,
fleshly, and carnal privilege, common to the worst, as well as to the best of
men. As it is the Prerogative of Paul, even then when he was a persecuting
Pharisee; as it is a Privilege which a man may enjoy, and yet be in the state
of damnation. And here likewise (if time would permit) I should exhort you unto
three things very seasonable and profitable.

1. Exhort.
Let us not rest satisfied in being the Children of Religious Parents, but let
us labor to inherit the virtues of our Parents. There are many Children, who
are blots and blemishes to their Parents, as Manasseh was to Hezekiah, Conmodus
unto Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, of whom it is said, that he had been perfectly
happy, had he not begotten such a Son; Prorsus felicem futurum fuisse (inquit
Ausoinius) si hunc filium non generasset.
And that he did injure his Country in nothing but in being the Father of such
an ungodly child.

Hoc solo patriae, quod genuit, nocuit. There are many Citizens amongst us, who
are the wicked sons of very godly Parents, let such know, That it is a fearful
thing to sin against good education, and to walk contrary to those religious
Principles, which they sucked in from their very Cradle; That that which is a
great mercy in it self, is to them a great judgment; And that their very
Parents shall rise up in judgment against them, and be instead of a thousand
witnesses to condemn them.

2. Exhort. 2.
Let us not rest contented in being born of noble Parents, but let those that
are nobly born, labor to be nobly minded; For it is the noble mind makes a
man noble, and not the noble title. It is a notable saying of Gregory the
great, A King may command his Subjects to call a Lion a Lamb, but he cannot
make a Lion to be a Lamb; A King may give a man noble Titles, but he cannot
make the man a noble man, because he cannot give him a noble and virtuous
mind. And therefore you that are nobly born must labor to be nobly and
virtuously minded. Nobility without virtue is, but, as a scarlet-roabe upon a
leprous body, and like a jewel in a swines snout. There are very many who are
ignobly born, and yet prove noble; Iphicoabes.
such was the Cobblers son who grew to be a famous Captain, and when he was
upbraided by a noble man with his mean original, Genus meum a me incipit tuum
in te desinit.
wittily answered, My nobility begins with me, and thine ends in thee; And
there are many who are nobly born, and yet prove ignoble, to the dishonor of
their progenitors; Such were the children of Alcibiades; Such was Hezekiah's
son; Such must not you be, you must labor to be a credit to your Ancestors.

And you must not account it sufficient to be born of earthly Parents, though
never so noble, but you must labor to be born of God, and to be born from
above; for as Christ says, Except a man be born from above, (...). Joh. 3. 3.
(for so it is in the original) He shall never enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. It is not your being born from below, (though your Parents be never so
high) which will entitle you to heaven; unless you be born from above, unless
you be heaven-born Christians. A true Christian is of a noble extraction; he is
the adopted son of God, Brother to Jesus Christ, heir of God, and coheir with
Christ; He is the noblest man in the world; Such must you labor to be; and in
comparison of this all outward nobility is, but as dung and dross.

3. Exho. 3.
Let us not rest satisfied in being Citizens of this famous City of London, but
let us labor to be Citizens of the new Jerusalem, to be Citizens of that City
which is made without hands, eternal in the heavens. Heaven in Scripture is
often called a City, Heb. 11. 10, 16.
and it is no mean City, Heb. 13. 14 Psalm. 87.
glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of the living God; all earthly
Cities are mean and poor, in comparison of it, and not worthy to be named that
day in which we speak of this City; the Scripture calls it, Heb. 11. 16
A better Country, that is, an heavenly; As far as heaven exceeds the earth,
so far does this City exceed all earthly Cities. It exceeds them.

1. Heaven is a City, that exceeds all other Cities in in twelves respects.
In its greatness and bigness;and therefore it is called a great City, Revel
21. 10. And, that great City by way of emphasis; The holy Jerusalem descending
out of heaven. Our Savior Christ says, Joh. 14. 2.
That in his fathers house there are many Mansions; Who can tell how many? For
there are in heaven a great multitude, Rev. 7. 9.
which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues. If the Sun be 166times bigger than the Earth, how big is this blessed
City?

2. In its sublimity and altitude; It is a City seated above all visible
heavens, as the Apostle says, Ephes^ 4. 10. Therefore it is called; The
highest Heaven, and the third Heaven, far above the aeriall, and aetheriall
heavens. And this shows the excellency of this City; For in the Composition
of the World, the purest, and the most excellent things are situated in the
highest places; The earth as the grossest is put in the lowest room; the air
above that, and therefore purer than that; the fire purer than the air; the
starry heaven above them, and therefore of a more pure composition, which
Aristotle calls, Quinta essentia; But the heaven of the blessed is above the
starry heaven, and therefore of a far purer composition, and as Zanchy says,
It is inter omnia corpora simplicia simplicissimum.

3. In its beauty and glory; For this City has no need of the Sun or Moon to
shine in it; Rev. 21. 23 Rev. 12. 5.
But the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And
herein also consists the excellency of this City because it is a place where
we shall be filled with the glory of God, The Lord God Almighty shall be the
everlasting light of it, Isa. 60. 19.
and our God the glory of it.

4. It exceeds all other Cities in the wealth and riches of it; For it is a
City of pure gold, Rev. 21. 18, 19, 21.
and the streets of it are of pure gold, the walls of it and the foundations
are garnished with all manner of precious stones, and the twelve gates of it
are made of twelve pearls, etc. These expressions are all of them
Metaphorical, borrowed from things that are most precious, and of highest
account with men upon earth, to set out the incomparable wealth and riches of
heaven. And surely if the streets be of pure gold, O how beautiful are the
inner rooms! How rich is the Chamber of Presence of the great King of Kings!

5. In the pleasures of it; There are many Cities which are pleasantly
situated, and wherein all earthly pleasures are to be enjoyed; This famous City
of London is deservedly styled not only The Storehouse of profit, but the
Garden of pleasure; But Heaven is a Paradise of all pleasure, and therefore it
is called Paradise; Earthly Paradise was omnium voluptatum promptuarium, A
promptuary and storehouse of all pleasures, and delights, much more is
heavenly Paradise: It is the Garden of the Lord, wherein the Saints of God are
satisfied with joys and unspeakable delights.

6. In the privileges and immunities of it; Every City has its privileges, and
immunities to invite men to dwell in it, and to be free of it. But now the
privileges, and immunities of heaven are unexpressible; There we shall all be
Kings, 2 Timothy 4. 8 Rev. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
crowned with a crown of righteousness, a crown of life, and a crown of glory.
There we shall be free from all misery, from the wicked and their persecutions,
from the Devil and his temptations, and above all we shall be free from the
body of sin and iniquity.

7. In the necessary accommodations of it; A City is a place where all things
necessary for the comfort of man's life are to be found. The whole Country
round about bring in their Commodities to it. We use to say of Cheap side in
London, That it is the best garden in England. But now Heaven is a City wherein
we shall have a perfect possession of all good things. It is an happiness made
up by the aggregation of all things desirable.

8. In the excellency of the inhabitants; It is one of the greatest
commendations of a City, when the Inhabitants of it are godly and religious.
But now in Heaven there are none, but the Souls of just men made perfect in
grace. Heb 12. 23 Isa. 60. 20.
The People which dwell there are all righteous; Therefore it is called, Rev.
21. 10
A holy City, because it consists only of holy persons.

9. In the safety and security of it. It is a great commendation of a City when
it is safe and secure from enemies; There is hardly any City in the whole World
which enjoys this happiness. But now in heaven, there is perfect safety and
security. Therefore it is said, Rev. 21. 25
That the gates of it shall never be shut. They that dwell there, are above the
Fear, and hurt of men or Devils.

10. It exceeds all other Cities in the work and employment which the Citizens
of this City have. In earthly Cities men turmoil themselves with wordly
businesses, and are troubled about many things, drowning themselves in the
cares of the world etc. But in Heaven there is no work but to sing Hallelujahs,
and to be always praising God, and rejoicing in his Presence.

11. It exceeds all other Cities in the durableness and eternity of it; The
pleasures of this City are everlasting, and the Glory, Honor, Riches and
Privileges etc. of it, are everlasting. Therefore it is said to be a City which
has foundations. The Apost. tells us, Heb. 11. 10
That Abraham looked for a City which has foundations. This expressio^ is put
down in oppositio^ to Abraham's dwelling in Tents and Tabernacles. Tectum habet,
fundamentum non habet.
A Tent is an house which has a covering but no foundation; A Tent is a moveable
house, easily reared up, and easily pulled down; But now the heaven of the
blessed is a firm and an enduring City, a City which has foundations. This
Phrase signifies Two things.

1. The unchangeableness and unalterableness of this Heavenly City.

2. The everlastingnesse and eternity of it.

Both of them are expressly mentioned by the Apost. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Where he
calls heaven not only an immortal, (...).
and undefiled, but an inheritance that never fades away. All Farthly Cities
decay in time, and need reparation: But this is a City which never fades; A
place which needs no reparation. And is as a Flower that is always sweet, and
never withers, as excellent after 10000000. years, as at the first moment of
its creation. It is unchangeable and unalterable.

And so also, it is eternal and everlasting. Earthly Cities have no foundation,
and therefore are fading and perishing. They are like Cities made of wax or
snow, which quickly melt away, like Nebucadnezzars Image, whose head was of
fine gold, and breasts of silver, but the feet which upheld it were composed of
brittle clay, that is easily dissolved. Earthly happiness like the earth is
founded upon nothing.

And as the Cities we dwell in, so we that dwell in these Cities have no
foundation, unless it be in the dust, Job. 4. 14.
as Job speaks; Therefore the Apostle says, We have here no abiding City, but
we seek one to come. Heb. 12. 28
Heaven is a Kingdom, that cannot be shaken. A mansion house, as Christ says,
Joh. 14.
In my Fathers house are many mansions; (so called from their perpetuity.) But
we have no (...), no abiding city here. Nature (says Cicero) has not given a
dwelling place to us here upon earth, Natura non habitandi sed commorandi
diversorium hic nobis dedit.
but only a lodging place, as a guest in an Inn for a night and away.
Therefore it is, that the Saints of God in all ages have acknowledged
themselves to be sojourners, pilgrims, and strangers in this world, traveling
thorough it, as thorough a strange Country unto their mansion house in Heaven.
In a word;

All earthly Cities, Persons, and happiness are subject, First to alteration,
and next to dissolution. The longest day has its night, and the longest life
its death. The famous Monarchies of the World have had their periods. Kings
dye, and Kingdoms dye; And great and famous Cities are in length of time
ruinated, and demolished. We in this Nation have seen strange alterations,
changes, and dissolutions. All earthly Cities are changeable, and perishing;
but Heaven is a City which has foundations: It is an unchangeable and
everlasting City.

Lastly, This City excells all other Cities in the builder and maker of it;
Earthly Cities are built by men, but the builder of this City is God: so says
the Apostle, Heb. 11, 10
He looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
There are some who think, that the Heaven of the blessed is an uncreated place:
But this a great error. For every thing in the world is either the Creator, or
the Creature; ^f heaven were an uncreated place, it should he a God and not a
Creature. We believe in our Creed, That God is the Creator of all things
visible and invisible. And the forementioned text tells us; Heb. 11. 10.
That God was the builder and maker of it. Here are two words used (...), the
last word signifies, that God made it, summo artificio, to set out his skill
and workmanship. When great men build great houses for their own dwelling, they
build them according to their greatness. When Ahashuerosh made a feast, to
show the riches, and glory* of his Kingdom, it was a most magnificent feast.
Solomon's Temple (built by him) was justly accounted the glory of the World,
Pliny calls it, Orbis miraculum, The miracle of the World. When Nebucadnezzar
built a Palace for his own dwelling, it was a sumptuous one. The Heathens tell
us of glorious structures made by earthly Kings. Nulla alia aedificandi
Pyramidis causa quam vana, and stulta ostentatio ut scilicet nec pecunia ipsa,
nec etiam plebs otiosa esset- Pancyrolla.
of the Temple of Diana; The Sepulcher of Mausolus; The Walls of Babylon; The
Capitol of Rome, etc. and the Pyramids of Egypt, one of which was twenty years
building, and three hundred threescore thousand men always at work about it.

If all the Kings of the earth should join together to build a Palace, surely
it would be a rare building; But if all the Angels in heaven should join, and
set their wisdom on work to build an house, surely it would be an Angelical
structure. Much more when God himself who is an infinite Agent, infinite in
glory, power, and wisdom, shall make an house to show his skill, wisdom, glory,
and power, this house surely must needs be superlatively excellent; Such an
house and such a City is Heaven, whose Builder and curious Artificer was God.
And therefore it is said, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
to be an house made without hands; Not only without earthly hands, (for so
all the visible Heavens were made) but without hands, that is, after a more
excellent manner than the other Heavens; The other Heavens are said to be made
by the hand of God, Psalm. 19. 1. Psalm 102. 25. But this was made without
hands, that is, after a more glorious, and a more unconceiveable manner than
all the other Heavens.

Q. Qeust.
But for what end did God build this glorious City?

A. Answ.
For two ends.

First, 1.
For his own dwelling house. John 14. 2
Christ calls it, His Fathers House. God indeed dwells every where in regard of
his Essence, but in regard of the presence of his Glory, he dwells only in
Heaven. This shows the surpassing excellency of this Heavenly House; It is an
House fit for God to dwell in.

Secondly, 2.
God made this City, that it might be a place where the Saints of God shall
live in the embraces of God for ever. Come ye Blessed of my Father (says
Christ,) inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. It is a Kingdom of glory,
and happiness prepared for the Saints before the foundation of the world. In a
word. God made this City to be the habitation of Angels and Saints after this
life, in which they shall see God face to face; and be made like to Christ in
glory, and enjoy such pleasures and delights, which eye never saw, nor ear
never heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive. But here I
shall draw a veil, not forgetting what the ancient Fathers usually say, when
they speak of Heaven, Experimento opus est; We shall never perfectly understand
the excellency of this City, till we come to be dwellers in it.

O let us all labor to be Citizens and Freemen of this blessed City. Here are
this day assembled, multitudes of Citizens and Freemen of London: How happy
would it be if all here present, were Citizens and Freemen of Heaven. If there
were a City in this world, in which whosoever dwelt should be always rich, and
healthful, and young and happy, what flocking would be to such a City? Such a
City is heaven; it is a City in which the Saints of God shall all be Kings, and
shall be perfectly and perpetually happy. Let us bind our selves Apprentices
to God in this life; and when our short time is out, he will make us Freemen of
that City, which has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God. We must not
think to be the Devils slaves here, and Gods Freemen in heaven; but we must be
Gods faithful servants here, and we shall be his Freemen hereafter.

Heaven is not only an excellent* City, Rev. 21. 27.
but a holy City, into which no unclean person shall in any wise enter. In
earthly Cities wicked men dwell, as well as righteous, and more wicked than
righteous; but in this City, the people shall all be righteous, Col. 1. 12.
as it is Isaiah, 60. 21. This City is the inheritance of the Saints, and of
all the Saints, and only of the Saints, and unless we be born again, John 3. 3
we shall never enter into this City. And therefore let us pray unto God, that
he would make us meet and fit to enter into this holy and heavenly City; Col.
1. 12.
that he that made us creatures, would make us new creatures; that God by
grace, would make us fit to enter into glory. In a word, let us make it appear
this day, that we are not only Citizens of London, but of heaven, by our deeds
of charity distributed to Christ's poor for Christ's sake. God has entailed not
only temporal and spiritual, Isaiah 58. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
but eternal mercices upon charity and liberality; Luc. 6. 38
and therefore let us make to our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
Luc. 16. 9
that when we fail, they may receive us into everlasting habitations; Let us
lay up our treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, Mat.
6. 20
and where thieves do not break thorough and steal. Let me speak to you in the
words of the Apostle Paul: 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.
Charge them that are rich in this world, (A man may be rich in this world as
Dives was, and poor enough (as he was) in the other world*) therefore if you
would not only be rich here, but rich in the other world, you must not be
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us
all things richly to enjoy, you must do good, and he rich in good works (not
only do good works, but be rich in good works,) ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for your selves a good Foundation against the
time to come, that you may lay hold on eternal life. The world foundation is
not here to be understood in the builders sense, but in the Lawyers sense, who
call the evidences upon which they ground their plea, their foundation. The
merits of Christ, are our only foundation to build our hope of heaven upon;
but good works are the evidencing foundation. Let us lay up for our selves in
heaven a good foundation, by works of Charity, that at the great day of
Judgment, Jesus Christ may say unto us, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in; I was
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. So much for this Text, and for this time.

FINIS

