The Kings Majesty's Last Gracious MESSAGE FOR PEACE Sent to the two Houses of
Parliament EXAMINED, And several Observations from the same Concerning IRELAND:
With a Copy of the Lord Digbies Letter, the Kings Majesty's Commission, AND
The Articles of Pcace.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbank, Feb. 10. 1645.

IN the first place it is to be observed, what authority the Earl of Glamorgan
had to Treat with the Irish Rebels, under the Kings Signet; (for it cannot be
rightly called a Commission (had it been under the Great Seal at Oxford)
because that is declared Null by the Parliament.) The Warrant Signed was in
these words. A Copy of the Kings Warrant to the Earl of Glamorgan.
Charles Rex.

CHarles by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and right welbeloved Cosen Edward
Earl of Glamorgan greeting. We reposing great and especial Trust and Confidence
in Your approved Wisdom and Fidelity, Do by these (as firmly as under Our Great
Seal to all Intents and Purposes) Authorize and give you power to Treat and
Conclude with the Confederate Roman Catholics in Our Kingdom of Ireland, if
upon necessity any thing be to be condescended unto, wherein Our Lieutenant
cannot so well be seen in, as not fit for Us at the present publicly to own;
Therefore We charge you to proceed according to this Our Warrant, with all
possible secrecy, and for whatsoever you shall engage your self upon such
valuable considerations, as you in your judgment shall deem fit; We promise in
the word of a King and a Christian, to ratify and perform the same that shall
be granted by you, and under your Hand and Seal; the said Confede^ate
C^tholiques having by their Supplies testified their zeal to Our Service; and
this shall be in each particular to you a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Oxford under Our Signet and Royal Signature the 12. day
of March, in the 20. year of Our Reign, 1644.
In the next place it is very requisite to know what this Treaty of the Earl of
Glamorgan, with the Irish Commissioners did produce, and that was this. He
Treats with the Irish Commissioners for the raising of 10000 men for the King,
to be sent into England, the Earl of Glamorgan immediately to bring over 4000
of them, they to be sent to Dublin, and from thence to be transported. This
they agree to do on their part.

The Earl of Glamorgan by virtue of his Authority from the King, grants to the
Commissioners (in lieu thereof) these Articles following.

A Copy of the ARTICLES of PEACE agreed on with the Irish Commissioners.
1. IMprimis, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in
the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all
and every the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in the Kingdom of
Ireland, of whatever state, degree or quality soever he or they be or shall be,
shall for evermore hereafter have and enjoy within the said Kingdom, the free
and public use and exercise of the said Roman Catholics Religion, and of the
respective function therein.

2. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and on the
behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That the said professors of
the Roman Catholic Religion, shall hold and enjoy all and every the Churches
by them enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them possessed at any time since the
23. of October, 1641. and all other Churches in the said Kingdom, other then
such as are now actually enjoyed by His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

3. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the
behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all and
every the Roman Catholics Subjects of Ireland, of what estate, condition,
degree or quality soever, shall be free and exempted from the Jurisdiction of
the Protestant Clergy, and every of them; and that the Roman Catholic Clergy
of this Kingdom shall not be punished, troubled or molested for the exercise of
their Jurisdiction over their respective Catholic flocks, in matters
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

4. Item, It is further granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and
on the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That an
Act shall be passed in the next Parliament to be holden in this Kingdom, the
tenor and purport whereof shall be as follows, viz. An Act for the relief of
His Majesty's Catholics Subjects of His Highness Kingdom of Ireland: Whereas
by an Act made in Parliament held in Dublin the second year of the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act restoring to the Crown, the ancient
Jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all
Foreign power repugnant to the same; And by one other Statute made in the said
last mentioned Parliament, entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Administration of the
Sacrament, Sundry Mulcts, Penalties, Restraints and Incapacities, are and have
been laid upon the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in this Kingdom,
in, for and concerning the use, profession, and exercise of their Religion, and
their functions therein, to the great prejudice, trouble and disquiet of the
Roman Catholics in their Liberties and Estates, and the general disturbance
of the whole Kingdom. For remedy whereof, and for the better settling, increase,
and continuance of the Peace, Unity and Tranquillity of this Kingdom of Ireland;
His Majesty at the humble suit and request of the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, is graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, And
be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of
the same, That from and after the first day of this S^ssion of Parliament, it
shall and may be lawful to and for all the professors of the Roman Catholic
Religion, of what degree, condition or quality, to have, use and enjoy the free
and public exercise and profession of the said Roman Catholic Religion, and
of their several and respective functions therein, without incurring any mulct
or penalty whatsoever, or being subject to any restraint or incapacity
concerning the same; Any Article or Clause, Sentence or Provision in the said
last mentioned Acts of Parliament, or in any other Act or Acts of Parliament,
Ordinances, Law or usage to the contrary, or in any wise notwithstanding. And
be it also further Enacted, That neither the said Statutes, or any other
Statute, Acts or Ordinance hereafter made in Your Majesty's Reign, or in the
Reign of any of Your Highnesses most Noble Progenitors or Ancestors, and now of
force in this Kingdom; nor all, nor any branch, article, clause and sentence in
them or any of them, contained or specified, shall be of force or validity in
this Realm, to extend to be construed, or adjudged to extend in any wise to
inquiet, prejudice, vex or molest the professors of the said Roman Catholic
Religion, in their Persons, Lands, Hereditaments or Goods, for any thing,
matter or cause whatsoever, touching and concerning the free and public use,
exercise and enjoyings of their said Religion, function and profession. And be
it also further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That Your
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects in the said Realm of Ireland, from the
first day of this Session of Parliament, shall be, and be taken, deemed and
adjudged capable of all Offices of Trust and advancement, places, degrees and
dignities, and preferment whatsoever, within Your said Realm of Ireland, any
Acts, Statutes, Usage or Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And that other
Acts shall be passed in the said Parliament, according to the tenou^ of such
Agreement or Concessions as herein are expressed; and that in the mean time the
said Roman Catholic Subjects, and every of them, shall enjoy the full
benefit, freedom and advantage of the said Agreements and Concessions, and of
every of them,

5. Item, It is accorded, granted and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the
behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That His Excellency the Lord
Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other or others
authorized or to be authorized by His Majesty, shall not disturb the professors
of the Roman Catholic Religion in their present possession and continuance of
the profession of their said Churches Jurisdiction, or any other the matters
aforesaid in these Articles agreed and condescended unto by the said Earl,
until His Majesty's pleasure be signified for confirming and publishing the
Grants and Agreements hereby articled for, and condescended unto by the said
Earl.

6. Item, And the said Earl of Giamorgan does hereby engage His Majesty's Royal
word and Public Faith, unto all and singular the professors of the said Roman
Catholic Religion within the said Kingdom of Ireland, for the due observance
and performance of all and every the Articles, Grants and Clauses therein
contained, and the Concessions herein mentioned to be performed to them.

7. Item, It is accorded and agreed, That the said Public Faith of the Kingdom
shall be engaged unto the said Earl, by the said Commissioners of the said
Confederate Catholics, for sending ten thousand men to serve His Majesty, by
order and public Declaration of the General Assembly now sitting, And that the
Supreme Council of the said Cenfederate Catholics, shall engage themselves to
bring the said number of men armed, the one half with Muskets, and the other
half with Pikes, unto any Port within this Realm, at the Election of the said
Earl, and at such time as he shall appoint, to be by him shipped and
transported to serve His Majesty in England, Wales or Scotland, under the
command of the said Earl of Glamorgan as Lord General of the said Army, which
Army is to be kept together in one entire body, and all other the Officers and
Commanders of the said Army are to be named by the Supreme Council of the said
Confederate Catholics, or by such others as the General Assembly of the said
Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom shall entrust therewith:

In witness whereof the parties to these presents have hereunto
interchangeably put their hands and Seals the 25. day of August. 1645.
Glamorgan.

The Commissioners for the Rebels were.
Lord Viscount Mount Garret, Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alexander mac Donnel
Esquire, Nicholas Plunket Esquire, Sir Talbot Baron^^, Dermer O Bryan Esquire,
John Dillon Esquire, Patrick Darcy Esquire, Jeffery Brown Esquire.

Now for Digbies part it plainly appears, that he was at the very moulding of
this design; Here follows the Copy of a Letter which he sent to the Irish
Commissioners before he went from the King.

A Copy of the Lord Digbies Letter to the Irish Commissioners.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
TO disabuse you, I am Commanded by His Majesty to declare unto you, that were
the Conditions of His Affairs much more desperate then they are, He would never
redeem them by any Concession of so much wrong, both to His Honor and
Conscience: It is for the defense of His Religion, (principally) that he has
undergone the extremities of War here, and He would never redeem His Crown by
ratifying that there: So that to deal clearly with you, as you may be happy
your selves, and be happy instruments of His Majesty's restoring, if you would
be content with Reason, and give him that speedy assistance, which you well
may: So if nothing will content you, but what must wound His Honor and
Conscience, you must expect, howsoever His condition is, and how detestable
soever the -- of this Kingdom, are to Him, He will in that point join with
them, the Scots, or with any of the Protestant Religion, rather then do the
least Act that may hazard that Religion, in which, and for which, He will live
and die. Having said thus much by His Majesty's Command, I have no more to
add, but that I shall think myself very happy if this take any such effect, as
may tend to the peace of that Kingdom, and make me

Your affectionate humble Servant George Digby.

This Letter of Digbies, was before the Earl of Glamorgan was sent over to
Ireland in the Infantry of the Design, which it seems came not to maturity
until now.

FINIS.
Published according to Order.


