THE KINGS MAJESTY'S MANIFESTO To the Kingdom of IRELAND. Undertaken and
published By the Marquess of Clanrickard.

Assuring them of the Kings hand, the Queen and Prince of Wales their
engagements, and the assurance of the Crown of France for performance thereof.

And that the Marquess of Ormond shall punctually observe (during the Kings
want of freedom) such commands from the Queen and Prince of Wales, as shall
be signified unto him by the Lord Digby (as principal Secretary of State;) and
not obey what is commanded by his Majesty in any Restraint.

As also for the calling a free Parliament, procuring Acts of Oblivion, and
other desires of the Catholics of that Kingdom. Signed by the Marquess of
Clanrickard.

January 19. 1646. These Papers of the Marquess of Clanrickards undertakings
between his Majesty and the Kingdom of Ireland, are examined and printed
according to ORDER of PARLIMENT.

Printed by I. G. 1647.

THE MARQVES OF CLANRICKARD His undertaking for the King,
Of the 19, of November, 1646.
UPon the Engagements and Protestations of the Generals, Nobility, and
Officers of the Confederate Catholic Forces, I Vllick, Marquess of
Clanrickard, do on my part solemnly bind and engage my self unto them, by
the Reputation and Honor of a Peer, and by sacred Protestations upon the
Faith of a Catholicque, in the presence of Almighty GOD, That I will procure
the ensuing undertakings to be made good unto them, within such convenient
time, as Securities of that which are to be fettched from beyond Sea, can well
be procured: or failing therein, to unite my self to their parties, and never
to sever from them, and these their interest, till I have secured them unto
them.

I.
First, that there be a Revocation by Act of Parliment of all the Laws in
force within this Kingdom, in as much of them as shall concern any penalty,
inhibition, or restraint on the Catholics of the free exercise of their
religion.

II.
Secondly, that they shall not be disturbed in the enjoyment of their Churches,
or any other Ecclesiaasticall possessions, which were in their hands at the
publication of the late PEACE, until that matter, with other referred already,
receive a settlement upon a Declaration of his M jesties gracious Instructions
in a free Parliament, held in this Kingdom, his Majesty being in a free
condition himself.

III.
And I do further engage my self, never to consent to any thing that may
bring them in hazard of being dispossessed, and never to sever my self from
them, until I see them so secured therein by Commission, or by their Trust, or
Power from his Majesty in the prime Garrisons in this Kingdom, to put them out
of all danger of being dispossessed.

IV.
And I do further engage my self, that forthwith there shall be a Catholic
Lieutenant General of all the F^rces of this Kingdom, by his Majesty's
Authority, and that the Generals, or either of them, signed to the said
engagements, shall forthwith be invested by the Kings Majesty's Authority,
with principal commands worthy of them in the standing Army in this Kingdom.
And likewise in some important Garrisons now under his Majesty's obedience, and
that a considerable number of the confederate Catholic Forces, shall
immediately be drawn into all the chief Garrisons under his Majesty's obedience.

V.
And I do further assure proportionable advantages to such of any other Armies
in this Kingdom, as shall in like manner submit unto the Peace, and his
Majesty's Authority, and for the security of as many of th^se particulars as
shall not be forthwith performed and made good unto them, by the foresaid
Marquess of Ormond, his Majesty's Lieutenant General of this Kingdom, I will
procure them the Kings hand, the Queen and Prince of Wales engagements, and an
engagement of the Crown of France, to see the same performed unto them. And
further, for their assurance that the Lord Lieutenant shall engage himself
punctually to observe such free commands as he shall receive from his Majesty
to the furtherance and advantage of the Catholics of this Kingdom, or
(during the Kings want of freedom) from the Queen and Prince of Wales, as
shall be signified unto him (as the Kings positive pleasure) by the Lord Digby,
as principal Secretary of State. And further, that whilst the King shall be in
an unfree condition, he will not obey any Orders that shall be procured from
his Majesty, by advantage of his Majesty's want of freedom, to the prejudice
of what is undertaken.

VI.
And lastly I do protest that I shall never esteem my self discharged from
this engagement by any power or authority whatsoever, provided on both parts
that this engagement and undertaking be not understood or intended to debar
or hinder His Majesty's Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom from the benefit of
any further grace, and favors which His Majesty may be graciously induced to
conferr unto them, upon the Queens Majesty's medication, or any other Treaty
abroad, with his holiness.

I.
And I do further engage my self to employ my utmost endeavors and power by
way of Petition and persuasion unto His Majesty, to afford all the subjects of
this Kingdom that shall appear to have been injured in their Estate,
redresses in the next free Parliament.

II.
And I do also further undertake, that all persons joining, or that shall join
with the present engagement, shall be included in the Act of oblivion, promised
in the Articles of peace for Acts done by them since the publication of the
said peace, unto the date of the said engagement.

Dated November. 19. 1646. Signed CLANRJCKARD.

FINIS.

