His Majesty's LAST MESSAGE TO THE PARLIAMENT, WITH His desires for the Bishop
of Armagh, Bishop of Exeter, Bishop of Rochester, Bishop of Worcester, And
other Doctors to come to HIM.

AND HIS Majesty's Declaration concerning the Marquis of Ormonds Negotiation in
Ireland.

ALSO The Votes of both Houses of Parliament, in Answer to His Majesty's
Message.

With a Letter to the Commissioners in the Isle of Wight, which passed both
Houses on Saturday last being the 4th of November 1648.

Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner 1648,

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS Ma^esties last Message to the Parliament, with his desires for the Bishop
of Armagh, Bishop of Exceter, Bishop of Rochester, Bishop of Worcester, and
other Doctors to come to Him.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to the votes and instructions of both Houses, his Majesty was
acquainted that the concession which he delivered in, was not satisfactory in
the business of the Church, and so the other Votes not satisfactory, sent by
Sir Peter Killeygrew, were delivered to his Majesty. And also that concerning
the business of Ireland, with a request in behalf of both houses of
Parliament to desire his Majesty, that whereas there was a Letter intercepted
from the Marquess Ormond, of such dangerous consequence, by complying with
Irish Rebels, under pretense of Authority; Which being against the Parliament,
could not be in any other, except his Majesty should give any such commission,
and therefore it was desired, that his Majesty to clear himself of such a
compliance with those bloody Rebels, would declare against the same: And if the
Marquis of Ormond had any Authority from him to agitate there that seeing he
did comply with those Rebels against the Protestants, that his Majesty would be
pleased to recall his Commission, or declare against that action of joining
with the Irish Rebels, and Ormonds compliance with the Romish Catholic
council at Kilkenny.

To these papers and desires, his Majesty delivered in several papers, (Viz.)

That in regard that the two houses of Parliament were not satisfied in his
offers concerning the Church. That he is not satisfied in his conscience to do
more then what he has offered therein. Yet to the end that his Majesty may be
the better satisfied herein, he desires that 4 Bishops and 2 Doctors, may be
admited to him, to confer with him about the same, and then he will return as
speedy an Answer as may be.

And his Majesty does desire that the time of Treaty may be lengthened, that so
he may proceed with the Commissioners to a final conclusion, if it may be.

As to the business of Ireland, concerning the Marquis of Ormonds Negotiation
there with the Rebels, His Majesty returned this Answer: That he thinks it not
fit to have new Propositions put upon him, such as that, which was none of
those formerly presented. That he has given in his Answer to all and every
one of the old Propositions, which they presented to him from the Houses, and
has no answer to any of his, which he has made, and does therefore desire
that such things may not be put upon him.

The Commissioners answered his Majesty, that they could not look upon that as
a positive Answer. That the business was a business of great consequence,
Ormond having negotiated with the Irish Rebels, and concluded an agreement, to
the great danger of this Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, and that their
desire was, that his Majesty would be pleased to Declare against those
barbarous and bloody Irish Rebels, and to this pressed his Majesty for a full
and final answer.

To this his Majesty again replied by another Paper, that he had not since the
Treaty began, given out any Commission, nor acted in any such thing, nor
passed any thing in that nature.

That the whole business of Ireland is included in the Treaty, in every part
of it, and by his Majesty's offers, the power of that kingdom is made over to
the Parliament, so that if all things were concluded by the Treaty, then that
would fall in amongst the rest; But for doing any thing in the interim, his
Majesty did not give his consent, saying, that he desires the Treaty may
conclude all.

It is desired that the Commissioners from the Parliament or some of them may
have leave to come to London, about some business that does much concern
them: as also to give an account to the Houses vire voce, and not by Letter,
that the Parliament may be rightly informed of all things.

Newport 2 November. 1648.
The names of the Bishops, and Doctors desired by His Majesty to be sent to Him.
CHARLES. R.

The Bishop of Armath, The Bishop of Exceter, The Bishop of Rochester, The
Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Fearne, Doctor Morley.
Die Sabbati 4 November. 1648.
1 Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.

THat 14 days be added to the Treaty between His Majesty and the Commissioners
of both houses of Parliament, for a safe and well-grounded peace to be
proceeded in according to their former Instructions at Newport in the Isle of
Wight.

2 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That leave be given to Doctor Usher, Doctor Brumrigge, Doctor Prideux, Doctor
Warner, Doctor Fearne, And Doctor Morley to go to His Majesty,

3 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That His Majesty's paper concerning the Marquess of Ormond in Ireland is not
satisfactory, and that the Commissioners be desired to press His Majesty for a
full and final answer therein.

4 Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, That all the Votes of both Houses in Order to the Treaty, except
that of Delinquents be sent to the Commissioners forthwith.

5 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That a Letter be sent to the Commissioners with the said Votes enclosed, to be
communicated to His Majesty, and that they be desired, to press His Majesty to
a full and final answer.

6 Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That leave be given to the Commissioners at Newport for such of them to return
as they shall agree upon, provided they leave six behind, whereof 2 Lords and 4
Commoners, and of them, three to be of the Little, whereof one Lord, and two
Commoners.

FINIS.
A DECLARATION Of His Excellency Robert E. of Warwick Lord High Admiral of
ENGLAND, CONCERNING

The uniting of the two Navies, and restoring of the Kings Majesty, the Prince
of Wales, the Duke of York and the rest of the Royal Issue, to their just
Rights and Privileges.

And His Resolution touching all those who endeavor to obstruct the Treaty,
and hinder the setting of Truth, and a happy Peace, in this unsettled Church and
Kingdom.

With His Majesty's last and final Propositions to all Loyal and reasonable
Subjects. Subscribed CHARLES R.

Printed for satisfaction of all those who desire Peace, 1648

A DECLARATION OF ROBERT EARL of WARWICK, Concerning the Kings Majesty, and the
Prince of Wales, and his resolution touching all those who are opposite to
Peace.
Whereas, there are diverse persons within the City of London, and parts
adjacent, who endeavor to inflame the Kingdom in a most inhumane, bloody, and
intestine War, and to involve them in a Labyrinth of trouble, and Calamities,
by their present commotions, actings, and contrivances, in making the King and
Parliament odious to the People, and stirring up their hearts against them, for
the obstructing and blasting the hopeful Issue and Blossoms of this blessed
Treaty. Therefore, for preventing thereof, and propogating the present Work in
hand, his Excellency Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of his
Majesty's narrow Seas, has declared his Resolution in reference to the same,
protesting,

That He will use his utmost endeavors toward the settling of truth, and a
happy peace in this unsettled Church and Kingdom and that He will be
isntrumental for the bringing of his Majesty to London, and settling of His
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, and the rest of His Royal
Issue in their just Rights and privileges, so soon as His Majesty shall be
pleased to satisfy and confirm the Desires of his two Houses of Parliament so
much tending to the good and preservation both of Religion, Crown and Kingdoms.

Some Overtures have been lately ^ade between his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and his Lordship, in relation to a conjunction and uniting of both
Navies; but his Lordship has utterly detested against the some, slighting the
Princes invitation and representing a Letter unto his Highness, That he takes
it as the greatest dishonor that can be incident to man, for any Personage
whatsoever to betray the trust reposed in him, and that He is resolved to
sacrifice his life in the Cause and Engagement which he has undertaken, not
doubting but that the omnipotent God of Heaven (to whom the Honor of his
Engagement does belong) will cause the Wnids and Seas to fight for them, whose
Truth is their Banner, Shield and Bucker; and therefore dehorts his Highness
to persist no longer in the way he is in, but forthwith to come in, and unite
himself with the Parliament, that so his person may be preserved from all
violence and injury and a restoration made of all due Rights and privileges,
and that he may render himself isntrumental for the composing of all
differences, and establishing of a firm and lasting Peace throughout His
Fathers Realms and Dominions.

This Letter is said to be sent from aboard the St. George, to the Prince at
Helver-Sluce, and signed WARWICK.

Letters further from the Navy say, That the Prince is desirous to spin out
some longer time at Gorea before he puts to Sea, in expectation of what the
Treaty will produce, and that if it takes not effect, he is resolved for
Ireland, to join with the Marquis of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiqueen, and to
land an Army in the West of England at the Spring, for the re-investing of the
King, and restoring of Him, to his just Rights, Power and Authority

The said Letters do further intimate, That the Lord high Admiral has
received a Letter from his Majesty, purporting things of great concernment, and
how far he has condescended to the desires of his two House^ (...) desiring
him to be isntrumental for the settling of a firm and lasting peace.

His Majesty's final Answer touching Episcopacy.
Right Honorable,
ON Wednesday morning last the Kings Majesty and the Commissioners met in the
Treaty Chamber, and taking their places at the Council Table according to the
usual manner, the Earl of Northumberland rose up, and made a short Speech,
Humbly desiring his Majesty to remove his averseness from the settling of
Religion, and to hearken unto the advice of His great and loyal Council, so
much tending to the honor of His Majesty and Posterity, and the settling of a
true and lasting peace throughout all His Realms and Dominions.

Which done, his Lordship presented a Copy of the Parliaments last Votes
brought by Sir Peter Killegrey, on Tuesday night last, in answer to his
Majesty's Enlargement of Concessions touching Episcopacy. His Majesty (after
reading the same) rose up out of the Chair of State, and made a very learned
and excellent Speech to the Commissioners.

His Majesty having thus graciously declared Himself, the Commissioners began
to proceed according to their Instructions, and desired a more fuller and
satisfactory Answer, touching the utter extirpation of Episcopacy, which took
up some time of debate in pro and con, and the day being far spent, they
referred the further results thereof to the happy succession of the morrow
following.

And (accordingly) yesterday morning they met again, where the streams of joy
issued from the current of the hearts both of Prince and People, who came to a
final close upon all the Proposals, His Majesty promising upon his Royal Word
to pass those Bills into Acts which He had already assented to. And being
further pressed by the Commissioners to sign to the Bill for the establishing
of Episcopacy, his Majesty desired respite of time till Saturday morning, which
was accordingly granted.

And this morning (about the accustomed hour) his Majesty gave the
Commissioners a visit, and sitting down in the Chair of State, presented a
Paper to them, which is said to be very satisfactory, containing His Royal
Assent to the Proposition of the Church, and likewise to all the rest of the
Bills and Proposals. This joyful tidings were soon echoed throughout the
Island; insomuch that the Bells rang tryumphantly in all the respective
Parishes. But by reason of the sudden dispatch of the Post, I am forced to
conclude, and remain

Your Honors devoted servant, J. RISHTON.
Newport 5 October. 1648.
Postscript.
SIR,
SInce my last, Here has happened several Overtures between his Majesty and the
Parliaments Commissioners; they have had much debate upon the Propositions,
especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the
dark Cloud being expelled, and the splendour of the Gospel shining most
gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graciously pleased to declare his
Royal Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royal Word to pass
all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and consonant to
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And as to the business of the Church
(which is all they stick at) the King has promised to give his concurrence
therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his dis^assenting. And 14
days more being added to the Treaty, it is hoped a fair conclusion will attend
the happy beginning. His Majesty has delivered another Paper to the
Commissioners, which I have here inserted, viz.

CHARLES, R.

HIs Majesty rests very much unsatisfied. That you have now again wholly
declined the answering of those three questions so clearly proposed by him,
which your selves also confess to be of grea importance, upon this only
pretense, That the whole volumn of Ecclesiastical policy is contained in them:
Whereas his Majesty did neither expect nor require from you any large or
polemicall Discourse concerning those Questions conceiving that you were in
some sort obliged to have declared what your judgment was therein, with the
grounds thereof. For certainly until one of these three things can be clearly
evidenced unto his Maj. 1. Either that there is no certain form of Church
Government at all prescribed in the Word. 2. That the Civil power may change
the fame as they see cause. 3 Or if it be unchangable, that it was not
Episcopal, but some other, his Maj. thinks himself excusable in the judgment
of all reasonable men, if he cannot be induced to give his consent to the utter
abolition of that Government of the Church which he found here settled to his
hands, which has continued all over the Christian world, from the times of the
Apostles until this last Age.

FINIS.

