C. R. A LETTER SENT FROM HIS MAJESTY
To the high Sheriffs of the Counties of York, Lincoln, Stafford, Derby,
Chester, Lancaster, Nottingham, Westmorland, Cumberland, Northumberland and the
Bishopric of Durham, etc.
WHereas by Letters Patents under Our great Seal of England, We have granted
unto Sir George Wentworth the Office of Receiver of Our Revenew, arising by the
forfeitures of Popish Recusants, in the Northern Counties, thereby authorizing
him to receive, and take up in Our name, and to Our use all the Rents and
forfeitures due and payable to Us, for or in respect of Recusancy, or
Conviction of any person or persons whatsoever, or by force of any Act or Acts
of Parliament made against Recusants notwithstanding; which, as we are
informed, you have not only taken upon you to discharge Recusants within that
County, from paying their Rents and forfeitures into Our Receipt at York, to
our said Receiver, or his Deputy, but pretend they have no power to receive the
same. thereby making Our Grant of no effect: Which having taken into Our
Princely consideration, and foreseeing that by this means Our Revenew will not
only be impaired; but if timely redress be not applied, may be in danger to
be destroyed and lost; We have thought good, and by these presents require and
command you, that from henceforth you forbear, upon any pretense whatsoever,
to receive the said Forfeitures or Compositions for Recusancy, or to hinder the
said Sir George or his Deputies in receiving or collecting the same, according
to his said Grant, until Our pleasure therein be further made known.

Given at Our Court at York quinto die Maii, 1642.
BY THE KING
A Proclamation for putting the Laws against Popish Recusants in due execution.
THE Kings most excellent Majesty, having been formerly moved by his
Parliament, for putting the Laws in execution against Papists, whereto He has
from time to time still given His gracious Answers, expressing his willingness
thereunto: But now finding, that no such proceedings against them have been yet
had, as might answer His Majesty's expectation: His Majesty therefore, out of
His Princely and pious care, as well for maintaining the true Protestant
Religion established in this Kingdom, as for suppressing by lawful ways, all
increase and growth of Popery; Has thought fit to publish His Royal Pleasure
therein: Wherefore His Majesty does hereby straightly charge and command, all and
every His Judges and Justices of Assize, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other
His Officers and Ministers whatsoever, whom it does any way concern, That they,
and every of them, according to the duties of the r several Offices and
Places, do forthwith, and without further delay, put in due and effectual
execution the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, provided and made against
Popish Recusants, and that without favor or connivence; As they tender His
Majesty's just and Royal Commands, the good of this Church and Kingdom, and
will answer for neglect of their duties herein.

Die Martis, 20. Maii, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
the Magazines of the several Counties in England and Wales, shall be forthwith
put into the power of the Lord Lievtenants of the said Counties, respectively,
(being such as the Parliament does confide in) for the Service, and safety of
His Majesty and his Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be Printed and
Published.

Ioh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

LONDON Printed for I.T. 1642.


