THE KINGS Majesty's last DECLARATION TO The Lord Mountague, and the rest of
the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT with the ARMY.

Wherein is declared, His Majesty's Desires to the said Commissioners,
concerning His Highness the DUKE of YORK.

AND The Armies Propositions for Peace, to Both Houses of Parliament; together
with the Parliaments Answer, and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax his Reply.

LONDON: Printed for R. Rishton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, July 3. 1647.

The Kings MAJESTY'S DECLARATION, Presented to His loyal and faithful
Subjects upon His going to Windsor.
Sir,
HAving obtained such a fit opportunity, to express my willingness in a
satisfactory way, to all your Desires, I shall here impartially communicate the
most remarkablest Occurrents, which has (lately) ebbed and flowed, within the
Kingdoms great Stream, whose appearance in this instance of time, seems to
be the Worlds chiefest Object. But by reason of breviation, and the desire of a
sudden dispatch, of some of these papers to the Army, I must of (necessity)
betake my self to my limited bounds, and briefly insist upon those things which
are of greatest concernment, being so much desired by the whole Kingdom, viz.

The Kings Majesty having received a Copy of some certain Votes, agreed upon by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, touching the removing of the
Kings Majesty to Holdenby; At the reading whereof, His Majesty began to show a
great dislike of the same, and His great unwillingnesse to return to Holdenby,
and after some consultation thereupon, His Majesty declared His Resolution to
the Right Honorable the Earl of Denbigh, the Lord Mountague, and the rest of
the Parliaments Commissioners, now residing with his Majesty, concerning the
said Votes; Wherein He further declares, his full resolution and determination
touching the particulars mentioned therein, and more particularly, concerning
the Vote for disposal of His Royal Person, further declaring,

That He has set down his Resolution, concerning his return to Holmby, and
that he cannot give his Royal assent for compliance with the said Vote, having
fully resolved for Windsor, and to that end, great preparations are making for
the entertainment of His Royal Person, diverse Carriages being already
dispatched thither, for the better accommodation of his Majesty.

His Majesty further declared, That He desires the Duke of York, and the rest
of His Children at London, may be speedily sent down thither; which if granted,
it will give great satisfaction to his Majesty, by reason of his long and
earnest desire, to see those Princely Babes, whom He has for many years,
wanted the sight of.

His Majesty having thus declared his will and pleasure, together with his
resolution, he desired that all things might be made ready, and that his
Sumpture horses might be forthwith in readiness, which was accordingly
performed.

His Majesty has further declared, that he desires nothing more earnestly,
then to see this languishing Kingdom settled in peace and unity, that so all
his loyal Subjects throughout his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, may enjoy a
firm and lasting Peace.

And for the accomplishing of these his Majesty's Desires, the Officers and
Soldiers under command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, has sent up
Propositions for Peace, to Both Houses of Parliament, for the speedy settling of
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales in peace and amity; which
Propositions are briefly drawn up into 8 Heads, as follows.

Propositions for Peace, proposed to both Houses of Parliament, for a safe and
well-grounded Peace, throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
1 That the declaration inviting men to desert the Army, and promising their
arrears in case they do so, may be recalled and annulled. 2 That the Army may
be presently paid up, equally to those that have deserted it. 3 That His
Majesty's coming to Richmond may be suspended, until affairs be settled.

And in the mean time, no place may be appointed that may be any nearer to
London, then the Parliament will allow the quarters of the Army to be.

4 That the Members charged, may be forthwith suspended or sequestered the
House. 5 That those that dave deserted the Army may be instantly discharged,
and dispersed, and receive no more of their arrears till the Army be first
satisfied. 6* That both Parliament and City may be speedily, and effectually
freed from those multitudes of Reformadoes and soldiers before mentioned, that
flock together bout London, by a speedy dispatch, and discharging of them from
the City. 7 That such listings, or raising of new Forces, or drawing together
of any before mentioned, and all preparations toward a new war, may be
effectually declared against and suppressed as also all invitations, or
endeavors to draw in foreign forces. 8 That the present perplexed astairs of
the Kingdom, and those concerning the Army, as also all the things desiered in
our late representation in behalf of the Kingdom, may be put in some speedy
way of setlement and composure.


By the appointment of His Excellence Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Council of
War. JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secretary.

In answer to which; the General has received the Votes of both Houses of
Parliamen, which has given a great deal of satisfaction to the army, they
being now satisfied in most of their desi^e^. Whereupon the General presently
gave out Orders, for the drawing back of the army, and the Headquarters to be
at Wickham, 27. miles from London.

And in further pursuance of the said vote the General writ a Letter to the
Commissioners of Parliament with the army, and another to the Commissioners for
the City of London, for them to acquaint the Parl. and City with the
proceedings of the army, and their drawing further back from London.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
BY the Votes you pleased to communicate to me this morning, I find the
Parliament has taken into their consideration the Propositions of the army,
which necessarily craved some satisfaction before the with drawing of it; and
that their progress already made (though but in part) meets with such a
compliance in my Council of war, that it begets in them a general confidence,
of the Houses speedy and full answer to the remaining Propositions; and
therefore to testify the readiness of this army to observe the Commands of
Parliament, they have resolved to remove the army to a farther distance, and
the head quarters to be at Wickham, believing, that this forwardness on their
part to satisfy both Parliament and City, will not retard, but hasten the
Resolutions of the Houses with a full satisfaction to the particulars not yet
answered.

This is a perfect Copy of his Excellencies own Letter, desiring you to hasten
the publishing of it, and to send us down two or three hundred Copies for the
use of the army, and I shall remain

Wickham 2 July 1647. Yours to command, R. RISHTON.


FINIS.

