KING CHARLES HIS LETTER TO THE GREAT TURK; The High and Mighty Emperor SULTAN
MORAT HAN: Chief Lord and Commander of the Ottoman Kingdom, Sole and Supreme
Monarch of the Eastern Empire.

LONDON: Printed for H. Blunon. August 11. 1642.

CHARLES. By the grace of the most High God, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the High and Mighty Emperor, Sultan Morat Han; Chief Lord and Commander of
the Ottoman Kingdom, and sole and Supreme Monarch of the Eastern Empire:
SENDS GREETING.
WE understand by Our Ambassador Resident with You, with how much Honor and
respect, the death of Our dear Lord and Father (of ever glorious memory) was
condoled at your Imperial Port: and if the signification thereof, and of Our
peaceable succession to these Crowns, have not in all this time come unto you
immediately from Our self, it has not been through any default of Our
affection, or respect to You, but many important affairs upon Our first Access,
and the dangerous troubles wherewith Our City of London and many other
principal parts of Our Kingdom have been (and at this time are) infected
with; have diverted Us, and forced Us to defer these offices longer than We
intended* or desired; and as we hope You will: For these important Reasons,
readily and freely excuse those Omissions which in so weighty occasions may
well be dispensed withal.

So We pray You to be assured, that We are desirous that the Amity which has
of long time been held between our Predecessors, may be renewed, continued, and
confirmed: And the intercourse of Trade between Our Subjects and Yours be
maintained and preserved, for the good of both Our Kingdoms and People, and to
give You the better proof of Our Real and sincere intentions therein; We have
ratified, and do ratify the Treaty made by Sir Thomas Row in that Your
Imperi^ll Port, with Your Subjects of Algier and Tunis: duly to observe the
Articles of that Treaty in all respects toward Our Subjects. We do likewise
recommend unto You, and pray You in conformity to Our desire of friendship and
good correspondencie, to confirm and ratify those privileges which have been
formerly granted by your Predecessors to Our Merchants, and to enlarge the same
according to present occasions, as shall be most convenient for the good of
both Our Kingdoms; which as We will study by all good means to keep up in
full force, and most advantageous execution: So We may not omit to represent
unto You, the Grievances of Our Subjects, when they are most unjustly wronged
contrary to the Capitulations between Us, and We presume, contrary to Your
knowledge and consent.

That which we have now to desire your Justice in: is,

First, for extreme injuries done by inferior Officers, and especially by one
Morat Chaus, a Customer of that Port, who has not only broken, but also
scorned and contemned the Articles of the Capitulations; and that in the
Publik. Divan. to your dishonor, and to the great prejudice of our Merchants:

Secondly, an open injustice done to our Subjects in Algier, wherein our
English Consul, and the rest of our Nation, were restrained of their Liberty,
their goods seized upon, and forced to pay great sums of money, contrary to
Justice, and the direct terms of the treaty; But if while We on our behalf do
observe the Capitulation and all good terms of friendship; such mean persons
as Customers and other Officers, be suffered and born out in these unjust
Insolences and oppressions upon Our Subjects, in a manifest breach of the
Capitulations.

We cannot shut our ears against the Petitions of our Subjects, but must
according to their Humble Suit give Order to withdraw their Persons and Estates
from such dangers, wrongs, and injustice; unless upon this our Instance, we
find a speedy redress and exemplary punishment inflicted upon such as have,
or shall transgress the Rules of Justice, and the Amity and Contract between
Us: Which, We recommend to your judgment and care, as a matter wherein the
welfare of Our and Your people and Countries is interessed.

We do further particularly pray You, to give express Order for the upholding
and maintaining of the Article of Privilege, for the paying but only of one
Custom within all the Ports under Your Jurisdiction; with free liberty to
export any Commodity (having once paid Custom) without further Charge: And
that Our Subjects be not exacted upon contrary to that privilege.

The further particulars of Our Subjects grievances, and what else We desire to
be negotiated with You, We have given in Charge to Our Ambassador: to whom We
pray you to give credit, and to return Us full Answer to the several points of
this Our Letter: Wherein if You shall give relief to our Subjects, and punish
those that violate the Capitulation; We shall reserve it as a singular
Testimony of Your Justice, Your good intentions toward Us, Your constancy in
your Contracts, and Your Judgment in what has Relation to the good of Your
own Dominions: And We shall be ready to answer that Relation of Yours, in
whatsoever shall rest on Our parts to perform.

Dated the first of August:
FINIS.

