Whereas much time has been spent in meetings and debates betwixt His
Excellency James Lord Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant and General Governor
of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Commissioner to His most Excellent
Majesty, Charles, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc. for the Treating and Concluding of a Peace in the said Kingdom
with His Majesty's Humble and Loyal Suhjects, the Confederate and Roman
Catholics of the said Kingdom of Ireland of the one part, and the Right
Honorable Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskerry, and others Commissioners Deputed and
Authorized by the said Confederate Roman Catholic Subjects of the other part;
and thereupon many difficulties did arise, by occasion whereof sundry matters
of great weight and consequence necessarily requisite to be condescended unto
by His Majesty's said Commissioners, for the safety of the said Confederate
Roman Catholics, were not hitherto agreed upon, which retarded, and does as
yet retard the Conclusion of a firm Peace and settlement in the said Kingdom.
And whereas the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Glamorgan is entrusted and
authorized by His most Excellent Majesty, to grant and assure to the said
Confederate Catholic Subjects further Grace and favors, which the said Lord
Lieutenant did not as yet in that Latitude as they expected, grant unto them;
and the said Earl having seriously considered of all matters and due
circumstances of the great Affairs now in agitation, which is the peace and
quiet of the said Kingdom, and the importance thereof, in order to His
Majesty's service, and in relation to, a Peace and settlement in His other
Kingdoms; and hereupon the place having seen the ardent desire of the said
Catholics to assist His Majesty against all that do or shall oppress His
Royal Right or Monarchick Government; and having discerned the alacrity and
cheerfulness of the said Catholics to embrace Honorable conditions of Peace,
which may preserve their Religion and other just Interests. In pursuance
therefore of His Majesty's Authority under His Highness Signature Royal and
Signet, bearing D^^e at Ox^^ the 12. day of March in the twentieth Year of His
Reign, Granted unto the said Earl of Glamorgan, the tenor whereof is as
follows: Viz. Charles Rex. Charles by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and
right welbeloved Cosen Edward Earl of Glamorgan greeting. We reposing great and
especial trust and Confidence in Your approved wisdom and fidelity, Do by these
(as firmly as under Our Great Seal to all intents and purposes) Authorize and
give you power to Treat and Conclude with the Confederate Roman Catholics in
Our Kingdom of Ireland, if upon necessity any thing be to be condescended unto,
wherein Our Lieutenant cannot so well be seen in, as not fit for Us at the
present publicly to own; Therefore We charge you to proceed according to this
Our Warrant, with all possible secrecy, and for whatsoever you shall engage
your self upon such valuable considerations, as you in your judgment shall
deem fit; We promise in the word of a King and a Christian, to ratify and
perform the same that shall be granted by you and under your Hand and Seal; the
said Confederate Catholics having by their Supplies testified their Zeal to
Our Service; and this shall be in each particular to you a sufficient Warrant.
Given at Our Court at Oxford under Our Signet and Royal Signature the 12. day
of March, in the 20. Year of Our Reign, 1644. To Our right trusty and right
welbeloved Cosen Edward Earl of Glamorgan. It is therefore granted, accorded and
agreed by and between the said Earl of Glamorgan, for and on the behalf of His
most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors on the one part, and the
Right Honorable Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Lord President of the
Supreme Council of the said Confederate Catholics, the said Donnogh, Lord
Viscount Muskerry, Alexander mac Donnel, and Nicholas Plunket Esquire; Sir Talbot
Barronet, Dermot O Brien, John Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Geffrey Brown Esquire;
Commissioners in that behalf appointed by the said Confederate Roman
Catholics Subjects of Ireland, for and in the behalf of the said Confederat
Roman Catholics Subjects of the other part, in manner and form following;
(that is to say)

1. IMprimis, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in
the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all
and every the professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in the Kingdom of
Ireland, of whatever estate, degree or quality soever he or they be or shall
be, shall for evermore hereafter have and enjoy within the said Kingdom, the
free and public use and exercise of the said Roman Catholics Religion, and
of the respective function therein.

2. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and on the
behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That the said professors of
the Roman Catholic Religion, shall hold and enjoy all and every the Churches
by them enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them possessed at any time since the
23. of October, 1641. and all other Churches in the said Kingdom, other then
such as are now actually enjoyed by His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

3. Item, It is granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the
behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That all and
every the Roman Catholics Subjects of Ireland, of what estate, condition,
degree or quality soever, shall be free and exempted from the Jurisdiction of
the Protestant Clergy, and every of them; and that the Roman Catholic
Clergy of this Kingdom shall not be punished, troubled or molested for the
exercise of their Jurisdiction over their respective Catholic flocks, in
matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

4. Item, It is further granted, accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and
on the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That an
Act shall be passed in the next Parliament to be holden in this Kingdom, the
tenor and purport whereof shall be as follows, viz. An Act for the relief of
His Majesty's Catholic Subjects of His Highness Kingdom of Ireland: Whereas
by an Act made in Parliament held in Dublin the second Year of the Reign of the
late Queen Eliz. Entitled, An Act restoring to the Crown, the ancient
Jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all
Foreign power repugnant to the same; And by one other Statute made in the said
last mentioned Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Administration of the
Sacrament, Sundry Mulcts, Penalties, Restraints and Incapacities, are and have
been laid upon the professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in this Kingdom,
in, for and concerning the use, profession and exercise of their Religion and
their functions therein, to the great prejudice, trouble and disquiet of the
Roman Catholics in their Liberties and Estates, and the general disturbance
of the whole Kingdom. For remedy whereof, and for the better settling, increase
and continuance of the Peace, Unity and Tranquillity of this Kingdom of Ireland;
His Majesty, at the humble suit and request of the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, is graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, And
be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of
the same, That from and after the first day of this Session of Parliament, it
shall and may be lawful to and for all the professors of the Roman Catholic
religion, of what degree, condition or quality, to have, use and enjoy the free
and public exercise and profession of the said Roman Catholic Religion, and
of their several and respective functions therein, without incurring any mulct
or penalty whatsoever, or being subject to any restraint or incapacity
concerning the same; Any Article or clause, sentence or provision in the said
last mentioned Acts of Parliament, or in any other Act or Acts of Parliament,
Ordinances, Law or usage to the contrary, or in any wise notwithstanding. And
be it also further Enacted, That neither the said Statutes, or any other
Statute, Acts or Ordinance hereafter made in Your Majesty's Reign, or in the
Reign of any of Your Highnesses most Noble Progenitors or Ancestors, and now of
force in this Kingdom; nor all, nor any branch, article, clause and sentence in
them or any of them, contained or specified, shall be of force or validity in
this Realm, to extend to be construed, or adjudged to extend in any wise to
inquiet, prejudice, vex or molest the professors of the said Roman Catholic
Religion, in their Persons, Lands, Hereditaments or Goods, for any thing,
matter or cause whatsoever, touching and concerning the free and public use,
exercise and enjoyings of their said Religion, function and profession. And be
it also further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That Your
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects in the said Realm of Ireland, from the
first day of this Session of Parliament, shall be, and be taken, deemed and
adjudged capable of all Offices of Trust and advancement, places, degrees and
dignities, and preferment whatsoever within Your said realm of Ireland, Any
Acts, Statutes, Usage or Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And that other
Acts shall be passed in the said Parliament, according to the tenor of such
Agreement or Concessions as herein are expressed; and that in the mean time the
said Roman Catholic Subjects, and every of them, shall enjoy the full
benefit, freedom and advantage of the said Agreements and Concessions, and of
every of them.

5. Item, It is accorded, granted and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the
behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, That His Excellency the Lo:
Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other or others
authorized or to be authorized by His Majesty, shall not disturb the professors
of the Roman Catholic Religion in their present possession and continuance of
the profession of their said Churches Jurisdiction, or any other the matters
aforesaid in these Articles agreed and condescended unto by the said Earl,
until His Majesty's pleasure be signified for confirming and publishing the
Grants and Agreements hereby articled for, and condescended unto by the said
Earl.

6. Item, And the said Earl of Glamorgan does hereby engage His Majesty's
Royal word and Public Faith, unto all and singular the professors of the
said Roman Catholic Religion within the said Kingdom of Ireland, for the due
observance and performance of all and every the Articles, Grants and Clauses
therein contained, and the Concessions herein mentioned to be performed to them.

7. Item. It is accorded and agreed, That the said Public Faith of the Kingdom
shall be engaged unto the said Earl, by the said Commissioners of the said
Confederate Catholics, for sending ten thousand men to serve his Majesty, by
order and public Declaration of the General assembly now sitting, And that
the Supreme Council of the said Confederate Catholics, shall engage
themselves to bring the said number of men armed, the one half with Muskets,
and the other half with Pikes, unto any Port within this Realm, at the
Election of the said Earl, and at such time as he shall appoint, to be by him
shipped and transported to serve his Majesty in England, Wales or Scotland,
under the Command of the said Earl of Glamorgan as Lord General of the said
Army, which Army is to be kept together in one entire body, and all other the
Officers and Commanders of the said Army are to be named by the Supreme
Council of the said Confederate Catholics, or by such others as the General
Assembly of the said Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom shall entrust
therewith:

In witness whereof the parties to these presents have hereunto
interchangeably put their hands and Seals the 25. day of August, 1645.
Glamorgan,
Signed, Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Somerset, Jeffery
Barron, Robert Barry.
Copia vera Colata fideliter cum Originali:

Thomas Cashell, Franc. Patricius Waterford de Lismore.



This is a true Copy of the Original Copy, found in the Archbishop of Tuams
Carriage,

compared by Us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King.



Articles of agreement
made and concluded upon by and between the Right Honorable Edward Earl of
Glamorgan, and in pursuance, and by virtue of his Majesty's authority under his
signet and Royal signature, bearing date at Oxford the twelfth day of March in
the twentieth year of his Reign, for and on the behalf of his most Excellent
Majesty of the one part, and the Right Honorable Rich: Lord Viscount
Mountgaret, Lord President of the Supreme Council of the Confederate
Catholics of Ireland, Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskerry Alex: M. Donnell, and
Nicholas Plunket Esquires, Sir Robert Talbott Baronet, Dermot o Brien, John
Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Jeffery Brown Esquires, for and on the behalf of
his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, and the Catholic Clergy of Ireland,
of the other part.

IMprimis, The said Earl does grant, conclude and agree, on the behalf of his
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, Donnogh Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alex. Match Donnell, and Nicholas
Plunket, Esquires: Sir Robert Talbot Barronet, Dermot o Brien, John Dillon,
Patrick Darcy, and Ieffery Brown, Esquires: That the Roman Catholic Clergy
of the said Kingdom, shall and may from henceforth for ever, hold and enjoy
all and every such Lands, Tenements, Tithes, and Hereditaments whatsoever by
them respectively enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them posessed at any time
since the three and twentieth of October one thousand six hundred forty one:
And all other such Lands, Tenements, Tithes, and Hereditaments belonging to the
Clergy within this Kingdom, other then such as are actually enjoyed by his
Majesty's Protestant Clergy.

Item. It is granted, concluded and agreed on by the said Richard Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Viscount Muskerry, Alex: Match. Donnell, and Nicholas
Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot o Brien, John Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and
Jeffery Brown, on the behalf of the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland,
that two parts in three parts to be divided of all the said Lands, Tithes, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, mentioned in the precedent Article, shall for three
years next ensuing the feast of Easter, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God. 1646 be disposed of and converted for and to the use of his Majesty's
forces, employed or to be employed in his service, and the other third part to
the use of the said Clergy respectively, and so the like disposition to be
renewed from three years to three years, by the said Clergy during the Wars.

Item. It is accorded and agreed by the said Earl of Glamorgan, for and in the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, that his Excellency the Lord
Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland or any other or others
authorized or to be authorized by his Majesty, shall not disturb the
Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in their present possession and
continuance of the possession of their Churches Lands, Tenements, Tithes,
Hereditaments, Jurisdiction or any other the matters aforesaid in these
Articles agreed and condescended to by the said Earl, until his Majesty's
pleasure be signified for confirming and publishing the grants and herein
articled for and condescended unto by the said Earl.

Item. It is accorded granted and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors that an act shall be passed
in the next Parliament to be held in this Kingdom, according to the tenor of
such Agreements or Concessions as herein are expressed, and that in the mean
time, the said Clergy shall enjoy the full benefit, freedom and advantage of
the said Agreements and Concessions and every of them.

And the said Earl of Glamorgan does hereby engage his Majesty's Royal word
and Public Faith unto the said Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and the rest of the
said Commissioners, for the due observation and performance of all and every
the Articles, Agreements, and Concessions herein contained and mentioned, to be
performed to the said Roman Catholic Clergy, and every of them.

In witness whereof the parties to these presents, have hereunto
interchangeably put their hands and Seals the 25 day of August, Anno Dom.
1645. Glamorgan,
Signed, Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Sommerset, Jeffery
Barron, Rob. Barry.

Whereas in these Arrticles touching the Clergy livings, the right honorable
the Earl of Glamorgan is obliged in his Majesty's behalf to secure the
Concessions in these Articles by Act of Parliament: We holding that manner of
securing those grants as to the Clergy Livings to prove more difficult and
prejudicial to His Majesty then by doing thereof and securing those
Concessions otherwise as to the said Livings, the said Earl undertaking and
promising in the behalf of His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as hereby
he does undertake to settle the said Concessions, and secure them to the
Clergy, and their respective Successors, in another secure way, other then by
Parliament at present, till a fit opportunity be offered for securing the same,
do agree and condescend thereunto. And this Instrument by his Lordship signed,
was before the perfecting thereof intended to that purpose, as to the said
Livings, to which purpose We have mutually signed this endorsement. And it is
further intended that the Catholic Clergy shall not be interrupted by
Parliament, or otherwise as to the said Livings, Contrary to the meaning of
these Articles.

Glamorgan,
Copia vera Colata fideliter cum Originali,

Thomas Cashell, Fra. Patricius Waterford and Lismore.


This is a true Copy of the Original Copy, found in the Archbishop of Tuames
Carriage,

compared by us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King.



I Edward Earl of Glamorgan do protest and swear faithfully to acquaint the
Kings most Excellent Majesty with the proceedings of this Kingdom in Order to
his service, and to the indeerment of this Nation, and punctual performance of
what I have (as Authorized by his Majesty) obliged my self to see performed,
and in default not to permit the Army entrusted into my Charge to adventure it
self, or any considerable part thereof until Conditions from his Majesty, and
by his Majesty be performed.

Glamorgan.
September the third* 1645.
Copia vera concordans de verbo ad verbum fideliter cum originalis.

Tho. Cashell.


This is a true Copy of the original Copy, found in the Archbishop of Tuams
Carriage,

compared by us, Arthur Annesley, Rob. King.



A Copy of a Letter in Cipher.
Honorable Sir.
THere are some passages which we omitted in our letters to the Committee,
because we judge it expedient to express them in Cipher, the Rebels grew
higher in their demands since the Kings affairs have been in a declining
condition, which with their abusing the Kings and authority in the taking our
Garrisons in Connagh, and turning the English out of some of them, has so
incensed the Marquess of Ormond, that he desires but power and opportunity to
break of all Treaty and fall upon them, and in order thereunto we have had an
Overture by one that came from him to us, for the British and Scotts Forces to
join with him against the Rebels upon these conditions.

First that the Treaty between England and Scotland, should be observed.

Secondly that the Covenant should not be pressed upon the Forces under his
Lordships Command, and that it should be left free for those of them that would
to use the Common Prayer book, and the established Government, till the King
and Parliament settle some other.

Thirdly that the British Army be left to the chief Governor for the time
being, he appointing them a Governor of their own choosing.

Fourthly that every party out of his estate or charge be restored.

Fifthly that none be sent out of the Kingdom without consent on both parts.

Sixthly that some Ammunition be lent to them of Dublyn.

Seventhly for our security Drogheda should be given into our hands, we giving
assurance that use should not be made of it against his Lordship.

Eighthly both parties to swear to perform. We suppose some good effect might
be produced from these beginnings, but without the Scots Commissioners we have
no power, and therefore expect your directions therein, and desire that in the
mean while they may be kept secret, for if any notice of a transaction in this
kind come to the Rebels, it would hazard the putting Dublyn and those parts
into their hands, the proposition is the more considerable because your Armies
here will much want a port in Leinster for a Magazine, but we shall do nothing
in it till we hear from you, but what may keep them on having nothing more to
advertize you of at present, we remain.

Belfast this nineteenth of November. 1645. Your most humble servants, Arthur
Annesley. Rob. King. William Beale.

If you think fit to proceed we doubt not but to bring the business unto far
better conditions then are proposed.



SIR,
THe same Letter which We have written to the Committee of both Kingdoms, We
have also written to the Lords and Commons, and if either give redress to the
wrongs complained of, it is well, What We wrote to you of the nineteenth of
this month in Character, might as well have been done with less trouble, For
Master Galbreth that delivered to us the same under an injunction of great
Secrecy, has since communicated it to most of the Colonels of the British
Army, so that it was evidently a Plot to draw this Army under the Command of
the Marquess, I was jealous of it at first, and we took bonds of him to
appear before the Committee when the Scots Commissioners shall land, but it
was not thought fit to commit him till then, because there be diverse other
Malignants whom we intend at that time to lay up together, who perhaps would
not appear then, if there were any very strict course taken now.

We think the strength of the Army stands well affected, but both Armies have
known Malignants in them, who being removed, there will be no danger. Since my
former, Sir Patrick Wemys is come from Dublyn, and brought his whole Family
with him. I think he has done his part exceeding well, and if it be not
effectually prosecuted, you shall plainly know where the fault lies, We want
our money and meal extremely, without them we are as it were wind-bound; We
intend to visit the Major General shortly, He says he has no Commission to
command the Army, but you may see by his warrant that we have sent to the
Committee he wants not a Commission to leavy Money; Our Letters lie here for
want of a Vessel to waft them over, nor have we heard a word thence since our
landing, but I will forbear that further trouble till there be more cause.

Belfast, 26. November. 1645. Your most humble and most affectionate servant,
Rob. King.
Postscript.
SIR,
You will receive herewith, Copies of such Papers as were found in the
Archbishop of Tuams Carriage, they are of very high consequence, for they show
you what His Majesty grants the Papists here, and how far the peace with the
Rebels is advanced, be pleased to read them I pray you.



The News from Sligo.
ON the Lord's Day, October. 17. 1645, the Rebels (before the Ulster-Forces from
the Laggan were come to Sligo) surrounded the Town with about Two thousand Foot
and Three hundred Horse. The Garrison seeing little hopes of the Ulster-mens
advance (not knowing they were then at Bundrous) conceived it of absolute
necessity to hazard the fighting with the Rebels with their own strength and
Sir William Cole's Troop, rather then to lose themselves and the out-Garisons,
which were in a manner all blocked up by the Rebels lying between them and
Sligo. Captain Richard Coot and Captain Cole, commanded the Horse, being near
Two hundred; and after some skirmishing with the Rebels Horse, fell pell-mell
into their several Divisions of Foot, routed them and pursued them: And
Lieutenant Colonel Sanderson sallying out of the Town with his Foot, and Sir
Francis Hamilton coming in the nick of time with his Troop, they had all
execution upon the Rebels for Five miles; and at the end thereof, left slain
the Popish Archbishop of Tuum, the Rebels President of Connaught, for a
memorable Mark. They took One hundred and fifty Horse, with their Arms, their
Tents, and all other Baggage and Ammunition, and had much Spoil; several
Colors of Horse and Foot, and many Officers of note, to the number of about
Twenty eight, Prisoners; about Two hundred killed: and our loss but of one
man, and Six hurt. Many more of the Rebels might have been killed, but that our
Foot left the chase and fell to plunder.

Their whole Army being thus defeated, One thousand Foot and Three Troops of
Horse that were coming to join with them, upon the news thereof returned. And
our men, with the Laggan-Army joined with them, have since entered the Barony of
Tereragh, and taken Thirteen Castles there well provided of Corn, which was our
chief want, and like to be the loss of that whole Province, if God in this
miraculous manner had not supplied it. The Oxen which drew the Enemy's Wagons,
drew our Ordnance for the taking in of the said Castles. And now our men have
good Quarters for this Winter about the said Castles, which keep the Country
under Contribution.

The Archbishop of Tuum was a principal Agent in these Wars, and one of the
supreme Council of Kilkeny. He attended their Army at this time, to visit his
Diocese, and to put in execution an Order for the Arreres of his Bishopric,
granted to him from the Council at Kilkeny; which Order, together with the
Popes Bull, and several other Letters of Correspondence between him and his
Agents from Rome, Paris, and several parts of this Kingdom, were found about
him: The Particulars of which Letters (in order to the Irish affairs) are as
follows.

That the Pope would not at the first engage himself in the sending of a Nuntio
for Ireland, till the Irish Agents had fully satisfied him that the
establishment of the Catholic Religion was a thing feasible and attainable in
this Kingdom; whereupon he was content to solicit their Cause with Florence
and Venice, etc. and also to delegate Farmano his Nuntius to attend this
Kingdom: who the said Nuntius, after some delays in France, was at last
expedited thence by express Order from the Pope; and he arrived at the River
of Kilmare in a Frigot of One and twenty Pieces, Six and twenty Italians of his
retinue, Secretary Belinges, and diverse regular and secular Priests, October. 22.
The Irish are much encouraged with these Supplies which he has brought; the
List whereof found about the Archbishop, is:

Imprimis, Two thousand Muskets, Four thousand Bandeliers, Two thousand Swords,
Five hundred Petronels, and Twenty thousand pound of Powder, (all which arrived
in another Barque by it self at Brook-haven, October. 10.) together with Five or
Six Desks or small Trunks of Spanish Gold, the sum uncertain.

These Letters likewise inform us that the Kings hopes are from the Irish
Nation; and if they desert him, he is like to be in a hard condition very
speedily. Several other things they contain concerning Priuce Rupert, Colonel
Leg, the King's Losses at Bristol and Chester. Something there is also of the
Treaty of Peace. Ormond (says one) is fonnd a Machevillian: Dillon, Muskerry,
Talbot, are for Peace: Conditionibus quibuscunque iniquis, says another: Our
public Affairs are in via, non in termine, says a third: The Propositions
high, the Answers high and sly. There are some mysteries of State in this
business, which I cannot commit to Paper. Yet morally certain it is, there
will be Peace, says a fourth. It seems also there were some differences
amongst the Rebels themselves, as between Muskerry and Brown, insomuch that
Brown is dispatched from Dublin to Kilkeny between Castle haven and Preston;
insomuch that Father Scaramppe went from the supreme Council to reconcile them.
There was also a private Letter of suspicious informations against Dominico
Spinola an Agent in Ireland, wherein he is said to hold Correspondence with the
Queen of England in France, and to be a lover of their Enemies.

Prisoners at Sligo.
Great (...) as Dom. o Flaherty, Lieutenant Colonel to (...) Cousin German to
the Earl of Clanrickhard, and his next Heir. John Gerdy, Lieutenant Colonel to
Sir Tibbot Bourk, eldest son to the Lord of Mayoe. Richard Bourk, Major to
Richard Bourk aforesaid. Captain William o Shaghuise, brother to Sir Roger o
Shag huise. Captain Garret Dillon, son to Sir Lucas Dillon, who says that his
father was shot in the thigh. Captain Costologh, with diverse other inferior
Officers. The titular Archbishop of Tuum was slain. Captain Brown, brother
Geffry Brown the Lawyer who brought One hundred Muskets from Galloway, was also
killed.
A true and fuller Relation from Ireland of the Service performed by the men of
Iniskillin, of Sir William Cole's Regiment and Troop at Lowtherstowne, upon
Thursday November. 27, 1645, about One of the Clock in the night; wherein they
did not only (by Gods providence) rescue their prey, but having there routed a
Party of Four or Five hundred men of the Rebels, did likewise put the whole
Army of Owen mac Art o Neale to flight. Viz.
SIr William Cole, upon Sunday morning, November. 23, received a Letter from Sir
Charles Coot Lord President of Con^^^ght; who, to satisfy his Lordships
desires, commanded his Troop to march unto him to be at Sligo, on Thursday
night, November. 27, to join in some expedition by his Lordships Orders, against
the Rebels in that Province.

The greatest part of his Troop with their horses, were then in the Island of
Baawe, Sixteen miles Northward from Iniskilline, who upon his notice did march
away upon Monday, Nov. 24, together with almost all the Foot-Souldiers of Two
Companies of his Regiment that quartered with their Cattle, and many of the
Cows of Iniskilline in that Island, unto Bellashanone, which was their place of
Rendezvous.

The Cornet of that Troop, upon Tuesday November. 25, with about Twenty
Horsemen, marched from Iniskilline to the Westward of Loghern, with resolution
to lodge that night by the way, within Fifteen miles of Sligo; but a little
Snow falling, altered their determination, and so took their course to
Balleshanone without appointment, God in his high Providence for the
advancement of his own glory and our good, directing them thither: where as soon
as they got their horses shod, they were still hastening toward Sligo, whither
sundry of their Foot-Companies aforesaid on horseback rid before them: And a
great part of the Troop were advanced as far as Bundrowis, where the Alarm
overtook them, with Orders to return to resist the Enemy, to the number of Four
or Five hundred men of Omin mac Arts Army, under the Conduct of several
Captains, led by Roury mac Guire in chief, who upon Wednesday morning, November.
26, being provided with Two of our own Boats by the Treachery of one Bryan o
Harran and others of our bosome-Snakes, protected Synons, had entered the said
Island of Baawe at the South-end of it, and was burning, spoiling, preying
their goods; wherein they prevailed, even to the stripping naked of all our
women, plundering and taking theirs and our then absent Soldiers Clothes,
Victuals and Arms away.

That party of our Horsemen speedily returning to Bellashanone, whence with the
Cornet, the rest of the said Troop, some of the Foot-souldiers on horseback,
and Captain John Falliot, accompanied with as many horsemen as he could make,
hastened toward the North-end of that Island, which is distant from the
South-end thereof Three English miles. But the Enemy having driven the prey of
Cows, Horses and Mares forth at the South-end, our Horsemen with Captain
Folliot followed by Termon-Castle, whence they marched through very inaccessible
Woods and Boggs in the night, to the Cash (distant Sixteen miles from
Bellashanny) being the first place that they could guide themselves by the
track of the enemy and prey, which they still pursued with cheerfulness to
Lo^therstowne, where overtaking them about One of the clock in the morning of
Nov 21. 1645, their Trumpet sounding a Charge, they followed it home so
resolutely, that after a fierce Confliction, in a short time, they routed the
Enemy, and had the execution of them for a mile and a half, slew many of them
in the place, took some prisoners, rescued most part of their prey, recovered
their own Soldiers that were then the Enemy's prisoners, with some of the
Rebels knapsacks to boot: Which sudden and unexpected fright did so amaze Owin
mac Art and his Army, consisting of about Two thousand Foot and Two hundred
Horse (as prisoners do inform) who after they had made their Bravado on the top
of an hill within a mile of Iniskillin in the evening of Nov. 26, to keep the
Town from issuing forth to resist or stay the prey, encamped that night at
Ballena^all^ght within Four miles of this Town, that they all in a most fearful
and confused manner ran away to the mountains so vehemently scared and
affrighted, that their Van thought their own Rere were my Troops, and their
Rere likewise imagined (those that escaped the Fight by flight from
L^^ther^^^^ne) to have been also my party that pursued them; whereby their
Mantles, Clokes, and all that could be an impediment to their more speedy
slight, were cast upon the ground and left behind them; and so continued until
they passed the mountains of Slewbagha into the County of Monnaghan, where they
are quartered upon the County Creaghts which lies from Arthur Blanye's house,
and from Monaghan Duffe near the Town of Monaghan, all along to D^oghedah,
consisting of the banished inhabitants of Tyrone, Ardmagh, Monaghan and Lowth.

My Troop returned with Captain Folliot in safety (praised be God) without hurt
of man or beast, save one horse of Lieutenant Edw. Grahames that was shot and
killed under him. And having put the said prey again into the said Island, upon
Friday Nov. 28, they marched to Bellashanny, whence again they came home to
Iniskilline on the North side of Logherne, the 30 of November. 1645.

Among those that were slain, the Grand son of Sir Tirlagh was Henry o Neal was
one.

One Captain killed. Two Lieutenants killed.

And I find there is some man of more eminent note then any of these killed,
but as yet cannot learn certainly who it is. Lieutenant Tirlagh o Moylan, of
Captain Awney o Cahans Company, taken prisoner, who upon examination says that
Inchiquin has given a great blow of late unto Castlehaven and Preston in
their Quarters near Yoghel; and also says that the intent of this Army was,
that if they could come off with our said prey without check, they purposed
then to have besieged this Town, and according as Fortune favored them, to
have proceeded against the Lagan and other places of Ulster.

And yet I find by the Answer of some others of the Prisoners, that by
direction from the supreme Council of Ireland, this Army of Owen mac Arts are
to serve in nature of a running party to weaken our Forces of Iniskillins,
Laggan and Clanebyes by sudden incursions, to kill, spoil and prey us upon all
occasions of advantage, according as by their successes therein they shall
assume encouragement to themselves to go forwards against us, but especially
against Iniskilline, which they conceive is worst able to resist their Attempts.

Captain Falliot had Sixteen Horsemen, with Four of Manor Hamiltons men and
Four of Castle- Termon Horsemen that joined very fortunately in this Service
with my Troop: for which God Almighty be ever glorified and praised by

William Cole.

Die Lunae, 12 Januarii. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Committee of Lords
and Commons for Irish Affairs, do take care that the Relation of the late good
Success in Ireland be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

