His Majesty's Message to both Houses, concerning Disbanding of both Armies,
and His Majesty's return to both Houses of Parliament.
OXFORD, 12. April, 1643.
TO show to the whole world how earnestly his Majesty longs for peace, and that
no success shall make him desire the continuance of his Army to any other end,
or for any longer time than that, and until things may be so settled, as that
the Law may have a full, free, and uninterrupted course, for the defense and
preservation of the rights of his Majesty, both Houses, and his good Subjects.

1. As soon as his Majesty is satisfied in his first Proposition concerning his
own revenue, magazines, ships, and Forts, in which he desires nothing but that
the just, known, legal rights of his Majesty (devolved to him from his
Prog^nitors) and of the persons trusted by him, which have violently been taken
from both, be restored unto him; and unto them, unless any just and legal
exceptions against any of the persons trusted by him (which are yet unknown to
his Majesty) can be made appear to him. 2. As soon as all the Members of both
Houses shall be restored to the same Capacity of Sitting and Voting in
Parliament, as they had upon the first of January, 1641. the same of right
belonging unto them by their Birth rights, and the free Election of those that
sent them, and having been voted from them for adhering to his Majesty in these
distractions. His Majesty not intending that this should extend either to the
Bishops, whose votes have been taken away by Bill, or to such in whose places
upon new Writs new Elections have been made. 3. As soon as his Majesty and both
Houses may be secured from such tumultuous Assemblies as, to the great breach
of the Privileges, and the high dishonor of Parliaments, have formerly
assembled about both Houses, and awed the Members of the same, and occasioned
two several Complaints from the Lords House, and two several desires of that
House to the House of Commons, to join in a Declaration against them, the
complying with which desire, might have prevented all these miserable
distractions, which have ensued Which security his Majesty conceives can be
only settled by adjourning the Parliament to some other place, at the least
twenty miles from London, the choice of which his Majesty leaves to both
Houses.
His Majesty will most cheerfully and readily consent that both Armies be
immediately disbanded, and give a present meeting to both his Houses of
Parliament at the time and place at and to which the Parliament shall be agreed
to be adjourned.

His Majesty being most confident, that the Law will then recover the due
credit and estimation, and that upon a free debate in a full and peaceable
convention of Parliaments, such provisions will be made against seditious
preaching and printing against his Majesty, and the established Laws, which
has been one of the chief causes of the present distractions; and such care
will be taken concerning the Legal and known rights of his Majesty, and the
property and liberty of his Subjects, that whatsoever has been published or
done in or by color of any illegal Declaration, Ordinance or Order of one or
both Houses, or any Committee of either of them, and particularly the power to
raise Arms without his Majesty's consent, will be in such manner recalled,
disclaimed and provided against, that no seed will remain for the like to
spring out off for to future, to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, and to
endanger the very being of it.

And in such a Convention his Majesty is resolved by his readiness to consent
to whatsoever shall be proposed to him by Bill for the Real good of his
Subjects, (and particularly for the better discovery and speedier conviction of
recusants, for the education of the children of Papists by Protestants in the
Protestant Religion, for the prevention of practices of Papists against the
States, and the due execution of the Laws, and true levying of the penalties
against them) to make known to all the world, how causeless those fears and
jealousies have been which have been raised against him, and by that so
distracted this miserable Kingdom. And if this offer of his Majesty be not
consented to, (in which he asks nothing for which there is not apparent
Justice on his side, and in which he deferres many things highly concerning
both himself and people, till a full and peaceable convention of Parliament,
which in Justice he might now require) his Majesty is confident that it will
then appear to all the world, not only who is most desirous of peace, and whose
fault it is that both Armies are not now disbanded, but who have been the true
and first cause that this peace was ever interrupted, or these Armies raised,
and the beginning or continuance of the War, and the destruction and
desolation of this poor Kingdom (which is too likely to ensue) will not, by the
most interressed, passionate, or prejudicate Person, be imputed to his Majesty.

Printed by his Majesty's Command at OXFORD, 1643:


