HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO His Right Trusty, and Well-beloved Subjects, the
Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, to be communicated to all
His loyal Subjects within the Cities of London and Westminster.

Brought by the Duke of Richmond, November. 7. 1648.

And Col. Hammonds Declaration concerning the King, for preservation of His
Royal Person from the hands of His Enemies; and his Protestation touching the
same.

With a Message from the Army to the said Col. Hamond, and their Propositions
and Desires touching the person of the King, and their Design touching the
Treaty.

Dated at Newport Novem. 6. and brought by the Post yesterday.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

London Printed for R. RISHTON, 1648.

JOYFUL NEWS From the Princes NAVY AND A great Victory obtu^ned at Sea: With
the particulars thereof, and the manner of the Fight. Sent in a Letter from the
Navy the 4 of November. 1648.
SIR,
ON Thursday last being the 2. of this instant Novem. we received an Allarum
from Sea, occasioned by certain ships, who had the Princes colors, and struck
sail within three leagues of Helverd-stuce; whereupon the Lord Amirall sent
forth three Frigates, and two of the great Vessels, who chased them, and gave
them many a gallant shot, and after few hours dispute, boarded one of them, and
sunk another; the Master of the prize which was taken, confessed, that they
were bound for the Prince, with a resolution to join with him, and to assist
his Highness against the Parliament.

This Fleet is said to consist of about eleven ships, most of them being men of
War, and it is rumored, that they were most of them Swedish Ships.

But the Princes Fleet has declared, that they will not be commanded by any
strangers, who since the dismissing of the Lord Willoughby, and Capt. Batten,
have made Prince Rupert Lord Admiral; but the Seamen were so much enraged and
troubled thereat, that they began to mutiny, resisted the Command of Pr. Rupert
and the rest of the Irish and Dutch Commanders* fell to blows, killed 3 or 4
eminent Commanders, wounded diverse of them, amongst the rest, Prince Rupert
has received a dangerous wound, and its thought mortal. The Conflict being
ended, the Mariners of the re^olted ships called a Council amongst themselves,
turned ^ut Pr. Rupert, and diverse others, and have made choice of new
Commanders.

They have sent a Letter to the Prince of Wales, to invite him aboard; but by
reason of the weakness of his body, occasioned by sudden sickness, and a
dangerous disease, He cannot answer their expectations.

The Lord Admiral has again offered them Indemnity, and it is conceived they
will embrace the same, for they have protested to his Lordship, never to engage
with the Princes Cavalry; The Lord Admiral has sent a Declaration to them,
advertizing.

That He will use his utmost endeavors toward the settling of truth, and a
happy peace in this unsettled Church and Kingdom, and that He will be
isntrumental for the bringing of his Majesty to London, and settling of His
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, and the rest of His Royal
Issue in their just Rights and privileges, s soon as His Majesty shall be
pleased to satisfy and confirm the Desires of his two Houses of Parliament so
much tending to the good and preservation both of Religion, Crown and Lingdoms.

Some Overtures have been lately made between his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and his Lordship, in relation to a conjunction and uniting of both
Navies; but his Lordship has utterly detested against the some, slighting the
Princes invitation and representing a Letter unto his Highness, That he takes
it as the greatest dishonor that can be incident to man, for any Personage
whatsoever to betray the trust reposed in him, and that He is resolved to
sacrifice his life in the Cause and Engagement which he has undertaken, not
doubting but that the omnipotent God of Heaven (to whom the Honor of his
Engagement does belong) will cause the Wnids and Seas to fight for them, whose
Truth is their Banner, Shield and Bucker; and therefore dehorts his Highness
to persist no longer in the way he is in, but forthwith to come in, and unite
himself with the Parliament, that so his person may be preserved from all
violence and injury, and a restoration made of all due Rights and privileges,
and that he may render himself isntrumental for the composing of all
differences, and establlshing of a firm and lasting Peace throughout His
Fathers Realms and Dommions.

This Letter is said to be sent from aboard the St. George, to the Prince at
Helver-Sluce,

Letters further from the Navy say, That the Prince is desirous to spin out
some longer time at Goree before he puts to Sea, in expectation of what the
Treaty will produce, and that if it takes not effect, he is resolved for
Ireland, to join with the Marquis of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiqueen, and to
land an Army in the West of England at the Spring, for the re-investing of the
King, and restoring of Him to his just Rights, Power and Authority

The said Letters do further intimate, That the Lord high Admiral has
received a Letter from his Majesty, purporting things of great concernment, and
how far he has condescended to the desires of his two Houses, desiring him
to be isntrumental for the settling of a firm and lasting peace.

From aboard the St. George 4. November. 1648. From the Isle of Wight thus.
SIR,
SInce my last, Here has happened several Overtures between his Majesty and the
Parliaments Commissioners; they have had much debate upon the Propositions,
especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the
dark Cloud being expelled, and the splendour of the Gospel shining most
gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graciously pleased to declare his
Royal Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royal Word to pass
all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and consonant to
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And as to the business of the Church
(which is all they stick at) the King has promised to give his concurrence
therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his dis-assenting. And 14
days more being added to the Treaty, it is hoped a fair conclusion will attend
the happy beginning. His Majesty has delivered another Paper to the
Commissioners, which I have here inserted, viz.


CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty rests very much unsatisfied, That you have now again wholly
declined the answering of those three questions so clearly proposed by him,
which your selves also confess to be of grea importance, upon this only
pretense, That the whole volumn of Ecclesiastical policy is contained in them:
Whereas his Majesty did neither expect nor require from you any large or
polemicall Discourse concerning those Questions conceiving that you were in
some sort obliged to have declared what your judgment was therein, with the
grounds thereof. For certainly until one of these three things can be clearly
evidenced unto his Maj. 1. Either that there is no certain form of Church
Government at all prescribed in the Word. 2 That the Civil power may change
the fame as they see cause. 3 Or if it be unchangable, that it was not
Episcopal, but some other, his Maj. thinks himself excusable in the judgment
of all reasonable men, if he cannot be induced to give his consent to the utter
abolition of that Government of the Church which he found here settled to his
hands, which has continued all over the Christian world, from the times of the
Apostles until this last Age.


And for the better faciliating the Work in hand, we hear that his Majesty has
sent a Message (by the D. of Lenox) to the Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of London, and also to diverse members of both Houses, intimating, That He
desired a longer time to be added to the Treaty, desiring them to be
isntrumental for the re-investing of his Majesty, and to agitate for his
speedy coming to London, with other remarkable Occurrences, which He desires
may be cammunicated to his Royal hearted Citizens, and that they may seriously
read and peruse the same. It is conceived his Majesty has some notable design
against the Army, for He has vowed to play a new Game, if the Treaty take not
effect. But upon the close of this Letter, here arrived a Post from the Army to
Col. Hamond, desiring him to be vigilant for the last 14 days added to the
Treaty, and to prevent his Majesty's escape there being a design laid for the
conveying of his person away, if he cannot accomplish his desires in the said
respit of time. Col. Hamond is extraordinary vigilant in managing the great
trust reposed in Him, and has declared that he will use his utmost endeavors
for the preservation of His Majesty's Royal person from the hands of his
Enemies, and to protect him from the rage and subtilty of those who seek his
Majesty's ruin [meaning the Royal party now resident at his Court] And the
Soldiery do assure him, they will live and die with him therein.

Newport 6 November. 1648.
FINIS.

