The Kings Majesty's last MESSAGE And DECLARATION To His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax. Communicating 1. His Maj. Desires touching his Subjects of England. 2.
His Maj. firm Resolution, touching the privilege of His Subjects. 3. His Maj.
Gracious Promise to his Excellency.
Written by His Maj. own Hand, and Signed Charles Rex, [now resident in the
Isle of Wight.] Whereunto is annexed, The Genesis Resolution and Answer,
concerning His Maj. Desires; Presented to the public view of the Kingdom.

Imprimatur

G. Mabbot.

Charles I and Sir Thomas Fairfax

London, Printed by J. C. for G. HORTON, 1647.

A Joyful MESSAGE FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY, TO HIS Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, Concerning His Majesty's Resolution toward Kingdom and Army.
SIR,
UPon Friday last, being the third of this instant December, came to my hands,
a copy of his Majesty's last Message, dated from the Isle of Wight, and
directed to his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax; which Message was read in the
presence of diverse Colonels, Lieutenant colonels, Majors, and Captains of the
Army, at a Gouncell held at Winsor; a copy whereof, I have sent you here
enclosed, together with the Generals Declaration and Resolution thereupon.

CHARLES REx.

HAving left Order at our remove from Hampton Court, that a copy should be
given you of what we had then written to both houses of Parliament, touching
the causes of our withdrawing, and the continuance of our resolutions to
improve every occasion of the satisfaction of all chief interests, that so a
happy peace may be settled in all our Dominions: In pursuance whereof, we have
lately sent a message to both houses from this place, and a copy of it to you,
and being desirous in order to that blessed work, to give you our present sense
upon the condition of affairs as they now stand, We have thought fit to appoint
Sir John Barkley to repair unto you, and to communicate the same to you, And we
shall be glad by him to receive a mutual communication of your sense also upon
this s^b^ect, not doubting but you easily perceive by the late disorders into
what a depth of confusion the Army and Nation will fall, if not timely
prevented, and therefore we have now again proposed (as the only expedient) a
personal Treaty, for the composing all differences, and fulfilling the desires
of all interests, to which if you will employ your credit, as you cannot but
expect the blessings of God upon your endeavors therein; so may you justly
look for the best return that ever our condition shall be able to make you.

Given under Our Hand and Seal at Carisbrook Castle, Novem, the six and
twentieth, 1647.
For Sir Thomas Fairfax, General.

The Declaration and Resolution of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, touching
the Kings Majesty's Desires for a personal Treaty, in answer to the aforesaid
Message.
HIs Excellency being very tender of admitting any intercourse with the King,
or any from Him, resolved not to have any discourse in private, nor any thing
in public, but what might be for His better accommodation, or the like; but
for the matter of a personal Treaty, his Excellency could give no answer to
it, the Parliament having it under consideration.

The General having thus expressed himself. Col. Barkley (who brought the Kings
Message) withdrew, and prepared his journey toward the King.

SIR,
For other particulars, touching the proceedings of the General Council of
the Army and the Soldiery, I shall refer you to the enclosed, VIZ.

UPon Thursday last the Council of the Army assembled at Windsor, where they
had many long debates in reference to the settlement of the Peace of the
Kingdom, and about disbanding of the supernumerary Forces; and after some time
spent thereupon, it was ordered, that part of the Soldiery should be
disbanded, that so a speedy course might be taken for the ease of those
Counties which have been a long time overburthened.

Collonell Lilburns Regiment has lately presented a Remonstrance to the
General, the substance thus; That they utterly disclaim the disserting of, or
engaging against the Parliament or Army with any, and that they are resolved to
adhere and stand firm to his Excellency against all opposition whatsoever,
which was very well taken and approvod of. Col. Skroopes Regiment of Horse has
also declared their firm and constant Resolutions toward the General, and to
oppose and hinder the designs of those who shall endeavor to divide the
Soldiery from his Excellincy. Thus having imparted the most material passages,
I remain

Yours to serve you, T. F.
Henley, December. 4, 1647.

FINIS.

