His Majesty's GRIEVANCES SENT (...)y a Message from His Majesty, by Mr. John
Ashburnham, and Sir John Barkley, to Col. Hammond, Governor of the Isle of
Wight.

WITH (...) Letter from Col. Hammond (read in both Houses of Parliament,)
concerning his treaty with his Majesty.

^lso Instructions sent from the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, to
Col. Hammond, concerning his MAJESTY.

And Propositions for peace, to be sent to His Majesty on Monday next.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

A LETTER FROM Colonel Hammon, Governor of the Isle of Wight, (and Colonel
of a Regiament of Foot, of the Army, under the immediate command of his
Excellency).
Read in both Houses of Parliament.
My Lord,
I Hold it my duty to give your Lordship an account of the Kings unexpected
coming into this Island, and of the manner of it, which was thus. This
morning, as I was on the way passing from Carisbrook Castle to Newport, Mr.
Ashburnham, and Sir John Barkley overtook me, and after a short discourse, told
me that the King was near, and that he would be with me that night: That he
was come from Hampton Court, upon information that there were some, intended to
destroy his person, and that he could not with safety continue any longer
there, and that finding his case thus, chose rather to put himself in my hands,
being a Member of the Army, (whom he says he would not have left could he have
had security to his person) then to go to any other place. Being herewith
exceedingly surprised at present, I knew not what course to take, but upon
serious consideration, weighing the great concernment that the person of the
King is of, in this juncture of affairs, to the settlement of the peace of the
kingdom. I resolved it my duty, to the King, to the Parliament, and Kingdom,
to use the utmost of my indevours to preserve his person from any such horrid
attempt, and to bring him to a place of safety. Where he may also be in a
capacity of Answering the expectation of Parliament and Kingdom, in agreeing
to such things, as may tend to the settlement of those great divisions, and
destractions, abounding in every corner thereof. Hereupon I went immediately
with them over the water, taking Captain Basket (the Captain of Cawse Castle)
with me, and found the King near the waterside, and conceiving my self no way
able to secure him there. I chose (he desiring it) to bring him over into this
Island, where He now is.

My Lord, My indevours (as for my life) shall be to preserve and secure his
person: And I humbly desire I may receive the pleasure of the Parliament in
this great and weighty matter. And that the Lord will direct your Counsels to
his glory and the Kingdoms good, and peace, shall be my prayer: And my
endeavor shall be ever to express my self in all things in my power,

My Lord, Your Lordships and the kingdoms most humble and faithful servant.
TO. HAMMOND.
Cawse this 13 November. 1647.
For the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the house of
Peers pro tempore.
A Message from his Majesty to Coll: Hammond; Concerning his coming to the
Isle of Wight, whereof he is Governor, sent by Sir Jo. Berkley, and Mr.
Ashburnham. Novem. 13. 1647.
HIs Majesty has commanded us to wait upon you, and to acquaint you, that he
(being at this instant not far from hence) intends to be with you this
night, having (since Thursday night last) left Hampton Court, upon several
informations, (which his Majesty had before received from credible hands) that
there were some engaging in a bloody design against his royal person to
destroy him, by taking away his life which (as his Majesty was informed, by
those whom he had reason to believe) was prosecuted against him by the
complotters so far, that he could not with safety to his person continue at
Hampton Court any longer.

His Majesty finding himself in that condition hereby that he was in such
danger, and (that although he had with great patience endured a tedious
restraint hopeing it would conduce to the peace of the Kingdom, and stop that
effusion of blood which otherwise might be spilt, yet) finding by two certain
proofs, that his continuance there, was like to prove not only the ruin of
his royal person, but dangerous to the destruction of the whole Kingdom.

His Majesty therefore choose rather to put himself into your hands (for the
safety of his person conceiving it to be the best way for the good and peace of
the Kingdom, you being a member of the Army, rather then any other.

And his Majesty has commanded us to assure you that he would not have left
the Army by his departure, could he have had security to his person, and
therefore is come to this Island (rather then to any other place,) to cast
himself upon you until the pleasure of the Houses be known.

November. 17. 1647. Heads of Instructions agreed upon by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament assembled, to be sent to Col. Hammond, concerning the King.
1 THat the place where His Majesty shall reside for the safety of his person,
shall be the Isle of Wight. 2 That no persons who have born Arms against the
Parliament (except such inhabitants as have compounded) shall reside in that
Island. 3 That none that have born Arms (though they be inhabitants, and have
compounded) shall be admitted to the King. 4 That no Forraigners that come out
of other Kingdoms, shall be admitted to the Kingdom, without Order of one of
the Parliaments of England or Scotland.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament have also Ordered, that the Propositions
be sent to his Majesty on Monday next; and that the Scots Commissioners be
acquainted therewith.

November. 17. 1647. Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.



FINIS.

