THE KINGS POSSESSIONS: WRITTEN By His Majesty's own Hand; annexed by way of
Notes, to a Letter sent to the Ecclesiastical Assembly at LONDON: Jn Answer to
a Letter sent from them.

NEWCASTLE: Printed by Stephen Bulkley, Printer to the Kings Majesty, 1647.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
MAy the Father of lights open thine eyes to see over this strangers shoulders,
and by this impartial Perspective, what thou, whilst kept down thus low by thy
new Masters, and through tby Seducers false Mediums, have not hitherto been
suffered to perceive, it being now purposely hid from thine eyes: Behold a mere
stranger, that notwithstanding his manifold obligations, and personal
engagements to a contrary Discipline in the Church and different form of
Government in the State, yet overruled by the manifest truth and honesty of
the Kings Cause, breaks through all those Restraints of his Liberty (as far as
he may) to tell thee thus much plain English Truth. Behold here Genevas
^eneration, and full vindication too of thine own Mother the Church of England,
as it stood under Episcopacie traduced here at home by her own Spurious brood
of Superstitious, Popish, Antichristian, what not? And this Apology directed to
the Assembly-men in answer to their Letter what ever it was

Behold here again, a clear justification of a King, vilified by his own for
that for which strangers do admire him; His clemency, his inclinations to
peace, his acts of grace, etc. Behold here the root of Gall, that which has
brought forth all these National mischiefs, the popular tumults and
conspiracies pointed at here, is the only evident cause of the Kings divorce
from the Parliament. See here, by whom poor Ireland was deserted: one thing
also thou may here take notice of from these standers by, That the Clergy in
their own proper Sphere may be as fit and as honest, and perhaps, in some
respects more able for the good speed of a treaty, then those that do slight
them with utter Praeterition.

Last of all, behold here the loyal and religious Subjects only Militia, or
his own proper Magazine; to wit, the known Laws of the Land, that and prayer
and submission are the only defensive weapons allowed here by this Master of
Fence.

I say no more save only, that I do heartily pity thee, and therefore I do
still pray for thee, and for all thy fellow bondmen, that God will bring into
the way of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived, Amen.

Reverend, godly, and worthy Sirs, our dear Brethren and Companions in the
Work of the Lord.
JF proportionably to the grief we have conceived at your letters; wherein you
have expressed the most sad face of your affairs) we had but as much ability
either by our consolations to assuage your sorrows, or by our counsels to ease
your burdens, or by any our cooperation to help your extremity: we should
think our selves very happy in so well corresponding with your honorable and
most loving compellation of us: and right glad we should be thus to requite
you with our best and effectual good offices. But alas, as the scantnesse of
our capacity in this kind; so the ignorance of the more inward causes of so
many miseries, and chiefly the perplex and dangerous nature of matters now in
agitation among you: All these put together, strike us quite dumb: we are as
men who^ly at a stand, able only (in a kind of silent astonishment or holy
horror) to admire, and to adore that finger of God, which is now lifted up
over you all.

But since, being by you so lovingly invited to it, we must needs at last break
off our silence: We are reduced to an extraordinary Suspense both of Minds and
of Pens, what to say first or last, or indeed what to say at all.

And now in the end, after long deliberation, least, as Jobs friends, we should
transgress by precipitate or unseasonable discourse: Behold our hearts and
mouths top-full of the Senses and Expressions of our hearty commiseration, our
eyes running down with tears of compassion, our breasts even swollen up with
sighs and groans at your calamities. These are they, God is our Witness, that
fill up the greatest part of our private prayers, of our public Devotions,
Fastings, and Humiliations: In all which we are resolved to give the Father of
mercies no rest, until your tranquillity being once more ordained in Heaven,
God do extend peace upon Earth unto you all like a River, and the fullness of
his Blessing, like an ever-flowing stream.

Our affairs, yea the general interest of all the reformed Churches are so
closely involved in yours, and so mutually depending thereon, That your safety
once procured, assures us all of our own good Estates.

Therefore, especially during this grievous Tempest, which may seem to bring
about again the heavy times of the Saints great primitive Tribulation, we are,
in a manner, compelled with trembling hearts and lips, to power out our
lamentations into the ears of our most gracious and heavenly Father, no longer
now only preparing to contend by Fire, as he once revealed it in a Vision to
his Prophet Amos, Amos 7.4, 5. but already for a long time really contending by
Fire indeed: And how then can we forbear from crying out? O Lord forgive, cease
we heseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small, and round about
all in a flame, by the fire of thy burning indignation. From this our own
Watchtower, untoucht as yet by Divine miracle: We have beheld this furious
conflagration, spreading it self all over; We have seen the Grisoen-Italian
Churches utterly defaced, the Gospel in Bohemia its ancient Seat, wholly
extirpated; the Palatinate devoured; the French Churches deprived of all humane
supports and refuges (like so many poor little Callow Birds, alive indeed, but
only during pleasure the) German Churches almost all over-shaken; yea, more
then half destroyed, your own Ireland swallowed up with an unexpected deluge of
Assassines and Robbers, one only thing was wanting to that huge heap of
public calamity; namely, that flourishing England (the very eye and
excellency of all the Churches, Christ's own choice, purchase, and peculiar; the
Sanctuary of the afflicted, the Arceonall of the faint-hearted, the Magazine of
the Needy, that Royal Standard of good hope) should by so unlookt for an
accident, without an external Enemy, or foreign Impression, become in a
manner its own Felo de se, and make an end of its self with its own cruel
hands.

What a sad spectacle is this to see that Church thus trodden under foot? To
see that glorious Fould of our Lord thus ransackt, yea worryed, not by the wild
Beasts of the Forest, not torn in pieces by the merciless paws of the Lion,
or of the Woolf, but utterly dismembered by its own unnatural sheep enraged and
exasperated one against another.

An horrid example this, and till now never heard nf among the reformed
Churches.

It seems, heretofore, like Christ's own true sheep, they were kept tame by the
fear of God, united by the same bond of Faith, knit together by the
apprehension of the common enemy: and so long they did both express and
exercise holily and faithfully their mutual charity, quiet* and unity amongst
themselves: in all which, they preserved themselves from the rage of the Wolf
by the Christian simplicity of their own conditions, by the innocence of their
pious lives, by the sanctity of their Religion, by the constant undantednesse
of their holy Faith.

But now we are wholly struck with horror at the change of that so glorious
Face of your Church, whilst we hear at this distance the loud report of those
deadly wars that are now flaming up between the King and his People: to see at
Daggers drawing indeed, Brethren against Brethren, Parents against their own
Children, Christ's sheep pushing against and goring their own Fellows, nay
their own Shepherds: At all this we are utterly amazed, and would scarce have
believed, that in the self-same pitched field, one and the same God and Father,
in the name of one and the same Mediator, at one and the same time, could be
invocated for help on both sides, to shed the blood of those, that for the
Major-part had hitherto by so many clear Demonstrations in the whole equal
course of their lives, equal in their Piety toward God, equal in their love
and loyalty toward their Country, approved themselves such faithful and true
Brethren one to another. Strange, that these should now against their own
Bowels, turn all their wa^like power, far better if employed in the just
punishments of their own treacherous Neighbors, or toward the relief of their
dearest Brethren so long bowing the back under the weight of their bondage, and
even at the last gasp for help.

What marvel then, if these your cruel distractions have awakened; yea,
divided even to a variety the judgments and affections too of Christendom?

Neither do we our selves deny but that for a while we did somewhat stagger at,
and as it were fluctuate about it; yet that demur of ours did neither proceed
from prejudice against, nor from partiality toward either side, as not being
called upon by either, neither publicly nor privately, till now of late in
your reference unto us, which we do reckon as no small piece of honou, since in
your esteem, our judgment may seem of so much weight, as able to advance or
balance down either party, both being of such extraordinary quality.

We have contained our selves within the bounds of a conscionable judgment, and
impartial charity toward both parties, for indeed we are both Brethren; We
have neither way exceeded the compass of our own measure, but still kept a
mean, as rejoicing on the one hand at those good things which we did hear were
entertained with the general applause of all good men; So on the other hand,
we could not but behold with grief those other Sinister passages that in
themselves did carry a more fatal appearance.

We were overjoyed at the issue of the Scottish troubles, that seemed at first
to presage a combustion, not unlike this of yours, and yet far sooner quenched,
for as by Gods own admirable handiwork (So by the never-enough-magnified of
your most gracious King, and by the Concord of that wary Nation) that fire was
in time put out, ere it did burst into a more open flame.

At the first report of these your own Commotions, our minds were possessed
with a good hope that all past offenses might with the same promptitude and
facility be forthwith repaired, and all matters composed.

So that what actions or counsels should appear amiss, might by the benignity
of the best of Princes be easily redressed, and consequently both Church and
Commonwealth without noise or blood shed, be kept in due order*

In pursuance of all which, we could not but admire the happy and glorious
beginnings of the Parliament, and the more then Fatherly affection of his most
gracious Majesty, evidenced by his enacting those Laws, from which for the
time to come, there was a clear hope of a Government full of equity, and freed
from all corruption:

An example not so rare, as indeed singular in this our wild Generation, so
fertile of violent Powers and Princes. But all these our goodly hopes were
soon blasted by that raging storm and tempest of popular tumults among you,
that did force away both your most gracious Prince from his Parliament, as also
a great part of the Parliament from it self. Since which we have heard indeed
of many attempts and enterprises, many Propositions and Projects, but all of
them come to nothing, nothing is yet brought to perfection, nothing is yet
rightly settled or established.

The business of the Church might seem the chief object of your care and
solicitude: If it had been handled and debated at times, and with minds calm
and quiet: had the opposite judgments been compared and impartially weighed one
with another; such an orderly course might happily have purchased a lasting
Peace to your Kingdom, and also rendered unto your Church that most desired
Primitive face of the Apostolical times: Such was Episcopacy in its first
Apostolical vigor of Discipline and Government, the which as at the Synod of
Dort this very man did both acknowledge unto Bishop Carlton to be the best
Form of Church Government, and also did heartily wish for it in his own Church;
so does he sufficiently commend the happy effects of it above page 5. in that
full passage of his containing the Superlative Praises of the former
flourishing estate of the Church of England, as before these troubles it stood
under Episcopacie: The Restoration of which former good Estate, is again by
this Author at the latter end of this Epistle, page 12. earnestly wished and
prayed for.
but behold how quite contrary the event has fallen out? for the minds of
both sides being averse from, yea, violently bent one against another, this
very matter has proved the great rock of offense by exasperating the wound,
and tearing it wider and wider, * by distracting more and more asunder the
hearts of each party, distempered enough already through former partiality and
discord of affections. Nay, if the report be true, these Church Distractions
have opened a wide gap to so many boysterors and private spirits, which we hear
have assumed to themselves the most mischievous Title of Independents, then
which Destructive Sect nothing could more undermine, yea quite overturne the
very foundation of the Church.

Besides all that, we have bin extremely grieved at this, That the spirit of
division has so plentifully sown among you his pernicious Tares of Fears and
Jealousies, that they have not only fructified, but even overgrown all over
all manner of mutual trust, in despite of so many Royal protestations sealed
and bound up with so many most grievous Imprecations. But the very top and
height of all our sorrows on your behalfes, has been this. That all that
cursed fuel thus heaped on, is now at last kindled into bloody war,
lengthned on both sides by a multiplication of deadly feuds, So that during
such an universal combustion, what ever men's bare words, and never so frequent
Protestations other wise may pretend, yet the Royal Honor, Power and Dignity,
cannot but fall into utter contempt: and on the contrary, the licentiousness
of the most audacious and lawless, cannot but gather strength, and out-grow
the other: and then consequently* Piety must needs decay, mutual love and
charity must needs vanish away; and in stead thereof, a kind of savage
disposition, yea brutish rage must needs invade at last the minds and manners of
the men of this Generation, who in process of time will no longer look upon
the old original causes that began the war, but rather upon the new mutual
injuries freshly done, or received in the very progress or prosecution of the
war between two parties divided, far more by an odious difference of
reproachful Names, as it were, infamous brands fixed upon each other, then
really by the cause it self. It had been far more easy unto us, and all good
men else, to deliver our judgments upon your case: had the Major part of
either side differed from the other, either in the more essential points of
Religion, or else dissented about the Fundamental Laws of the Commonwealth:
or had either party been oppressed Woe be to them that first began that war
whose Non-necessity, yea Injustice strangers themselves can so far off so
plainly perceive and condemn too.
by the other in a direct way of open persecution, or had there been an
introduction of public tyranny against the laws through the baseness and
pusillanimity of the other party: But as for you, you have abundant cause of
comfort or security against all these evils. To wit, in a fair, quiet, legal
Parliamentary way, not in a Martial way: therefore he mentions not at all the
power of Arms, but only the power of the Laws.
since by virtue of your own most just and powerful Laws, those Laws that
already have been indifferently agreed upon by the general consent of all
parties concerned, you may with ease prevent, or put all those forementioned
evils which in other Kingdoms may seem almost unavoidable. All these
considerations put together, have moved us for a long while seriously to
deliberate and advise what might be at last, the best expedient left to procure
an honest and sure Peace among you. Indeed we have been much scandalized, that
all the Mediations of several Kingdoms and Provinces in league with you, have
been tried and used all in vain: Howbeit it came into our mind to propound
this one Medium more, whether now at last there be yet any hope to obtain from
the Kings most gracious Majesty, and from the Parliament, that, of both sides,
Ecclesiastical persons may be chosen of unquestioned Trust, and Fame-proofe
beyond all suspicion, to whom this great business may be committed; Namely,
that comparing the chief points now in controversy, they may chalkout some
good way toward an holy peace. But first these men must by Gods good Spirit
themselves be dispossessed of all factious inclinations, that so they may
become fit Vmpires and Trustees of the public Peace, and impartial
Ambassadors of Reconciliation between both parties, and also able and studious
too by all their Speeches, Exhortations, and Sacred Obtestations to charm the
hearts that on both sides are so obdurate in War and Bloodshed.

This were the ready way, by thus interposing the Sacred Censer in the very
midst of these public flames, to quench all the heart-burnings: for who knows
whether at the devout Prayers and holy groans of Persons Sacred, thus
prostrate at the footstool of the Heavenly grace, the Divine power and glory
may not break out once more, and show forth it self by moving the hearts of
both Parties to lay down all hatred, and public enmities? The only way to
procure such sound Council of both sides, and to purchase again the precious
blessing of a general Peace, is especially when all humane helps fail, to
call in the Divine Assistance, which no man did ever try in vain. By these
good means that may be brought to pass (what cannot be hoped for from Civil
War, however the success prove) that by a voluntary Inclination of Minds,
the wound shall be so fully closed up, as that Love and Charity may in time
perfectly be recovered.

The good opinion which you have conceived of us, may suffer us to offer these
Considerations unto you. It might be immodesty in us to prescribe, or to advise
you any further: But no Law of Modesty can ever forbid us to wish, and to Vow,
and to beseech God for you, yea to appeal unto God, and to adjure you all in
his Name.

O then above all, take a speedy and special care for a sure and found Peace,
what ever it be What would this Peacemaker have said if he had seen or heard
of so many Royal reiterated offers of peace wherewith the Sovereign has and
still does woo his Stiff-necked Subjects, Certainly, the more peaceable side
has always amongst good men had the Reputation of the better side.
it is to be preferred before any Civil Broils. Beware least the fortune of
War smiling upon you, draw you on, and tempt you to commit your great
Affairs to the Ambignous Chance of Victory, then which nothing can happen more
deadly, yea pernicious unto the Common wealth. Roll away that huge Scandal
that lies so heavy upon the whole Christian world, yea wash and wipe off that
foul stain of black oppression charged especially upon the purest Profession
of the Gospel, as if still it did in a kind of Antipathy, or secret hatred,
oppose and oppugn all Kingly power, and Supreme authority. Mittigate and
assuage the exulcerated, and too-too much provoked mind of your King, and do
not compel Him to Pinacles and Precipices.

Rather bear with some blemishes and Corruptions from which no Empire could
yet wholly be free, no not in its most flourishing Estate. Account not those
Remedies the best, that are abruptly applied and accumulated; but those rather,
that being taken in by degrees, may in time, by little and little, go down
more easily, and digest the better, and so at last obtain a Confirmation. And
last of all, by the Bowels and mercy of Christ, suffer your selves to be
entreated, that we may no longer see that Wealth, Power, and Strength which God
has graciously bestowed upon you, employed, yea, utterly wasted in the fatal
Ruin of your own selves, but rather let it be stretched out to the Relief,
and support of so many of your own This was very good Council from a Stranger:
had the Subjects had the grace to follow it in time; then had there been an end
of the old War, and a happy Prevention of a new War, which, except stopped by
timely submission, can portend nothing but the utter National Ruin of Church
and State, which God in mercy avert.
most afflicted Brethren, even panting after your own Peace. Of Ireland.


May the God of Peace himself hear, accept, and grant these our sincere
Devotions; May God defeat all the P^o^s, and disappoint all the Machinations of
the Devil, and of Antichrist. May the same God restore your Kingdom and your
Churches to that High State and pitch of Holiness and of Glory, in which, on
the Theater of the Universal Church they have hitherto excelled and
out-shinedall the This full Testimony of the excellent State of the Church of
England ( still as it heretofore stood under Episcopacy) outspeakes all the
former, and to this good Ejaculation from Geneva, no right,
Protestant-Malignant but will heartily say, Amen.
Churches upon Earth.

As for us, take in good part this our plain Sense delivered freely unto you,
in a Brotherly Confidence, and Pardon and Impute our delay of Answer unto these
weighty Reasons. The Report was here very strong, that you were now very fair
for a Treaty of Peace: Therefore we thought it fit to expect what a day might
bring forth, that so all our words and all our affections too, might overflow
with mere gratulations and full expressions of our Joys. But sorry we are,
that we have yet again been deceived with vain hopes. And now that we may
speedily recover and enjoy that Happiness we both wish and pray, with as much
Devotion as becomes your dearest Brethren, (who glory not a little in your good
esteem of us) That God will power down upon you his richest Benedictions,
together with a large Measure of his Wisdom, and Spiritual Strength.
Farewell, and prosper in the Lord.

The Copy of a Certificate from one of the Scribes of the Assembly to a
Minister in London.
SIR,
I Have perused the paper and examined the Records, and find that there was
never any such letter sent from Dr. Deodate in the Name of the Church of Geneva
to the Assembly: the whole letter now printed at Newcastle is an abominable
forgery, I find that we did receive a letter from the Church of Geneva in
answer unto ours sent unto them, but not Signed by Deodate but 2. others in the
name of all the Pastors and Professors of the Church and University of Geneva:
but there is no likeness between the one and the other.

FINIS.

