HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS MESSAGE To both Houses of Parliament, sent from
Nottingham, August 25.

With the Answer of the Lords and Commons to the said Message:

And HIS MAJESTY'S REPLY to the same. Sept. 2.

TOGETHER With the Answer and humble Petition of both Houses to His Majesty's
last Message:

And also His Majesty's Message in Reply to the said Answer, Sept. 11. 1642.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

DIEV ^ ET MON ^ DROIT
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms

His Majesty's gracious Message to both Houses of Parliament, sent from
Nottingham, 25. August, 1642.
By the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, Sir John Culpeper Knight, Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and Sir William Vvedall, KNIGHT.
WE have with unspeakable grief of heart long beheld the distractions of this
Our Kingdom; Our very soul is full of anguish until We may find some remedy
to prevent the Miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole Nation by a
civil War: And though all Our endeavors tending to the Composing of those
unhappy differences betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament (though pursued
by Us with all Zeal and Sincerity) have bin hitherto without that Successee
Whoped for; Yet such is Our constant and earnest care to preserve the public
Peace, that We shall not be discouraged from using any Expedient, which by the
blessing of the God of Mercy may lay a firm foundation of Peace and Happiness
to all Our good Subjects: To this end observing that many Mistakes have arisen
by the Messages, Petitions and Answers betwixt Us and Our two Houses of
Parliament, which happily may be prevented by some other way of Treaty,
wherein the Matters in difference may be more clearly understood, and more
freely transacted; We have thought fit to propound to you, That some fit
persons may be by you enabled to treat with the like number to be authorized by
Us, in such a manner, and with such freedom of Debate, as may best tend to that
happy Conclusion, which all good-men desire, The Peace of the Kingdom: Wherein
as We promised in the Word of a King all safety and encouragement to such as
shall be sent unto Us, if you shall choose the place where We are for the
Treaty, which We wholly leave to you, presuming of the like care of the safety
of those We shall employ, if you shall name another place; So We assure you and
all Our good Subjects, that (to the best of Our understanding) nothing shall be
therein wanting on Our part, which may advance the True Protestant Religion,
Oppose Popery and Superstition, Secure the Law of the Land (upon which is
built as well Our just Prerogative, as the Propriety and Liberty of the
Subject) Confirm all just Power and Privileges of Parliament, and render Us
and Our people truly happy by a good Understanding betwixt Us and Our two
Houses of Parliament. Bring with you as firm Resolutions to do your duty, and
let all Our good People join with Us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his
blessing upon this Work.

If this Proposition shall be rejected by you, We have done Our duty so amply,
that God will ab^olve Us from the Guilt of any of that blood which must be
spilt. And what opinion soever other Men may have of Our Power, We assure you
nothing but Our Christian and Pious care to prevent the Effusion of blood has
begot this Motion, Our Provision of Men, Arms and Money being such as may
secure Us from further violence, till it please God to open the eyes of Our
People.

The Answer of the Lords and Commons to His Majesty's Message of the 25. of
August. 1642.
May it please Your Majesty,
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having received Your Majesty's
Message of the 25 of August, do with much grief resent the dangerous and
distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to
prevent, both by our several Advices and Petitions of Your Majesty, which have
bin not only without success, but there has followed that, which no ill
counsel in former times has produced, or any age has seen, namely, those
several Proclamations and Declarations against both the Houses of Parliament,
whereby their Actions are declared Treasonable, and their Persons Traitors; And
thereupon Your Majesty has set up Your Standard against them, whereby You
have put the two Houses of Parliament, and in them this whole Kingdom out of
Your Protection; so that until Your Majesty shall recall those Proclamations
and Declarations, whereby the Earl of Essex and both Houses of Parliament, and
their adherents and assistante, and such as have obeyed and executed their
commands and directions, according to their duties, are declared Traitors, or
otherwise delinquents; And until the Standard set up in pursuance of the said
Proclamations be taken down, Your Majesty has put us into such a condition,
that whilst we so remain we cannot by the fundamental Privileges of
Parliament, the public trust reposed in us, or with the general good and
safety of this Kingdom give Your Majesty any other Answer to this Message.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament. H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

s
His MAJESTY'S Reply
To an Answer sent by the two Houses of Parliament to His MAJESTY'S Message of
the 25. of August, concerning a Treaty of Accommodation.
WE will not repeat what means We have used to prevent the dangerous and
distracted estate of the Kingdom, nor how those means have been interpreted,
because being desirous to avoid effusion of blood We are willing to decline all
memory of former bitterness that might make Our offer of a Treaty less
readily accepted.

We never did Declare, nor ever intended to Declare both Our Houses of
Parliament Traitors, or set up Our Standard against them, and much less to
put them and this Kingdom out of Our Protection: We utterly Profess against it
before God and the World. And further to remove all possible Scruples which may
hinder the Treaty so much desired by Us; We hereby Promise, so that a day he
appointed by you for the revoking of your Declarations against all Persons as
Traitors or otherwise, for assisting of Us, We shall with all cheerfulness
upon the same day recall Our Proclamations and Declarations, and take down Our
Standard: In which Treaty We shall be ready to grant any thing that shall be
really for the good of Our Subjects; Conjuring you to consider the bleeding,
condition of Ireland, and the dangerous condition of England, in as high a
degree as by these Our offers We have declared Our Self to do: And assuring you
that Our chief desire in this world is to beget a good understanding and
mutual confidence betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY
The humble Answer and Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, unto the KINGS last Message.
May it please Your Majesty.
IF we the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled should repeat all the
ways we have taken, the endeavors we have used, and the expressions we have
made unto Your Majesty to prevent those Distractions and Dangers Your Majesty
speaks of, likely to fall upon this Kingdom, we should too much enlarge the
Reply; therefore as we humbly, so shall we only let Your Majesty know, that
we cannot recede from our former Answer, for the Reasons therein expressed: For
that Your Majesty has not taken down Your Standard, Recalled Your
Proclamations and Declarations, whereby You have declared the Actions of both
Houses of Parliament to be Treasonable, and their Persons Traitors, and You
have published the same since Your Message of the 25 of August, by Your late
Instructions sent to Your Commissioners of Array: Which Standard being taken
down, and the Declarations, Proclamations and Instructions recalled, if Your
Majesty shall then upon this our humble Petition, leaving Your Forces, Return
unto Your Parliament, and receive their faithful Advice, Your Majesty will
find such Expressions of our fidelities and duties as shall assure You, That
Your Safety, Honor and Greatness can only be found in the Affections of Your
People, and the sincere Counsels of Your Parliament whose constant and
undiscouraged Endeavors and Consultations have passed through Difficulties
unheard of, only to secure Your Kingdoms from the violent Mischiefs and
Dangers now ready to fall upon them, and every part of them; who deserve better
of Your Majesty, and can never allow themselves (representing likewise Your
whole Kingdom) to be balanced with those persons, whose desperate Dispositions
and Counsels prevail still so to interrupt all our Endeavors for the relieving
of bleeding Ireland, as we may fear our Labors and vast expenses will be
fruitless to that distressed Kingdom. As Your presence is thus humbly desired
by us, so is it in our hopes Your Majesty will in Your Reason believe, there
is no other way then this to make Your Majesty's self happy, and Your Kingdom
safe.

Jo. Brown Cler. Par.

His Majesty's Message
In Reply to the Answer and humble Petition of both Houses of Parliament.
WE have taken most ways, used most endeavors, and made most real
expressions to prevent the present Distractions and Dangers, let all the world
judge, as well by former Passages, as by Our two last Messages, which have been
so fruitless, that (though We have descended to desire and press it) not so
much as a Treaty can be obtained, unless We would denude Our Self of all
Force to defend Us from a visible Strength Marching against Us, and admit those
Persons as Traitors to Us, who according to their Duty, their Oaths of
Allegiance, and the Law, have appeared in defense of Us their King and Liege
Lord (whom We are bound in Conscience and Honor to preserve) though We
disclaimed all Our Proclamations and Declarations, and the erecting of Our
Standard as against Our Parliament. All We have now left in Our Power is, to
express the deep Sense We have of the public misery of this Kingdom, in which
is involved that of Our distressed Protestants of Ireland, and to apply Our
Self to Our necessary Defense, wherein We wholly rely upon the providence of
God, the Justice of Our Cause, and the Affection of Our good People, so far We
are from putting them out of Our Protection. When you shall desire a Treaty of
Us, We shall piously remember whose Blood is to be spilt in this Quarrel, and
cheerfully embrace it. And as no other Reason induced Us to leave Our city of
London, but that with Honor and Safety We could not stay there; nor raise any
Force, but for the necessary Defense of Our Person and the Law, against Leavies
in opposition to both; so We shall suddenly and most willingly return to the
One, and disband the Other, as soon as those Causes shall be removed. The God
of Heaven direct you, and in mercy divert those Judgments which hang over this
Nation, and so deal with Us and Onr Posterity, as We desire the Preservation
and Advancement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law and the Liberty of the
Subject, the just Rights of Parliament, and the Peace of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

