royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



His Majesty's gracious Message to both Houses of Parliament, sent from
Nottingham 25. August 1642. by the Earls of Southampton, and Dorset, Sir John
Culpeper Knight Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir William Vuedall Knight.
WE have, with unspeakable grief of heart, long beheld the Distractions of this
Our Kingdom; Our very Soul is full of Anguish, until We may find some remedy
to prevent the miseries which are ready to over-whelme this whole Nation by a
Civil War. And though all Our endeavors, tending to the composing of those
unhappy differences betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament (though pursued
by Us with all Zeal and Sincerity) have been hitherto without that success We
hoped for, Yet such is Our constant and earnest Care to preserve the public
Peace, That We shall not be discouraged from using any Expedient, which, by the
blessing of the God of Mercy, may lay a firm foundation of Peace, and
Happiness to all Our good Subjects. To this end, observing that many mistakes
have arisen by the Messages, Petitions, and Answers betwixt Us and Our two
Houses of Parliament, which happily may be prevented by some other way of Treaty,
wherein the matters in difference may be more clearly understood and more
freely transacted, We have thought fit to propound to you, That some fit
persons may be, by you, enabled to treat with the like number, to be authorized
by Us in such a manner, and with such freedom of debate as may best tend to
that happy Conclusion, (which all good men desire) The peace of the Kingdom.
Wherein, as We promise, in the word of a King, all safety and encouragement to
such as shall be sent unto Us, if you shall choose the place where We are for
the Treaty, which we wholly leave to you, presuming of the like care of the
safety of those We shall employ, if you shall name another place; So We assure
you and all Our good Subjects, That (to the best of Our understanding) nothing
shall be therein wanting on Our part which may advance the true Protestant
Religion, oppose Popery and Superstition, secure the Law of the Land (upon
which is built as well Our just Prerogative as the Propriety and Liberty of the
Subject) confirm all just Power and Privileges of Parliament, and render Us
and Our people truly happy by a good Understanding betwixt Us and Our two
Houses of Parliament. Bring with you as firm resolutions to do your duty, and
let all Our good people join with Us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his
blessing upon this work. If this Proposition shall be rejected by you, We have
done Our duty so amply, That God will absolve Us from the guilt of any of that
blood which must be spilt. And what opinion soever other men may have of Our
Power, We assure you nothing but Our Christian and pious care to prevent the
effusion of blood has begot this motion. Our provision of Men, Arms, and
Money, being such as may secure Us from further violence, till it please God to
open the eyes of Our People.

Imprinted at York by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642


