A LETTER SENT FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY TO THE LORDS OF HIS PRIVY COUNCIL OF
THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty and wel-beloved Cousins, and Councellers, We greet you well.
Although We have already written Our mind to you Our Council; yet upon Our
second thoughts, arising especially from some bad rumors, coming to Our
knowledge, We find it necessary both for Our Self, and for the good of that
Our kingdom, to declare, and make known both Our disposition and desires more
fully.

We know and feel the charge to be great, and the place to be high, wherein
God (the King of kings) has placed Us, and that We must render an account of
all Our actions to him, who in his own time shall judge all men without
exception of persons. We have no other intentions, but by Our government, to
honor him by whom Kings reign, and to procure the good of Our people: and for
this end to preserve the right and authority wherewith God has vested Us, and
which by his Providence has been derived to Us, by many Princely progenitors:
in the which glory that Our ancient Kingdom, and native Realm of Scotland
does participate.

We did not require of you, that you should sit as Judges upon the affairs of
another Kingdom: We only intended to have both Our sufferings and Our
actions, (as they are expressed in many papers past betwixt Us and Our
Parliament) made thoroughly known unto you: that since We have none besides you
whom We can acquaint with Our proceedings, you may clearly see that We have
been so far from wronging Our Parliament of England, that We have given them
all satisfaction, even above that which they themselves in the beginning did
express, or almost desire: and as much as could well consist with the safety
of Our Person and Honor. We will not put you in mind of your natural
affection toward Us, which We know will rather be kindled then extinguished by
Our distress: Nor of your Covenant, wherein you are zealous of Our Greatness
and Authority, and which stands in that sense wherein you did swear and
subscribe it: Nor of the many good Laws made in Our late Parliament (of which
We hope the present and succeeding generations shall reap the fruits, when We
are dead and gone:) Nor of the many promises made to Us, upon which We were
willing to yield to such things for settling the government of that Our
Kingdom, in Our personal absence, which neither could We have granted, nor
would you have craved (as your selves did profess) had Our greater affairs
permitted Our residence amongst you. And whereas We are most unjustly blamed
and calumniated, 1. That We are popishly affected: 2. That We are the cause of
the bloodshed in Ireland: 3. That We intend to bring in foreign Forces: We
here do protest and declare in presence of him who knows the most secret of
Our intentions and actions, that We are no ways conscious to Our Self of the
guiltiness of any of the said aspersions: and do take him to witness Our
innocence therein, who only has the privilege to be the searcher of hearts.
And if any after so full and plain profession shall distrust this Our free
declaration, We attest God, that the fault is in the malignity of their
rebellious humors, and no ways deserved on Our part.

Given at Our Court at YORK, the 20. of May, 1642.
London, Printed by Robert Young, His Majesty's Printer for the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND.


