20. Januarii 1641. His Majesty's Letter to both Houses OF PARLIAMENT.
HIS Majesty perceiving the manifold distractions which now are in this
Kingdom. which cannot but bring great inconvenience, and mischief to this
whole Government; In which, as His Majesty is most chiefly interested, so he
holds himself by many Reasons, most obliged to do what in him lies, for the
preventing thereof; Though he might justly expect (as most proper for the duty
of Subjects) that Propositions for the remedies of these Evils, ought rather to
come to him, then from him; yet his Fatherly care of all his people being such,
That he will rather lay by any particular respect of his own dignity, then
that any time should be lost, for prevention of these threatening Evils, which
cannot admit the delays of the ordinary proceedings in Parliament; Does think
fit to make this ensuing propositions to both Houses of Parliament

That they will with all speed fall into a serious consideration of all chose
particulars, which they shall hold necessary, as well for the upholding and
maintaining of his Majesty's just and Regal Authority, and for the settling of
his Revenue; As for the present and future establishing of their privileges,
the free and quiet enjoying of their Estates and Fortunes, the liberties of
their persons, the Security of the true Religion now professed in the Church
of England, and the settling of Ceremonies in such a manner, as may take away
all just offense: Which when they shall have digested, and composed into one
entire body, that so his Majesty and themselves may be able to make the more
clear judgment of them: It shall then appear by what his Majesty shall do,
how far he has been from intending or designing any of those things, which
the too great fears and jealousies of some persons seem to apprehend: And how
ready he will be to equal and exceed the greatest examples of the most
indulgent Princes in their Acts of Grace and Favor to their people.

So that if all these present distractions (which so apparently threaten the
ruin of this Kingdom) do not (by the blessing of Almighty God) end in an
happy and blessed Accommodation, his Majesty will then be ready to call Heaven
and Earth, God and Man to Witness, that it has not failed on his part.

London, Printed for F. C. and T. B. 1641.


