THE KINGS LETTER To the Marquess of ORMOND: AND The Marquess of ORMONDS
LETTER to MONROE.

RELATING The Kings whole Design, concerning all the three Kingdoms.

LONDON: Printed, by I. C. June 8. 1646.

TO MAJOR GENERAL MONRO.
SIR,
HAving this Morning received a dispatch from His Majesty, and Command to
impart it not only to His Council, but to all His Loyal Subjects: I am
confident you have so good title to a knowledge thereof, that I have held it my
part instantly to dispatch it unto you by an Express, and so Sir, wishing you
all happiness, Frest

Your assured humble Servant, ORMOND.
Dublin Castle, May 21. 1646.
The Kings Letter to the Marquess of ORMOND.
CHARLES REX.

RIght Trusty and entirely beloved Cosen and Councellor, we greet you well,
having used all possible means by sending many gracious Messages to the two
Houses of Parliament, wherein we have offered all they have heretofore desired
from them nothing but what themselves since these unhappy Wars have offered
to procur a personal Treaty with them for a safe and and well grounded Peace,
and having instead of a dutiful and peaceable return to our said Messages,
rereceived either no answer at all, or such as argues nothing will satisfy
them but the ruin; not only of us, our Posterity and friends, but even of
Monarchy it self.

And having lately received very good Security, that we and all that do or
shall adhere to us, shall be safe in our Person, Honor, and Consciences in the
So ch Army, and that they shall really and effectually join with us, and with
such as will come in unto us, and join with them for our preservation and
shall imply their Armies and forces to assist us to the procuring of an happy
and well grounded Peace for the good of us, and our Kingdoms in the recovery
of Our just right.

We have resolved before Newark, And if it shall please God that we come safe
thither, we are resolved to use our best endeavors with their assistance, and
with the conjunction of the forces under the marquess of Montrosse, and such
of our well affected Subjects of England as shall rise for us to procure, if it
may be an honorable and speedy Peace with those who have hitherto refused to
give ear to any means tending thereunto.

Of which our resolution we hold it necessary to give you this advertizement
as well to satisfy you and all our Council, and loyal Subjects with you to
whom we will that you communicate these our Letters, that failing in our
dearest and sinceer endeavors by Treaty, to put an end to the miseries of this
our Kingdom, we esteemed Our self obliged to leave no probable expedient
unattempted to preserve Our Crown and Friends from the usurpation and tyranny
of those whose Actions declare so manifestly their Design to overthrow the
Laws and happy established Government of this Kingdom.

And now We have made known unto you Our Resolution, We recommend to your
special Care the disposing and managing of Our Affairs on that side, as you
shall conceive most for Our Honor and Service, being confident the course We
have taken (though with some hazard to Our Person) will have a good influence
on that Our Kingdom, and Defense, if not altogether prevent the Rebels
transporting of Forces from those Parts into that Kingdom.

And We desire you to satisfy all Our well-affected Subjects on that side, of
Our Princely Care of them; whereof they shall receive the effect, as soon as
God shall enable Us: We desire you to use some means to let Us and Our
Council at Oxon: here frequently from you, and of your Actions and Conditions
there. And so GOD prosper your Loyal Endeavors.

Given at Our Court at Oxon: the Thirteenth of April, 1646. By His Majesty's
Command. EDWARD NICHOLAS.

FINIS.

