THE KINGS Majesty's Letter, Sent from Holmby to both Houses of PARLIAMENT,
With his Majesty's Propositions for some Bishops or Doctors appointed to attend
his Majesty for the exercise of his Conscience, and clearing of his judgment
in the present differences in Raligion.

With other Papers concerning the Propositions of the King and the
Commissioners at Holmby-House.

And his Majesty's desire to have some of these to be sent to him; viz.

The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Peterborough. Dr.
Shelden. Dr. May. Dr. Sa^derson. Dr. Bailey. Dr. Heywood. Dr. Beale. Dr. Fuller.
Dr. Hammond, Dr. Tailor.
London Printed Anno Dom.

The Copy of a LETTER Sent from the KINGS Majesty at Holmby, to the Speaker of
the House of Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to both Houses of
PARLIAMENT.
With a List of the names of the Bishops and Doctors propounded by the King to
attend his Majesty.
CAROLVS REX.

SInce I have never dissembled, nor hid my conscience. And that I am not yet
satisfied, with the alteration in Religion, to which ye desire my consent;

I will not loose time in giving reasons, (which are too obvious to every body)
why it is fit for me to be attended by some of my Chaplains, whose opinions (as
Clergymen) I esteem and reverence.

Not only for the exercise of my conscience; but also for the clearing of my
judgment, concerning the pr^sent differences in Religion; as I have (at full)
declared to Mr. Marshall, and his Fellow-Minister: having showed them that is
the best and likeliest means of giving me satisfaction (which without it, I
cannot have) in these things; whereby the distractions of the Church may be the
better settled.

Wherefore I desire, that (at least) two of these reverend Divines, whose names
I have here set down, may have free liberty to wait upon me, for the
discharging of their duties to me, according to their Function.

Holmby Feb. 17. 1646. Charles Rex.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to the
two Houses of Parliament at Westminster assembled.

The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Peterborough. Dr.
Shelden, Clerk of my C^oset. Dr. May, Deane of York. Dr. Sanderson. Dr. Baylay.
D Heywood. Dr. Beale. Dr. Fuller. Dr. Hammond. Dr. Tailor.
Thus far the Kings Letter


These or two or more of these Bishops and Episcopali Doctors, his Majesty
desires may have free liberty to wait upon him, to officiate for the exercise
of his conscience, and clearing of his conscience.



The Copy of a Letter from Holmby-House, concerning some assaires since his
Majesty's and the Comissioners coming thither.
Noble Sir,
BEing come so near, I cannot choose but kiss your hand with a salute of my
real affection: I am not ignorant, that as we expect determination from your
Orb, so you resolution from this. I wish I could satisfy your expectation in
letting you understand what we so much d^ubt, and therefore are the sadder.
What I have to communicate (at present) as a certainty is this, concerning the
King, the Commissioners, the Ministers, and their endeavors with his Majesty.

1. Concerning the King, his Majesty is very cheerful and pleasant, but much
grayer then he was when he went from his Court at White Hall: he is very
familiar with the Lords and desires to be as near London as may be. His Majesty
came hither yester night, all things being so well prepared, that his Majesty
showed no dislike at all: he desired Sir Fulk Grivell might be his Cup Bearer,
and Mr. Mildmay has his place by the Kings appointment also. No Malignants are
permitted, nor dare attempt to come to come to his Majesty, his Majesty being
freed from those late fittings up and watchings that he had before, begins now
to look better.

2 The Commissioners are tired with a long and tedious journey, tyresome ways,
and a careful charge and would take it for a very great favor, if they might
be called home, being very willing to resign up their places.

3 The Ministers, Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Carol preached on the Lords Day, but
the King will not hear them, His Majesty has often conference with them, and
argues very stiffly for Episcopacy, and the Book of common prayer, and against
the Covenant, and they endeavor to give his Majesty fatisfaction in every
scruple; one of them says grace every day at his Majesty's table But his
Majesty would feign have some of his own Chaplains that are not for the
Presbyterian way; yet do we not so despair, but that we hope in good time,
his Majesty will be wrought upon to join with the Parliament, if ill
instruments be still kept from him. God grant an happy union. Thus I conclude,

Holmby Feb. 17: Your obedient servant, C. W.

The Copy of another Letter from Holmby house, concerning his Majesty's Letter
sent by the Commifsioners.
Honorable Sir,
His Majesty told the Lords, that he had a Letter to send to the Parliament,
for some of his own Chaplains, to have liberty to be with Him; And offered
their Lordships to read the said Letter before his Majesty had sealed it, and
to send it to the Parliament. But their Lordships acquainted his Majesty, that
they could not do it safely by their Jnstructions; but if his Majesty would
seal it up, they would send it to the Parliament, which his Majesty did, and
gave it to their Lordships, who have sent it up accordingly, Their Lordships
desiring liberty to come to London, being weary of the present employment. Sir,
no more at present, but that I subscribe my self,

Your most humble servant, W. SMITH.
Dated at our quarters at Holmby; this 18. of February 1646.
FINIS.

