The Kings Message to both Houses. January 12. 1641.
HHis Majesty taking notice that some conceive it disputable whether His
proceedings against my Lord Kymbolton, Master Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig,
Master Pym, Master Hampden, and Master Strode, be legal and agreeable to the
Privileges of Parliament, and being very desirous to give satisfaction to all
men in all matters that may seem to have relation to Privilege, is pleased to
wave His former Proceedings: and all doubts by this means being settled, when
the minds of men are composed, His Majesty will proceed thereupon in an
unquestionable way: And assures His Parliament that upon all occasions He will
be as careful of their Privileges, as of His Life or his Crown.

His Majesty's Profession and Addition to His last Message to the Parliament.
Jan. 14. 1641.
HHs Majesty being no less tender of the Privileges of Parliament, and
thinking himself no less concerned, that they be not broken, and that they be
asserted and vindicated whenever they are so, then the Parliament it self,
Has thought fit to add to His last Message, this Profession, That in all His
Proceedings against the Lord Kymbolton, Mr Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr pym,
Mr Hampden, and Mr Strode, He had never the least Intention of violating the
least Privilege of Parliament; And in case any doubt of breach of Privileges
remain, will be willing to clear that, and assert those, by any reasonable way
that His Parliament shall advise Him to. Upon confidence of which, He no way
doubts His Parliament will forthwith lay by all Iealousies, and apply
themselves to the Public and pressing Affairs, and especially to those of
Ireland, wherein the good of this Kingdom, and the true Religion (which shall
ever be His Majesty's first care) are so highly and so nearly concerned: And
His Majesty assures himself, that His care of their privileges will increase
their tenderness of His lawful Prerogative, which are so necessary to the
mutual defense of each other; and both which will be the foundation of a
perpetual perfect Intelligence between His Majesty and Parliaments, and of
the Happiness and Prosperity of His People.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1641.


