HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO THE MAYOR OF Kingston upon Hull, 25. of April. 1642
To Our trusty and welbeloved, the Major, Aldermen, and Burgesses of Our Town
and Port of Kingston upon Hull.

TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well, Whereas We have been long
sensible of the just Complaints and great Burdens of Our Subjects in these
Northern parts, by occasion of the Garrison in our Town of Hull; And whereas We
were upon Friday the 22. of this Month petitioned by diverse of the Gentry, and
others, Inhabitants of this County, That the Munition at Hull might remain in
the Magazin there, for the security of Our Person, and of all these Northern
parts, their Fear, being much grounded upon the Parliaments Relations of
foreign Invasions: Upon which, the more to express Our care of Our peoples
safety, We did our Self go in Person to that Our Town, that upon Our own view,
We might consult what proportion of it might be fily removed upon any pressing
Occasion, having a respect to the promised supply for Scotland, the necessary
use of Arms for Ireland, as well as for the safeguard and satisfaction of these
Northern parts: But much contrary to Our expectation, and the Duty and
Allegiance of Our Subjects, We found the Gates of that Our Town shut, and the
Bridges drawn up against Us; and though We came in a peaceable way, reposing
the greatest Confidence in the Loveand Loyalty of our People, by offering (as
We did) to put Our own Person, and Our two Sons, but with twenty Horse, into
that Town, there being in it a Garrison of about eight hundred soldiers; Yet
We were not only denied entrance, but in a warlike manner opposed by Sir John
Hotham, the armed men being placed in all the Ports, and about all the Walls of
the Town, alleging(though falsely) for his excuse, The Command of the
Parliament, and being pressed by Us to show such an Order in writing, he could
not do it; for We were ever very confident that there was never any public
Order of theirs, that could so much as imply a denial to Our admission; We
knowing well enough, that he was entrusted by them for a Guard and Security of
that place against foreign Enemies, or those at home who are disaffected in
Religion, and not against His natural Sovereign, which hostile Opposition and
adtuall Levying of War against Our Person, being by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.
enacted High Treason: Which Statute considered, and that for the avoiding of
all lealousies, as We have said, We were content to have been admitted with so
very small a number in our Company, We were thereupon constrained to proclaim
the said sir John Hotham, and all those that should adhere to, or assist him,
Traitors. Of all which abovesaid passages, We have acquainted Our Parliament,
demanding lustice to be done upon him, that they might thereby have opportunity
to vindicate the imputation laid on them by sir John Hotham, and Wethe easier
way to chastize, according to the Law, so high a Treason. And lest a
misunderstanding of Our Intentions, or of the Law may misguide any of Our
loyal and well-affected Subjects, the Inhabitants, Captains, Officers, or
soldiers in that Town, We have thought fit to commend to your Consideration
the aforenamed statute, with that of the 11. of Hen. 7. Cha. 1

Wherein it is dec^ared, by the unanimous Assent of Parliament, That the
Subjects of this Realm are bound, by the Duty of Allegiance, to serve the King
for. the time being, for the defense of His Person and the Land, against every
Rebellion, Might, or Power raised against Him, and with His Majesty to ente, or
abide in Service in Battle, if cause so require. And it was therefore then
enacted, That from thenceforth no person whatsoever that shall attend upon the
King, or be in place, by His command within or without the Land That for the
same deed and true service of Allegiance, he, and they be no ways attaint or
convict of high Treason, or of other Offenses for that Cause, by any Process
of Law, whereby he, or any of them shall lose or forfeit Lives, Lands,
Tenements, Goods or any thing; but be for that Deed and Service utterly
discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss; And if any Act or Acts, or other
Process of Law thereupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this
Ordinance, that then that Act or Acts, or other Process of the Law whatsoever
they shall be, stand and be utterly void.

All which, together with the Copies of Our Message and Petition (which We send
here enclosed) We require you to publish to the Inhabitants, and all such
Commanders and Soldiers as will hear them: That knowing both the Peril of
the Law on the one side, and the security of such as shall adhere to Us on the
other, they be not misled (through ignorance)to decline their Allegiance; and
that the Soldiers may lay down their Arms, and admit Our entrance in a
peaceable way. In so doing, you shall both discharge your duties, and those
that shall have need, be assured to find (upon such their submision) Our ready
Mercy and Pardon. And We do likewiser require, and charge all you, the
Inhabitants (as well Soldiers as others) upon your Allegiance, Thatyou permit
not any part of our Magazin or Munition to be removed or transported out of
that Town under any pretense of Order or Power whatsoever, without our Royal
Assent in writing under Our Hand. Assuring you, That it will be much more
pleasing to Us to have Occasion administered by the Fidelity of the Inhabitants
to enlarge those Graces and Immunities granted to that Town by Our
predecessors, then to have any occasion to question your Charter.

Given at Our Court at York, the 25 of April, 1642.
Printed at York, and now re-Imprinted in London.


