HIS MAJESTY'S Last Speech, and Protestation, which he made on Sunday. the
fifth of this instant February, in the Cathedral Church of Oxford, the Lords
and the chief of the Vnivorsity being present, before the receiving of the
Sacrament, for the renouncing of Popery.

WITH THE PIOUS JOY OF A TRVE HEART enlarged on the contemplation, and
assurance of so great a happiness, to the great comfort of all His Majestye;
subjects, which will live and dye in the Protestant Religion and abhor Popery.

1642Oxford Printed for W. Web, and since reprinted at London for R. Sutton.

HIS MAJESTY'S Speech and Protestation on Sunday the fifth of February, before
the Lords and University of Oxford, for the renouncing of Popery.
THere is not that Blessing which Man on Earth can be capable of, but it may be
obtained by Prayer. Our many sins had tempted the Almighties Wrath, and
pulled down Judgments on our Heads; our many Prayers have woed again the
Almighties Mercy, and procured new Blessings to descend upon us. We have felt
the edge of the Sword, and languished under the Iron hand of War: we now
again begin to hear the sounds of Joy, and to behold the smooth Brow of Peace
to smile upon us. This is the work of God, and the event of the Prayers of
holy men; and as it was procured by the Exercise of Religion, so Religion
begins to flourish, and to be confirmed by it, and fears no more the thick
Clouds of Superstition and Popery shall shadow and overspread this Kingdom.

On the fifth of this present Month, his Majesty being resident at Oxford,
and attended with a brave Train of the Nobility, heard that morning a Sermon
in the Cathedral Church: which being ended, and the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist being that day to be celebrated, his Majesty beholding a great
multitude or his Nobility round about him, spoke thus unto them.

My Lords;
Although I am not bound to give account to any of my thoughts but unto God
alone, yet for your better satisfaction, and that my people might understand
how much I have suffered by prejudicate rumor and opinion; I this day protest
before the face of Almighty God, and before you all, that in my heart I am
far from Popery, and so by Gods grace will continue unto the end of my life;
neither did my Queen ever to my knowledge so much as persuade me once to alter
my Religion.

When he had spoke this, with great gratulation and joy of his Nobility, he
received the holy Sacrament.

And this assurance of his Majesty has bin since seconded in hi^ Answer to the
Petition of both his Houses of Parliament; wherein he assures them of his
pious resolution to maintain the true Protestant Religion, and for the
abolishing of Superstition and Popery: which has turned our weeping into
laughter, and our sorrows into song^ of Joy. God give us the grace, to give
his glorious Name the praise, to be grateful unto him, to rejoice in him with
true thank fullness, when such a Blessing is imparted, and now our s^^^^es are
comf^rted. To this purpose the Story of the Jews, being deli^ered from all
their fears, is very remarkab^e. The Text says, That they rested the same
day, and made ^t d^y of feasting, and gladness, a good day, and sent portions
and presents one to another: But wherefore was all this? for saving their
lives, and prevailing against their enemies.

But, O thou God of Heaven! That ridest upon the wings of the Wind, and hold
the reins of the Kingdoms of the World in thy hand, to let loose or restrain
at thy pleasure: Thou know that we have more causes to rejoice, and be glad,
then the Jews in their Purim* for if we may compare the less with the
greater, they had but the preservation of their bodies, and a flight triumph
against their temporal enemies; we are in the way to save our souls, and put
our spiritual adversaries to flight, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.

What, is Papistry to be suppressed, the Priests and Jesuits to be banished,
and the Gospel of Jesus Christ to flourish? My soul leapes for joy, and my
heart is inditing a good matter, I speak of the things which I have made
touching the King: My tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer. O blessed be God
for this alteration.

Does not Jeremy tell us, that in Ramah there was a voice heard, lamentation
and weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not
be comforted, because they were not. Did not all England wring their hands for
sorrow, and begin to mourn, and to be affrighted, when they saw the Papists so
arrogantly mischievous, to insult in every Town and Shire, and mock us to our
faces? To bring up their Armies, and defy our Religion, and threaten utterly
to demolish it, as if Sandolet and Tabiah were come again to deride the Jews,
when Nehemiah did re-edifie the Temple. And has not God put it into the Kings
heart, to damme up this inundation, and to keep the raging Sea within its
bounds, that it should not overflow the lower and more fruitful grounds?

Mark but the progression of this Business: How have the Papists behaved
themselves within these two years, and especially since his Majesty has
absented himself from his Parliament? How insolently have they bragged of their
Forces? How illegally have they mustered and drawn them together? And being now
under the command of the Earl of Newcastle, how impudertly have they threatened
the overthrow of us all, especially of our late flourishing and renowned City
of London.

But was this all? No, no, the several Shires of England, worse by far then
the Jews, who poisoned the Springs of Sweet Water, in these days had and
still have malicious Instruments to corrupt the Youth of the Country; and the
Priests, Jesuits, Friars have run from House to House, and made them all
amazed with crying out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

The Court at Oxford, and the frequent Visitations of our Malignants in London,
have their Assemblies mingled with a number of audacious and peremptory
Romanists, who not only branded us for luke-warmenesse, and uniustifiable
Actions, but boasted in their Disputations that they had put the true and
learned Ministers and Servants of God to silence, as if Sidkiah should strike
Machaiah on the face, and peremptorily ask him, When the Spirit of God
departed from him, to be infused in such an Underling.

The Court had not only every Corner, but public Walks filled with Papists
and Hispaniolized Temporizers: and what did they, but appear in several
disguised forms, and their corrupt hearts taught their tongues to vent forth
Blasphemies and notorious Abuses? For as you read how Jeremy was taken by his
enemies, and brought before the Princes and Priests, for weakening the hands of
the Men of War, and daunted their hearts that wished well to the Peace of
Sion; so played these imposturing Spirits, charming all men with such
Subtleties, that they would believe nothing true, but what proceeded from
themselves.

Most infinite i^ the difference between the government of the Protestant and
Papist Churches; the Papists committing blasphemous Idolatry, derogating from
the Honor of God, attributing it to the adoration of Creatures; they dissemble
with God and their own souls, and all that deal with them, they allow of
murder and monstrous impiety, and in a word are poisoned with the dregs of
abomination wherewith the whore of Babylon has filled her cup, when the true
protestant and zealous Christian allows God the pre-eminence of all
adoration, will by no means blaspheme with idolatrous* Exorcismes detesteth
whoredom and all incestuous leprosy, desieth the participation of Gods glory
to murder simply and plainly contriveth his affairs, and keeps his word
though it be to his own hinderance intermeddles not with matters of State,
except he be called to places of Eminency; and dares not abuse the Majesty of
Princes by interiecting a jealousy and suspicion between the Prince and the
Subject. And is not this a great alteration? and cause enough to induce us to
thank God, and acknowledge his mercy and kindness, that our King and
Parliament would go and buy eyesalve without money perspicuously to look into
the enormities of the Church and Common wealth, and not only with Nehemias to
abridge the extremity of usury to compel a relaxation of debts and
oppression: to keep and sanctify the Sabbath, to put away their Idolatrous
wives, but also will not suffer the Ammonites and Moabites to come into Gods
temple but enforce them to banishment out of Jerusalem, and thus (thanks be to
God) our great Nehemiah the King has bin pleased now to express Himself
against the Papists, He not only thinks them as pricks and thorns in the
sides of good Christians; but He finds them (for all their pretenses of
assisting Him) as noisome and infectious weeds in the Commonwealth, to eat
up and choke the sweet flowers and the spring-grasse.

Shall such a man as I fly (says Nehemiah?) And shall such a King as I (says
our Sovereign) Who has been trained up from my infancy to deny Popery now
suffer my Kingdom of great Britain the Nursery of zealous Professors, the
Mirror of Purity and Piety to be defiled and contaminated with the poison of
superstition?

Now I have recollected my self, shall I give way to rotten and filthy Policy
to eat up the heart of true Relion, or suffer private ends to thicken
themselves like some obscure and dangerous cloud to stand as an interposition
between the sunny splendour of Gods Word, and the fair progress of
government? No, no, I will now be my self, and therefore if either the Pope or
Sectary derides me with Michol for dancing before the Ark, and bringing it
into Gods house I will answer with David, I will yet become more vile and
zealous for the Lord, and as he told his wife that therefore God had taken the
Kingdom from his father and invested him with the Diadem of it, so may now King
Charles answer all Malignants, that therefore God will make Him mighty in His
Provinces in despite of Malignant opposition: And Great Brittaize shall not be
able only to stand firm, but like an impregnable rock in all honor, riche^,
and prosperity, and of sufficiency to protect distressed neighbors, and
recover unfortunate and surrepted Province.

Therefore away ye Priests and Iesui es, and let us hear no more of your daring
impostures, and that you will yet remain Papists and with the adder stop your
ears though the charmer charmeth never so wifely, let us see the backs of our
adversaries, and the banishment of those that hate us that we may see our
honest neighbors sublevated with care and diligence, the whole Island
flourishing with prosperity and confidence the poor relieved the trade
restored, the City repaired, the Merchant countenanced* the true soldier
honored, the clergy man beloved, the well-deserving reverenced, the weak
supported* the obstinate punished the offender, through frailty remitted, and
all just actions practiced to the glory of God, and the comfort of our own
souls.

FINIS.

