C. R. BY THE KING.
To Our trusty and welbeloved Our Colonells, Lievtenant-Colonells,
Serjeant-Majors, Captains, and all other Our Officers of Our Army.
WE taking into Our Princely Consideration the ready affection of Our good
People of Our Counties of Oxford and Berks, to supply and furnish Our Army with
all possible accommodation the Country can afford, Do expect therefore, that
you, whom We have trusted with Commands, shall take especial care in your
several Quarters, that all Soldiers under you treat, all Our good people
with Brotherly humanity, and that none of them waste or spoil any Corn, Hay,
or other provisions, but to husband and preserve the same, as much as may be:^
And do require your Care herein, as you tender Our Honor, the good of Our
Army, and the conservation of the weale-publike. Further commanding you to let
all the Soldiers under your Command know from Us, That if they shall
transgress herein, they must expect to receive that punishment which either
the law Martial, or the Laws of the Land can justly impose upon them: And We
admonish you that upon all Complaints against any of your Soldiers, you render
them to Our Ministers of Justice to be examined and proceeded against
accordingly; Hereof you may not fail.

From Our Court at OXFORD, this Twentieth of January, 1642.
An Agreement of the great Inquest made At the last Sessions for the County of
WORCESTER, for the raising of three Thousand pound Monthly, toward the
payment of His Majesty's Forces, sent and raised for defense of the said County
and City of Worcester.
Wigorn. ss. Ad general. Session. pacis Dom. Regis tent. apud Wigorn. pro Com.
praedict. decimo die Ianuarii, Anno Regni Dom, CAROLI nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
Decimo Octavo.
WHereas the great Inquest at this present Sessions, upon consideration had of
the Kings Majesty's most gracious Letters, agreed that there should be raised
forth of the County of Worcester, the sum of three Thousand pounds of lawful
English money a Month, toward the payment of His Majesty's forces, sent and
raised for the defense of the said County, and the City of Worcester. the
first payment to be for this present Month of January, and the said Sum or
Sums which should be raised, to be paid unto the several High-Constables of
the County of Worcester, and to be paid by them unto John Bacon Gent. to be
disposed of by Sir William Russell Baronet, High-Shriffe of the County of
Worcester, and Governor of the said City, upon account to be given by him to
the Kings Majesty, and likewise to the said County, which first Monthly
payment shall be paid before the second day of February next coming, and so to
continue, as long as Sir William Russell and the Kings Majesty's Justices of
peace of the County of Worcester, assembled at this present Sessions, shall
think fit: And that the same Money should be assessed by four or more of the
most sufficient Inhabitants of every Parish or Vjllage in the County of
Worcester, according to the usual rates of the payments within the said
County, And that every person which should be so assessed for his Lands and
Rents where they Lie, and all persons of ability should be assessed for their
personal estate, And likewise the Clergy, and all others that are owners of
Impropriate Tithes or any others Tithes whatsoever, should be assessed toward
the said payment from time to time, which said agreement of the great Inquest,
the Court does very well approve, and does order it accordingly, It is
thereupon ordered, That the Clarke of the Peace shall presently make out
warrants to the several High-Constables of the County of Worcester for the
Collecting of the same

Per CURIAM.
Printed at OXFORD by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. Anno Dom.
1642.


