THE KINGS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH to both houses of Parliament on
Thurseday the second of December. 1641.

Whereunto is added the King and Queens Royal loves returned to the worthy
members of the honorable City of London.

Or a Royal Invitation from both their Majesty's, for the Lord Major and Court
of Aldermen to feast with them at their Highness Palace of Hampton Court.

Which was performed on Friday the third of December 1641. with the manner of
Knighting of Five of the Aldermen there, and the two Shriffes of LONDON.

London, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

HIS MAJESTY'S Speech to both Houses of Parliament the second of December. 1641.
My Lords And Gentlemen.
I Am to Speak a word unto you, since I have been so long absent from you, it
is in no way in answer to the learned speech of Master Speaker; but yet I
shall touch one point of it concerning Ireland, but first I must tell you,
though I have been absent longer then indeed I did expect, or could have been
expected by you; yet I stayed no longer in Scotland, then the necessity of
those affairs would absolutely permit, and indeed I have done therein so much
good, that I dare boldly affirm unto you, I have left the people a most
contented and happy nation: so that if I did misreckon in the time, I did not
misreckon in the end.

Now though I have deceived you a littl of your expectation in point of time I
confess, you have deceived my expectation in finding of business here, for I
had thought to have found things in quietness, and settled both for Religion,
and peace, of this Kingdom, but I found great distractions, in so much as the
Parliament was thought fit to be guarded, this I speak not any way to seek
out a fault, or to have any distrust of the hearty affections of my Subjects,
but but on the contrary when I came here (as you all see) I found the affection
of my people to me with great comfort.

Now I assure you I come with the same affection that you, or any good people
of the world can wish, for I am far from disliking any thing I have done
hitherto, that if it were to be done again even in the favor and good of my
people, that I protest, I would do it again, and whatsoever may be justly
expected of me for securing of religion, and liberty of my people, I shall not
fail to do it.

And therefore I shall mention no particular at this time, but only the great
particular of Ireland, which Master Speaker did mention of, which I do not
doubt, but you have had a great care, yet me thinks, things go on flowly,
and I mention this more seasonably, because a couple of noble men are come out
of Scotland, according to the petition, and instructions, which it pleased both
houses to send to me at Barwicke, which I instantly dispatched to the Council
there, who now have the full disposal of things, I spoke to them this
morning, and I desire both houses to appoint a select Commit to treat, and
end these businesses with them.

I have but this word to say, that I assure you I have no other end, but the
happiness of my people for their flourishing is my greater glory, and there
affection, is my greatest strength


