Die Jovis 26. December. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the House
does hereby give thanks to Master Calamy for his great pains taken in the
Sermon he Preached on Wednesday the 25. of this instant December, in the Abbey
Church Westminster, it being the day of the monthly Fast. And this House does
desire him to Print and publish the same. And lastly, It is Ordered, that none
shall Print or publish his said Sermon without being Authorized so to do under
the hand of the said Master Calamy.

Io. Brown Cler. Parlamentorum.

I Do appoint Christopher Meredith, to Print this Sermon, and no man else.

EDMUND CALAMY.

AN INDICTMENT AGAINST ENGLAND BECAUSE OF HER SELFEMVRDERING DIVISIONS:
Together WITH AN EXHORTATION TO AN ENGLAND-preserving Unity and Concord.

Presented in A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable House of Lords in
the Abbey Church at Westminster; at the late Solemn Fast, December 25. 1644.

By Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of Aldermanbury in LONDON.

Cyprian. Pacem Ecclesiae Martyrio praeferimus.
Peius est scindere Ecclesiam quam sacrificare Idolo.
LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE OF Lords Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe differences and Divisions of England at this day are so many, so great,
and so destructive to Church and State, as that it cannot but be accounted a
transcendent act of Piety and Charity for any man to endeavor according to his
place to compose the one, and remove the other. But though this work be very
excellent, yet it is also very dangerous to him that shall undertake it. For it
is often found, that he that will step into reconcile two parties that are a
fighting, does prove the party against which both of them will fight. Or if not
both, yet always the party that does the wrong will be a bitter enemy to him
that would make up the breach. And therefore it is expressly said, Act. 7. 26,
27. That when Moses saw two of his brethren striving one aagainst the other,
and stepped in to set them at one, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren, why wrong ye
one another? He that did his neighbor the wrong thrust him away, saying, Who
made thee a Ruler and a Judge over us? But yet notwithstanding, happy is that
man whom God shall make any ways isntrumental to the bringing in of a holy
and blessed Peace into this distressed Island, though with the loss of his own
life. Famous is the example of Gregory Nazianzen, who was Bishop of
Constantinople, eminent for Learning and Piety: And yet when he saw a
prevailing Faction endeavoring to choose another into his place, and that it
would much disturb the peace of the City Ruffini histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
if he did not yield it up; he brake out into this speech: Absit, inquit, ut mei
causa aliqua simultas oriatur in Dei Sacerdotibus. Si propter me est ista
tempestas, tollite, and mittite me in mare, and desinet a vobis quassatio. God
forbid that for my cause any difference should arise amongst the Ministers of
God: If this tempest be raised for my cause, take me, and throw me into the Sea
that so the tempest may cease. A sentence worthy to be written in letters of
Gold, and to be put in practice by every true hearted Englishman. The like we
read of Codrus a Heathen King, who for the love of his people exposed himself
to death. And of Curtius, and of three Decii that devoted themselves to ruin
for the safety of their Country. The Book of God tells us of Moses that was
willing to have his name blotted out of the Book of life: and of Paul that was
willing to be an Anathema, that so God might be reconciled to the people of
Israel with whom he was displeased. But the greatest example of all is of our
Lord and blessed Savior, who emptied himself of his Divinity, and became a
servant, and a curse, that he might become our Peacemaker.

Much to this purpose is said in the ensuing Sermon, which is now made public
by your Commands. Something also is said to keep up your spirits from being
over-dismaied at the consideration of these Landdestroying Divisions. Great are
the searchings and tremblings of heart, because of these Divisions. But be not
over-discouraged: It is Gods Prerogative to bring light out of darkness, good
out of evil, unity out of division. He works by contrary means as well as
by unlikely means. He delivered Jonah by a Whale, and kept him (as Basil
says) vivus in sepulchro. He raised Joseph by casting him into prison; he
cured the blind man by clay and spittle. And I doubt not but he will bring a
great deal of good at last out of our Divisions. It is observable that Simeon
and Levi, that at first were brethren in iniquity, joining together to destroy
the Shechemites, and for this cruel act, as a suitable punishment, were divided
in Jacob, and scattered in Israel, Genesis 49. 7. Yet notwithstanding because
afterward Levi was zealous for God against the worshippers of the golden
Calfe, and did appear valiantly on Gods side, Exodus 32. 26. God did turn this
curse into a blessing, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. For Levi was consecrated to teach Jacob
Gods judgment, and Israel his law, etc. And the Simeonites, as Ainsworth
observes, Ainsw. xi Genesis 4^. 7.
were also Teachers of the Law in the Synagogues of Jacob; and the Levites in
the Schools of the sons of Israel. This story is written for our
consolation. The time was when we dwelt in peace and unity, but then we
combined against God and his children; and for this cause as a just curse, God
has divided us one from another, to the utter ruin one of another. But yet
notwithstanding, if you (Right Honorable) will go on to show your selves
zealous for God and his Cause, and to appear vigorously and faithfully on his
side; God will turn our great curse into a great blessing. And as the dividing
of the Red Sea was made by God a way and means to lead the people of Israel
over into Canaan, and to destroy the Egyptians: So God will make our Divisions
in this Red Sea of blood, into which we are plunged, a way and means to a
happy Canaan of unity and peace; and to the utter ruin of our implacable
Adversaries. Thus he did with the divisions of Paul and Barnabas, as this
Sermon relates unto you. Only be courageous for God, and in nothing be
terrified at our differences, but make your peace with him, and he at lastwill
make us at peace one with another: which is the earnest prayer of

Your Honors

A SERMON PREACHED TO the Right Honorable House of Lords on the Monthly Fast,
December 25. 1644.
Matthew. 12. 25. latter end. Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought
to desolation: and every city or house divided against it self, shall not
stand.


THese words are a just Apology of Jesus Christ, against the unjust accusations
and blasphemies of the Scribes and Pharisees. There was a man brought unto
Christ that was possessed with a Devil that made him dumb and blind; and
Christ healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb, both spoke and saw; Verse.
22. This great miracle had three different effects. The common people were
astonished and said; Is this the son of David? Verse. 23. His own kindred
thought him mad, and sought to lay hold on him, Mark. 3. 21. But the Pharisees
when they heard of it, they blasphemously said; This fellow does not cast out
Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Now Christ to clear himself
from this cursed aspersion brings four Arguments, whereof this in my Text is
the first. Interpreters take much pains to make out the strength of the
Argument. The sum of what they say is this. It is an Argument drawn from the
policy and subtlety of the Devil. For if Satan cast out Satan (says Christ)
then Satan should be divided against himself. And if Satan should be divided
against himself, then Satan should seek his own ruin. For every kingdom
divided against it self, is brought to desolation, and every city or house
divided against it self shall not stand. But it is incredible to think that
Satan should seek the ruin of his own kingdom, which he indeavoureth by all
means to promote and propagate. And therefore it is certain, that I do not
cast out Devils by the power of Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. This is Christ's
first Argument.

But my purpose is to handle these words, only as they are an entire
proposition in themselves; as they are a general Maxim, written in great
Characters, not only in the Book of God, but in the Book of Nature: and as
they are a clear Looking-glass, in which with sad countenances we may behold
the woeful condition that England is in at this present. For these words are
the words of Jesus Christ, who is truth it self. Every kingdom divided
against it self is brought to desolation, and every house or city divided
against it self cannot stand. And if every Kingdom, then the Kingdom of
England, divided against it self is brought to desolation, and if every City,
then the City of London divided against it self shall not stand. In the words
themselves, we have two parts.

First, Christ does here set down one great Cause of the ruin of Kingdoms,
Cities, and Families: and that is division against it self. Every Kingdom
divided against it self: The word in the Greek is (...), which does not
signify every little, small division, but such a division, that does (...),
that does cut a City in pieces, such a division, when it is (...), when it is
intrinsecall to a Kingdom, when it is got within the bowels of a Kingdom, it
is like unto the wind, which when it gets into the bowels of the Earth, makes
an Earthquake, and blows up Towns, and Houses, and Kingdoms. So do these
divisions, whether Ecclesiastical, or Political, whether about matters of
Religion, or of Civil Government, when they get within a Kingdom, they blow
up a Kingdom, a City, and a Family.

Secondly, Our Savior Christ here sets out the greatness of the ruin that is
caused by these divisions; and that both Intensively, and Extensively. First,
Intensively, and that by two expressions.

First, Christ here says, such a divided Kingdom is brought to desolation:
the word in the Greek is (...), it is made a wilderness: Though a Kingdom in
time of Peace be as happy as a Paradise, division will turn a Paradise into a
desolate wilderness: And the words are in the Present tense, to show the
certainty of it: It is brought, not it will be brought; Every Kingdom divided
against it self is brought, and it is brought to desolation. Divisions do not
only distemper a Kingdom, and make a Kingdom diseased, but they are deadly,
and fatal to a Kingdom, they are like unto a great and wide breach made in
the Banks to let in the Sea, to swallow up a whole Kingdom: they are like a
breach made in the walls of a City besieged, that lets in the Enemy to take
the City. And then,

Secondly, Christ says, such a divided City shall not stand. Christ does not
only say, it shall reele, and totter; but he says expressly, (...), it shall
not stand: or as it is in the 3. Mark. 24. It cannot stand; it must tumble and
fall. Divisions in a House, are not only like unto the breaking of the Windows,
or the pulling down of the Tyles, which may be done, and yet the House may be
safe: but they are like unto a House all on fire, which must necessarily be
burnt down if it be not quenched. Or like unto a House, when the Pillars of it
are pulled down, and the House it self falls with it. So is a Kingdom,
City, or Family, divided against it self, it cannot stand, says Christ,
(...), Mark. 3. 24.

Secondly, Our Savior sets out the greatness of this ruin by the Extension
of it; It is here said, Every Kingdom divided against it self. Divisions in a
Kingdom, are like a sweeping plague, that devoures whole Kingdoms, without any
distinction. Though a Kingdom be never so well provided with Men, Arms, and
Ammunition, Ships, Walls, and Bulwarks: yet notwithstanding, if divisions get
into that City, and Kingdom, they are as a spreading gangrene, that will
quickly infect the whole Kingdom, and destroy it utterly, be it never so well
fortified by Sea or Land. Nay, though there should be a Kingdom of Saints; yet
notwithstanding, if Differences and Distractions get within that Kingdom, they
will prove like the worm that did eat up Ionah's gourd in one night;
Divisions in a very little space will swallow up, and devour all the outward
happiness, even of a Kingdom of Saints.

And not only so, but every City, (says Christ) and every House, though it be
never so Religious, so Honorable, so rich a Family; yet notwithstanding if
divisions get into that Family, it cannot stand. These divisions, they are like
unto the Mors in olla, like unto the Coloquintida, that spoiled all the
pottage; They are as a poysonfull herb, that spoils all the riches and
goodness of a Family: like unto Eagles feathers, which (as some say) when they
are mingled with other feathers, spoil all the feathers they are mingled
withal. So do Divisions, Contentions, and Factions, when they get into a
City, or Family, they spoil all the wealth, riches, and honors of that
Family: for so says our Savior Christ; Every kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation, and every City, or House divided against it
self shall not stand. The words thus explained, will afford us this Doctrine.

Doct. That Divisions, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Political, in
Kingdoms, Cities, and Families, are infallible causes of ruin to Kingdoms,
Cities, and Families.

This Doctrine is proved, not only by the History of the Bible; but by the
History of all Ages. The Kingdom of England is sufficient alone to prove the
Truth of this Doctrine. Historians observe, that there was never any great
mischief fell upon England, but the Cause of it was, the Divisions that were
among them. When Caesar first made inrode into Britaino, he was called in by
the Faction of Lib. 5. de Bello Gallico. quod factionibus and studiis
trahebantur.

Camden Britann. Jam inde interior Britannia magis civilibus bellis, and
partium studiis, quam Romanorum viribus attrita, post varias clades ultro
citroque illatas in Romanorum potestatem paulatim concessit.

Dum enim singuli pugnabant universi sunt victi, sic in mutuam perniciem
ruentes ut non nisi oppressi senserint omnibus perire, quod singuli amiserunt.
Claudius his discordiis fretus, etc.


Mandubratius. And Tacitus says, that all the Victories that the Romans got,
it was by the Factions and Divisions that were among the Britains. And
afterward, when the Saxons made a Conquest of Britain; Vortigern that had got
the Kingdom by a Faction, to maintain his Party, sent for the Saxons in, as
some say, or at lest employed them, when, in, to take his part, as others
write. But all write, that by this means he destroyed himself, and the whole
Kingdom. And so likewise, when the Normans made a Conquest upon England; they
were invited hither by the Factions that were in England. Especially, by the
Faction that the Earl Goodwin made, and his son Toustaine, as our Historians
do relate. And since the Norman Conquest, I need not put you in mind of the
great effusion of blood that was here in England, all the time of the Barons
wars: And of the miserable condition of England, when the House of York and
the House of Lancaster rose up one against another. And what shall we say to the
desolate and bleeding condition of England, and Ireland, at this present? Does
not our forlorn, and miserable estate sufficiently make good this Doctrine:
That Divisions in Church and State, are destructive to Church and State?

But besides the Kingdom of England, I might show you, how the Empire of
Grecia as long as Alexander kept it in unity flourished in great prosperity,
but after the death of Alexander, it was divided into four parts, and these
four Governors destroyed one another by divisions. I might also instance in
the Empire of Rome, as soon as ever it was divided by Constantine into two
parts, from that very time (as Sigonius relates) the Roman Empire, which
before that was very strong and potent, began first secretly to grow weak, and
afterward to decay, till at last it came to utter destruction.

I might instance also in the people of the Jews, as long as they were as a
City united within it self in David's and Solomon's time, so long they did
exceedingly flourish; but as soon as ever they were divided into ten Tribes,
and two Tribes, they presently began to war one against another, and to open
the door to foraine Invasions; till at last they were all of them utterly
ruinated. Famous is the story of the City of Jerusalem, when it was besieged
by Titus Vespasian, Josephus tells us it had three mighty Factions in the very
bowels of it: The chief of which Factions were Iehochanan, Eleazar, Schimeon.
And that these three Factions did kill more then the enemy himself; and were
the cause of the taking of that famous City. The like is reported of Reason 1.
Why Divisions are so fatal to Kingdoms, because they take away all the
preservatives of a Kingdom.

1. They take away Peace from a Kingdom.


the famous City of Constantinople, when it was taken by the Turks, etc.

But let us a little consider the Reasons why Divisions are so fatal and
destructive to Kingdoms, Cities, and Families.

The first Reason is, because that these intestine divisions they destroy all
those things that are as walls, and bulwarks to preserve a Nation from ruin.
As for example:

First, Divisions destroy the peace of a Kingdom: Now there is nothing that
preserves a Kingdom more then peace: And therefore the Hebrews comprehended
all blessings under the name of Peace. Heaven it self, it is nothing but
tranquillit as pacis; what is God, but the God of peace? and what is Christ,
but the Prince of Peace? And therefore, as Dr. Stoughton Sermons.
that Cardinal made his Emblem, A Beach tree, with this Motto: Take off the
top and it is the ruin of all the rest: for such is the nature of the Beach
tree, that if you cut the top off, the tree presently withers: such may be the
Motto of every Kingdom: Take off the top, and it is the ruin of all the rest:
Take away Peace, and you destroy a Kingdom. The truth is, there is no outward
blessing, is a real blessing where peace is wanting: your Estates, your
Honors, are no blessings, if you have not peace to enjoy them. And therefore,
as the Artificer carved his own name into the Buckler of Minerva so exactly,
that whosoever should undertake to pick out his name, must necessarily spoil
the Buckler: so it is with Peace, peace is so woven into the prosperity of a
Kingdom, that whatsoever destroys peace, must needs destroy a Kingdom. Now
Division takes away peace, and therefore Division ruins a Kingdom.

2. They take away unity, love, and concord.
And then secondly, Division takes away the Unity of a Kingdom; now Unity is
the great preserver of Church and State: it is the great preserver of all
bodies, both Natural, Political, Artificial, and Theological. What is that,
that keeps the fabric of Heaven from dissolving into pieces, but the Unity
and the agreement of the discordant Elements? What keeps this great fabric
here from falling, but the Union and conjunction of the parts of it? stones
joined together make a building, but stones uncemented, destroy and overthrow a
building: boards joined together make a Ship, disioytned make a shipwreck.
What keeps the body of a man in health, but the just proportion and harmony of
every part? the members of the body divided from the head are presently
destroyed: the branches divided from the Vine receive no joyce, no sap, no
virtue: Every thing is preserved by unity and concord. Lords and Commons
united save a Kingdom: divided make shipwreck Calente adhuc sanguine Christi.
Hieron.
of a Kingdom. The Church of Christ at first, when the blood of Christ was yet
warm, was at unity within it self, and all with one accord praising and
serving God, and then it flourished exceedingly. The Church was then like a
pure Virgin attended with all the graces of Gods Spirit as with so many
Hand-maides. But afterward when it fell into divisions it lost her Virginity,
and Hegesip. ex Eusebius.
all her handmaids forsook her. For this is true both in Philosophy and in
Divinity, Omne divisible est corruptibile: Whatsoever is divisible, is
corruptible. And the like I say of concord, love and friendship, which are
nothing else but unity in affection: These are the glue that soders; these are
the nerves and sinews that join a Kingdom together. And therefore the
Apostle says, Above all things put on love which is the bond of perfection: it
is a Col. 3. 16.
bond to join Kingdoms, and Cities, and Families together. And therefore,
whatsoever breaks this bond of Kingdoms in pieces, must needs devour and
destroy Kingdoms. But divisions do this. For they are like a Caterpiller to
devour all peace, unity, love, friendship, and concord, which are the great
supporters of Kingdoms. They are like unto the great Plague of the Locusts
that devoured all the green things in the land of Egypt: There Exodus 9.
is nothing that is good in a Nation, nothing that is green and flourishing in
a Nation, but division and contention will destroy it. And therefore divisions
must needs be destructive to Kingdoms. This is the first Reason: and then

Reason 2. Why Divisions are so destructive to Kingdoms, because they open a
door to all misery.

1. They let in confusion.


Secondly: As divisions take away all those things that are the Buttresses to
uphold a Nation: So on the other side, they open a door to all kinds of
misery; they bring in myriads of evils into a Kingdom: They are like unto
Pandora's box, which when it was once opened, out flied all kind of sicknesses
and diseases: As for example:

First, Where intestine divisions dwell, there dwells strife and envy; and
where envy and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, I am. 3.
16.

2. They let in a foraine enemy.
Secondly, Divisions open a door to let in a foraine enemy: and it is a free
and miraculous mercy that God has kept out the French, and the Spaniard, and
the Danes from invading England in these times of our divisions.

3. They disenable us to resist a foraine enemy.
And then thirdly, Divisions weaken a Kingdom, and make it unable to resist a
foraine enemy, if he should come in: for divide a City, and so many divisions
you make, so much you take away from the strength of that City. Let five men
join together to bear a burden, and they will bear it with ease: but if
three of those five shall divide from the other two, the burden will sink the
other two. Vis Vnita fortior, strength conjoined is a great deal stronger;
strength divided is weakened; Counsels divided are weakened; men divided are
weakened: But then

4. They set a Kingdom against it self.
Fourthly, and especially, Divisions set a Kingdom against it self, so says
my Text, Every Kingdom divided against it self: Divisions make the father to
fight against the child* and the child to fight against the Father: Divisions
set the husband against the wife, and the wife against the husband: Divisions
make us to be our own hangmen, our own executioners. Divisions make us Viper
like to eat out the bowels one of another. Divisions make us to sheath our
swords in our own bowels. As God caused the Midianites to destroy one another:
so these Divisions set a Kingdom against it self; they set a man against
himself; a City against it self, to destroy it self,: In a word, that I may
express all misery in one They bring in Civil wars.
phrase: Divisions bring in Civil wars, which of all wars are most
uncivil. There are three Iron whips with which God does whip mankind, when it
grows monstrous in iniquity; the Plague, Sword and Famine, which Tertullian
calls Tonsur as insolentis humani generis, The loppings and prunings of Mankind
when they grow rank in iniquity. Of those three plagues War is the
greatest. And therefore when the Prophet put David to his Trilemma, he chose
the Plague, rather then the Sword, or Famine, and beseeches with great
earnestness: Let me not fall into the hands of man. Of all judgments War is
the greatest, which for the most part is attended with Famine and Plague. But
of all wars no war so mischievous as Civil war, for these Reasons.

Civil wars are the worst of wars, for four Reasons.
First, Because there is no war so unnatur all as Civil war: for in Civil
war, the father fights against the child, and the friend against the friend,
and the brother against the brother.

Secondly, There is no war so cruel as Civil war: and therefore you shall
observe, that the Hagarens, and the Ammonites, and the Moabites, and the
Edomites, were the greatest enemies that the people of Israel had: Now these
were of the kindred Odia proximorum sunt cerrima.
of the people of Israel; The hatred of brethren is most bitter when they fall
out: You have an example of this in the 20. of Judge. 48. The people of Israel,
they went to fight against their brethren, and when they had conquered them
they did not only kill every man they met withal, but they killed every beast
that they met withal, and they killed every thing that came to hand: It is a
strange expression, to show the cruelty of Civil war: and you know how the
bloud-thirstie Cavalieres, at Oxford, do hunger and thirst to drink Cups full
of the blood of the Roundheads (as they call us).

Thirdly, These wars, they are most treacherous; no war so treacherous as
Civil war, for there will always be false brethren, that will labor to
betray their brethren into the hands of the enemy, for it is a war amongst
Brethren; and these are the times wherein we may take up the complaint of
Jeremy, Ier. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5. and wherein we had need follow the example of Mica.
7. 5, 6.

Fourthly, and lastly, these wars of all wars are most uncomfortable. And
therefore you shall read that when the people of Israel had overcome the
Beniamites, in stead of rejoicing for the victory, they all fell a weeping
because of their brethren that were slain, Judge. 21. 2.

These are the Reasons why Civil wars are the worst of wars. But of all
Civil wars that ever were, none so wicked, none so mischievous as the Civil
wars of England. Of all the arrows that are in the quiver of Gods
judgments, there is no arrow so sharp, so keen, as this arrow that God now
shoots out against England. For there is a Generation of men risen up amongst
us that fight against the Parliament whom they themselves did choose, and
entrust with their laws, liberties, and religion. Men that fight against a
Reformation: That fight themselves into Popery, Slavery, and Beggary. That
join with the Papists of England, and Popish Rebels of Ireland to fight (as
they say) for the Protestant Religion. That fight for their Liberties against
the Parliament, the great and only Conservator of their Liberties. That call
God to record that they intend nothing but the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and of the liberties of the people, and yet endeavor by all
treachery and bloody ways to subvert Religion and Liberties. That God should
suffer such multitudes of men to be so far drunk with error, and to be so
far blinded with prejudice, this is a judgment of all judgments most
superlative.

Now all these are the fruits of our divisions, and therefore certainly, Jesus
Christ might well say, or if Christ had not said it, our own experience would
have taught us the truth of this Text: Every Kingdom divided against it self
is brought to desolation, and every house, and every city divided against it
self shall not stand. This is all that I shall say for the explication of the
Doctrine.

But now (through the blessing of God) I shall come to the Application.

Use 1.
If intrinsecall divisions he so destructive to the Kingdom, let us weep and
mourn before the Lord this day, at the consideration of the sad condition that
England is in at this present. This day is a day of weeping and mourning: And I
shall present a subject before you that will move you to tears if there be any
bowels of compassion in you, and to say as Jeremy 14. 17. Let mine eyes run
down with tears night and day, and let them not cease, for the virgin
daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.
And if a tender and dutiful child cannot without great mourning and
lamentation behold his Mother rent and torn in pieces by wild Beasts; surely
it will be most unnatural in us who are the sons and daughters of England,
to hear of the divisions and distractions of England with dry eyes, and hard
hearts. It is reported of Cato, that from the time that the Civil wars began
in Rome between Caesar and Pompey, he was never seen to laugh, or to wash his
face, or to shave his beard, or cut his hair. This example will rise up in
judgment against many of us who are so unaffected and insensible of the great
and unexpressible calamities of poor England, once a pleasant Paradise, but
now a howling wilderness.

If Divisions destroy a Nation, it is a miracle of mercy that England is yet a
Nation: for our divisions are multiplied exceedingly. Our times run all upon
divisions, and subdivisions. We may say of England, as Austin of Africa, That
it is divided in minutula frustula, it is crumbled into very little little
pieces. I will bring them all into two heads.

1. Our Divisions from God. 2. Our Divisions one from another.
First, Our Divisions from God, by our most grievous sins and A Catalogue of
the divisions of England, and what cause to mourn for them.

1. Our Divisions from God.


iniquities. For as smoke drives Bees out of their Hives, so does sin drive
God away from a Kingdom. And there is nothing that makes God forsake a
Kingdom but sin. Isaiah 59. 2. Your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.
Now there is no Nation under heaven, that has divided it self more from God
by sin then England has. There was a time when the Parliament of England
made a whip with six strings to whip many godly people to death. This was in H.
the eighths days. There was a time when the Parliament of England did solemnly
upon their knees abjure the Gospel, and desire reconciliation with Antichrist.
This was done in Q. Mary's days; after which followed the bloody persecution
by the Laws then established. And though these Laws were afterward repealed*
yet how often have we Apostatized from God since that time? And even at this
very day, though there be much talk of Reformation; yet (alas) there was never
less practice of Reformation. Our Churches indeed are Reformed, but our hearts
and lives are no whit Reformed. Our high altars are taken down, but our high
minds are not taken down. The worship of God is purer, but the worshippers are
as impure as ever. We have no bowing to the name of Jesus, no bowing to Altars,
Images, and Crucifixes. There is less knee-Idolatry; but I fear me, we have
as much heart-Idolatry as ever, as much Covetousness, as much trusting to an
Arm of flesh as ever. And though our Idolatry be less, yet Adulteries, and
Fornications, were never more, I cannot say punished, but I must rather say,
Never more committed, and never less punished. Do not men boast of their
adulteries, and yet escape unpunished? It is a mercy of God, that scandalous
Ministers are thrust out of their livings. But I beseech you tell me, Is there
a Law to punish a scandalous Minister; and is there no Law to punish a
scandalous Gentleman, and a Lord also if he grow scandalous? Shall the
Cheap Side Cross be taken down (wherein you have done well;) and shall your
Cheapside iniquities, your Cheapside adulteries yet remain? It is a mercy,
that we are freed from the tyranny and cruelty of the High Commission, and
Star Chamber. But I am sure, there is as much complaint; I do not say, as just
complaint; but as much complaint, of oppression and injustice in the
Parliament-Committees in the Counties; as ever there was of the Star Chamber,
or High Commission.

We live in times wherein there was never more judging of others, and never
less judging of our selves. We live in the sadest days that ever England saw,
and yet what abundance of pride is there in apparel? what lustful fashions,
even in these bloody days? what security in sin, even whilst the Ship of
the Kingdom is sinking? What deadness of heart? What coldness and formality
in Gods worship? What unthankfulness? what unfruitfulnesse, etc. Indeed here
is much fasting, but little weeping. Never more murmuring, more censuring, and
never less reforming, then in these days, even in these days of Reformation.
And shall we not weep bitterly before the Lord this day for these sins? These
are the sins that divide a Nation from God. And if God once forsake a Nation,
it is left in a desperate condition. For as the Trojans when they lost their
Palladium, were presently vanquished: so when a Nation has lost Gods favor,
it sinks into ruin irrecoverably and presently.

2. For our divisions one from another.
But secondly, Let us mourn this day also for our Divisions one from another;
and first for our State-divisions, and then for our Church-divisions.

1. For the divisions of the Commonwealth.
First, Let us mourn for the Divisions of the Commonwealth. Is it not a sad
thing to see the Head rent from the Members; and that that Head that should be
a preserver of the Body, is now, by ill counsel, a destroyer of his Body?
that, that Head, that should be like a head of gold, is now, through ill
counsel, made a head of iron, to crush its own body in pieces? Oh! let us
mourn for this, this day.

And then let us mourn for the rent that is amongst the Members. Is if not a
sad thing to see the Members rent and torn one from the other? Nobleman
against Nobleman, Gentleman against Gentleman, Citizen against Citizen; Father
against Son, and Son against Father, etc. And that which England never saw
till this day, A pretended Oxford Parliament, against a true Westminster
Parliament?

And especially, Let us bemoane, and bewail the Divisions that are amongst our
selves here at home: That we that are all engaged in the same Cause, and in the
same Covenant, and that are under the same condemnation, under the unjust
charge of Rebellion, that there should be such differences, and such divisions
amongst us, even amongst us, whose heart does not bleed to think of it? That
though Hannibal ad portas, yet the Senators of Rome should be at difference
amongst themselves; the Lords should divide from the Commons, and the Commons
from the Lords, whilst the enemy is seeking to destroy both Lords and Commons?

2. Divisions in the Church.
But above all, let us bemoane the Divisions that are in the Church about
matters of Religion. For Eus. de vita Constantini. Dissensiones in Ecclesia
sunt horribiliores and perniciosiore* quovis bello Civil.
Constantine says well, That the dissentions of the Church are more terrible
and more pernicious then any Civil war. And these are exceedingly increased
amongst us especially in the famous City of London. One says, I am of Paul;
another says, I am of Apollos; a third says, I am of Cephas. Some are
Antinomians, that is, Patrons of free vice, under the mask of free grace. Some
are Anabaptists, that say, That the condition of an Infant of a believing
Parent, is as sad and miserable as the condition of an Infant of a Turk or
Infidel: and one of them was not ashamed to say, That it is as lawful to
Baptize a Cat or a Dog, as an Infant of a Christian Parent. Some are Brownists,
that say, That all our Ministry is Antichristian, and our Worship, and
Churches Antichristian. Some are of no Church at all, believing all Churches to
be falsely constituted, and therefore refuse to join with any Church in the
worship of God, and wait till God raise up Apostles to plant new Churches.
Some believe that the Soul dies with the body, and that both shall rise
again at the last day. Others begin to say, they believe that the Soul is
mortal, as well as the Body, and that there is no Resurrection, neither of
Soul or Body. Some plead for an illimited toleration of all Religions. It
would see me a wonder, if I should reckon how many separated Congregations, or
rather Segregations there are in the City: What Churches against Churches,
etc. But I forbear. The Lord knows, that I mention these things with a sad
heart, and that I do not hereby intend to exasperate your Lordships against
the persons that hold these opinions, above what the Word of God does clearly
require at your hands; or to uncover any nakedness of our Dear Mother that
was unknown before, but only to present before you our sad and miserable
condition; that thereby you may be quickened unto prayer, stirred up to
humiliation in a day of Fasting and Weeping, and also provoked to use all
Scripture helps for the suppression of these distractions.

The mischiefs that Church divisions (...).
For great and wonderful are the mischiefs that proceed from these
Church-divisions* Give me leave to mention a few of them.

First, Hereby Gods Name is exceedingly dishonored, and the true Religion ill
spoken of. Julian that cursed Apostate, railes against the Christians in his
days, and says of them, That they lived together as so many Dogs and Bears,
rending and tearing one another: and adds, Who then would be so simple as to
become a Christian? The very Heathen in their Interludes scoffed at the
divisions that were amongst the Christians (as the Histories of the Primitive
times inform us) to the great disgrace of Christian Religion. And I wish this
might not also be verified of our days.

Secondly, Hereby the happy Reformation that all good people expect and long
for, is much hindered. For as the building of Babel was hindered by the
confusion of Tongues, so is the building of Sion also. For every man drives his
own p ivate way of Reformation, and strives to hinder all other ways that are
opposite to his way. It is with us in England, as it was with the Suitors in
Plutarch, who because they could not all of them obtain the Virgin they sued
for, agreed to cut her in pieces, and every one to take a bit of her. We are
all Suitors for a Reformation, and because we cannot get such a one as may
please every man, hence come our Divisions; by which what do we else but agree
together to cut the Kingdom in pieces and every man to take his morsel?
Epiphanius Epiphan. here is. ^8.
tells a sad story of Meletius, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, both confessors
of the Christian faith, both of them condemned ad metalla, for their
profession, who upon a small difference fell into so great a Schism, that they
drew a partition between each other in the Prison, and would not held
communion in the same worship of Christ, for which notwithstanding they jointly
suffered; which dissension of theirs did cause such a rent and sect in the
members of the Church, that it did more hurt then any persecution of the
enemy. Just so is our condition: For we are here in London, and in the
Associated Counties, shut up as in a Prison, (for we dare not travel beyond
our line) and whilst we are in prison we draw partitions one from another, and
separate from one another, whilst we are all suffering for the same cause. And
this hinders Reformation more then all that the enemy can do to obstruct it.

Thirdly, Hereby the good cause we fight for is exceedingly disparaged. For do
we not hear the enemy boasting and saying, These are the men that cry down
Prelacy: you see they can agree in nothing but in Anarchie and confusion! Are
there not many that begin to grow weary of these wars, and cold in the
prosecution of the Parliaments most just cause, even for this very reason,
because they know not amongst so many Religions (as they call them) for what
Religion they fight?

Fourthly, Hereby the enemy is much encouraged. His hope of conquering is
built upon our Divisions. And therefore he does as Medea did, who when she fled
a way with Jason, and was pursued by her father, took her brother Absyrtus,
and cut him in pieces, and scattered him in the way that she fled in, that so
her father might be busied in taking up the scattered pieces of his son, and
she in the mean time fly securely a way. Even so do our enemies labor to
cut us in pieces by our divisions, (for the enemy has a chief stroke in our
divisions) that they in the mean time may securely study our ruin, while we
are gathering up our divided parties.

Fifthly, Hereby the hearts of people are mightily distracted, many are
hindered from conversion, and even the godly themselves have lost much of the
power of godliness in their lives. I say, The hearts of people mightily
disturbed, while one Minister preaches one thing as a truth of the Gospel, and
another Minister preaches the quite contrary with as much confidence as the
former. And thus, as Optatus says, Inter licet tuum and non licet meum nutant
and remigant animae Christianorum. While one Minister says I, and another
says No, the common peoples minds are mightily distracted. And many also are
hindered from conversion. For who will venture into a ship that is tossed with
contrary waves, and ready to sink? And even the godly themselves are much
decayed in the study and practice of faith and repentance, and of the power of
godliness. For all their time is so much taken up with unnecessary
disputations, as that they have little leisure to repent, and to study to
increase in holiness. Inter disputandum religio amittitur. The truth is, Here
is so much dispute about the government of Christ in our Churches, as that
there is little of Christ's government in our hearts or houses. So much dispute
about the gathering of Churches, as that there were never fewer gathered really
to the Church then in these our days.

Sixthly, By these divisions godly Ministers are mightily discouraged: in so
much as there are many that grow weary of their standings in Gods Church, and
begin to think of leaving their places, and of going to live in private, and
to shut themselves up in their Studies, (as Luther was once counseled) and to
cry, Domine miserere nostri.

Seventhly, Hereby a door is opened to all kind of Atheism: For do not our
profane men begin to say, We know not of what Religion to be, and therefore we
will be of no Religion. If we hold of such, others will condemn us, and if we
hold of them, others also will condemn us; and therefore we will rather stand
Neuters, and profess no Religion at all?

Eighthly, Hereby God is necessitated to prolong our wars: For all the
bloud-thirstie Cavaliers are but as so many Shepherds dogs sent out by God to
gather his sheep together. Gods people are now as sheep scattered one from the
other to the reproach of Religion, and dishonor of God; and God has sent the
enemy as his dog to call them all together, and till this be fully accomplished
these dogs will not be taken off.

Ninthly, These divisions open a wide door to the utter ruin and destruction
of the Kingdom. For they bring in deadly hatred above the hatred that is
caused by Civil dissentions; even such a hatred that bursteth asunder the very
bonds of nature it self, as Christ foretells, Ioh. 16. 2. They shall kill you,
and think they do therein God good service. What abominable hatred was there
between the Jew and the Samaritane; in so much as that the Woman of Samaria
wondered that Christ would ask a little water of her that was a Samaritane?
From this hatred follows, Excommunications, Anathematizations, etc. And from
thence to fire and faggot, and to as exquisite torments as the wit or malice of
men could invent. Witness the ten Persecutions. Witness the Spanish
Inquisition. Witness the Parisian Massacre of the Protestants upon Bartholomew
Eve. Witness Queen Mary's bloody days. Witness the Divisions of the Greek
Churches between the (...) and (...), and diverse others of that kind (Pezelius
reckons ten) which divisions first brought Pezel. mollisi^ hystor.
in the Saracens, and afterward the Turks, who are the great scourge of
Christendom to this day. These and many more are the mischiefs that arise
from our divisions about matters of Religion.

And therefore if there be any bowels of compassion in us toward a poor
bleeding, dying Kingdom, let us weep before the Lord this day; and wish that
our heads were fountains, that we might mourn continually for the Virgin
daughter of England. Let there be great thoughts of heart for the divisions of
our Reuben. It is reported of certain young debauched Gentlemen that Dr.
Stoughtons Sermons.
were swaggering in a Tavern in the Marketplace, while the City wherein they
dwelt was in great calamity; and one of them putting his head crowned with a
garland out of the window, was espied by the Magistrates of that City, whom
when they saw, they caused him to be beheaded because he was so insensible of
the public danger. A famous Story for our Times. The Lord make us more
apprehensive of Englands miseries in a spiritual way.

And let us also this day admire the mercy of God that we are not yet consumed
notwithstanding our manifold divisions. And let us expect certain ruin and
destruction, if these divisions continue. The word of Christ must be true. A
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. England is tottering, and it
will fall if these divisions last; and the fall thereof will be great. And
therefore let us prepare for desolation, and provide an Arc of safety for our
selves by faith in Jesus Christ: a Kingdom that cannot be shaken; an house
made without hands, eternal in the heavens.

If Divisions be so destructive to Kingdoms, Cities, and Families? This
reproves those that are the Authors and Fomenters of these Divisions that are
now amongst us. These are the Incendiaries Use 2.
of England. If he that sets one house on fire deserves hanging, much more they
that set a whole Kingdom on fire. If he that murders one man must be put to
death, much more he that murders three Kingdoms. Mark them (says the
Apostle, Romans 16. 17.) that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Avoid them as the greatest
enemies of England. These are like the Salamander that cannot live but in the
fire of contention. These are of a Jesuitical spirit. And no doubt the heads,
and hands of the Jesuits are in all our divisions. There are Seven things,
says Solomon, Prove. 6. 16. which are an abomination to the Lord: and the
seventh and last, and not the least, is he that sows discord among brethren;
but much more he that sows discord amongst three Kingdoms. And if it was a
sign of the false mother to desire to have the child divided; much more is it
a sign of an unnatural and cruel child to endeavor to divide his mother in
pieces.

Use of reprofe of the causers of our divisions.

1. Such as cause divisions between King and people.


More particularly here are two sorts to be reproved.

First, Such as sow divisions between the King and his people. That labor to
keep up and to increase the walls of partition between them. These are the
Sanballats and Tobiah's that tell the King that the Parliament are Rebels, that
they seek his life, and would uncrowne Him and his Posterity, and bring in
Anarchy and confusion. These are they that tell the King, (as Rhehum the
Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe wrote to Artaxerxes, concerning Jerusalem,
Ezra 4. 12.) that the City of London is a rebellious and bad City; hurtful
to Kings, and has always moved sedition, etc. These give the King this Motto,
divide et impera. But these are without my reach, and therefore I shall speak
no more of them.

2. Such as cause divisions at home.

1. Such as are false-hearted.


Secondly, and especially such Incendiaries and firebrarnds that kindle the
fire of contention amongst our selves at home: and these are of two sorts.

First, Such as are absolutely false-hearted, and have made their peace at
Oxford; and are here at Westminster only to cast in bones of contention, to
divide our counsels, and to work factions amongst us. These are men hardened
in sin, and there is little hope of reclaiming them. These build their houses
upon the blood of three Kingdoms. These are the Iudasses of England; and it
were just with God to give them the portion of Judas.

2. Such as are discontented.


Secondly, Such as are discontented, though not false-hearted; and through
discontent and dislike of the proceedings of Parliament do much hurt, and
create many factions amongst us. These discontented persons are like pieces of
soft wax, ready to carry any impression that the adverse party shall stamp
upon them. These are of three sorts. Three sorts of discontented persons.

1. Such as are discontented out of pride and covetousness.




First, Such as are discontented out of pride and covetousness, because they
cannot get those places of profit and honor which they expect; and because
they have not that credit and repute amongst the people that others have:
hereupon they come to dislike the public proceedings and to make parties and
factions. There were many such in the Primitive Church that turned Heretics,
because they could not obtain the preferment they stood for. These men seek
themselves and not the public. These are not Commonwealths men, but
Private-wealths men: These seek their own belly, and because they cannot have
a Cabin so richly furnished as they desire, therefore they endeavor to drown
the ship wherein their cabin is. These are like those that will set an house
on fire to roast an ^gge. Mark what the Apostle says of these, Romans 16. 18.
They that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and
by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

2. Such as are discontented out of a blind zeal.
A second sort are such as are discontented out of a blind zeal; such as
differ from us in opinion, and because they begin to perceive, that if matters
of Religion were once settled, their ways of worshipping God would be
discountenanced, therefore they labor to put all things into confusion, and to
hinder a settlement as much as they can; that so in the mean time, their
numbers may increase. For as Toads and Serpents grow in dark and dirtie
sellars, so do Sects, Errors, and Heresies grow in times of distraction and
confusion. These are the men that desire to fish in troubled waters, because
they can catch most fish in troubled waters. These are like unto Sanballat and
Tobiah, etc. who foresaw that if the Temple were once rebuilt, that then their
way of worship upon Mount Gerizin would be contemned, and therefore they
labored to cast bitter aspersions upon the workmen, they laid heavy things to
their charge, and used all kinds of Policy to obstruct the Temple-worke they
had in hand. Just so do these men cast bitter aspersions upon the Assembly of
Ministers, and upon every Parliament man that opposes their way, and labor by
all means to hinder their proceedings; because they foresee that if by their
advise, matters of Religion were once established, their ways and opinions
would be presently disgusted. It is very observable, that all the several
Sects amongst us, though they differ one from another, yet they all agree
together in their opposition against the Assembly of Ministers as their
greatest enemies. Just as we read in the 83 Psalm, of ten Nations, differing
one from another in Religion, Place and Customs, Nice. lib. 8. cap. 46.
and yet all of them confederating against the people of God. Nicephorus tells
us, that the Meletiani and Ariani, did at first much disagree, not only in
opinions, but in affections; but afterward when they saw the Orthodoxe party
increase so mightily, as that it was likely to swallow both of them up, they
joined together in a firm league to oppose the Orthodox Party (though still
differing one from the other) insomuch that in process of time, the Meletiani
were called Ariani, and the Ariani, Meletiani. So also Lib. 12. cap. 8.
in Africa. The Rogatianist, Maximinianists, and Donatists joined together as
Sampsons Foxes not in one Opinion, but in a league of friendship for a while,
that they might make up the greater number against the Orthodox Party. And is
not this the practice of our times? Do not Anabaptists, Brownists,
Antinomians, agree together in opposing the Assembly of Ministers, and in
Independency from all superior Ecclesiastical Government, without the bounds
of a particular Congregation.

Such as are discontented by way of revenge.
A third sort are such as are discontented, and thereupon disturb our Peace by
way of revenge; that lie under Iealousies and Suspicions (whether just or
unjust I dispute not) and cannot regaine their credit, and therefore labor to
cast a blame upon all others, and bring as many as they can into the same
condemnation with themselves. Just like the Fox in the Fable, that had his
tail cut off, and therefore persuaded all other Foxes to cut off their tails,
telling them it was an uncomely thing for a Fox to have a tail. Even so do
these men. Because they lie under suspicion themselves, therefore they would
persuade others also, that they are under the like suspicion, that thereby they
might make them discontented, as they themselves are. And thereby the building
of the Temple is much hindered, public affairs disturbed, and the poor Ship
of England ready to sink under the burden.

Now all these sorts of men are sharply to be reproved, every man according to
his degree of guiltiness. These are the Devils Agents. For it is the proper
work of the Devil to divide God from men, men from God, and one man from
another. And as it is a work of the Devil, so it will bring us to the Devil,
if we repent not of it.

Use 3.
If Divisions be so fatal and destructure to Kingdoms, Cities, and Families.
Oh let us all be entreated according to our several places, to contribute what
help we can possible to the healing of our Divisions, and to the bringing in
Peace, Love, Unity and Concord amongst us. Oh that God would make me his
instrument this day, to raise up your hearts to the obedience of this duty.

Exhortations to unity and peace.

And first with the Kings Majesty.


First, Let us labor to be at Peace with the Kings Majesty, as far as is
possible, and may be obtained, salva conscientia. Let us not only pray for
Peace, but follow after Peace, and if it flies from us, let us pursue it. I
remember what I have read of Calvin, that he should say; That he would
willingly travel over many Seas, to see one Uniform draught of Religion,
wherein all Protestants might agree. And who would not willingly sacrifice up
his life to the fire to see King and Parliament thoroughly agreed? To see a
Holy, Safe, and well-grounded Peace made? I say, a Holy well*grounded Peace.
For there are some amongst us, that are like the Gadarens, that prefer their
Hogs before Christ and his Cause; that wish more for the settlement of their
Trading, then of their Religion. These are Swines not Christians. There are
others as bad that desire a Peace upon any terms, though with the loss of
Liberty and Religion. Just like the Israelites, that would needs have Quails.
But while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them.
He that desires Peace without respect to Religion, the plague of God will go
along with that Peace. There is a double Peace.

A double Peace.

1. A treacherous Peace.


First, A treacherous Peace. Such as shall betray us into Popery, Tyranny, and
slavery; Such as was made with the Protestants in France, a London*massacring
Peace. Such as the Israelites made with the Cananites, which was a perpetual
thorn and snare unto them. Such as Ahab made with Benhadad. This is a
Land-devouring, and a Religion-destroying Peace. This is to betray Christ as
Judas did with a kiss of Peace.

2. A holy and safe Peace.
Secondly, A holy, safe, well-grounded Peace. And Cursed is the man that is an
enemy to such a Peace. My prayer is; That God would make our King a
Melchisedeck, who was King of Righteousness, and King of Peace. That
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other in his days. That this may be
added upon the Kings Coin. Henricus Rosas, Regna Jacobus, Populum Carolus. And
here let me crave leave humbly to beseech your Lordships, that in this Treaty
that is shortly to begin, you would make Religion your Jewel, and Peace as
your golden ring, on which it may be put. To make Peace your box of
Alablaster. And Reformation the precious ointment within it. To make Peace as
the gold, and Religion as the Temple that sanctifies the Gold. Happy is the
people that is in such a case. Happy England if once it comes to sing the
Angels Song. Glory be to God on high, in earth Peace.

And yet let me forewarne you also, not to trust too much to Treaties, and
overtures of Peace, David had a son whose name he called Absalom, which in
Hebrew signifies a Father of Peace* David promised to himself great felicity
in that child. But he proved a Father of war and misery to his Father. Say
not. This Treaty will be an Absalom, for fear it prove an Absalom in a
contrary sense as Absalom himself did. It is very fatal, that in the midst of
our Treaties, there have always been great Plots to destroy us, as we see
verified at this day.

2. One with another.
Secondly, But that which I especially aim at this day, is to persuade you
that are here present, to be at peace and unity amongst your selves, and to
join together against the Common enemy. But most of all you that are Earls,
Lords, and Gentlemen of rank and quality. For the greater the persons are
that disagree, the more is the hurt that is done by their disagreement. As in a
House, if the Master and Mistress agree the house will stand and subsist,
though the inferior servants fall out one with the other. So if the Lords and
Commons unite together the City and Kingdom will stand, though there should
be many divisions amongst the Common people. And therefore it is your duty
above others (Right Honorable) to follow after those things that make for
(...).
Peace, Unity and Concord, to be ambitious of Peace as you are exhorted, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. to speak the truth in love. (...).
Ephesians. 4. 15. and to love in the truth. (...).
2 Epist. of John verse 2.

Now that your hearts and affections may be fully wrought up, to make it your
chief design to practice this duty. I shall use these ensuing Motives and
Arguments.

First, Consider how Pathetically and Emphatically, the holy Apostle persuades
all Gods people to the practice of this duty. I Motives and Arguments to
persuade us to study unity and peace.
will name but two Texts. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be
no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment, Phil. 2. 1, 2. If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit,
if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind, etc.

Secondly, Consider what excellent Arguments the Apostle uses, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4,
5, 6. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. There
is one body, and one spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your
calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God, etc. These are omnipotent
Arguments. If one God, and one Lord, and one body, etc. Shall not his children
be one? And afterward, verse. 11, 12, 13. the Apostle tells us. That when Christ
ascended up to Heaven, he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, etc.
Till we all come to the unity of the faith, etc. Christ's intendment in
appointing a Ministry in his Church was not only to bring his people to
verity, but also to the unity of the faith. This is the great work of a
Minister, to bring his people to unity as well as verity.

Thirdly, Consider what a horrible sin it is to divide one from another, and
to be at hatred and variance one with another. This is a work of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. where it is observable that the Apostle reckons up seven
synonymicall expressions to set out the greatness of this sin. The works of
the flesh are hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, envyings;
of the which I told you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. This sin alone
unrepented on will shut a man out of heaven. Therefore it is said, Revel. 22.
15. without are dogs. This sin alone makes thee unsit to come to the
Sacrament, Mat. 5. 23. This sin alone makes God abhor our Fasting-dayes,
Isa. 58. 4. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, etc. This sin alone turns
our prayers into curses: For when thou prayest unto God, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, if thou be in malice
and hatred with thy brother, thou prayest unto God not to forgive thee thy
trespasses. Notable is the speech of Cyprian, Peius est seindere Ecclesiam quam
sacrificare Idolo, Schism in the Church is a greater sin then Idolatry.
Austin says, it is a greater sin then heresy. And this (says he) God
himself declared when he punished Corah and his company that were
Schismatiques with a greater punishment then ever he punished Idolaters or
Heretics: Quis iam dubitaverit hoc esse scelaratius commissum, quod est
gravius vindicatum.

Fourthly, Consider the woeful mischiefs that are brought into Church and
State by these our divisions. If all the Jesuits in the Christian world; If
all the Devils in hell should join together, to devise a way to undo the
Parliament, and the good Cause they manage, they could not invent a readier way
then by dividing you one from another at this time. This makes you to fight
against your selves, to murder your selves; your Cause, your Religion, and to
murder all that adhere unto you. Hereby God is dishonored, Reformation
hindered, Religion discredited, the good Cause disliked, the Enemy
strengthened; You are weakened, your Counsels disturbed, the War prolonged,
the Power of godliness abated, etc. as has been formerly mentioned. Hereby
we are all tantum non, destroyed, and destroyed we must be if our breaches be
not made up. For if we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one
of another, Gal. 5. 15. Famous is the Story Live. Decad. 1.
of Menenius Agrippa, who, when the people of Rome had divided themselver from
the Senate of Rome, came to the people and told them an Apologue of the members
of the body, how they did once conspire together against the belly, because
that the belly did live idly, and devour all the meat that the hands did
work forand feet walk for, etc. And therefore they agreed together to starve
the belly. The hands refused to work for to feed it; the mouth refused to take
in meat; the feet refused to go to fetch it, etc. But within a very little
while the members of the body saw their error: for the feet began to grow
feeble and unable to walk; the hands grew weak; the whole man sick: and then
they understood that the belly was not idle; but that it conveyed the
nourishment it received to every part of the body: and hereupon they all agreed
to join together to provide for the belly as well as for themselves. This
Fable reconciled the people, and Senators of Rome. This Fable teaches us, That
divisions in the body natural, and so also in the body politic, are
ruinating and destructive to the body.

And the truth is, All the hope the enemy has, is in our divisions; herein he
boasts, and glories: There is nothing that strengthens their designs at
Oxford so much: nothing that puts so much courage and resolution into the
hearts of our Adversaries, as the Divisions that are amongst us.

This is the argument Melancton used to persuade the divided Protestants of his
time to peace and unity; and he illustrateth his argument by a notable parable
of the Wolves and the Dogs, who were marching on-ward to fight one against
another. The Wolves that they might know the strength of their adversary, sent
forth a Master-Wolfe as their Scout: The Scout returns and tells the Wolves,
That indeed the Dogs were more in number, but yet they should not be
discouraged: For he observed, That the Dogs were not one like another; a few
mastives there were; but the most were little curres, which could only bark
but not bite, and would be afraid of their own shadow. Another thing also he
observed which should much encourage them, and that was, That the Dogs did
march as if they were more offended with themselves then with us; not keeping
their ranks, but grinning, and snarling, and biting; and sometimes tearing each
other, as if they would save us a labor. And therefore let us march on
resolutely, for our enemies, are their own enemies; enemies to themselves, and
their own peace; they bite and devour each other, and therefore we shall
certainly devour them. I need not make any Application of this Parable. There
is nothing that more heartens our enemies, and disheartens our friends, then
our Divisions.

Fourthly, Consider the great happiness that would accrue to Church and State,
if we were united together against the Common Enemy. If all the Saints upon
earth, and Angels in heaven should study to find out a way to save England from
ruin, they could not find out a readier way, then by uniting us together at
this time. England is an Island divided from all the world; and if it were not
divided within it self, it need not fear all the world. If London were as a
City at unity within it self, what could destroy it? Did we all do as the
Israelites did, Judge. 20. 8. They all arose as one man, etc. and as Joshua 23.
12. how quickly would these wars (through Gods blessing) be at end? What an
honor would it be to the Cause we fight for; to the Reformation we pray for;
the Religion we profess; to the God we worship, if we did with united strength
pursue these things? How should we support and help one another, et portantem
portare, as the Cranes do one another in the manner of their flying. I must not
here forget to mind you of that known story of Scillurus that had eighty
sons, and when he was dying he called them all before him, and presented them
with a bundle of spears, and bad them try whether they could break that
bundle; and they tried, but were not able. Afterward he pulls out one javelin
out of the bundle, and bade them break that, which they easily did; and so a
second, and a third, till they had broken them all. Intimating thereby, that
unity in Families, and compacted strength is the bond that preserves the whole
Family; and wheresoever this bond is broken, that Family is quickly destroyed.
The like story does Salust tell of one Micypsa, who when he was dying called
his sons and caused them to write this sentence in Golden letters: Concordia
parvae res crescunt, discordia magnae dilabuntur. Oh that God would give us
hearts to spiritualize these stories!

Fifthly, Consider the late National Covenant you have taken, wherein you have
lifted up your hands to the most High God, and have sworn to study unity and
conformity in Religion, etc. And to endeavor according to your places, to
extirpate Heresy, Schism, etc. I know not how it is come to pass, but sure I
am, our divisions are greater since we took this Covenant then before. And sure
I am that God will call us to a strict account for this grievous sin of
Perjury. And if ever England perish by these wars, this shall be Englands
Motto: Here lies a Nation that has broken Covenant with God, and therefore is
this great evil come upon her. And therefore I beseech you, be mindful of
your Covenant; and remember it is not the taking, but the keeping of Covenant
that prevails with God. And if he shall be shut out of heaven that keeps not
his promise, though it be to his hurt, Psalm. 15. 4. much more he that keeps not
his oath, when it is for his good.

Sixthly, Consider further, That our enemies that fight against us agree
together: Herod and Pilate are made friends, and join together to put Christ
to death. The Herodians and the Pharisees, though dissenting one from another,
yet both agree against Christ, Mar. 1^. 13. The Herodians were Courtiers, and
sought to bring in Tyranny; the Pharisees were popular, and sought to maintain
the peoples liberties; and yet they both joined together against Christ. thus
did the Sadduces and Pharisees also. Thus Act. 17. 18. The Epicures and
Stoiques combine against Paul. Shall Judas conspire with the Pharisees and
Sadduces to betray Christ? and shall the Disciples of Christ fall out amongst
themselves? Shall Paul and Barnabas divide one from another? God forbid! Shall
the Irish Rebels, the Oxford Lords and Gentlemen, the English Papists, and the
English Bishops: The Protestants at large, and the seduced people all agree
together like Sampsons Foxes with firebrands at their tails to burn three
Kingdoms? And shall not we agree together to save three Kingdoms? Shall the
Lions, Bearee, Tigers, Wolves, Lambs and Sheep, etc. that were shut up in the
Arc, agree together while they were in the Arc? (for we do not read that
they did hurt one another all that while) And shall not we that are shut up
here, in London, and in a few associated Counties as in an Arc, agree together
to preserve one another from a Deluge of Waters that is drowning us all* though
we should differ in some few things one from another?

Seventhly, Consider the very Heathen how careful they have been to maintain
unity and peace in times of public danger, and how careful to lay aside all
private quarrels. I will instance only in the speech of Aristides to
Themistocles. Plutarch tells us, that from their very childhoods they did differ
one from the other, and never could agree. But when a common enemy came against
them, then Aristides comes by night to Themistocles, and says unto him, Si
sapimus, omissa tandem iuvenili et inani concertatione, contentionem de
servanda Graecia salubrem honestamque suscipiamus, etc. Let us leave all
youthly contentions, and tend unanimously to the public good. Oh that this
counsel might take impression in the hearts of us Christians at this time.

Eighthly, Consider further, how that the very Devils in hell agree to promote
their own kingdom. If Satan be divided against Satan (says Christ) how can
his Kngdome stand? And my Text is brought (as I have said) as an argument to
prove that Christ did not cast out Devils by the power of Beelzebub, because
then Satan should be divided against himself, and seek his own ruin which he
will never do. There is peace amongst the Devils in hell. And certainly there
cannot be better Music to the Devils in hell, then to see the Parliament
divided against it self; and the City divided against it self; and the Godly
Ministers divided against themselves at such a time as this is.

Ninthly, and especially, (...) Lord Jesus Christ who is the Great Peacemaker,
who came into the world when all the world was at peace; at whose birth the
Angels sang, Glory to God on high, and in earth peace: who when he was dying
left a Legasie of peace to his people, and gave his Disciples a New
Commandment, to love one another: (which was therefore called a New
Commandment, because it was enforced with a new example; even the example of
Christ's love to us) Who when he made that admirable Prayer, John 17. the chief
part of it was, that God would make his children one, as he and the Father were
one. And he gives the reason of it, verse. 21. That the world may believe that
then have sent me. The world will not believe in Christ when they see
Christians disagree. Nothing hinders men from believing in Christ more then the
differences and divisions of those that do believe in Christ. It is an
excellent observation of Athanasius: That the very manner of Christ's death does
preach the Doctrine of Unity and love to Christians. For Christ was not sawen
asunder as the Prophet Isaiah was. He was not beheaded as John Baptist was.
There was not a bone of his broken, nor any whit of his garment rent or torn.
And all this to teach Christians (says he) to be at unity within themselves.
Was not a bone of Christ broken upon the Cross, and shall all his members
break in pieces now he is in heaven? Was his garment kept whole, and shall his
body be rent and torn in pieces? This is Paul's Argument to persuade the
divided Corinthians to Peace and Unity, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Is Christ divided? And
why are Christians divided if Christ were not divided? Why does one say, I am
of Paul; another, I am of Apollo; another, I am of Cephas, etc. And therefore
if you be Christians live in love and unity, as the Disciples of Jesus Christ,
that so the world may believe in Christ.

Oh that these Motives might take deep rooting in your affections: And that
every one in his place would labor after Peace and Unity. That you that are
Magistrates and Justices, would bind your selves to the peace! It is no
discredit in this sense to be bound to the peace. You are called Justices of
the Peace, not because you should hold your peace when God would have you to
speak; but because it is your duty to make peace, and to keep peace. Let all
godly Ministers preach up the duty of brotherly love, which is quite forgotten
amongst most Christians. It is a duty quite dead and buried; let us labor
that it may have a speedy resurrection. The Apostle says, 1 These. 4. 9. As
touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you etc. But we
Ministers, now a days, need to write and preach of no duty more then this. And
then let all Ministers and people, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and give
the Lord no rest until he make England and Ireland, a praise in the earth. Let
us pray for peace, and fight for peace, and contribute our money willingly for
a peace. For indeed, all our fighting, and all our vast expenses, are but as
ways and means to a safe and well grounded peace. Let us fight for peace,
with peace one toward another. And let us not complain and murmur at the
greatness of our contributions; but remember the story of the old covetous
Miser that hung himself to save charges; and his man coming in unawares and
seeing his Master a hanging, cut the rope in pieces and thereby saved his
Masters life. The Master being recovered, instead of thanking his man, fell a
chiding of him because he cut the rope in pieces, and so did put him to the
charges of a new rope: whereas he should rather have untied it, then cut it.
This man, you will say, did little deserve to have his life saved. Just such is
our condition. Our cruel enemies are ready to devour and destroy us. All that
the Parliament does, is to cut the rope in pieces with which they would hang
us. And if we be put to more then ordinary charge, let us not grumble at those
expenses which are the preservation of our lives. That man is unworthy to live,
that murmurs to lay out a little money to save his life.

But here I must put in three Caveats, and beseech you in the first place, to
remember that when I speak so much for unity, I would also have you to
remember that Vnum and verum convertuntur. That unity without veriy, is not a
true peace, but a conspiracy. Omnis concordia in veritate. Unity joined with
falsehood is execrable adultery, says Cyprian. When unity and falsehood are
married together, it is no lawful marriage, but execrable adultery. If I
cannot have peace with men, but I must lose my peace with God; farewell peace
with men that I may keep my peace with God. One great reason why we have so
little peace upon earth, is because we seek after it more then after the glory
of God in heaven.

You will must remember in the second place, that this Unity that we must
labor after, must be in a Scripture way. The Primitive Church for Unity sake,
and to prevent Schisms, set up one Presbyter as a Bishop to rule over the rest
with Maiority of power in Jurisdiction and Ordination. But this at best was but
a humane invention, and it proved an increaser of Schism and Division. The
Papists set up the Pope to preserve unity: But he is the greatest Apple of
strife the Christian world has. It will be our care to study to promote a
unity in such a way which the Scriptures hold forth, and this will prosper.

You must also remember in the third place, that our unity, peace, and love,
as it must be in the truth, so it must be in truth. It must be cordial and
real. Oh, that I could once see all Gods people of one lip, as it was before
the confusion of Tongues, Genesis 11. 1. That this might be the Motto of Gods
people in England: Cor unum, via una, One heart, and one way. That they that
shall sing one and the same Song in heaven, may agree in the same way of
worship here upon earth. Excellent was that speech of Grynaeus, when he was
dying: I am now going (said he) to a place (meaning heaven) ubi Lutherus
Calvino been convenit: where Luther and Calvin agree well together. Shall we
agree well in heaven, and shall we not agree together upon earth? God forbid.
Let us always remember that speech of Joseph his brethren when they were going
home to their Father, Gen 45. 29. See that you fall not out by the way. We are
all pilgrims, traveling toward our heavenly Canaan, to one and the same God
and Father. Oh let us not fall out by the way. And let the two Arguments that
Abraham used to Lot, Genesis 13. 7, 8. mightily prevail with us, to make us more
ambitious of unity, peace, and concord, then ever yet we have been. Let there
be no strife between me and thee, etc. for we are brethren, and the Canaanite
is in the Land. These are two golden allurements: the Lord make them
effectual! I had almost forgotten David's Arguments in the 133. Psalm. Behold,
how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to live together in unity. The
word Behold, is prefixed that so the commendation might take the deeper
impression. Many things are good which are not pleasant, and many things
pleasant, which are not good; but it is both good and pleasant for brethren to
dwell together in unity. It is like Aarons precious ointment that went down
to the skirts of his garments, etc. It is a communicative mercy that perfumeth
whole Kingdoms with blessings. It is like the dew of Hermon, etc. It makes
barren Lands fruitful. It is like the dew upon the mountains of Sion, where
the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Object. 1. Means and helps for the procurement of unity and peace.

Answ.


But you will say, Here are Motives and Arguments sufficient to persuade any
man to the practice of this blessed grace. Let us hear some helps and means
to procure this great mercy, that so our Divisions may be healed; and peace,
unity, and concord may dwell in our Land.

This is a work worthy of a God, and none but a God can do it.

It is with us in England, as it was with the women that went early in the
morning to the Sepulcher, and there they found a great stone, and they said,
Who shall roll away this stone? for it is very great. Mar. 16. 3, 4. And
behold, there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.
This is our condition. There is a great Mountain of Division that obstructs
the happiness of England, and that hinders the Lord Christ and his Kingdom
from rising out of the grave of superstition. But who now shall roll away this
great stone from the door of the Sepulcher? I fear it will cost an
earthquake before it be removed. Oh that we had faith to remove Mountains! Oh
that God would send his Angel to roll away this stone! That God would make the
Assembly of Ministers his Angels to take away this great Mountain, that so
there may be a Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and his pure worship in all its
glory and beauty even in our days! The story of Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 10. 12.
will very well suit with our times: We are in a very great straight as he was;
and what he did, and said, will very well be fit us. Let us go to God by
prayer, and say. Oh our God, we have no might against this great company that
comes against us. We have no strength to heal our Divisions in the Church,
and in the State, they are so great and so many. We know not what to do, but
our eyes are upon thee. Thou that did find out a way hid from ages and
generations, Col. 1. 26. A way hid from Angels and Archangels, hid within thy
self, Ephesians. 3. 9. To save poor undone, fallen, lost man, even by Jesus
Christ. Oh find out a way to reconcile King and Parliament, to unite thy
divided people in the truth! Oh blessed Jesus that came into the world to
break down the middle wall of partition between Jew and Gentile; that art
the great Peacemaker, make up our wide and great breaches, and take away the
many walls of partition that divide us one from another. After this manner we
must wrestle with God in prayer, and watch thereunto with all perseverance.

But besides this general help by Prayer; give me leave to name a few other
which are more particular.

1. Help.
First, Let us labor to make our peace with God, and God will make us at peace
one with another. Tranquillus Deus tranquillut omnia. If God be at peace with
thee, he will make the very stones in the street to be at peace with thee; he
will make peace flow down like a river, and like a mighty stream. When a man's
ways please God, he will even make his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove.
16. 7. You shall find in Scripture, that when a Church, State, or person
divided it self from God by sin, God suffered it as a punishment to be
divided from it self by faction. As Soon as ever Solomon had forsaken God by
Idolatry, God presently divided his Kingdom from him. And God threateneth
Ierem. 13. 13. That because his people had forsaken him, that therefore he
would fill the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with drunkenness, and he would dash
them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, he would
not pity, etc. You shall find also that when a King and Kingdom returned to
God, then they had peace, and flourished in all outward happiness, 2 Chronicles*
15* 3* 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13, 19. 2 Chronicles. 17. 3, 5, 6. 10* And therefore if ever
you would cure Englands distractions to purpose; strike at the root and cause
of our divisions. Let us labor to find out all those sins that separate
between us and God; And when you have found them out, you must not deal with
them as the Parliament does with their prisoners which they take, using them
more kindly and courteously then they were used before they were prisoners: nor
as David would have his son Absalom, concerning whom he gave a strict charge,
that they should use him kindly for his sake: but you must do as the Oxford
men do with our prisoners, use them cruelly. Do as Joshua did with the five
Kings whom first he kept up close prisoners in a Cave, and afterward sent for
them, and trod upon their necks, and hung them up before the Lord. Thus must we
deal with our sins, and then we shall have peace. For as the lines in a
circumference that are drawn to the Center, the nearer they are to the Center,
the nearer they are one to another: So the nearer any men come to God in
similitude and likeness, the nearer they will be joined one to another in
unity and love. For if any may say he loves God and hates his brother, he is
a lier. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he
that loves God, love his brother also, 1 Ioh. 4. 20, 21.

Secondly, Take heed of the Land-destroying Opinion of those that plead for an
illimited toleration of all Religions, even of Turkisme, Iudaisme, etc. The
Lord keep us from being poisoned with such an Error! This Text rises up
against it. For it will divide a Kingdom against it self. It will rend it
into a thousand pieces. It it a Doctrine directly contrary to your late Oath
and Covenant. A Doctrine that overthrows all Church Government, brings in
confusion, and opens a wide door unto all irreligion and Atheisms. For at
the same door tha all false religious come in, the true Religion will quickly
get out. And if it be as good for a man to live where nothing is lawful, as
where all things are lawful: surely it is every way as uncomfortable to live
where there are all Religions, as where there is no Religion at all.

Thirdly, To heal our Divisions, we must labor to be clothed with the
garment of humility: For only by pride (says the Wiseman) comes contention,
Prove. 13. 10. Now there is a double humility we must be clothed withal;
humility of judgment, and humility of heart. First, humility of judgment,
to think that others may know the truth as well as our selves; to have a low
esteem of our own understanding: For he that thinks he knows any thing,
he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. And if any man teach
otherwise, etc. says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 9. He is proud knowing nothing,
etc. And therefore let us not be wise in our own eyes, nor lean to our own
understandings, Prove. 3. 5. 4. Secondly, humility of heart. An humble heart is
a peaceable quiet heart. An humble heart will be sensible of the least sin,
much more of this great sin to distract and destroy the peace of three
Kingdoms by unnecessary disputations.

Fourthly, Labor for grace to contemn the world and all worldly things. For
many times divisions arise out of base Covetousness. It was the love of the
world that divided Demas from Paul. And therefore it is said, 1 Timothy 3. 3. That
a Minister must not be greedy of filthy lucre; and as if that were not
sufficient; he adds nor covetous. And therefore if you would live in unity
and peace; Take heed and beware of covetousness.

Fifthly, Pray for the spirit of meekness, patience, long-sufferance; and for
mortified affections. It is one of the Ingredients required in a Minister, that
he should be one That is not soon angry, Titus 1. 7. and one that is patient,
no striker, no brawler, 1 Timothy 3. 3 Meekness, and Patience, and Mortification,
are necessary Ingredients into that Medicine that must cure our divided
Kingdom. For an angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgressions. Prove. 29. 22. Unmortified affections are the cause of much
disturbance in Families and Cities. And therefore Christ says, Mar. 9. 50.
Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. This salt is the
salt of Mortification. We must labor to have our anger mortified; our love of
the world mortified; our pride mortified; and this will be a notable means to
make us at peace one with another. As in the Old Law, every sacrifice was to be
seasoned with salt: So let every man pray for This salt within himself to
season his unmortified affections, and this will keep him from putrefying in
malice, envy, hatred, etc.

Sixthly, Let all thy private aims be swallowed up in the public good. Let
the Cause of Jesus Christ and his Church be dearer to thee then thine own
life; and this frame of spirit will exceedingly incline thee to all lawful
ways of peace and unity. Remember Old Ely, and how his heart trembled for the
Ark of God, 1 Samuel 4. 13. 18. He trembled not for the thought of his children,
but for the Arc; and as soon as ever mention was made of the taking of the
Arc, he fell down and brake his neck: he was not troubled at the mention of
the death of his two sons, etc. The like we read of his daughter in law, 1 Samuel 4. 19, 10, 21, 22. The like of Nehemiah who was in great prosperity
himself, and yet how was he distressed in spirit for the miseries of
Jerusalem, Nehem. 1. 4. The like we read of Daniel, etc.

Seventhly, We must nip Divisions in the bud, and quench the fire of Contention
at the beginning. That fire is easily quenched at first, which when it has
once taken possession is not to be quenched. The Lord grant it be not laid to
our charge, that we have suffered Englands distractions to grow to such a
height, and have not labored in our several places to compose and quiet them.

Eighthly, Let us yield one to another for peace sake. Famous is the example of
Abraham, and worthy of all imitation, who yielded his right up to Lot, who was
his younger and inferior, for peace sake, Genesis 13. 9. If thou will take the
left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou departest to the right
hand, then I will go to the left.

Ninthly, Take heed of groundless iealousies and suspicious one of another.
This is Englands great sin, and the chief cause of many distempers amongst
us. We are like unto the children of Israel, who when they came first out of
Egypt did almost deifie Moses and Aaron, But afterward, as soon as ever they
began to meet with straights and difficulties, they began presently to murmur
against them, and to call their fidelity into question; and to accuse them, as
if they had a design to bring them into the Wilderness to destroy them, Exodus
16. 2, 3. Just so do we. When our Armies for our sins are justly punished
with ill success, instead of reflecting upon our sins, to be troubled for
them; we fall a murmuring against our Chief Commanders, and question their
fidelity; as if they had a design to betray us into the enemies hand. I do
not speak this as if I would countenance any Commander that is guilty; or
hinder just complaints of, and inquiries after those that are guilty; or the
use of just means to be rid of such. But all that I say is: That to fasten
unjust suspicions, and groundless iealousies, upon those that venture their
lives and estates in the common cause, is to be guilty of Robbery and Murder:
it is to steal away and murder their good names, which is as precious as life
it self: and it is a sin that God will not pardon unless the party that is
guilty endeavor to make restitution of his good name, which is a work not
easy to be done. For a man's good name is like a white piece of paper, which if
once blotted it will be hard to wipe out that blot so as to leave no print of
it behind. A man's good name is like a Merchants estate which is long in
getting, but is lost in a minute: and when it is lost in the bottom of the
Sea, how shall it ever be recovered again? So is a man's good name. But yet God
will accept of our endeavors to make restitution if faithful and industrious.

Tenthly, To heal our Divisions, we must make conscience to silence all our
private Opinions, and differences. Have thou faith? (says the Apostle, Romans
14. 22.) have it to thy self before God. Do not disturb the Church of God at
this time with thy private faith. Indeed if it be a matter absolutely necessary
to salvation, it is charity to acquaint the Church of God with it: but if we
can be saved without it, this is not a fit time to broach any new Opinion. For
as Elisha said to Gehezi, 2 King. 5. 26. Is this a time to receive money? etc.
So say I: Is this a time to trouble England with New Opinions? Aulus Gellius
tells us of certain men that were in a Ship ready to perish by reason of a
great Tempest, and one of them being a Philosopher, fell a asking of many
trifling Questions: to whom they answered: (...); We are perishing, and do
thou trifle? So say I; Is England a perishing, and is this a time to trouble it
with unnecessary disputations? I doubt not but there will a time come wherein
every man's own opinion shall be heard: but this is a time wherein we should
all unite against the Common Enemy that seeks to devour us all. For my part,
I do here openly profess, That if I had an opinion disagreeing from that way
of Reformation which is likely to be set up, and did see that the publishing of
it would disturb the peace of the Kingdom, I would do with it as the
Mariners did with Jonah, I would cast it into the sea rather then increase the
Tempest by my opinion; especially at such a time as this is. And I doubt not
but every honest man will do the like.

Lastly, It is your duty (Right Honorable) whom God has betrusted with great
power, to suppress these divisions and differences in Religion by your Civil
Authority, as far as you are able, lest you be accessory unto them. For God
has made you Custodes utriusque tabulae, Keepers not of the second Table
only, (as some fondly imagine) but of the first Table also, and not only
Keepers, but Vindices utriusque Tabulae, Punishers also of those that
transgress against either of them. For you are the Ministers of God for good,
and Revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans 13. 4. And God
has deputed you for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. 1 Pet. 2. 19. There are some that would blot out half your
Commission, and restrain this Good and evil to civil good and to evils only
against men. But this is against that general Rule, Non est distinguendum ubi
lex non distinguit. Where the Law does not distinguish, there must not we
distinguish. Tell me I beseech you, Shall it be lawful for Magistrates to
punish those that destroy men's bodies, but not those that destroy men's souls?
Shall they be blamed for suffering men to draw people away from obedience to
the Laws of the Land and to themselves, and not also for suffering men to draw
away people from the truth of the Gospel, and from the ways of God, such as
Hymenaeus and Philetus, who overthrow the faith of some, and their words eat
as a Canker? Shall Christian Magistrates take up the Maxim of Tiberius, Deorum
iniurias Diis curae esse? Let God himself take care to vindicate himself from
injuries committed against God? As for me, I will (just like Gallio) take care
of none of these things. Can Christian ears endure such language? Does not God
prophecy, Isaiah 49. 23. That in the New Testament Kings shall be our nursing
Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers? And how can a Christian Magistrate
discharge that duty aright if he has not power from God to punish those that
would poison the souls of his weak children with heresies, and
soul-destroying opinions? I do not deny, but that there is great wisdom to be
observed by Magistrates in distinguishing between persons and persons, between
errors and errors. Some persons are pious and peaceable, others turbulent and
furious. Some errors are such, as subvert the faith, and destroy the power of
Godliness: others are of a lesser nature, which may consist with the power of
Godliness, and with an unity in the faith. But that which I now speak
against, is that unbounded Bloody Tenent. The Good Samaritan. John Baptist.
liberty that is pleaded for in diverse books lately written, which hold forth
this prodigious Tenent. That every man is to be suffered to have the liberty
of his conscience, be it never so Heretical or Idolatricall. This overthrows
all the power of the Magistrate in punishing heresy, blasphemy, Idolatry, and
is contrary to many plain Texts of the 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. 2 Chro. 34. 32. Ezra
10. 8. Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 6. 2 King. 23. 1.
Old Testament, and to those of the New Testament above mentioned.

Object. Will you allow the Magistrate to Tyrannize over men's consciences.

Answ. By no means. But I believe it is the Duty of Magistrates to keep men
from infecting their Subjects with soule-destroying errors. If thou have an
Heretical opinion, have it to thy self, and the Magistrate will not; nay,
cannot meddle with thy private conscience. But if thou labourest to infect
others with thy grace-destroying opinions. I doubt not but the Magistrate is
bound to keep thee from spreading thy infection to the undoing of the souls of
his Subjects. If he may lawfully shut up a man that has the plague upon his
body, that he may not infect others, why not a man that has the plague of
Heresy upon his soul, that so he may not destroy the souls of thousands?
Shall a Master in a Family have power to put away a servant that is tainted
with a gross opinion, and yet not be called a Tyrant over that servants
conscience? And shall not the Chief Magistrate of a Kingdom have power to put
out of his Kingdom (at least to shut up from doing hurt) one that is his
subject and polluted with blasphemous heretical Idololatricall opinions? Is
not the Kingdom the Magistrates House and Family? But enough of this.

These are the means that are to be used to cure the miserable distractions of
England. The Lord give us grace to put them in practice.

Use 4.
There is one Use more yet behind, and that is an Use of Consolation to the
people of God. Notwithstanding, all the Divisions and Distractions that are in
the Kingdom. This is an Alablaster box full of precious ointment, and it
consists of four particulars.

1. Remember for your Comfort that there was never any great Reformation
brought in by Godinto a Kingdom, but it has always been attended with
divisions and differences in Religion. In Luthers Reformation, How great were
the differences between him and Calvin; Insomuch, as the Reformation was more
hindered by their Divisions, then by the power and policy of the Enemy, and yet
notwithstanding, God carried on the Work of Reformation maugre these
divisions. In the Primitive times, many and great were the Divisions of the
Church and of the Ministers thereof; Insomuch, as Nazianzen says, that in his
time there were six hundred errors in the Church; and in Constantines time,
the differences between the Bishops were so many, that they brought bundles of
petitions one against another, which the Emperor out of his wonderful desire
of Peace would not so much as read, but burnt them all before their faces. How
sad was the division between Paul and Barnabas, and yet God turned it to a good
effect. For by that means the Gospel was the more spread throughout the world!
And therefore let us not be over-discouraged. For these Divisions are no new
things, and therefore no strange things.

2. Consider for your comfort, Magna veritas et praevalebit. Truth is a beam
of God, the purchase of Jesus Christ, and it shall prevail at last. Though our
divisions and distractions do much weaken us and prorogue our settlement, yet
notwithstanding the Cause we manage is Gods Cause, and it shall prevail at
last. As Christ Jesus rose from the grave in spite of the Jews that rolled a
great stone before the door of the Sepulcher to hinder him. So the Cause of
Christ, and the worship and government of Christ shall rise and flourish: and
there will come a time wherein the Church of God shall be glorious here upon
earth; and the Motto of it shall be Cor unum, via una. One heart, one way. This
will come to pass in spite of our Divisions. For God has promised it, Ier.
32. 39. Zeph 3. 9.

The third Comfort is: That Antichrist shall down though he be never so
firmly united. The Kingdom of the Devil shall be destroyed though Satan join
with Satan. And though Satan will not cast out Satan, but is strongly
compacted, and as a City at unity within it self, yet God will cast out
Satan at last, and his kingdom shall perish. Though Turk and Pope; though
French and Spaniard; though the Irish Rebels, and English Papists and
Protestants at large should join hand in hand and conspire together to
overthrow the little flock of Jesus Christ, yet notwithstanding they do but
kick against pricks. Antichrist is fallen, and the poor flock of Christ shall
be as a burdensome stone unto all people; all that burden themselves with it
shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together
against it, Zach. 12. 3. Bellarmine makes unity a sign of a true Church. But
then there should be a true Church amongst the Devils; for where he dwells there
is peace. And yet the Papists cannot boast much of their unity. For they have
their different Sects opposite one to another, and the Jesuit to them all.
Unity without verity is a sign of the Malignant Church, but not of the Church
of Christ. And unity without verity, shall not uphold a State. For though
hand join in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished, Prove. 11. 21.

Lastly, Remember in what state and condition the people of the Jews were in
when Christ came into the world. It was when the government was departed from
Judah, and the Kingdom given to a stranger; when the Sanedrim (which was their
Parliament) was destroyed; and they themselves brought into perfect slavery.
Their condition was never so bad as at that time. And also they never had more
Sects and Divisions then when Christ was borne: There were in Jerusalem the
Herodians, the Scribes and Pharisees. There were also the Esseni, (though the
Gospel makes no mention of them.) In this sad juncture of time Jesus Christ was
borne. Oh what abundance of consolation may be sucked out of the breasts of this
truth! Christ came into the world when his Church was in the greatest
extremity. And are not we at this time in great extremity? Are we not brought
very low by our sins, and by our divisions the fruit of our sins? We have
divided our selves from God by our sins, and God has divided us one from
another. Let us beseech the Lord Jesus Christ to come once more into the world
by his Spirit of power! Let us not despair of his coming. For he is Deus in
monte. He is our peace now the Assyrian is in the Land, Mic. 5. 5. And when he
comes he will come as a Conqueror to subdue his enemies under his feet.

This day is the day which is commonly called The Feast of Christ's Nativitie,
or Christmas day: A day that has been heretofore much abused to superstition
and profaneness. It is not easy to reckon whether the superstition has
been greater, or the profaneness. I have known some that have preferred
Christmas day before the Lords Day, and have cried down the Lords Day, and
cried up Christmas day. I have known those that would be sure to receive the
Sacrament upon Christmas day, though they did not receive it all the year
after. This and much more was the superstition of the day. And the
profaneness was as great. Old Father Latimer says in one of his Sermons,
That the Devil had more service in the twelve Christmas holy days (as they
were called) then God had all the year after. Seneca says of his time, Olim
December mensis erat, nunc annus est. There are some that though they did not
play at Cards all the year long, yet they must play at Christmas; thereby, it
seems, to keep in memory the birth of Christ. This and much more has been
the profanation of this Feast. And truly I think that the superstition and
profanation of this day is so rooted into it, as that there is no way to
reform it but by dealing with it as Hezekiah did with the brazen Serpent. This
year God by a Providence has buried this Feast in a Fast, and I hope it will
never rise again. You have set out (Right Honorable) a strict Order for the
keeping of it, and you are here this day to observe your own Order, and I hope
you will do it strictly. The necessity of the times are great. Never more
need of Prayer and fasting. The Lord give us grace to be humbled in this day of
Humiliation for all our own, and Englands sins; and especially for the old
superstition, and profanation of this Feast: always remembering upon such days
as these, Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the Sermons Preached and Printed by Order of both or either
Houses of Parliament* From January 1643. to January 1644.
January 31. 1643. Master Cawdrey. Prove. 29. 8. Master Rutherford. Dan. 6. 26.

February 28 1643. Mr. Baylie. Zach. 3. 1, 2. Mr. Young. Psalm* 31. 24*

March 27. 1644. Mr. Gelespie. Ezekiel. 43. 11. Mr. Bond. Isaiah 45. 15.

At the Thanksgiving for the Victory given to our Forces under Sir William
Waller, and Sir William Belfore, over Sir Ralph Hoptons Army.
April 9. 1644. Mr. Obediah Sedgwick. Psalm. 3. 8. Mr. Case. Daniel 11. 32.

At the Thanksgiving for the Victory given to the Forces under the Command of
the Lord Fairfax at Selby in Yorkshire.
April 23. 1644. Mr. Perne. Exodus 34. 6. not Printed. Mr. Caryl. Revel. 11. 16,
17.

April 24. 1644. Doctor Staunton. Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Mr. Green. Nehemiah 1. 3, 4.

May 29. 1644. Doctor Smith. Psalm. 107. 6. Mr. Hall. Matthew. 11. 12.

June 26. 1644. Mr. Hardwick. Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Mr. Hicks. Isaiah 28. 5, 6.

At the Thanksgiving for the Victory over Prince Rupert, and the surrender of
York.
July 28. 1644. Mr. Vines. Isaiah 63. 8. Mr. Hinderson. Matthew. 14. 21. Mr.
Herle. not Printed.

July 31. 1644. Mr. Rathband not Printed. Mr. Gower. Dan. 12. 10.

At a Fast Extraordinary.
August 13. 1644. Mr. Hill. Hag. 1. 7, 8. Mr. Palmer. Psalm. 99. 8.

August 28. 1644. Mr. Rayner. Hag. 2. 6, 7. Mr. Tysdale. Psalm. 122. 6.

At a Fast Extraordinary for the Dysaster in the West.
September. 12. 1644. Mr. Newcomen. Joshua 7. 10, 11. Mr. Coleman. Psalm. 65. 5.

September. 25. 1644. Mr. Proffet. Isaiah 9. 13. Mr. Seaman. 1 Kings 3. 9.

At a Fast upon the Uniting of the Armies together.
October. 22. 1644. Before the Lords* Mr. Temple. not yet printed. Mr. Chambers.
Mr. Palmer. Before the Commons* Mr. Calamy. Acts 17. 30. Mr. Sedgwick. Hebrews
11. 7. Mr. Vines. 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26*

October. 30. 1644. Before the Lords, Doctor Smith. Doctor Staunton. Psalm. 106.
30. Before the Commons* Mr. Scudder. Micah 6. 9. Mr. Woodcock. Revel. 16. 15.

November. 5. 1644. Before the Lords, Mr. Strickland. Psalm. 46. 1. Mr. Spurstow.
Ezra 9. 13, 14. Before the Commons, Mr. Herle. 2 Samuel 21. 16, 17. Mr. Anthony
Burges. Revel. 19. 2.

November. 27. 1644. Before the Lords, Mr. Hill. 2 Corinthians. 17. 18. Mr.
Wilkinson. 1 Chronicles. 21. 24. Before the Commons, Mr. Pickering. Zach. 3. 2. Mr.
Gipps. Psalm. 46. 1.

December. 25. 1644. Before the Lords, Mr. Calamy. Mr. Sedgwick. Before the
Commons. Mr. Thorowgood. Phil. 4. 5. Mr. Langley. Psalm. 74. 19, 20.


