royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for a general Fast to he held throughout this Kingdom on the
second Friday in every Month.
When a general Fast was first propounded unto Us, in contemplation of the
miseries of Our Kingdom of Ireland, We readily gave Our Consent unto it, and
in Our Court, and in Our Person have duly observed it, as a Religious duty,
fit to be exercised in a time of common Calamity. But when We have seen what
ill use has been made of those public meetings under the pretense of
Religion, in Pulpits, and Prayers and Sermons of many seditious Lecturers to
stir up and continue the Rebellion raised against Us within this Kingdom; And
that those who first moved and seemed to affect the relief of Our distressed
Subjects of Ireland, have deserted the care thereof, and diverted the Means
ordained for the support and preservation of that Kingdom, to the destruction
of Us and of this Kingdom of England: We have thought it fit to Command that
such an Hypocritical Fast, to the dishonor of God, and the slander of true
Religion be no longer continued and countenanced by Our Authority, which has
been too long continued already, to such false and Traitorous ends. And yet We
being desirous (as by Our duty to Almighty God We are bound) by all possible
means to express Our own Humiliation, and the Humiliation of Our People, for
Our own sins, and the sins of this Nation, (as We have great cause) are
resolved to continue a Monthly Fast, but not on the day formerly appointed and
so much abused by those who are in Rebellion against Us, by using it as a
principal Engine to their own designs. We do therefore hereby Command,
that from henceforth no Fasts, or public Meetings under that name be held on
the last Wednesday of the Monerh in any part of this Our Kingdom of England,
as for many Months it has been, nor upon any other day, then as hereby is
appointed by Us, which We are well assured, none of Our Subjects may or ought
to do without, much less against Our Command: but instead thereof We do
expressly Charge and Command, That in all Churches and Chappells in all parts of
this Our Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, there be a solemn Fast
held, and Religiously observed on the second Friday in every Month, with
public Prayers to God, and Preaching in all places where it may be had, when
and where we may all both Prince and People as one man, earnestly power out Our
Prayers to God, for the diverting of his heavy judgments from Us, for the
continuing of his Gracious Protection over Us and this Nation, for the avoiding
of all Malicious practices against Us, and the settling and establishing of a
happy Peace amongst us. And to the end that with one heart and voice we may
perform so Religious an Exercise, we have caused devout forms of Prayers to
be Composed and Printed, and intend to disperse them into all the parts of this
Our Kingdom, and do Command that they be used in all Churches and Chappells
at the solemn and public meetings. And if thus we shall heartily and
unfainedly apply Our selves to Our good God and Gracious Father, whom we have
offended, and praise him for his many and even miraculous deliverances past, we
may with Comfort and Confidence hope that he will in mercy look upon Us, and
be reconciled unto Us.

Given at Our Court at Oxford this fifth day of October, in the nineteenth year
of Our Reign.
God save the KING.
OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.


