THE PAPERS Which passed at NEVV-CASTLE BETWIXT His Sacred MAJESTY AND Mr AL:
HENDERSON: Concerning the Change of CHURCH GOVERNMENT. Anno Dom. 1646.

LONDON, Printed for R: ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1649.

FIDEI DEFENSOR.

Non enim to spreverunt Solum, sed me spreverunt, ne Regnem super ipsos.



For Mr. Alex. Henderson.
His MAJETIES first Paper.
Mr. Henderson,
I Know very well what a great disadvantage it is for Me, to maintain an
Argument of Divinity with so able and learned a man as your self, it being
your, not My profession; which really was the cause that made Me desire to hear
some learned man argue My Opinion with you, of whose abilities I might be
confident, that I should not be led into an Error, for want of having all
which could be said, laid open unto Me: For indeed, My humor is such, that I
am still partial for that side, which I imagine suffers for the weakness of
those that maintain it; always thinking that equal Champions would cast the
balance on the other part; Yet since that you (thinking that it will save
time) desire to go another way, I shall not contest with you in it, but
treating you as My Physician, give you leave to take your own way of cure;
only I thought fit to warn you, lest if you, (not I) should be mistaken in
this, you would be feign (in a manner) to begin anew.

Then know that from My Infancy I was blessed with the King My Fathers love,
which, I thank God, was an unvaluable happiness to Me, all his days, and
among all his cares for My education, his chief was, to settle Me right in
Religion; in the true Knowledge of which, he made himself so eminent to all the
World, that, I am sure, none can call in question the brightness of his Fame
in that particular, without showing their own ignorant base Malice: He it was,
who laid in Me the Grounds of Christianity, which to this day I have been
constant in; so that whether the worthiness of My Instructor be considered, or
the, not few, years that I have been settled in My Principles; it ought to be no
strange thing, if it be found no easy work, to make me alter them: and the
rather, that hitherto, I have (according to S. Paul's rule, Romans 14.22.) been
happy in not condemning my self, in that thing which I allow: Thus having
showed you how, it remains, to tell you what, I believe, in relation to these
present miserable distractions.

No one thing made Me more reverence the Reformation of My Mother, the Church
of England, than that it was done (according to the Apostles defense, Acts
24.18.) neither with multitude, nor with tumult, but legally and orderly; and
by those, whom I conceive to have only the reforming power; which with many
other inducements, made Me always confident that the work was very perfect, as
to Essentials; Of which number Church Government being undoubtedly one, I put
no question, but that would have been likewise altered, if there had been
cause; which opinion of mine, was soon turned into, more than, a confidence;
when I perceived, that in this particular (as I must say of all the rest) we
retained nothing but according as it was deduced from the Apostles to be the
constant universal custom of the Primitive Church; and that it was of such
consequence, as by the alteration of it, we should deprive our selves of a
lawful Priesthood, and then, how the Sacraments can be duly Administered, is
easy to judge: These are the principal Reasons, which make Me believe that
Bishops are necessary for a Church, and, I think, sufficient for Me (if I had
no more) not to give My consent for their expulsion out of England; but I have
another obligation, that, to my particular, is a no less tie of Conscience;
which is My Coronation Oath: Now if (as S. Paul says, Romans 14.23.) he that
doubts is damned if he eat, what can I expect, if I should, not only give
way knowingly to My Peoples sinning, but likewise be perjured My self?

Now consider, ought I not to keep My self from presumptuous sins? and you
know who says, What does it profit a man, though he should gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? wherefore My constant maintenance of Episcopacy
in England, (where there was never any other Government since Christianity was
in this Kingdom) Me thinks, should be rather commended than wondered at; My
Conscience directing me to maintain the Laws of the Land; Which being only
My endeavors at this time, I desire to know of you, what warrant there is in
the Word of God, for Subjects to endeavor to force their Kings Conscience? or
to make him alter Laws against his will? If this be not My present case, I
shall be glad to be mistaken; or, if My Judgment in Religion has been misled
all this time, I shall be willing to be better directed: till when, you must
excuse Me, to be constant to the Grounds which the King My Father taught Me.

C. R.
Newcastle, May 29. 1646.
For His Majesty, Mr. Alexander Henderson's first Paper.
SIR,
1. IT is your Majesty's royal godnesse, and not my merit, that has made your
Majesty to conceive any opinion of my abilities; which (were they worthy of the
smallest testimony from your Majesty) ought in all duty to be improved for your
Majesty's satisfaction. And this I intended in my coming here at this time, by
a free, yet modest expression of the true motives and inducements which drew my
mind to the dislike of Episcopal Government, wherein I was bred in my younger
years at the University. Like as I did apprehend that it was not your
Majesty's purpose to have the Question disputed by Divines on both sides; which
I would never (to the wronging of the cause) have undertaken alone; and which
seldom or never has proved an effectual way, for finding of truth, or moving
the minds of Men to relinquish their former Tenants, Dum res transit a judicio
in affectum; witness the Polemicks between the Papists and us, and among our
selves, about the matter now in hand, these many years past.

2. Sir, When I consider your Majesty's education under the hands of such a
Father, the length of time wherein your Majesty has been settled in your
principles of Church Government; the Arguments which have continually in
private and public, especially of late at Oxford, filled your Majesty's ears
for the Divine right thereof; your Coronation Oath; and diverse State-reasons
which your Majesty does not mention: I do not wonder, nor think it any
strange thing, that your Majesty has not at first given place to a contrary
impression. I remember that the famous Joannes Picus Mirandula proves by
irrefragable Reasons (which not rational man will contradict) That no man has
so much power over his own understanding, as to make himself believe what he
will, or to think that to be true which his reason tells him is false; much
less is it prossible for any man to have his reason commanded by the will, or
at the pleasure of another.

2. It is a true saying of the Schoolmen, Voluntas imperat intellectui quoad
exercitium, non quoad specificationem, Mine own will, or the will of another
may command me to think upon a matter; but no will or command can constrain
me to determine otherwise then my reason teaches me. Yet Sir, I hope your
Majesty will acknowledge, (for your Paper professes no less) that according
to the saying of Ambrose, Non est pudor ad meliora transire, It is neither
sin nor shame to change to the better: Symmachus in one of his Epistles (I
think to the Emperor Theodosius and Valentinian) alleges all those motives,
from education, from prescription of time, from worldly prosperity, and the
flourishing condition of the Roman Empire, and from the Laws of the Land, to
persuade them to constancy in the ancient Pagan profession of the Romans,
against the embracing of the Christian Faith. The like reasons were used by the
Jews for Moses against Christ; and may be used both for Popery and for the
Papacy it self, against the reformation of Religion and Church Government; and
therefore can have no more strength against a Change now, than they had in
former times.

3. But your Majesty may perhaps say, That this is petitio principii, and
nothing else but the begging of the Question; and I confess it were so, if
there can be no Reasons brought for a Reformation or Change; your Majesty
reverences the Reformation of the Church of England, as being done legally and
orderly, and by those who had the Reforming Power: and I do not deny, but it
were to be wished, that Religion where there is need, were always Reformed in
that manner, and by such power, and that it were not committed to the Prelates,
who have greatest need to be reformed themselves, not left to the multitude,
whom God stirs up when Princes are negligent: Thus did Jacob reform his
own Family, Moses destroyed the golden Calfe, the good Kings of Judah reformed
the Church in their time: but that such Reformation has been perfect, I cannot
admit. Asa took away Idolatry, but his Reformation was not perfect; for
Jehosaphat removed the high Places, yet was not his Reformation perfect, for it
was Hezekiah that brake the brazen Serpent, and Josiah destroyed the
Idol-Temples who therefore bears this Elogie, That like unto him there was no
King before him. It is too well known that the Reformation of K. Hen: 8. was
most imperfect in the Essentials of Doctrine, Worship, and Government; And
although it proceeded by some degrees afterward, yet the Government was never
reformed, the head was changed, Dominus non Dominium; and the whole limbs of
the Antichristian Hierarchy retained, upon what snares and temptations of
Avarice and Ambition, the great Enchanters of the Clergy, I need not express.
It was a hard saying of Romanorum Malleus Grofted of Lincoln, That Reformation
was not to be expected, nisi in ore gladii cruentandi: yet this I may say, that
the Laodicean lukewarmnesse of reformation here, has been matter of continued
complaints to many of the Godly in this Kingdom; occasion of more schism and
separation then ever was heard of in any other Church; and of unspeakable grief
and sorrow to other Churches, which God did bless with greater purity of
reformation. The glory of this great work we hope is reserved for your
Majesty, that to your comfort and everlasting fame the praise of godly Josiah
may be made yours; which yet will be no dispraise to your royal Father, or
Edward 6. or any other religious Princes before you; none of them having so
fair an opportunity as is now by the supreme providence put into your Royal
hands. My soul trembles to think and to foresee, what may be the event, if
this opportunity be neglected. I will neither use the words of Mordecay, Esth.4
14. nor what Savanarola told another Charles, because I hope better things from
your Majesty.

4. To the Argument brought by your Majesty (which I believe none of your
Doctors, had they been all about you, could more briefly and yet so fully and
strongly have expressed) [ That nothing was retained in this Church but
according as it was deduced from the Apostles to the constant universal
practice of the Primitive Church; and that it was of such consequence, as by
the alteration of it, We should deprive our selves of the lawfulness of
Priesthood (I think your Majesty means a lawful Ministry) and then how the
Sacraments can be administered, is easy to judge.] I humbly offer these
considerations: First, what was not in the times of the Apostles, cannot be
deduced from them: We say in Scotland, It cannot be brought, that is not there
ben; but (not to insist now in a Litourgy, and things of that kind) there was
no such Hierarchy, no such difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter in the
times of the Apostles, and therefore it cannot thence be deduced; for I
conceive it to be as clear as if it were written with a sun-beame, that
Presbyter and Bishop are to the Apostles one and the same thing, no majority,
no inequality of difference of office, power, or degree betwixt the one and the
other, but a mere identity in all. 2. That the Apostles intending to set down
the Offices and Officers of the Church, and speaking so often of them, and of
their gifts and duties, and that, not upon occasion, but of set purpose; do
neither express nor imply and such Pastor or Bishop as has power over other
Pastors, although it be true, that they have distinctly and particularly
expressed the office, gifts, and duties of the meanest Officers, such as Deacons.
3. That in the Ministry of the New Testament there is a comely, beautiful,
and divine order and subordination; one kind of Ministers both ordinary and
extraordinary being placed in degree and dignity one before another, as the
Apostles first, the Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, etc. in their own ranks:
but we cannot find in Offices of the same kind, that one has majority of
power, or priority of degree before another; no Apostle above other Apostles
(unless in moral respects) no Evangelist above other Evangelists; of Deacon
above other Deacons; why then a Pastor above other Pastors? In all other sorts
of Ministers ordinary and extraordinary a parity in their own kind, only in
the office of Pastor an inequality. 4. That the whole power and all the parts
of the Ministry, which are commonly called the power of order and jurisdiction,
are by the Apostles declared to be common to the Presbyter and Bishop: And that
Mat. 15.16, 17. the gradation in matter of Discipline or Church Censures, is
from one, to two, or more; and if he shall neglect them, tell it to the Church;
he says not, tell it to the Bishop; there is no place left to a retrogradation
from more to one, were be never so eminent. If these considerations do not
satisfy, your Majesty may have more, or the same further cleared.

5. Secondly, I do humbly desire Your Majesty to take notice of the fallacy of
that Argument, from the practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal
consent of the Fathers. It is the Argument of the Papists for such traditions
as no Orthodox Divine will admit. The Law and Testimony must be the Rule. We
can have no certain knowledge of the practice universal of the Church for
many years, Eusebius the prime Historian confesses so much, The learned
Josephus Scaliger testifies, that from the end of the Acts of the Apostles
until a good time after, no certainty can be had from Ecclesiastical Authors
about Church matters. It is true, Diotrephes sought the pre-eminence in the
Apostles times, and the mystery of iniquity did then begin to work; and no
doubt in aftertimes some puffed up with Ambition, and others overtaken with
weakness, endeavored alteration of Church Government, but that all the
learned and godly of those times consented to such a change as is talked of
afterward, will never be proved.

6. Thirdly, I will never think that Your Majesty will deny the lawfulness of
a Ministry, and the due administration of the Sacraments in the Reformed
Churches, which have no Diocesan Bishops, since it is not only manifest by
Scripture, but a great many of the strongest Champions for Episcopacy, do
confess, that Presbyters may ordain other Presbyters; and that Babtisme
administered by a private person, wanting a public Calling, or by a Midwife,
and by a Presbyter, although not ordained by a Bishop, are not one and the same
thing.

7. Concerning the other Argument taken from Your Majesty's Coronation Oath; I
confess, that both in the taking and keeping of an Oath (so sacred a thing is
it, and so high a point of Religion) much tenderness is required: and far be
it from us, who desire to observe our own Solemn Oath, to press Your Majesty
with the violation of Yours. Yet Sir, I will crave your leave, in all
humbleness and sincerity to lay before Your Majesty's eyes this one thing,
(which perhaps might require a larger dicourse) that although no humane
authority can dispense with an Oath, Quia Religio juramenti pertinet ad forum
Divinum; yet in some cases it cannot be denied but the obligation of an Oath
cease: As when we swear homage and obedience to our Lord and Superior, who
afterward cease to be our Lord and Superior; for then the formal cause of
the Oath is taken away, and therefore the obligation, Sublata causa tollitur
effectus; sublato relato, tollitur Correlatum. Or when any Oath has a special
reference to the benefit of those to whom I make the promise, if we have their
desire or consent, the obligation cease; because all such Oaths from the
nature of the thing, do include a condition. When the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, have covenanted for the abolishing or altering of a Law, Your
Majesty's Oath does not bind You, or Your Conscience to the observing of it;
otherwise no Laws could be altered by the Legislative Power. This I conceive
has been the ground of removing Episcopal Government in Scotland, and of
removing the Bishops out of the Parliament of England. And I assure my self,
that Your Majesty did not intend at the taking of Your Oath, that although both
Houses of Parliament should find an alteration necessary, although (which God
Almighty avert) You should lose Your Self, and your Posterity, and Crown, that
You would never consent to the abolishing of such a Law. If Your Majesty still
object, that the matter of the Oath is necessary and immutable; that does not
belong to this, but to the former Argument.

8. I have but one word more concerning Your Piety to Your Royal Father, and
teacher of happy Memory, with which Your Majesty does conclude. Your Majesty
knows that King James never admitted Episcopacy upon Divine Right; That His
Majesty did swear and subscribe to the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of
the Church of Scotland; that in the Preface of the latter Edition of Basilicon
Doron, His Majesty gives an honorable testimony to those that loved better the
simplicity of the Gospel, than the pomp and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, and that he conceived the Prelates to savor of the Popish Hierarchy,
and that (could his Ghost now speak to your Majesty) He would not advise your
Majesty to run such hazards for those Men who will choose rather to pull down
your Throne with their own ruin, than that they perish alone. The Lord give
your Majesty a wise and discerning Spirit to choose that in time which is right.

June 3. 1646.
For Mr. Alex: Henderson, A Reply to his Answer to My first Paper, June 6. 1646.
His MAJESTY'S second Paper.
Mr. Henderson,
IF it had been the Honor of the Cause which I looked after, I would not have
undertaken to put Pen to Paper, or singly to have maintained this Argument
against you (whose Answer to my former Paper is sufficient, without other
proofs, to justify My opinion of your abilities) but, it being merely (as you
know) for my particular satisfaction, I assure you that a Disputation of well
chosen Divines, would be most effectual; and I believe you cannot but grant,
that I must best know, how My self may be best satisfied, for certainly My
Taste cannot be guided by another Man's Palate, and indeed I will say, that
when it comes (as it must) to Probations, I must have either Persons or Books
to clear the Allegations, or it will be impossible to give Me satisfaction:
The foreseeing of which, made Me at first (for the saving of Time) desire that
some of those Divines, which I gave you in a List, might be sent for.

2. Concerning your second Section, I were much too blame, if I should not
submit to that saying of S. Ambrose which you mention, for I would be unwilling
to be found less ingenuous then you show your self to be in the former part
of it; wherefore my Reply is, that as I shall not be ashamed to change for the
better, so I must see that it is better before I change, otherwise inconstancy
in this were both sin and shame; and remember (what your self has learnedly
enforced) that no man's Reason can be commanded by another man's Will.

3. Your third begins, but I cannot say that it goes on, with that Ingenuity,
which the other did; for I do not understand, how those Examples cited out of
the Old Testament do any way prove that the way of Reformation, which I
commend, has not been the most perfect, or, that any other is lawful, those
having been all by the Regal Authority; and because Henry the Eights
Reformation was not perfect, will it prove that of K. Edward and Q. Elizabeth
to be unperfect? I believe a new mood and figure must be found out to form a
Syllogism, whereby to prove that: but however, you are mistaken; for, no man
who truly understands the English Reformation, will derive it from Henry the
Eight; for he only gave the occasion; it was his Son who began, and Q.
Elizabeth that perfected it; nor did I ever aver, that the beginning of any
Humane Action was perfect, no more then you can prove that God has ever given
approbation to Multitudes to Reform the Negligence of Princes: For, you know,
there is much Difference between Permission, and Approbation: But all this
time, I find no Reasons (according to your Promise) for a Reformation, or
Change (I mean since Q. Elizabeth's time.) As for your Romanorum Malleus his
saying; it is well you come of it, with [yet this I may say] for it seems to
imply, as if you neither ought nor would justify that bloody ungodly saying:
and for your comparing our Reformation here to the Laodicean lukewarmenesse,
proved by Complaints, Grievings, etc. all that does, and but unhandsomely,
Petere principium; nor can Generals satisfy Me; for, you must first prove,
that those Men had reason to complain, those Churches to be Grieved, and how
we were truly the Causers of this schism and separation: as for those words
which you will not use, I will not answer.

4. Here indeed you truly repeat the first of My two maine Arguments; but by
your favor, you take (as I conceive) a wrong way to convince Me; It is I must
make good the Affirmative, for I believe a Negative cannot be proved; Instead
of which, if you had made appear the Practice of the Presbyterian Government
in the Primitive times, you had done much; for I do avetre, that this
Government was never Practiced before Calvin's time; the Affirmative of which,
I leave you to prove; My task, being to show the lawfulness, and succession
of Episcopacy, and, as I believe, the necessity of it: For doing whereof, I
must have such Books as I shall call for; which possibly upon perusal, may,
one way or other, give Me satisfaction; but I cannot absolutely promise it,
without the Assistance of some learned Man, whom I can trust, to find out all
such Citations, as I have use of: wherefore blame Me not, if time be
unnecessarily lost.

5. Now for the fallaciousnesse of My Argument (to My knowledge) it was never
My practice, nor do I confess to have begun now; For if the Practice of the
Primitive Church, and the universal consent of the Fathers be not a convincing
Argument, when the Interpretation of Scripture is doubtful, I know nothing;
For, if this be not, then of necessity the Interpretation of private Spirits
must be admitted: the which contradicts Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1.20. is the Mother
of all Sects, and will (if not prevented) bring these Kingdoms into confusion:
And to say, that an Argument is ill, because the Papists use it, or, that such
a thing is good, because it is the Custom of some of the Reformed Churches;
cannot weigh with Me, until you prove, these to be infallible, or that to
maintain no Truth: And how Diotrephes ambition (who directly opposed the
Apostle S. John) can be an Argument against Episcopacy, I do not understand.

6. When I am made a Judge over the Reformed Churches, then, and not before,
will I censure their Actions; as you must prove, before I confess it, that
Presbyters without a Bishop, may lawfully ordain other Presbyters: And as for
the Administration of Baptism, as I think none will say, that a Woman can
lawfully, or Duly administer it, though when done, it be valid; so none ought
to do it, but a lawful Presbyter; whom you cannot deny, but to be absolutely
necessary for the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

7. You make a learned succinct discourse of Oaths in general, and their
several Obligations, to which I fully agree; intending, in the particular now
in question, to be guided by your own Rule, which is [when any Oath has a
special reference to the Benefit of those to whom I make the Promise, if we
have their desire, or consent, the Obligation ceaseth] Now, it must be known,
to whom this Oath has reference, and to whose Benefit? the Answer is clear,
only to the Church of England; as by the Record will e plainly made appear;
and you much mistake in alleging that the two Houses of Parliament (especially
as they are now constituted) can have this Disobligatory Power, for, (besides
that they are not named in it) I am confident to make it clearly appear to you,
that this Church never did submit, nor was subordinate to them; and that it was
only the King and Clergy, who made the Reformation, the Parliament merely
serving to help to give the Civil Saction: all this being proved (of which I
make no question) it must necessarily follow, that it is only the Church of
England (in whose favor I took this Oath) that can release me from it:
wherefore when the Church of England (being lawfully Assembled) shall declare
that I am free, then, and not before, I shall esteem My self so.

8. To your last, concerning the King my Father, of happy and famous Memory,
both for his Piety and Learning; I must tell you, that I had the happiness, to
know him much better then you; wherefore I desire you, not to be too confident,
in the knowledge of his Opinions; For, I dare say, should his Ghost now speak,
he would tell you, that a Bloody Reformation was never lawful, as not
warranted by Gods word, and that Preces and lachrymae sunt Arma Ecclesiae.

9. To conclude, having replied to all your Paper, I cannot but observe to you,
that you have given Me no Answer to My last Quaere; it may be you are (as
Chaucer says) like the People of England, what they not like, they never
understand: but in earnest, that Question is so pertinent to the Purpose in
hand, that it will much serve for My satisfaction; and besides it may be
useful for other things.

C. R.
Newcastle, June 6. 1646.
For His Majesty.
Mr. Alex: Henderson's second Paper.
SIR,
THe smaller the encouragements be, in relation to the success, (which how
small they are, your Majesty well knows:) the more apparent, and, I hope, the
more acceptable will my obedience be, in that which in all humility I now go
about, at your Majesty's command: yet while I consider, that the way of man is
not in himself; nor is it in man that walks, to direct his own steps; and
when I remember how many supplications, with strong crying and tears, have
been openly and in secret offered up in your Majesty's behalf, unto God that
hears prayer, I have no reason to despair of a blessed success.

1. I have been averse, from a disputation of Divines, 1. For saving of time;
which the present exigence and extremity of affairs, make more then ordinarily
precious; While Archimedes at Syracuse was drawing his Figures and Circlings in
the sand, Marcellus interupted his demonstration. 2. Because the common result
of Disputes of this kind, answerable to the prejudicate opinions of the
Parties, is rather Victory then Verity; while tanquam tentativi Dialectici,
they study more to overcome their adverse Party, then to be overcome if Truth,
although this be the most glorious Victory. 3. When I was commanded to come
hither; no such thing was proposed to me, nor expected by me. I never judged so
meanly of the Cause, nor so highly of my self, as to venture it upon such
weakness. Much more might be spoken to this purpose; but I forbear.


2. I will not further trouble your Majesty with that which is contained in the
second Section, hoping that your Majesty will no more insist upon Education,
prescription of Time, etc. which are sufficient to prevent Admiration, but
(which your Majesty acknowledges) must give place to Reason, and are no sure
ground of resolution of our Faith, in any point to be believed: although it be
true that the most part of men make these and the like, to be the ground and
rule of their Faith: an Evidence, that their Faith is not a Divine faith, but
an humane Credulity

3. Concerning Reformation of Religion in the third Section; I had need of a
Preface to so thorny a Theme, as your Majesty has brought me upon; 1. For the
Reforming power; it is conceived, when a General Defection, like a deluge,
has covered the whole face of the Church, so that scarcely the tops of the
Mountains do appear, a General Council is necessary; but, because that can
hardly be obtained, several Kingdoms (which we see was done, at the time of
the Reformation) are to reform themselves, and that by the Authority of their
Prince, and Magistrates: if the Prince or supreme Magistrate be unwilling, then
may be inferior Magistrate, and the People, being before rightly informed in
the grounds of Religion, lawfully Reform, within their own Sphere; and if the
light shine upon all, or the major part, they may, after all other means
assayed, make a Public Reformation. This, before this time, I never wrote or
spoke; yet the Maintainers of this Doctrine, conceive that they are able to
make it good. But, Sir, were I worthy to give advice to Your Majesty, or to the
Kings and supreme Powers on Earth, may humble Opinion would be, that they
should draw the minds, tongues, and pens of the learned, to dispute about other
matter, then the power or Prerogative of Kings and Princes; and in this kind,
your Majesty has suffered and lost more, then will easily be restored to your
self or your Posterity, for a long time. It is not denied but the prime
Reforming power, is in Kings and Princes, Quibus -- deficientibus, it comes to
the inferior Magistrate, Quibus Deficientibus, it descends to the Body of the
People; supposing that there is a necessity of Reformation, and that by no
means it can be obtained of their Superiors. It is true that such a
Reformation, is more imperfect, in respect of the Instruments, and manner of
Procedure; yet for the most part, more pure and perfect in relation to the
effect and product. And for this end did I cite the Examples of old of
Reformation by Regal Authority; of which none was perfect, in the second way
of perfection, except that of Josiah. Concerning the saying of Grostead, whom
the Cardinals at Rome confessed to be a more Godly man, than any of themselves;
it was his Complaint, and Prediction of what was likely to ensue, not his
desire, or Election, if Reformation could have been obtained, in the ordinary
way. I might bring two unpartiall Witnesses, Jewel and Bilson, both famous
English Bishops, to prove that the tumults and troubles raised in Scotland, at
the time of Reformation, were to be imputed to the Papists opposing of the
Reformation, both of Doctrine and Discipline, as an Heretical Innovation; and
note to be ascribed to the Nobility, or People, who under God, were the
Instruments of it; intending and seeking nothing, but the purging out of
Error, and settling of the Truth. 2. Concerning the Reformation of the Church
of England, I conceive, whether it was begun or not, in K. Henry the 8. time,
it was not finished by Q. Elizabeth: the Father stirred the humors of the
diseased Church; but neither the Son nor the Daughter (although we have great
reason to bless God for both) did purge them out perfectly: This Perfection is
yet reserved for your Majesty: Where it is said, that all this time I bring no
Reasons, for a further Change; the fourth Section, of may last Paper, has many
hints of Reasons against Episcopal Government, with an offer of more, or
clearing of those; which your Majesty has not thought fit to take notice of.
And learned men, have observed many Defects in that Reformation: As that the
Government of the Church of England, (for about this is the Question now) is
not builded upon the foundation of Christ and the Apostles; which they, at
least cannot deny, who profess Church Government to be Mutable and Ambulatory;
and such were the greater part of Archbishops and Bishops in England;
contenting themselves with the Constitutions of the Church, and the Authority
and Munificence of Princes, till of late, that some few have pleaded it to be
Jure Divino: That, the English Reformation has not perfectly purged out the
Roman Leaven; which is one of the Reasons, that have given ground, to the
comparing of this Church, to be Church of Laodicaea, as being neither hot nor
cold, neither Popish nor Reformed, but of a lukewarm temper, betwixt the two:
That it has depraved the Discipline of the Church, by conforming of it to the
Civil Policy: That is has added many Church Offices, higher and lower, unto
those instituted by the Son of God; which is as unlawful as to take away
Offices warranted by the Divine Institution: And other the like, which have
moved some, to apply this saying, to the Church of England; Multi ad
perfectionem pervenirent, nisi jam se pervenisse crederent.

4. In my Answer to the first of your Majesty's many Arguments, I brought a
Breviate of some Reasons to prove, that a Bishop and Presbyter, are one and the
same in Scripture: from which, by necessary consequence, I did infer the
negative; Therefore, no differences in Scripture between a Bishop and a
Presbyter; the one name signifying, Industriam Curae Pastoralis; the other,
Sapientiae Maturitatem, says Beda. And whereas your Majesty averres, that
Presbyterian Government was never practiced, before Calvin's time; your Majesty
knows, the common objection of the Papists, against the Reformed Churches;
where as your Church, your Reformation, your Doctrine, before Luther's time?
One part of the common Answer is, that is was from the beginning, and is to be
found in Scripture: The same I affirm of Presbyterian-Government: And for
proving of this, the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, have made manifest,
that the Primitive Christian Church at Jerusalem was governed by a Presbytery:
while they show, 1. That the Church of Jerusalem consisted of more
Congregations then one, from the multitude of Believers, from the many
Apostles, and other Preachers in that Church, and from the diversity of
Languages among the Believers. 2. That all these Congregations, were under one
Presbyteriall Government, because they were, for Government, one Church, Act.
II. 22, 26.
And because that Church was governed by Elders, Acts 11.30. which were Elders
of that Church, and did together for Acts of Government: And the Apostles
themselves, in that meeting, Acts 15. acted not as Apostles, but as Elders;
stating the Question, debating it, in the ordinary way of disputation; and
having, by search of Scripture, found the will of God, they conclude, It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and us: which in the judgment of the learned, may be
spoken by any Assembly, upon like evidence of Scripture. The like Presbyterian
Government had place in the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Thessalonica, etc. in
the times of the Apostles; and after them, for many years, when one of the
Presbytery was made Episcopus Praeses, even then, Communi Presbyterorum
Consilio, Ecclesiae gubernabantur, says Jerome; and Episcopos magis
consuctudine, quam Dispositionis Divinae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores,
and in commune debere ecclesiam regere.

5. Far be it form me to think such a thought, as that your Majesty did
intend any Fallacy, in your other maine Argument, from Antiquity. As we are to
distinguish between Intentio Operantis, and Conditio Operis; so may we in this
case consider the difference between Intentio Argumentantis, and Conditio
Argumenti. And where your Majesty argues, that, if your Opinion be not
admitted, we will be forced to give place to the Interpretation or private
Spirits, which is contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle Peter, and will prove
to be of dangerous consequence; I humbly offer to be considered by Your
Majesty, what some of chief note among the Papists themselves have taught us,
That the Interpretation of Scriptures, and the Spirits whence they proceed, may
be called private, in a threefold sense, 1. Ratione Personae, if the
Interpreter be of a private condition. 2. Rationen Modi and Medii, when
Persons, although not private, use not the public means which are necessary
for finding out the Truth, but follow their own fancies. 3. Ratione finis,
when the Interpretation is not proposed as Authentical to bind others, but is
intended only for our own private satisfaction.
The first is not to be despised; the second is to be exploded, and is
condemned by the Apostle Peter; the third ought not to be censured: But that
Interpretation which is Authentical, and of supreme Authority, which even man's
conscience is bound to yield unto, is of an higher nature. And, although the
General Council should resolve it, and the Consent of the Fathers should be
had unto it, yet there must always be place left to the judgment of
Discretion, as Davenant, late Bishop of Salisbury, beside diverse others, has
learnedly made appear in his Book, De Judice Controversiarum; where also the
Power of Kings in matter of Religion, is solidly and unpartially determined.
Two words only I add; one is, that notwithstanding all that is pretended from
Antiquity, a Bishop having sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, will
never be found in Prime Antiquity. The other is, that many of the Fathers did,
unwittingly, bring forth that Antichrist, which was conceived in the times of
the Apostles, and therefore are incompetent Judges in the Question of
Hierarchy. And upon the other part, the Lights of the Christian Church, at, and
since the beginning of the Reformation, have discovered many secrets,
concerning the Antichrist and his Hierarchy, which were not known to former
Ages: And diverse of the learned, in the Roman Church, have not feared to
pronounce, That, whosoever denies the true and literal sense of many Texts of
Scripture, to have been found out in this last Age, is unthankful to God, who
has so plentifully powered forth his Spirit upon the Children of this
Generation, and ungrateful toward those men, who with so great pains, so
happy success, and so much benefit to Gods Church, have travailed therein:
This might be instanced in many places of Scripture: I wind together Diotrephes
and the Mystery of Iniquity, the one, as an old example of Church-ambition,
which was also too palpable in the Apostles themselves; And the other as a
cover of Ambition, afterward discovered; which two, brought forth the great
Mystery of the Papacy at last.

6. Although your Majesty be not made a Judge of the Reformed Churches, yet you
so far censure them, and their actions, as, without Bishops, in your
judgment, they cannot have a lawful Ministry, nor a due Administration of the
Sacraments: Against which dangerous and destructive Opinion, I did allege what
I supposed, your Majesty would not have denied, 1. That Presbyters without a
Bishop, may Ordain other Presbyters. 2. That Baptism, administered by such a
Presbyter, is another thing than Baptism administered by a private Person, or
by a Midwife. Of the first your Majesty calls for proof: I told before, that
in Scripture, it is manifest, I Tim. 4.14.
Neglect not the Gift that is in Thee, which was given Thee by the Prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; so it is in the English
Translation: And the word Presbytery, so often as it is used in the New
Testament, always signifies the Persons, and not the Office. And although the
Offices of Bishop, and Presbyter were distinct; yet does not the Presbyter
derive his power of Order, from the Bishop. The Evangelists were inferior to
the Apostles; yet had they their power, not from the Apostles, but from Christ:
The same I affirm of the 70. Disciples, who had their power immediately from
Christ, no less then the Apostles had theirs. It may upon better reason be
averred, that the Bishops have their power from the Pope, than that Presbyters
have their power from the Prelates. It is true, Jerome says, Quid facit,
excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter; but in the same place
he proves from Scripture, that Episcopus and Presbyter are one and the same;
and therefore when he appropriates Ordination to the Bishop, he speaks of the
degenerated custom of his time. 2. Concerning Baptism, a private Person may
perform the external Action and Rites both of it and of the Encharist; yet is
neither of the two a Sacrament, or has any efficacy, unless it be done by him
that is lawfully called thereunto, or by a Person made public and clothed
with Authority by Ordination. This Error in the matter of Baptism, is begot
by another Error, of the Absolute Necessity of Baptism.

7. To that which has been said, concerning your Majesty's Oath, I shall add
nothing; not being willing to enter upon the Question, of the subordination of
the Church to the Civil power, whether to King, or Parliament, or both, and to
either of them, in their own place. Such an Headship as the Kings of England
has claimed, and such a supremacy as the Houses of Parliament crave, with
Appeals from the supreme Ecclesiastical Judicature to them as set over the
Church, in the same line of Subordination, I do utterly disclaim upon such
Reasons as give my self satisfaction, although no man shall be more willing to
submit to Civil Powers, each one in their own place; and more unwilling to
make any trouble then my self: Only concerning the application of the
Generals of an Oath, to the particular case now in hand; under favor, I
conceive not how the Clergy of the Church of England, is, or ought to be
principally intended, in your Oath: For, although they were esteemed to be the
Representative Church, yet even that is for the benefit of the Church
Collective, Salus Populi, being Suprema Lex, and to be principally intended.
Your Majesty knows it was so in the Church of Scotland, where the like
alteration was made. And, if nothing of this kind can be done without the
consent of the Clergy, what Reformation can be expected in France, or Spain,
or Rome it self? It is no to be expected, that the Pope, or Prelate will
consent to their own ruin.

8. I will not presume upon any secret knowledge of the Opinions held by the
King, your Majesty's Father, of famous Memory; they being much better known to
your Majesty. I did only produce, what was professed by him, before the world:
And although Prayers, and Tears be the Arms of the Church; yet, it is neither
acceptable to God, nor conducible for Kings and Princes, to force the Church to
put on these Arms: Nor could I ever hear a reason, why a necessary Defensive
War against unjust Violence is unlawful, although it be joined with offense
and invasion which is intended for Defense, but so that Arms are laid down
when the Offensive War cease: by which it does appear, that the War on the
other side, was, in the nature thereof, Defensive.

9. Concerning the forcing of Conscience, which I pretermitted in my other
Paper, I am forced now, but without forcing of my Conscience, to speak of. Our
Conscience may be said to be forced; either by our selves, or by others. By our
selves, 1. when we stop the ear of our Conscience and will not hearken, or
give place to information, resolving obstinately, Ne si persuaseris,
persuadebis; which is no less then a resisting of the Holy Ghost, and the
hardening of our hearts. 2. Or when we stop the mouth and suppress the clamours
of our Conscience; resolving rather to suffer the worm to gnaw, and the fire
to burn inwardly, then to make profession of that we are convinced to be
Truth. 3. Or when we sear our Conscience, as with an hot Iron, that it
becomes senseless; which is the punishment of the former: unto which is
opposed, the truly Tender Conscience; such as Josiah had, 2 Kings 22.19.
Again, 1. Our Conscience is said to be forced by others; when they obtrude
upon us what is in it self evil and unlawful; which if we admit, against our
own Conscience, we sin, two ways, one is, by doing that which is in it
self evil and unlawful; the other is, by doing it against a dictate of
Conscience, which is a contempt of God, whose Vicegerent it is. 2. Or when
others urge us to do that which is in it self good, or may lawfully be done,
but through error of Conscience, we judge it to be evil, and unlawful: in
this case, if we do not that which is pressed upon us, we sin, because the
thing is good and lawful: And if we do it, we sin; because we do against
our Conscience.
Which in this case binds, but obliges not: And yet there is a way to escape
out of this labyrinth, it being repugnant to the equity of the will of God to
lay a Necessity of sinning upon any man: The only way is, to lay aside such a
Conscience; it being a part of the Old man: Which we are commanded to put off;
otherwise, we being sufficiently informed, and yet cleaving to our old error,
we rather do violence to our Conscience our selves then suffer violence from
others. The Application, for Answering the Quaere, I leave to your Majesty.

Newcastle, June 17. 1646.
For Mr. Alex. Henderson. In Reply to his second Paper, June 22. 1646.
His MAJETIES third Paper.
1. I It were arrogance, besides loss of time, in Me to vie preambles with
you; For, it is truth I seek, and neither praise, nor victory; wherefore I
shall only insist upon those things which are merely necessary to my own
satisfaction; in order to which, I desired the assistance of some Divines;
whereupon I will insist no further, save only to wish, that you may not (as I
have known many Men do) lose time by being mistaken in the way to save it,
wherein I have only sought to disburden My self, but to lay no blame upon
you, and so I leave it.

2. Nor will I say more of the second then this, that I am glad you have so
well approved of what I have said concerning My education and reason; but then
remember, that another Man's will, is at least, as weak a ground, to build My
Faith upon, as My former education.

3. In this there are two points; First, concerning the Reforming power, then
anent the English Reformation; For the first, I confess you now speak
clearly, which before you did but darkly mention, wherein I shall mainly differ
with you, until you shall show Me better reason: yet thus far I will go
along with you, that when a General Council cannot be had, several Kingdoms
may reform themselves, (which is learnedly and fully proved by the late
Archbishop of Canterbury in his disputation against Fisher) but, that the
inferior Magistrates of People (take it which way you will) have this power, I
utterly deny; For which, by your favor, you have yet made no sufficient
proof, to My judgment: Indeed, if you could have brought, or can bring
authority of Scripture, for this opinion, I would and will, yet, with all
reverence submit; but as for your Examples, out of the Old Testament, in My
mind, they rather make for, than against Me, all those reformations being made
by Kings; and it is a good probable (though I will not say convincing)
Argument, that if God would have approved of a popular reforming way, there
were Kings of Judah and Israel sufficiently negligent and ill to have made such
examples by; but by the contrary, the 16. Chap. of Numbers shows clearly, how
God disapproves of such courses: but I forget this Assertion is to be proved by
you; yet I may put you in the way, wherefore let me tell you that this
pretended power in the People, must (as all others) either be directly, or else
declaratorily by approbation, given by God; which, how soon you can do, I
submit; Otherwise you prove nothing: For the citing of private Men's opinions
(more then as they concur with the general consent of the Church in their
time) weighs little with Me, it being too well known, that Rebels never wanted
Writers to maintain their unjust actions; and though I much reverence Bishop
Jewels memory, I never thought him infallible; for Bilson I remember well what
opinion the King My Father had of him for those Opinions, and how He showed him
some favor in hope of his recantation, (as His good nature made Him do many
things of that kind) but whether he did, or not, I cannot say: To conclude this
point, until you shall prove this position by the word of God, (as I will
Regal Authority) I shall think all popular Reformation, little better than
Rebellions; for, I hold that no Authority is lawful but that which is either
directly given, or at least, approved by God. 2ly. Concerning the English
Reformation, the first reason you bring why Q. Elizabeth did not finish it, is,
because she took not away Episcopacy, the hints of reason against which
Government, yor say I take no notice of; now I thought it was sufficient
notice, yea and answer too, when I told you, a negative (as I conceived) could
not be proved, and that it was for Me to prove the affirmative; which I shall
either do, or yield the Argument, as soon as I shall be assisted with Books,
or such Men of My opinion, who, like you, have a Library in their brain: And
so I must leave this particular, until I be furnished with means to put it to
an issue; which had been sooner done, if I could have had My will: indeed your
second well proved, is most sufficient, which is, that the English
Church Government is not builded upon the foundation of Christ and the
Apostles; but I conceive your probation of this, doubly defective; for first,
albeit our Archbishops and Bishops should have professed Church Government to
be mutable and ambulatory, I conceive it not sufficient to prove your
Assertion: and secondly, I am confident you cannot prove, that most of them
maintained this walking position, (for some particulars must not conclude the
general) for which you must find much better Arguments than their being
content with the Constitution of the Church, and the authority and munificence
of Princes, or you will fall extremely short: As for the retaining of the Roman
leven, you must prove it, as well as say it, else you say little: But that the
conforming of the Church discipline to the civil policy, should be a depraving
of it, I absolutely deny; for I aver, that without it, the Church can neither
flourish, nor be happy: And for your last instance, you shall do well to show
the prohibition of our Savior against addition of more Officers in the Church
than he named; and yet in one sense I do not conceive that the Church of
England has added any; for, an Archbishop is only a distinction for order of
Government, not a new Officer, and so of the rest; and of this kind, I believe
there are diverse now in Scotland which you will not condemn, as the
Moderators of Assemblies, and others.

4. Where you find a Bishop, and Presbyter, in Scripture, to be one and the
same (which I deny to be always so) it is in the Apostles time; now I think to
prove the Order of Bishops succeeded that of the Apostles, and that the name
was chiefly altered, in reverence to those who were immediately chosen by our
Savior, (albeit, in their time, they caused diverse to be called so, as
Barnabas and others) so that, I believe, this Argument makes little for you: As
for your proof of the antiquity of Presbyterian Government, it is well that
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster can do more then Eusebius could, and I
shall believe, when I see it; for, your former Paper affirms, that those times
were very dark for matter of fact, and will be so still for Me if there be no
clearer Arguments to prove it, then those you mention: for, because there were
diverse Congregations in Jerusalem; ergo, what? are there not diverse Parishes
in one Diocese? (your two first I answer but as one Argument) and because the
Apostles met with those of the inferior Orders, for Acts of Government; what
then? even so in these times do the Deanes and Chapters, and many times those
of the inferior Clergy assist the Bishops; but I hope you will not pretend to
say, that there was an equality between the Apostles and other Presbyters,
which not being, does (in My judgment) quite invalidate these Arguments: And if
you can say no more for the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Thessalonica, etc.
then you have for Jerusalem, it will gain no ground on Me; As for S. Jerome,
it is well known that he was no great Friend to Bishops, as being none
himself, yet take him altogether, and you will find that he makes a clear
distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter, as your self confesses; but the
truth is, he was angry with those who maintained Deacons to be equal to
Presbyters.

5. I am well satisfied with the explanation of your meaning concerning the
word Fallacy, though I think to have had reason for saying what I did: But by
your favor, I do not conceive that you have answered the strength of my
Argument, for when you and I differ upon the interpretation of Scripture, and I
appeal to the practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal consent of
the Fathers, to be judge between us, methinks you should either find a fitter,
or submit to what I offer; neither of which (to My understanding) you have yet
done; nor have you shown how, waving those Judges I appeal unto, the
mischief, of the interpretation by private Spirits, can be prevented. Indeed,
if I cannot prove by antiquity, that Ordination and Jurisdiction belongs to
Bishops, (thereby clearly distinguishing them from other Presbyters) I shall
then begin to misdoubt many of My former foundations; (as for Bishop Davenant,
he is none of those, to whom I have appealed, or will submit unto) but for the
exception you take to Fathers, I take it to be a begging of the Question; as
likewise those great discoveries of secrets, not known to former Ages, I shall
call new invented fancies, until particularly you shall prove the contrary;
and for your Roman Authors, it is no great wonder for them to seek shifts
whereby to maintain Novelties, as well as the Puritans: As for
Church-ambition, it does not at all terminate, in seeking to be Pope; for, I
take it to be no point of humility to endeavor to be independent of Kings, it
being possible, that Papacy in a multitude may be as dangerous as in one.

6. As I am no Judge over the Reformed Churches, so neither do I censure them,
for many things may be avowable upon necessity, which otherways are unlawful;
but know, once for all, that I esteem nothing the better because it is done by
such a particular Church (though it were by the Church of England, which I avow
most to reverence) but I esteem that Church most, which comes nearest to the
purity of the primitive Doctrine and Discipline, as I believe this does: Now
concerning Ordination, I bad you prove that Presbyters without a Bishop might
lawfully ordain, which yet I conceive you have not done; For, 2 Timothy 1.6. it
is evident that Saint Paul was at Timothies ordination; And albeit that all the
seventy had their power immediately from Christ, yet it is as evident that our
Savior made a clear distinction between the twelve Apostles and the rest of
the Disciples, which is set down by three of the Evangelists, whereof Saint
Mark calls it an ordination, Mark 3.15. and S. Luke says, And of them he
chose Twelve, etc. Luke 6.13. only S. Matthew does but barely enumerate them
by their name of distinction, Mat. 10.1. I suppose out of modesty, himself
being one, and the other two being none are more particular: For the
administration of Baptism, giving, but not granting what you say, it makes more
for Me then you: but I will not engage upon new Question, not necessary for My
purpose.

7. For My Oath, you do well not to enter upon those Questions you mention;
and you had done as well to have omitted your instance; but, out of discretion,
I desire you to collect your Answer out of the last Section; and for your
Argumeent, though the intention of My Oath be for the good of the Church
collective, therefore can I be dispensed withal by others than the
representative Body? certainly no more than the People can dispense with Me for
any Oaths I took in their favors, without the two Houses of Parliament; as for
future reformations, I will only tell you that incommodum non solvit
Argumentum.

8. For the King my Fathers opinion, if it were not to spend time (as I
believe) needlessly, I could prove by living and written testimonies, all, and
more, then I have said of Him, for His persuasion, in these points which I now
maintain; and for your defensive War, as I do acknowledge it a great sin
for any King to oppress the Church, so I hold it absolutely unlawful for
Subjects (upon any pretense whatsoever) to make War (though defensive)
against their Lawful Sovereign; against which no less proofs will make Me
yield but Gods word; and let Me tell you, that upon such points as these,
instances, as well as comparisons, are odious.

9. Lastly, you mistake the Quaere in my first Paper to which this pretends to
answer; for my Question was not concerning force of Arguments (for I never
doubted the lawfulness of it) but force of Arms, to which, I conceive, it
says little or nothing, unless (after My example) you refer Me to the former
Section; that which it does, is merely the asking of the Question, after a fine
discourse of the several ways of persuading rather than forcing of conscience:
I close up this Paper, desiring you to take notice, that there is none of these
Sections but I could have enlarged to many more lines, some to whole pages; yet
I chose to be thus brief, knowing you will understand more by a word than
others by along discourse; trusting likewise to your ingenuity, that reason
epitomized, will weigh as much with you as if it were at large.

C. R.
June 22. 1646.
For His Majesty, Concerning the Authority of the Fathers, and practice of the
Church. July 2. 1646.
Mr. Alex: Henderson's third Paper.
HAving in my former Papers pressed the steps of your Majesty's Propositions,
and finding by your Majesty's last Paper, Controversies to be multiplied, (I
believe) beyond your Majesty's intentions in the beginning; As concerning the
Reforming Power: The Reformation of the Church of England; The difference
betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter; The warrants of Presbyterian Government; The
Authority of Interpreting Scripture; The taking and keeping of Public Oaths;
The forcing of Conscience; and many other inferior and subordinate Questions,
which are Branches of those maine Controversies: All which in a satisfactory
manner to determine in few words, I leave to more presuming Spirits, who either
see no knots of Difficulties, or can find a way rather to cut them assunder,
than to unloose them: yet will I not use any Tergiversation; nor do I decline
to offer my humble Opinion with the Reasons theoreof, in the own time
concerning each of them; which in obedience to your Majesty's command, I have
begun to do alalready. Only Sir, by your Majesty's favorable permission, for
the greater expedition, and that the present velitations may be brought to some
issue, I am bold to entreat that the Method may be a little altered, and I may
have leave now to begin at a Principle, and that which should have been, inter
Precognita: I mean the Rule, by which we are to proceed, and to determine the
present Controversy of Church policy; without which we will be led into a
labyrinth, and want a thread to wind us out again. In your Majesty's first
Paper, the universal custom of the Primitive Church, is conceived to be the
Rule. In the second Paper, Section the 5. The practice of the Primitive Church,
and the universal consent of the Fathers, is made a convincing Argument, when
the Interpretation of Scripture is doubtful; In your third Paper, Sect. 5. the
practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal consent of the Fathers, is
made Judge; and I know, that nothing is more ordinary in this Question, then to
allege Antiquity, perpetual Succession, universal Consent of the Fathers,
and the universal practice of the Primitive Church, according to the Rule of
Augustine, Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec a Consilio institutum, sed semper
retentum est, non, nisi Authoritate Apostolica, traditum rectissime creditur.
There is in this Argument at the first view, so much appearance of Reason, that
it may much work upon a modest mind; yet being well examined and rightly
weighed it will be found to be of no great weight; for beside that the minor
will never be made good in the behalf of a Diocaesan Bishop, having sole power
of Ordination and Jurisdiction, there being a multitude of Fathers, who
maintain that Bishop and Presbyter are of one and the same Order; I shall
humbly offer some few Considerations about the major, because it has been an
inlet to many dangerous Errors, and has proved a mighty hinderance and
obstruction to Reformation of Religion.

1. First, I desire it may be considered, that whiles some make two Rules for
defining Controversies; the word of God and antiquity, (which they will have to
be received with equal veneration) or, as the Papists call them, Canonical
Authority, and Catholicall Tradition; and others, make Scripture to be the
only Rule, and Antiquity the authentic Interpreter; the latter of the two
seems to me to be the greater error: because the first sets up a parallel,
in the same degree with Scripture; but this would create a Superior, in a
higher degree above Scripture: For the interpretation of the Fathers shall be
the (...), and accounted the very Cause and Reason for which we conceive and
believe such a place of Scripture to have such a sense, and thus, Men shall
have Dominion over our Faith, against 2 Cor. 1.24. Our faith shall stand in the
wisdom of man, and not in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. and Scripture shall be
of private interpretation; For the Prophecy came not of old by the will of
man, 2 Pet. 1.20, 22. Nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit, Homo jam Deo
propitius esse debebit, says Tertullian.

2. That Scripture cannot be Authentically interpreted but by Scripture, is
manifest from Scripture: The Levites gave the sense of the Law by no other
means, but by Scripture it self, Neh. 8.8. Our Savior for example to us, gave
the true sense of Scripture, against the depravations of Satan, by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, and not by alleging any Testimonies out of the
Rabbis, Mat. 4. And the Apostles, in their Epistles, used no other help, but
the diligent comparing of Prophetical writings; like as the Apostle Peter,
will have us to compare the clearer light of the Apostles, with the more
obscure light of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.19. And when we betake our selves to
the Fathers, we have need to take heed, that, with the Papists, we accuse not
the Scriptures of obscurity or imperfection.

3. The Fathers themselves (as they are cited by Protestant Writers) hold this
Conclusion, that Scripture is not to be interpreted, but by Scripture in self:
To this purpose, amongst many other Testimonies, they bring the saying of
Tertullian, Surge veritas, ipsa Scripturas tuas interpretare, quam Consuetudo
non novit; nam si noscet, non esset: if it knew Scripture, it would be ashamed
of it self, and cease to be any more.

4. That some Errors have been received, and continued for a long time, in the
Church: The Error of Free will beginning at Justin Martyr, continued till the
time of Reformation, although it was rejected by Augustine, as the Divine Right
of Episcopacy was opposed by others. The Error about the Vision of God, That
the Souls of the Saints departed, see not the face of God, till the Judgment of
the Great Day, was held by Universal Consent: the same may be said of the
error of the Millenaryes; and, which more nearly touches upon the present
Question, the Ancients erred grossly about the Antichrist and Mystery of
Iniquity, which did begin to work in the days of the Apostles. Many other
Instances might be brought to prove the universal practice of the Church, as
were not warranted by the Apostles; as in the Rites of Baptism and Prayer; and
the forming up and drawing together of the Articles of that Creed, that is
called Symbolum Apostolicum; the observation of many Feasts and Fasts both
Aniversary and Weekly.

5. That it is not a matter so incredible, or impossible, as some would have it
appear to be, for the Primitive Church to have made a sudden defection from
the Apostolical purity: The people of Israel, in the short time of Moses his
absence on the Mount, turned aside quickly, and fell into horrible Idolatry,
Exodus 32. soon after the death of Josuah, and the Elders that had seen the
great works, which the Lord had done for Israel, there arose another Generation
after them, which did evil in the sight of the Lord, Judge. 2. and 7. soon
after the building of the Temple, and settling of Religion by David and Solomon,
the worship of God was defiled with Idolatry: when Rehoboam had established the
Kingdom, he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, 2 Chronicles.
12.1. And the Apostle says to the Galatians, Gal. 1.6. I marvel that you are
so soon removed unto another Gospel: why then shall we think it strange, that
in the matter of Discipline, there should be a sudden defection, especially it
being begun in the time of the Apostles? I know it is a common Opinion, but I
believe there be no strong reasons for it, that the Church which was nearest
the times of the Apostles was the most pure and perfect Church.

6. That it is impossible to come to the knowledge of the Universal Consent
and Practice of the Primitive Church: for many of the Fathers wrote nothing at
all, many of their writings are perished, (it may be that both of these have
dissented from the rest) many of the Writings which we have under their names
are supposititius, and counterfeit, especially about Episcopacy which was the
foundation of Papal Primacy: The Rule of Augustine aforementioned does two
much favor Traditions, and is not to be admitted, without cautions and
exceptions.

Many the like Considerations may be added; but these may be sufficient to
prove, that the unanimous Consent of the Fathers, and the universal practice
of the Primitive Church, is no sure ground of Authentical interpretation of
Scripture. I remember of a grave Divine in Scotland much honored by K. James
of happy memory, who did often profess that he did learn more of one Page of
John Calvin, then of a whole Treatise of Augustine: nor can there be any good
reason, (many there be against it) why the Ancients should be so far
preferred to the Modern Doctors of the Reformed Churches, and the one in a
manner Deified, and the other vilified: It is but a poor Reason that some give,
Fama miratrix senioris aevi, and is abundantly answered by the Apologist for
Divine Providence. If your Majesty the still unsatisfied concerning the Rule, I
know not to what purpose I should proceed or trouble your Majesty any more.

Newcastle, July 2. 1646.
For Mr. Alex: Henderson, July 3. 1646.
His MAJESTY'S fourth Paper.
I Shall very willing follow the method you have begun in your third Paper; but
I do not conceive, that My last Paper multiplies more Controversies than My
first gave occasion for; having been so far from augmenting the Heads of our
Disputation, that I have omitted the answering many things, in both your
Papers, expressly to avoid raising of new and needless Questions; desiring to
have only so many debated, as are simply necessary to show, whether, or not, I
may with a safe conscience give way to the alteration of Church Government in
England; and indeed I like very well, to begin with the settling of the Rule, by
which We are to proceed, and determine the present Controversy; to which
purpose (as I conceive) My third Paper shows you an excellent way; for there,
I offer you a Judge between us, or desire you to find out a better, which, to
My judgment, you have not yet done, (though you have sought to invalidate
Mine) For, if you understand to have offered the Scripture, though no Man shall
pay more reverence, nor submit more humbly to it, than My self; yet We must
find some rule to judge betwixt us, when you and I differ upon the
interpretation of the selfsame Text, or it can never determine our Questions;
as for example, I say you misapply that of 2 Cor. 1.24. to Me (let others
answer for themselves) for I know not how I make other Men to have dominion
over My Faith, when I make them only serve to approve My reason; nor do I
conceive how, 1 Cor. 2.5. can be applied to this purpose; For there Saint Paul
only shows the difference between Divine and Humane Eloquence, making no
mention of any kind of interpretation throughout the whole Chapter, as indeed
Saint Peter does, 2 Pet. 1.20. which I conceive makes for Me; for, since that
no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation; First, I infer,
that Scripture is to be Interpreted; for else, the Apostle would have omitted
the word Private: Secondly, that at least the consent of many learned Divines
is necessary, and so a fortiore, that of the Catholic Church, ought to be an
authentic Judge, when Men differ: And is it a good Argument? because ( Mat.
4.4.7.10.) Scripture is best interpreted by it self, therefore that all other
interpretations are unlawful? certainly you cannot think: Thus having showed
you that We differ, about the meaning of the Scripture, and are like to do so;
certainly there ought to be for this, as well as other things, a Rule or a
Judge between us, to determine our differences, or, at least, to make our
Probations and Arguments Relevant; therefore evading, for this time, to Answer
your 6 Considerations (not I assure you for the difficulty of them, but the
starting of new Questions) I desire you only to show Me a better, than what I
have offered unto you.

C. R.
Newcastle, July 3. 1646.
For Mr. Alex: Henderson, A particular Answer to Mr. Alex: Hendersons, July 3.
16. 1646.
His MAJESTY'S fifth Paper.
Until you shall find out a fitter way to decide our Difference in Opinion
concerning Interpretation of Scripture than the Consent of the Fathers, and the
Universal Practice of the Primitive Church, I cannot but pass you My Judgment
anent those 6 Considerations, which you offered to invalidate those
Authorities, that I so much reverence.

1. In the first you mention two Rules for defining of Controversies, and seek
a most old way to confute them, as I think; For you allege, that there is
more attributed to them, then I believe you can prove, by the Consent of most
learned Men (there being no Question, but there are always some flattering
Fools that can commend nothing but with hyperbolick expressions) and you know
that supposito quolibet, sequitur quidlibet; besides do you think, that
albeit some ignorant Fellows, should attribute more power to Presbyters, than
is really due unto them, that thereby their just reverence and authority is
diminished? So I see no reason why I may not safely maintain that the
Interpretation of Fathers, is a most excellent strengthening to My Opinion,
though Others should attribute the Cause and Reason of their Faith unto it.

2. As there is no Question, but that Scripture is the far best Interpreter
of it self, so I see nothing in this, negatively proved, to exclude any other,
notwithstanding your positive affirmation.

3. Nor in the next, for I hope you will not be the first to condemn your
self, Me, and innumerable Others, who yet unblamably have not tied themselves
to this Rule.

4. If in this you only intend to prove, that Errors were always breeding in
the Church, I shall not deny it, yet that makes little (as I conceive) to your
purpose; but if your meaning be, to accuse the Universal Practice of the
Church with Error, I must say it is a very bold undertaking; and, (if your
cannot justify your self by clear places in Scripture) much to be blamed,
wherein you must not allege, that to be universally received, which was not,
as I dare say, that the Controversy about Free will, was never yet decided, by
Occumenicall, or General Council; nor must you presume to call that an Error,
which really the Catholic Church maintained (as in Rites of Baptism, Forms
of Prayer, Observation of Feasts, Fasts, etc.) except you can prove it so by
the Word of God; and it is not enough to say, that such a thing was not
warranted by the Apostles, but you must prove by their Doctrine, that such a
thing was unlawful, or else the Practice of the Church is warrant enough for
Me to follow and obey that Custom, whatsoever it be, and think it good, and
shall believe that the Apostles Creed was made by them, (such Reverence I bear
to the Churches Tradition) until other Authors be certainly found out.

5. I was taught that de posse ad esse was no good Argument; and indeed to Me
it is incredible, that any custom of the Catholic Church was erroneous,
which was not contradicted, by Orthodox, learned Men, in the times of their
first Practice, as is easily perceived that all those Defections were, (some of
them may be justly called Rebellions) which you mention.

6. I deny it is impossible, (though I confess it difficult) to come to the
knowledge of the Universal Consent, and Practice of the Primitive Church,
therefore I confess a Man ought to be careful how to believe things of this
nature; wherefore I conceive this to be only an Argument for Caution.

My Conclusion is, that albeit I never esteemed any Authority equal to the
Scriptures; yet I do think the Unanimous Consent of the Fathers, and the
Universal Practice of the Primitive Church, to be the best and most
Authentical Interpreters of Gods word, and consequently the fittest Judges
between Me and you, when we differ, until you shall find Me better: For
example, I think you for the present, the best Preacher in New Castle, yet I
believe you may err, and possibly a better Preacher may come, but till then,
must retain My Opinion.

C. R.
Newcastle, July 16. 1646.
THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 9. l. 29. and 30. read, It cannot be brought.

But that is not the Ben; p. 11. l. 4. r. only in the p. 29. l. 28. r. very


