THE GREAT DANGER OF Covenant-refusing, AND Covenant Breaking. Presented In a
Sermon preached before the Right Honorable THOMAS ADAMS Lord Mayor, and the
Right Worshipful the Sheriffs, and the Aldermen his Brethren, and the rest of
the Common Council of the famous City of London, Jan. 14. 1645.

Upon which day the solemn League and Covenant was renewed by them and their
Officers with prayer and fasting at MICHAEL Basinshaw, LONDON.

BY EDMUND CALAMY, B. D. and Pastor of Aldermanbury LONDON.

PSALM. 76. 11. Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God.

ECCL. 5. 4, 5. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he
has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed.

Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not
pay.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the Crane in
Pauls-Church-yard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Thomas Adams Lord Mayor, and to the Right Worshipful
the Sheriffs and the Aldermen his brethren, and the rest of the
Common Council.
I Read in the Book of Nehemiah, that when the wall of Jerusalem was in
building, the builders met with so much opposition, that they were forced to
build with their weapons in one hand, and with their working tools in the
other. They had enemies from without, and they had secret enemies amongst
themselves. They met with many discouragements; but God carried them through
all, and at last they finished the wall to the confusion of their enemies, and
the rejoicing of their friends. Nehemiah's condition is our condition. The
Discipline and Government of the Church, is to the Church as a wall is to a
City. A City without walls is exposed to every enemy: so is the Church without a
Government. This wall is now in building: the Parliament (blessed be God) has
contributed very much to this building; but yet we meet with mountains of
opposition, and with many discouragements. Our enemies say, What do these
feeble Presbyterians mean? will they fortify themselves? will they make an
end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which
are burnt? Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break
down their stone-wall. Our enemies also raise false reports to weaken the hands
of the builders, and to make us afraid, as they did, Neh. 6. 6. 10. They say,
that the Presbyterian Government (which is the Government that comes nearest
the Word, and the Government of the best Reformed Churches) will prove
Tyrannical, and Episcopal. And that it is better to be under one Bishop then
under a hundred. But we answer, as Nehemiah did, Neh. 4. 4. Hear o our God, for
we are despised; and turn their reproach upon their own head. And as Neh. 6. 9.
Now therefore, o our God, strengthen our hands. But that which is worser then
this, is; that our seeming friends seek to undermine us, and to terrify us,
and say, as Neh. 4. 11. They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the
midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. And others are
ready to discourage us, and say as it is, Neh. 4. 10. And Judah said, The
strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish, so
that we are not able to build the wall. It is impossible (say some) to purge
our Churches according to the rule, they are so full of rubbish, and therefore
it is better and safer to study Separation from, rather then Reformation of our
Churches. But yet notwithstanding all these oppositions, and discouragements, I
doubt not but God Almighty will in his due time finish this wall of his, and so
perfect his own work, that all the enemies thereof shall cast down their eyes,
and perceive that this work was wrought of our God, Neh. 6. 16.

For the effecting of this blessed work, God has raised us up a happy
Parliament. And also God has raised you up ( Right Honorable, Right
Worshipful, and the rest of the Common Council) and has raised up your
spirits to strengthen our hands to this work, and to build the wall together
with us, (each of us in our places) that so the Church may no longer lie waste,
and open to all Errors and Heresies, and that we may be no longer a reproach to
all other reformed Churches. This work by your help will quickly be finished,
as it is written, Neh. 4. 6. So we built the wall, and all the wall was joined
together unto the half thereof, for the people had a mind to the work.

The times wherein you live are indeed very troublesome: but be not
discouraged; for it is foretold, Dan. 9. 25. That the wall of Jerusalem shall
be rebuilt, even in troublous times. And let me say to you as Mordecai to
Esther, Esther 4. 14. Who knows whether God has not raised you up to be
Mayor, to be Sheriffs, Aldermen, and Common Council men for such a time as
this is? Go on courageously, and God will trouble those that trouble you, and
bring good to you, and to the Church out of these troubles. We read of the
Pool of Bethesda, that when the water was troubled, then it became a healing
water. The untroubled water, was an unhealing water. So will God do with you;
he will make the troubled waters of the Sanctuary to become healing waters:
Insomuch as we all shall say, Periissemus nisi periissemus; We should have been
undone had we not been undone. Only be strong and of a good courage: I say it
again, be strong and of a good courage. I say it the third time (for so did God
to Joshua in 4 verses, Joshuah 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. Be strong of a good courage. The
Lord has made you instruments to do much good for Church and State; the same
God make you every day more and more isntrumental.

And be not terrified and dismayed because of the many Heresies and Errors that
are in the City. For as when the wall of Jerusalem was once built, all their
enemies did immediately vanish into nothing, Neh. 6. 16. So when the wall of
the Church shall be once erected, I doubt not but these prodigious errors will
all vanish.

And as when the Sun arises, all wild beasts go to their dens; so when the
bright Sun of Christ's kingly government shall appear in our Horizon, I trust
all these beastly errors will betake themselves to their dens of obscurity and
oblivion. It was said of Augustus, that when he was first Emperor he found
Rome in a poor condition, but he left it in a glorious condition; Invenit
lateritiam, sed reliquit marmoream. My prayer shall be (and oh that God would
hear me!) that you may be able to say, When I was first Mayor, or first
Sheriff, or first Common Council man, I found the City a City full of
division, full of profaneness, full of errors and heresies; but now I shall
leave it full of truth, full of holiness, and a City at unity within it self.
Inveni lateritiam, reliqui marmoream.

For the better bringing of this to pass, you did lately renew your solemn
League and Covenant; at which time this ensuing Sermon was preached. Since
which time, not only the Sermon, but the Preacher of it, has undergone many
harsh and bitter censures. It is the wickedness of these days to build their
own designs upon the ruin of other men's good name. But surely God will never
prosper such bloody practices. It is said of Antiochus, a vilde person, Dan.
11. 28. That his heart shall be against the holy Covenant. We have many amongst
us, that in this are like unto Antiochus, whose hearts, tongues, and hands, are
not only against our solemn League and Covenant; but against all that preach
for it, or write in the defense of it. There is indeed a Covenant that some do
much contend for, and make the very form of a particular Church, without which
a Church cannot be a true Church, which is called a Church Covenant. For my
part, I conceive that whosoever shall say, that a Church Covenant (I mean an
oath expressed by formal words) is an Ordinance of Christ, and necessary to the
very being of a visible Church; does not only un-church most of the Churches of
Jesus Christ, but does also set up his own invention for an Ordinance of
Christ. In the New Testament we read of no such Church-oath at the admission
of Members. And there is no place in the Old Testament (for ought I could ever
read) that speaks of a Church-oath to be taken at our admission into
Church Fellowship. Indeed we have mention made of a National Covenant, and of
the Covenant of grace, and of subscribing with our hands unto the Lord. But
what are these to a Church-oath; without which, no man is to be accounted a
Churchmember, or to have right to the seals of the covenant of grace? To urge
this as an Ordinance of Christ, is to set our posts by Gods posts, and our
threshold by Gods threshold, Ezekiel. 43. 8. But if I should expatiate any further
in this point, I should exceed the limits of an Epistle, and therefore I
forbear.

My hearty desire is, That this Covenant which you have now taken the second
time, may be carried about you in continual remembrance. And that it may serve
in stead of a thousand Arguments to make you zealously serviceable, to God, to
Church, and State. It is reported of Theseus, that he was so taken with the
wonderful works of Hercules, that he could not sleep for thinking of the
wonders of Hercules; and when he slept, he dreamt of Hercules wonders; and was
never satisfied till he had imitated him in working wonderful things also. And
it is also related of Themistocles, that he had always in his thoughts by
night and by day, the victories of Miltiades, and this made him insatiable till
he had imitated him. Oh that you would thus deal with the Covenant! That you
would think of it in your bed, in your closets, in your walks; and think of
what particulars you have sworn unto, and never leave thinking until you have
fully performed your Oath and Covenant. And if you keep Covenant with God, the
great God will keep Covenant with you, and all the blessings of the Covenant
which are mentioned in the book of God, which is the book of the Covenant,
shall be your portion for ever and ever. Which is the prayer of

Your much obliged Spiritual Servant EDM. CALAMY.

The great danger of Covenant-refusing, and Covenant Breaking.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 3. -- Truce Breakers; or, Covenant-breakers.
YOu are here met this day, to humble your souls before the Lord, and to renew
your solemn League and Covenant; I say, to renew it, and take it the second
time. It is no unusual thing for the people of God to repeat and reiterate
their Vows and Covenants. The great and solemn vow which we made to God in
Baptism, is renewed every time we come to the Lords Supper. And upon every Fast
day we bind our selves anew to God by Covenant. The people of Israel entered
into covenant, Ezra 10. 3. And the same people (as Chronologers observe) did
re-engage themselves in the same Covenant, Compare Ezra 7. 7. with Neh. 1. 1.
Neh. 10. The Scripture tells us, that Almighty God did Genesis 12. 3. 7. 13. 15.
15. 18. 17. 7, 8. Genesis 22. 18.
six times make one and the same covenant with Abraham; and swear the same
covenant twice to Isaac, Genesis 26. 4. 34. And therefore blessed be the great God
who has put it into your hearts to engage your selves a second time into a
National Covenant.

There are six reasons to justify this days solemnity before Six Reasons to
justify the renewing of the Covenant.
God and all that require satisfaction about it.

1. Because this National Covenant has been a long time as it were dead and
buried and quite forgotten amongst most people. And therefore it is high time
to raise it out of the grave of forgetfulness: and I hope this day will be to
the Covenant as a Resurrection from the dead.

2. Because of the great scorn and contempt that is cast upon it by diverse
sorts of people. The Malignants call it a conspiracy; others, though not
Malignants, yet malign the Covenant, and call it a snare, a trap, a
temptation, and account it a sign of a tender conscience to boggle at it, and
of a loose conscience to swallow it without scruple. And therefore to vindicate
the honor and reputation of the Covenant, and to wipe off the aspersions that
are cast upon it, you do well to take it the second time.

3. Because there are some that do openly profess their sorrow that ever they
took it, and would fain recant and retract what they have done. And therefore
to manifest that you are still of the same judgment, and that you do not
repent of what you have done, you do well to take it the second time.

4. Because of the pronenesse that is in all men (even the best of men) to
break covenant with God. A Covenant indeed is a golden Girdle to tie us fast to
God; it is a joining and glewing our selves to the Lord. The word (...) which
signifies an Oath, comes from (...) which signifies a Hedge. An Oath and
Covenant is a strong hedge to keep us from breaking out into disobedience. It
is an entering into bond to become the Lords; it is a binding our selves
apprentice to God. Voluntas (says Aquinas) per votum immobiliter firmatur in
bonum. But yet notwithstanding, the nature of the best man is very apt to break
these bonds, and to run away from his great Lord and Master, to suffer this
Hedge to decay, and this golden girdle to loosen and untye, and to disjoyne and
unglew himself from God. And therefore it is not only commendable, but very
necessary (and for this cause you are met this day) to enter into bond the
second time, to bind and inroll your selves again unto the Lord; to make up
this hedge, to tie this golden girdle yet faster, and to join and glue your
selves once more unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten.
It is reported of Bishop Hooper, that when he was at the stake to be burnt, the
Officers offered to tie him to the stake: but he said, You need not tie me, for
that God that called me hither will keep me from stirring; and yet because I am
partly flesh, I am willing you should tie me fast, lest I should stir. So may
the best Christian here present say: Lord I am carnal, sold under sin, I
have broken those golden cords of the Covenant with which I have tied my self
unto thee. Though I am spirit, yet am I flesh also: And therefore I come to
bind my self anew. As Dalilah dealt with Sampson, etc. so do I desire to
deal with my self, and to tie my self yet faster and faster to God, if by any
means I might be kept firm to him.

5. Because of the many glorious deliverances and salvations which God has
vouchsafed unto us. For since June last, we have had about 60 considerable
blessings and mercies* which all are as 60 Arguments to call upon us not only
to renew our thankfulness, but our Covenant also. Thus the people of Israel,
when God had delivered them out of Egypt, renewed their Covenant at Horeb, Exodus
19. And when they were delivered from their Wildernesse-enemies, Deuteronomy. 29. And
the same people did afterward, when God had given them the possession of
Canaan, re-oblige themselves by a covenant, Josh. 24.

6. Because of the sad condition the Church of God is in at this time. For
though God has given us glorious victories over our enemies, yet the Churches
of Christ lie desolate, Church-reformation is obstructed, Church Discipline
unsettled, Church-divisions increased. The famous City of London is become an
Amsterdam, Separation from our Churches is countenanced, Toleration is cried
up, Authority lies asleep. And therefore it is high time to take the Covenant
again, that so you may endeavor with renewed strength, as one man, vigorously
and courageously, for the settling of the tottering Ark according to the sphere
of capacity in which God has put you. You shall read in Scripture, that the
people of God did never any great service for the Church till they renewed their
Covenant; and you shall never read but that they did very great and glorious
services for the Church, after the renewing of their covenant with God. In
Zerubbabels time the Temple-work ceased for many years; but after Ezra and
Nehemiah caused the people to enter into covenant with God, it went on
prosperously and uninterruptedly. What famous things did the people of God
after Jehojada had drawn them into a covenant! 2. Kings 11. 7. 18. All the
people of the Lord went into the house of Baal, and brake it down, his Altars
and his Images brake they in pieces thoroughly, etc. The like we read of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 14, 15, 16. and of King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32, 33. And thus I
doubt not but you will endeavor to do in an orderly way according to your
places.

These are the Arguments to justify this days work before God to all the
Christian world.

To help you in this, so pious, so Christian, so necessary, so solemn a
business, I have chosen this Text. In the beginning of the Chapter the Apostle
tells us the condition that the Church of God should be in, in the last days.
This know also, that in the last days perilous time shall come. In the second
Verse he tells us the reason why these times should be such hard and dangerous
times; For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, etc. The reason is not
drawn from the miseries and calamities of the last times, but from the sins and
iniquities of the last times. 2 Chro. 15. 1.
It is sin and iniquity that makes times truly perilous. Isay 42. 24. 25.
Sin, and sin only, takes away Gods love and favor from a Nation, Judge. 6. 13.
and makes God turn an enemy to it. 1 Samuel 28. 15, 16.
Sin causes God to take away the purity and power of his Ordinances from a
Nation. Sin makes all the creatures to be armed against us, Rev. 2. 5.
and makes our own conscience to fight against us. Job 5. 23.
Sin is the cause of all the causes of perilous times. Sin is the cause of our
civil wars, 2 Samuel 12. 11. Sin is the cause of our divisions, James 4. 1.
Sin is the cause why men fall into such dangerous errors, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Sin
brings such kinds of judgments which no other enemy can bring. Sin brings
invisible, spiritual, and eternal judgments. It is sin that makes God give
over a Nation to a reprobate sense. Rom, 1. 24.
Sin makes all times dangerous. Let the times be never so prosperous, yet if
they be sinful times, they are times truly dangerous. And if they be not
sinful, they are not dangerous though never so miserable. It is sin that makes
afflictions to be the fruits of Gods revenging wrath, part of the curse due to
sin, and a beginning of Hell. It is sin, and sin only, that imbitters every
affliction. Let us for ever look upon sin through these Scripture-Spectacles.

The Apostle in four Verses reckons up 19 sins, at the causes of the miseries
of the last days. I may truly call these 19 sins, Englands Looking-glass,
wherein we may see what are the clouds that eclipse Gods countenance from
shining upon us: the Mountains that lie in the way to hinder the settlement of
Church Discipline. Even these 19 sins which are as an Iron whip of 19 strings,
with which God is whipping England at this day; which are as 19 Fagots, with
which God is burning and devouring England. My purpose is not to speak of all
these sins: Only let me propound a Divine project how to make the times truly
happy, for soul and body. And that is, To strike at the root of all misery,
which is sin and iniquity. To repent for, and from all these 19 sins, which are
as the Oil that feeds, and increases the flame that is now consuming of us.
For because men are lovers of themselves, Vsque ad contemptum Dei and
Reipublicae. Because men drive their own designs not only to the neglect, but
contempt of God, and the Commonwealth. Because men are covetous, lovers of the
world more then lovers of God. Because they are proud in head, heart, looks,
and apparel. Because they are unthankful, turning the mercies of God into
instruments of sin, and making Darts with Gods blessings to shoot against God.
Because men are unholy and heady, and make many covenants, and keep none.
Because they are (as the Greek word signieth) Devils, (...)
acting the Devils part in accusing the brethren, and in bearing false witness
one against another. Because they have a form of Godliness denying the power
thereof, etc. hence it is that these times are so sad and bloody. These are
thine enemies, o England, that have brought thee into this desolate condition!
These are the sins that will recruit the Kings army, if ever it be recruited:
and if ever God lead us back into the wilderness, it will be because of these
sins. And therefore if ever you would have blessed days, you must make it
your great business to remove these 19 mountains, and to repent of these
land-devouring, and soul-destroying abominations.

At this time I shall pick out the first, and the tenth sin to speak on. The
first is self-love, which is placed in the forefront; as the cause of all the
rest. Self-love is not only a sin that makes the times perilous, but it is the
cause of all those sins that make the times perilous. For because men are
lovers of themselves, therefore they are covetous, proud, unholy, etc. The
tenth sin is truce-breaking, and for fear lest the time should prevent me, I
will begin with this sin first.

The tenth sin then is truce breakers, or, as Romans 1. 33. Covenant-breakers.
The Greek word is (...), which signifies three things. First such as are
foederis nescii, as Beza renders it; or as others, infoederabiles; that is,
such as refuse to enter into Covenant. Or secondly, such as are foedifragi, qui
pacta non servant, (as Estius has it) or sine fide, as Ambrose; that is, such
as break Faith and Covenant. Or thirdly, such as are implacabiles, or as
others, sine pace; that is, such as are implacable, and haters of peace.

According to this threefold sense of the word, I shall gather these three
observations.

Doct. 1. That to be a Covenant-refuser, is a sin that makes the times perilous.

Doct. 2. That to be a Covenant-breaker, is a sin that makes the times perilous.

Doct. 3. That to be a peace-hater, or a truce-hater, is a sin that makes the
times perilous.

To begin with the first.

Doctrine the first. Doct. the first.
That to be a Covenant-refuser, is a sin that makes the times perilous. To be
foederis nescius, or infoedederabilis. For the understanding of this, you must
know that there are two sorts of Covenants. There are devilish and hellish
Covenants, and there are godly and religious Covenants. First, there are
devilish Covenants, such as Acts 23. 12. and Isaiah 28. 15. such as the holy
league (as it was unjustly called) in France against the Hugonites, and that of
our Gunpowder Traitors in England: such are our Oxford Covenants for the
destruction of the Parliament, and godly party. Now to refuse to take such
Covenants, is not to make the times perilous, but the taking of them makes the
times perilous. Secondly, there are godly and religious Covenants; such as Job
31. 1. I have made a Covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a
maid? Such as Psalm. 119. I have sworn I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments; such as 2 Chronicles. 15. 14. And such as this is, which you
are met to take this day. For you are to swear to such things which you are
bound to endeavor after, though you did not swear. Your swearing is not solum
vinculum, but novum vinculum, is not the only, but only a new and another
bond to ty you to the obedience of the things you swear unto; which are so
excellent and so glorious, that if God give those that take it a heart to keep
it, it will make these three Kingdoms the glory of the world. And as one of
the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland said when it was first taken in a most
solemn manner at Westminster, by the Parliament and the Assembly; That if the
Pope should have this Covenant written upon a wall over against him sitting in
his chair, it would be unto him like the handwriting to Belshazzar; causing
the joints of his loins to loose, and his knees to smite one against another.
And I may add, that if it be faithfully and fully kept, it will make all the
Devils in hell to tremble, as fearing lest their Kingdom should not long
stand. Now then for a man to be an Anticovenanter, and to be such a
Covenant-refuser, it must needs be a sin that makes the times perilous.

And the reason is, Reason. 1.


1 Because you shall find in Scripture that when any nation did enter into a
solemn religious Covenant, God did exceedingly bless and prosper that nation
after that time; As appears, 2 Chronicles. 15. 19. 2 Kings 11. 20. And we have a
promise for it, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. That thou should enter into Covenant with
the Lord thy God, etc. That he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, etc. And therefore to be a
Covenant-refuser, is to make our miseries perpetual.

2 Because as it is the highest act of Gods love to man, Reason 2.
to vouchsafe to engage himself by Oath and Covenant to be his God, Ezekiel. 16.
8.
so it is the highest demonstration of man's love to God, to bind himself by
Oath and Covenant to be Gods. There is nothing obliges God more to us, then to
see us willing to ty and bind our selves fast unto his service. And therefore
they that in this sense are Anticovenanters, are sons of Belial; that refuse
the yoke of the Lord, that say, as Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break his bands
asunder, and cast away his cords from us; such as Oderunt vincula pietatis,
which is a soul-destroying, and land-destroying sin.

3 Because that the union of England, Reason 3.
Scotland, and Ireland, into one Covenant, is the chief, if not the only
preservative of them at this time. You shall find in our English Chroniclers,
that England was never destroyed, but when divided within it self. Our civil
divisions brought in the Romans, the Saxons, Danes, and Normans. But now the
Anticovenanter, he divides the Parliament within it self, and the City within
it self, and England against it self; he is as a stone separated from the
building, which is of no use to it self, and threatens the ruin of the
building. Jesus Christ is called in Scripture the cornerstone, which is a
stone that unites two ends of a building together; Jesus Christ is a stone of
union, and therefore they that sow division, and study unjust separation, have
little of Jesus Christ in them. When the ten tribes began to divide from the
other two tribes, they presently began to war one against another, and to
ruin one another. The Anticovenanter he divides, and separates, and disunites;
and therefore he makes the times perilous.

The use is,

1 To reprove those that refuse to enter into Covenant with God; Use. 1.
and more particularly, those that refuse to take this solemn League and
Covenant. These are of two sorts. 1. Such as refuse it out of Malignity: 2.
Such as refuse it out of unnecessary scrupulosity; that raise and foment
doubts, to hinder themselves and others from taking it. As for the first, I
will not call your goodness and my charity so much in question, as to spend
time about them. And for the second, I conceive that those that scruple it, are
amongst the number of those that are absent, and therefore I should but idle
away precious time to satisfy the objections of those that are not present, to
recover satisfaction.

There are some men of whom I may say as the Apostle does to the Galatians,
Gal. 1. 6. I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you,
etc. And as Gal. 4. 15. I bear you record, that if it had been possible, you
would have plucked out your own eyes, and given them to me; Am I therefore
become your enemy, etc. So may I say of many: I wonder and marvel to see how
suddenly they are changed from that good opinion they once had of the Covenant;
For I bear the^ record, that there was a time when they not only took it
willingly, but would have hazarded their very lives in defense of it; How is it
then that the Covenant is become an enemy to them, and they unto the Covenant?
Surely the change is not in the Covenant, but in the Covenanters. I have much
to say in defense of it, and did say much when it was first taken; which now to
repeat will not be useful, and I believe for the company here present, very
unnecessary; and therefore I forbear.

The second use is to exhort you to be Covenant-takers this day, Use 2.
and to take it with these qualifications.

1. Solemnly, and seriously, and tremblingly; as in Gods presence, Ezra 10. 3.

2. With hearty grief and sorrow for all our former Apostasies and
Covenant-breakings, Jer. 50. 4. 5.

3. With judgment and understanding, Neh. 10. 28. rightly informed of the true
sense and meaning of every particular.

4. With a full assurance that it is an act very pleasing unto God, and that
God is much honored by it.

5. Freely and cheerfully, as they did, 2 Chronicles. 15. 14.

6. Faithfully and sincerely, with all your hearts and souls, and with your
whole desire; 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32. with a purpose to join your
selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten. Jer. 50. 5.

As for motives to persuade you to the practice of these things, and for rules
and directions about the manner of taking of it, I shall leave them wholly to
my Reverend brother who is to succeed; who will undertake this work fully and
at large. My chief aim is at the second doctrine, which is,

That for a Covenant-taker to be a Covenant-breaker, Doctrine 2.
is a sin that makes the times perilous.

For the opening of this point, I must distinguish again of Covenants. There
are civil, and there are religious Covenants. A civil Covenant, is a Covenant
between man and man; and of this the text is primarily, though not only to be
understood. Now for a man to break promise and Covenant with his brother, is a
land-destroying, and soul devouring abomination. We read 2 Samuel 21. that
because Saul had broken the Covenant that Joshuah made with the Gibeonites, God
sent a famine in David's time of three years continuance: To teach us, that if
we falsify our Word and Oath, God will avenge covenant breaking, though it be
forty years after. Famous is that text, Jer. 34. 17, 18, 19, 20. Because the
Princes and the People brake the covenant which they had made with their
servants (though but their servants) God tells them. Because ye have not
hearkened unto me in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, etc. Behold,
I proclaim liberty for you, says the Lord to the sword, to the pestilence, and
to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the
earth; etc. We read also Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19, 20. That God tells Zedekiah because
he brake the covenant he had made with the King of Babylon, that therefore he
would recompense upon his head the oath that he had despised, and the covenant
that he had broken, and would bring him to Babylon, and plead with him there
for the trespass which he had trespassed against the Lord. David tells us, Ps.
15. 4. that it is a sin that shuts a man out of heaven. The Turkish histories
tell us of a covenant of peace made between Amurath the great Turk, and
Ladislaus King of Hungary; and how the Pope absolved Ladislaus from his oath,
and provoked him to renew the war. In which war the Turk being put to the
worst, and despairing of victory, pulls out a paper which he had in his bosom
wherein the league was written; and said, O thou God of the Christians, if thou
be a true God, be revenged of those that without cause have broken the
league made by calling upon thy name. And the story says, that after he had
spoken these words, he had as it were a new heart and spirit put into him, and
his soldiers, and that they obtained a glorious victory over Ladislaus. Thus
God avenged the quarrel of man's covenant. The like story we have of Rodolphus
Duke of Suevia, who by the Popes instigation waged war with Henry the fourth
Emperor of Germany, to whom he had sworn the contrary. The Pope sent a Crown
to him with this Motto: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho; but in the
fight it chanced that Rodolphus lost his right hand; and falling sick upon it,
he called for it, and said, Spectate hanc dextram legitima supplicia
expendentem, quae fidem sacramento munitam, and Henrico Domino meo datam, vobis
urgentibus, praeter aequum and jus temere violavit. Behold this right hand with
which I subscribed to the Emperor, with which I have violated my oath, and
therefore I am rightly punished. I will not trouble you in relating the gallant
story of Regulus, that chose rather to expose himself to a cruel death, then
to falsify his oath to the Carthaginians. The sum of all is, if it be such a
crying abomination to break covenant between man and man, and if such persons
are accounted as the offscouring of men, not worthy to live in a christian, no
not in a heathen Commonweal: If it be a sin that draws down vengeance from
heaven, and excludes a man from heaven; much more for a man to enter into a
covenant with the great Jehovah, and to break such religious engagement; this
must needs be a destroying and soulda^ning sin. And of such religious covenants
I am now to speak

There are two covenants that God made with man, a covenant of nature, and a
covenant of grace. The covenant of nature (or of works) was made with Adam, and
all mankind in him. This covenant Adam broke, and God presently had a quarrel
against him for breaking of it, Genesis 3. 8, 9. And to avenge the quarrel of the
covenant, he was thrust out of Paradise; and there was a sword also placed at
the East end of the Garden of Eden, to avenge covenant breaking. And by nature
we are all children of wrath, heirs of hell, because of the breach of that
covenant. And therefore we should never think of original sin, or of the
sinfulness and cursednesse of our natural condition, but we should remember
what a grievous sin Covenant Breaking is.

But after man was fallen, God was pleased to strike a new covenant, which is
usually called a covenant of grace, or of reconciliation; a copy of which you
shall read, Ezekiel. 16. 7, 8, 9. This was first propounded to Adam by way of
promise, Genesis 3. The Seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. And then
to Abram by way of Covenant, Genesis 17. In thy Seed shall all the nations of the
world be blessed. And then to Moses by way of Testament, Exodus 33. It is
nothing else but the free and gracious tender of Jesus Christ and all his rich
purchases to all the lost and undone sons of Adam, that shall believe in him;
or, as the phrase is, Isai. 56. 4. that shall take hold of the covenant. Now
you must know that Baptism is a seal of this covenant, and that all that are
baptized, do sacramentally at least engage themselves to walk before God, and
to be upright; and God likewise engages himself to be their God. This covenant
is likewise renewed when we come to the Lords Supper, wherein we bind our selves
by a sacramental oath unto thankfulness to God for Christ. Add further, that
besides this general covenant of grace whereof the Sacraments are seals,
there are particular and personal, and family, and national covenants. Thus
Job had his covenant, Job 20. and David, Psalm. 119. 106. And when he came to be
King, he joined in a covenant with his people, to serve the Lord. Thus Asa,
Jehoiada, and Josiah, etc. Thus the people of Israel had not only a covenant
in circumcision, but renewed a covenant in Horeb, and in Moab; and did often
again and again bind themselves to God by vow and covenant. And thus the
Churches of the Christians, besides the vow in Baptism, have many personal
and national engagements unto God by covenant, which are nothing else but the
renovations, and particular applications of that first vow in Baptism. Of this
nature is the covenant you are to renew this day, etc.

Now give me leave to show you what a sword-procuring, and soul-undoing sin,
this sin of Covenant Breaking is; and ethen th reason of it. Famous is that
text, Levit. 26. 25. And I will send my sword which shall avenge the quarrel
of my covenant. The words in the Hebrew run thus: I will avenge the avengement.
In Greek (...). The Latin, ulciscar ultionem; which imports thus much. That
God is at open war and at public desiance with those that break his covenant;
he is not only angry with them, but he will be revenged of them. The Lord has
a controversy with all covenant-breakers, Hos. 4. 1. or as it is, Lev. 26. 23.
The Lord will walk contrary to them. In the 29. of Deuter. first God takes his
people into covenant, and then he tells them of the happy condition they should
be in if they did keep covenant. But if they did break covenant, he tells
them, verse 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. That the Lord will not spare him; but the
anger of the Lord and his jealousies shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven. And the Lord shall separate him, etc. And
when the nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land?
What means the heat of this great anger? Then shall men say, Because they
have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. This was the
sin that caused God to send his people of Israel into captivity, and to remove
the candlestick from the Asian Churches. It is for this sin that the sword is
now devouring Germany, Ireland, and England, etc. God has sent his sword to
avenge the quarrel of his covenant.

The reasons why this sin is a God-provoking sin are, Reason 1.


Because that to sin against the covenant, is a greater sin then to sin
against a Commandment of God, or to sin against a promise, or to sin against
an Ordinance of God. First, it is a greater sin then to break a Commandment of
God. For the more mercy there is in the thing we sin against, the greater is
the sin. Now there is more mercy in a Covenant, then in a bare Commandment.
The Commandment tells us our duty, but gives no power to do it. But the
covenant of grace gives power to do what it requires to be done. And therefore
if it be a hell-procuring sin to break the least of Gods Commandments, much
more to be a Covenant-breaker, Heb. 10. 28, 29. Secondly, it is a greater sin
then to sin against a promise of God, because a Covenant is a promise joined
with an oath, it is a mutual stipulation between God and us. And therefore if
it be a great sin to break promise, much more to break covenant. Thirdly, it is
a greater sin then to sin against an Ordinance, because the Covenant is the
root and ground of all the Ordinances. It is by virtue of the Covenant that we
are made partakers of the Ordinances. The Word is the book of the Covenant, and
the Sacraments are the Scales of the Covenant. And if it be a sin of an high
nature to sin against the book of the Covenant and the seals of the Covenant,
much more against the Covenant it self. To break covenant is a fundamental
sin, it raseth the very foundation of Christianity, because the Covenant is
the foundation of all the privileges, and prerogatives, and hopes of the
Saints of God. And therefore we read, Ephesians. 2. 12. that a stranger from the
Covenant is one without hope. All hope of Heaven is cut off where the Covenant
is willingly broken. To break covenant is an universal sin, it includes all
other sins. By virtue of the Covenant, we tie our selves to the obedience of
Gods Commandments, we give up our selves to the guidance of Jesus Christ, we
take him for our Lord and King. All the promises of this life and that that is
to come, are contained within the Covenant. The Ordinances are fruits of the
Covenant. And therefore they that forsake the Covenant, commit many sins in
one, and bring not only many, but all curses upon their heads. The sum of the
first Argument is: If the Lord will avenge the quarrel of his Commandment, if
God was avenged upon the stickgatherer for breaking the Sabbath, much more will
he be avenged upon a Covenant-breaker. If God will avenge the quarrel of a
promise, if the quarrel of an Ordinance: if they that reject the Ordinances
shall be punished; Of how much severer punishment shall they be thought worthy,
that trample under their feet the blood of the Covenant? If God was avenged of
those that abused the Ark of the Covenant, much more will he punish those that
abuse the Angel of the Covenant.

The second reason why covenant breaking is such a Landdestroying sin is,
Reason 2.
because it is a most solemn and serious thing to enter into covenant with
God; a matter of such great weight and importance, that it is impossible but
God should be exceedingly provoked with those that slight it and dis-respect
it. The Vow in Baptism is the first, the most general and the solemnest vow
that ever any Christian took, says Chrysostom; wherein he does not only
promise, but engage himself by covenant in the sight of God and his holy
Angels to be the servant of Jesus Christ, and therefore God will not hold him
guiltless that breaks this vow. The solemnity and weightinesse of
covenant-taking consists in three things.

1. Because it is made with the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who will
not be trifled and baffled withal. And therefore what Jehosaphat said to his
Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for men, but
for the Lord, who is with you in judgments; wherefore now let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, etc. The like I may say to every one that enters into
covenant this day. Take heed what you do, for it is the Lords covenant, and
there is no iniquity with the Lord, wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be
upon you. For our God is a holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive
your transgressions, nor your sins, as Joshua says, Josh. 24. 19.

2. Because the articles of the Covenant are weighty and of great importance.
In the Covenant of grace God ingageth himself to give Christ, and with him, all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings, and we engage our selves to be
his faithful servants all our days. In this Covenant we oblige our selves to
do great matters that nearly concern the glory of God, the good of our own
souls, and the happiness of three Kingdoms. And in such holy and heavenly
things which so nearly concern our everlasting estate, to dally and trifle
must needs incense the anger of the great Jehovah.

3. The manner used both by Jews, Heathen, and Christians, in entering into
Covenant, does clearly set out the weightinesse of it, and what a horrible sin
it is to break it. The custom amongst the Jews will appear by diverse texts of
Scripture: Jer. 34. 18. it is said, And I will give the men that have
transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the word of the Covenant
which they had made before me, when they cut the Calfe in twain, and passed
between the parts thereof. The words they used when they passed between the
parts were, So God divide me, if I keep not covenant. Neh. 5. 12. Nehemiah took
an oath of the Priests, Genesis 15. 10. 17, 18,
and shook his lap and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and
from his labor, that performs not this promise, even thus be he shaken out
and emptied. And all the Congregation said, Amen. In the 15 of Genesis Abraham
divided the Heifer, and shee-Goat, and a Ram, etc. And when the Sun was down; a
smoking furnace and burning lamp passed between these pieces. This did
represent Gods presence, says Clemens Alexandrinus, and it was as if God
should say: Behold, this day I enter into covenant with thee, and if thou
keep covenant, I will be as a burning lamp to illighten and to comfort
thee: But if thou breakest covenant, I will be like a smoking furnace to
consume thee. Thus also Exodus 24. 6. Moses makes a covenant with Israel, and
offers sacrifices, and takes the blood of the sacrifice and divides it, and
half of it he sprinkles upon the Altar, (which represented Gods part) and the
other half he sprinkled upon the people, as if he should say, As this blood is
divided, so will God divide you if you break covenant. This was the custom
amongst the Jews. Amongst the Romans, Caesa firmabant foedera porca. And when
it was divided, the Feciales gave one half to one party, and the other half to
the other, and said, So God divide you asunder if you break this covenant, and
let God do this so much the more by how much he is the more able. Hinc foedus
a foedo animali (scilicet porco) diviso. Sometimes they did make covenants by
taking a stone in their hands and saying, If I make this covenant seriously and
faithfully, then let the great Jupiter bless me. If not, so let me be cast
away from the face of the Gods as I cast away this stone. This was called
Jurare per Jovem lapidem. All these things are not empty notions, and
metaphorical shadows, but real and substantial practices, signifying unto
us, That God will, and must (for it stands with his honor to do it) divide and
break them in pieces that break covenant with him. This day you are to take a
Covenant by the lifting up of your hands unto the most high God, which is a
most emphaticall ceremony, whereby we do as it were call God to be a witness
and a judge of what we do, and a rewarder or a revenger, according as we keep
or break the Covenant. If we keep it, the lifting up of our hands will be as an
Evening sacrifice; if we break it, the lifting up of our hands will be as the
lifting up of the hands of a Malefactor at the Bar, and procure woe and misery
and wringing of hands at the great day of appearing.

The third reason why God will be avenged of those that are Covenant-breakers,
Reason 3.
is, because that a Covenant is the greatest obligation, and the most forcible
chain that can be invented to tie us to obedience and service. God may justly
challenge obedience without covenanting by virtue of creation, preservation,
and redemption; he has made us, and when lost, he has purchased us with his
blood. But being willing more abundantly to manifest his love, and that we
might be the more fastened to him, he has tied himself to us, and us to him by
the strong bond of a Covenant; as if God should say, Oh ye sons of men, I see
you are rebellious, and sons of Belial, and therefore if it be possible, I will
make you sure. I will engage you unto me, not only by creation, preservation
and redemption, but also by the right of covenant and association. I will make
you mine by promise and oath. And surely he that will break these bonds, is as
bad as the man possessed with the Devil in the Gospel, whom no chains could
keep fast. When we enter into covenant with God, we take the oath of Supremacy,
and swear unto him that he shall be our chief Lord and Governor, and that we
will admit of no foreign power or jurisdiction, but that God shall be all in
all. We likewise take the oath of Allegiance to be his servants and vassals,
and that he shall be our Supreme in spirituals and temporals. Now for a
Christian that believes there is a God, to break both these oaths of
allegiance and supremacy, it is cursed treason against the God of heaven, which
surely God will be avenged of. Amongst the Romans, when any Soldier was
pressed, he took an oath to serve his Captain faithfully, and not to forsake
him, and he was called Miles per sacramentum. Sometimes one took an oath for
all the rest, and the others only said, The same oath that A. B. took, the same
do I. And these were called Milites per conjurationem, or milites evocati. And
when any soldier forsook his Captain, he had Martial law executed upon him.
Thus it is with every Christian: He is a professed soldier of Christ, he has
taken presse-money, he has sworn and taken the Sacrament upon it to become the
Lords, he is miles per sacramentu^, and miles per conjurationem. And if he
forsake his Captain and break covenant, the great Lord of Hosts will be
avenged of him, as it is written, Jer. 11. 3. Cursed be the man that obeys
not the words of this covenant. To break covenant is a sin of perjury, which is
a sin of a high nature; and if for oaths the Land mourns, much more for
breach of oaths. To break covenant is a sin of spiritual adultery; for by
covenanting with God we do as it were join our selves in marriage to God, as
the Hebrew word signifies, Jer. 50. 5. Now to break the marriage knot is a sin
for which God may justly give a Bill of divorce to a Nation. To break covenant
is a sin of injustice; for by our covenant we do enter as it were into bond to
God, and engage our selves as a creditor to his debtor, Now the sin of
injustice is a Land-destroying sin.

The fourth reason why God must needs be avenged of those that are
covenant-breakers, Reason 4.
is, because it is an act of the highest Sacrilege that can be committed. For
by virtue of the Covenant the Lord lays claim to us as his peculiar
inheritance, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine. Ier. 31. 33. I will be their God and they shall
be my people. It is worthy observation, that in the Covenant there is a double
surrender, one on Gods part, another on our part. God Almighty makes a
surrender of himself, and of his Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Behold, says
God, I am wholly thy God; all my power, and wisdom, and mercy, and goodness,
etc. is all thine, my Son is thine, and all his rich purchases. My spirit is
thine and all his graces. This is Gods surrender. On our parts, when we take
hold of the Covenant, we make a delivery of our bodies and souls into the
hands of God, we choose him to be our Lord and Governor, we resign up our
selves into his hands. Lord we are thine at thy disposing; we alienate our
selves from our selves, and make a Deed of gift of our selves, and give thee
the lock and key of head, heart, and affections, etc. This is the nature of
every religious Covenant, but especially of the Covenant of grace. But now for
a Christian to call in as it were his surrender, to disclaim his resignation,
to steal away himself from God and to lay claim to himself after his
alienation; to fulfill his own lusts, to walk after his own ways, to do what
he lists, and not what he has covenanted to do, and so to rob God of what is
his, this is the highest degree of Sacrilege, which God will never suffer to
go unpunished. And surely if the stick-gatherer, that did but alienate a little
of Gods time; and Ananias and Sapphira, that withheld but some part of their
estate: and if Belshazzar for abusing the consecrated vessels of the Temple
were so grievously punished; how much more will God punish those that alienate
themselves from the service of that God to whom they have sworn to be obedient?
It is observed by a learned Author, of three famous Commanders of the Romans,
that they never prospered after they had defiled and robbed the Temple of
Jerusalem. First, Pompey the great, he went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, a place
never before entered by any but the High Priest, and the Lord blasted him in all
his proceedings after that time. Vt ille qui terram non habuit ante ad
victoriam, deesset illi terra ad sepulturam: That he that before that time
wanted earth to overcome, had not at last earth enough to bury him withal. The
next was Crassus, who took away 10000 talents of gold from the Temple, and
afterward dyed, by having gold poured down his throat. The third was Cassius,
who afterward killed himself. If then God did thus avenge himself of those
that polluted his consecrated Temple; much more will he not leave them
unpunished that are the living temples of the Holy Ghost, consecrated to God by
a covenant, and afterward prove sacrilegious, robbing God of that worship and
service which they have sworn to give him.

The fifth reason why this sin makes the times perilous is, Reason 5.
because covenant-breakers are reckoned amongst the number of those that have
the mark of reprobation upon them. I do not say that they are all Reprobates;
yet I say that the Apostle makes it to be one of those sins which are committed
by those that are given up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. 31. The words are
spoken of the Heathen, and are to be understood of breaking of covenants made
between man and man. But then the Argument will hold a fortiori. If it be the
brand of a reprobate to break covenant with man, much more to break a covenant
made with the great Jehovah by the lifting up of our hands to Heaven.

The last reason is, Reason 6.
because it is a sin against such infinite mercy, such bowels of Gods
unexpressible mercy. It is said, Jer. 31. 32. Which covenant they brake,
although I was a Husband to them. That is; Although I had chosen them for my
Spouse, and married my self unto them with an everlasting covenant of mercy,
and intailed Heaven upon them, yet they have broken my covenant. This was a
great provocation. Thus Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5. When thou wast in thy blood and no eye
pitied thee to have compassion upon thee, I said unto thee when thou were in
thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee, Live. It is twice repeated. As if God
should say, Mark it O Israel, when no eye regarded thee, then I said unto thee,
Live. Behold, says God, verse 8. Thy time was the time of love. Behold and
wonder at it, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea,
I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou
becamest mine. And yet for all this thou have sinned grievously against me.
Woe, woe unto thee, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16. 23. There is a, five fold
mercy in the Covenant, (especially in the covenant of grace) that makes the
sin of covenant breaking to be so odious.

1. It is a mercy that the great God will vouchsafe to enter into covenant with
dust and ashes. As David says in another case, Is it a slight matter to be
the son in law of a King* So may I say, Is it a slight matter for the Lord of
Heaven and Earth to condescend so far as to covenant with his poor creatures,
and thereby to become their debtors, and to make them as it were his equals?
When Jonathan and David entered into a covenant of friendship, though one was a
Kings son, the other a poor Shepherd, yet there was then a kind of equality
between them. But this must be understood warily, according to that text 2 Cor.
1. 9. Blessed be God who has called us into the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. He is still our Lord, though in fellowship with us. It is a
covenant of infinite condescension on Gods part, whereby he enters into a
league of friendship with his people.

2. The mercy is the greater, because this covenant was made after the fall of
Adam; after we had broken the first covenant. That the Lord should try us the
second time, is not only an act of infinite goodness in God, but of infinite
mercy. There is a difference between the goodness and the mercy of God.
Goodness may be showed to those that are not in misery: but mercy supposes
misery. And this was our condition after the breach of the first covenant.

3. That God should make this covenant with Man, and not with Devils.

4. This sets out the mercy of the covenant, because it contains such rare and
glorious benefits, and therefore it is called a covenant of life and peace,
Mal. 2. 5. an everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of David, Esaias 55. 3.
It is compared to the waters of Noah, Esaias 54. 9. Famous are those two texts,
Exodus 19. 5, 6. Ier. 32. 40, 41. Texts that hold forth strong consolation. By
virtue of the covenant, Heaven is not only made possible, but certain to all
believers, and certain by way of oath. It is by virtue of the covenant that we
call God Father; and may lay claim to all the power, wisdom, goodness, and
mercy, etc. that is in God. As Iehoshaphat told the King of Israel, to whom he
was joined in covenant, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as
thy horses: So does God say to all that are in covenant with him; My power is
thine, my goodness is thine, etc. By virtue of this covenant, whatsoever thou
want, God cannot deny it thee, if it be good for thee. Say unto God, Lord,
thou have sworn to take away my heart of stone, and to give me a heart of
flesh. Thou have sworn to write thy law in my heart, thou have sworn to
circumcise my heart, thou have sworn to give me Christ to be my King, Priest,
and Prophet, etc. And God cannot but be a covenant-keeper. By virtue of this
covenant, God cannot but accept of a poor penitent sinner laying hold upon
Christ for pardon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Jer. 3. 14. Promissa haec tuasunt, Domine;
and quis falli timet cum promittit ipsa veritas? In a word, we may challenge
pardon, and heaven by our covenant; 1 John 1. 9. God is not only merciful, but
just to forgive us. We may challenge heaven through Christ out of justice.

5. Add lastly, that the conditions of the Covenant on our parts should be
upon such easy terms, therefore it is called a Covenant of Free Grace. All
that God requires of us, is to take hold of this Covenant; Is. 56. to receive
this gift of righteousness, Romans 5. to take all Christ as he is tendered in the
Covenant. And that which is the greatest consolation of all, God has promised
in his Covenant to do our part for us. Jer. 31. 33, 34. Therefore it is called
a Testament rather then a Covenant. (In the new Testament the word (...) is
always used by the Apostle, and not (...)) Heaven is conveyed unto the elect
by way of Legacy; It is part of Gods Testament to write his law in our hearts,
and to cause us to walk in his ways, etc. Put these things together. Seeing
there is such infinite mercy in the Covenant. A mercy for God to enter into
Covenant with us, to do it with us and not the Angels, with us fallen, with us
upon such easy terms; and to make such a Covenant, that contains so many, and
not only so, but all blessings here and hereafter in the womb of it; it must
needs be a land-destroying and soul-destroying sin to be a Covenant-breaker.

The use and application of this doctrine is fourfold.

If it be such a Land-devouring sin to be a Covenant-breaker, Use 1.
let us from hence learn the true cause of all the miseries that have happened
unto England in these late years. Of Information.
The womb, out of which all our calamities are come. England has broken
Covenant with God, and now God is breaking England in pieces, even as a Potter
breaks a vessel in pieces. God has sent his sword to avenge the quarrel of
his Covenant. As Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, with
whips made of the cords which they brought to tie their oxen and sheep withal.
A Covenant is a cord to ty us to God, and now God has made an iron whip of
these cords which we have broken asunder to whip us withal.

We are a nation in Covenant with God, we have the books of the Covenant, the
Old and New Testament; we have the seals of the Covenant, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper. We have the Messengers of the Covenant, the Ministers of the
Gospel. We have the Angel of the covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ fully and
clearly set out before us in the Ministry of the Word. But alas, are not these
blessings amongst us, as the Ark was amongst the Philistines, rather as
prisoners, then as privileges; rather in testimonium and ruinam, quam in
salutem, rather for our ruin, then for our happiness? May it not be said of
us, as Reverend Moulin said of the French Protestants; While they burned us
(says he) for reading the Scriptures, we burnt with zeal to be reading of
them: now with our liberty is bred also negligence and disesteem of Gods word?
So it is with us. While we were under the Tyranny of the Bishops, oh how sweet
was a Fasting-day! how beautiful were the feet of them that brought the
Gospel of peace unto you? How dear and precious were Gods people one to
another, etc. But now how are our Fasting-dayes slighted and vilified? how are
the people of God divided one from another, railing upon (in stead of loving)
one another? And is not the godly Mininistery as much persecuted by the tongues
of some that would be accounted godly, as heretofore by the Bishops hands? Is
not the Holy Bible by some rather wrested then read? wrested I say by ignorant
and unstable souls, to their own destruction. And as for the seals of the
covenant. First, for the Lords Supper; How often have we spilt the blood of
Christ by our unworthy approaches to his Table? and hence it is, that he is now
spilling our blood. How hard a matter is it to obtain power to keep the blood
of Christ from being profaned by ignorant and scandalous Communicants? and can
we think that God will be easily entreated to sheath up his bloody sword, and
to cease shedding our blood? Secondly, for the Sacrament of Baptism; How
cruel are men grown to their little infants, by keeping of them from the seal
of entrance into the Kingdom of heaven, and making their children (their own
children) to be just in the same condition with the children of Turks and
Infidels? I remember at the beginning of these wars, there was a great fear
fell upon godly people about their little children, and all their care was for
their preservation, and their safety; and for the continuance of the Gospel to
them, etc. But now our little children are likely to be in a worser condition
then ever. The Oxford Army labor to steal away the Gospel from them, and the
Anabaptist labors to steal away the seal of the covenant of Grace from them;
and that which is worser then all, there are some godly people love to have it
so. And all this is come upon us as a just punishment of our Baptismall
covenant breaking. And as for Jesus Christ who is the Angel of the covenant:
are there not some amongst us that un-god Jesus Christ? and is it not fit and
equal that God should un-church us, and un-people us? Are there not thousands
that have sworn to be Christ's servants, and yet are in their lives the Vassals
of sin and Satan? And shall not God be avenged of such a nation as this? These
things considered, it is no wonder our miseries are so great, but the wonder
is, that they are no greater.

The second use, Use 2.
is an use of examination.

Days of humiliation ought to be days of selfe-examination. Of examination,
whether we be covenant-breakers or no.
Let us therefore upon such a day as this is, examine whether we be not amongst
the number of those that make the times perilous, whether we be not
covenant-breakers? Here I will speak of three covenants: First, of the covenant
we made with God in our Baptism. Secondly, of the covenants which we have made
with God in our distresses. Thirdly, and especially of this covenant which you
are to renew this day.

First, First for the Covenant we make in Baptism.
of the covenant which we made in Baptism, and renew every time we come to the
Lords Supper, and upon our solemn days of fasting. There are none here, but I
may say of them, The vows of God are upon you. You are servi nati, empti,
jurati; you are the born, bought, and sworn servants of God, you have made a
surrender of your selves unto God and Christ. The question I put to you is
this: How often have you broke covenant with God? It is said, Isaiah 33. 14.
The sinners of Sion are afraid: who shall dwell with everlasting burnings? who
shall dwell with devouring sire, etc. When God comes to a Church-sinner, to a
sinner under the Old Testament, much more to a Christian sinner; a sinner under
the New Testament: and lays to his charge his often covenant breaking,
fearfulness shall possess him, and he will cry out* Oh! woe is me, who can
dwell with everlasting burnings? our God is a consuming fire, and we are as
stubble before him. Who can stand before his indignation? (Nahum 1. 6.) Who can
abide in the fierceness of his anger? when his fury is poured forth like fire,
and the rocks are thrown down before him. Who can stand? Of all sorts of
creatures, a sinful Christian shall never be able to stand before the Lord,
when he comes to visit the world for their sins. For when a christian sins
against God, he sins not only against the Commandment, but against the
covenant. And in every sin he is a commandement-breaker, and a
covenant-breaker. And therefore whereas the Apostle says, Tribulation and
anguish upon every soul that sins, but first upon the Jew; etc. I may add;
First upon the christian, then upon the Jew, and then upon the Grecian; because
the covenant made with the Christian is called a better covenant; and therefore
his sins have a higher aggravation in them. There is a notable passage in
Austin, in which he brings the Devil thus pleading with God against a wicked
christian at the day of judgment. Aequissime judex, judica quod aequum est,
judica meum esse qui tuus esse noluit post renunciationem; Vt quid invasit
pannos meos? Quid apud eum lascivia, incontinentia, etc. quibus ipse
renunciaverit? Quid intemperantia, quid gula, quid fastus, quid caetera mea?
Haec omnia mea post renunciationem invasit. Meus esse voluit, mea concupivit;
Judica, aequissime judex, quoniam quem tu non dedignatus es tanto pretio
liberare, ipse mihi postmodum voluit obligare. That is, Oh thou righteous
Judge, give right judgment! Judge him to be mine, who refused to be thine even
after he had renounced me in his Baptism; What had he to do to wear my
Livery? What had he to do with gluttony, drunkenness, pride, wantonness,
incontinencie; and the rest of my ware? All these things he has practiced
since he renounced the devil and all his works. Mine he is, judge righteous
judgment; For he whom thou have not disdained to dye for, has obliged
himself to me by his sins, etc.

Now what can God say to this charge of the Devils, but, Take him Devil,
seeing he would be thine; take him, torment him with everlasting torments?
Cyprian brings in the Devil thus speaking to Christ at the great day of
judgment, Ego pro istis quos mecum vides nec alapas accepi, nec flagella
sustinui, nec crucem pertuli, nec sanguinem fudi, sed nec regnum coeleste illis
promitto, nec ad paradisum evoco, and tamen se mihi suaque omnia consecrarunt.
I have not (says the Devil) been whipped and scourged, and crucified, neither
have I shed my blood for these whom thou see with me. I do not promise them a
kingdom of heaven, etc. and yet these men have wholly consecrated themselves
to me and my service. Indeed if the Devil could make such gainful covenants
with us, and bestow such glorious mercies upon us as are contained within the
Covenant, our serving of Satan and sin might have some excuse. But when as
his covenant is a covenant of bondage, death, hell, and damnation: and Gods
covenant is a covenant of liberty, grace, and eternal happiness, it must
needs be a sin inexcusable, to be willingly and wilfully such a
covenant-breaker.

Secondly, Concerning our vows to God in our distress.
let us examine concerning the vows which we have made to God in our
distresses: in our Personal distresses, and our National distresses. Are we
not like the children of Israel of whom it is said, Psalm. 78. 34. When he slew
them, then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God,
etc. Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth, etc. for their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant? Are
we not like unto little children, that while they are whipping will promise any
thing, but when the whipping is over will perform nothing? Or like unto Iron
that is very soft and malleable while it is in the fire, but when it is taken
out of the fire, returns presently to his former hardness? This was Jacobs
fault: He made a vow when he was in distress, Genesis 28. 22. But he forgot his
covenant, and God was angry with him, and chastised him in his daughter Dinah,
Genesis 34. 5. and in his two sons Simeon and Levi. And at last God himself was
fain to call to him from Heaven to keep covenant. And after that time God
blessed Jacob exceedingly, Genesis 35. 9, 10, 11, 12. We read of David, Psalm. 66.
13, 14, 15. that he professes of himself, that he would go into Gods house,
and pay the vows which his lips had uttered, and his mouth had spoken when he
was in trouble. But how few are there that imitate David in this thing?

Thirdly, Concerning the solemn League and Covenant. Questions about the
Covenant.
let us examine our selves concerning the solemn League and Covenant which we
are to renew this day. And here I demand an answer to these questions.

1. Are there not many amongst us that scorn it and speak reproachfully of it?
That deal with it as the Children of Israel did with Manna, which at first they
did so highly value, as that they could not be kept within doors from gathering
of it, Quest. 1.
no not upon the Sabbath day; but afterward they came to loathe it as much as
ever before they loved it. And do not we deal so with the Covenant?

2. Quest. 2.
Are there not some that write against it, and that say in effect, That the
perjury that is committed about it, is rather in taking of it then in breaking
of it, and that it was not a right, but a rash oath? which I speak not only to
the shame of those that write thus, but also to the shame of those that suffer
such things to be written and to go unquestioned.

3. Quest. 3.
Are there not some that put corrupt glosses upon it, and deal falsely in the
Covenant? that say, that by virtue of the Covenant all Ministers are bound to
renounce their ministry, (even that ministry which God has blessed and put
his seal unto by the conversion of thousands) and either to take it up again
by Ordination from the people; or if we find no warrant in the Word for that
way, then to turn Seekers, and to wait till God send Apostles to ordain
Ministers? And yet these men cannot but know that the Parliament in their
Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers, have declared, that this is not the
meaning of the Covenant. Others there are that say; That by virtue of the
Covanant no man ought to pay tithes to his Minister unless he will incur the
sin of perjury. These men may as well say, That by the Covenant no Tenant ought
to pay rent to his Landlord, and that no man ought to keep the laws of the
Realm. For we challenge our tithes by virtue of the Laws established, etc. We
challenge a sufficient maintenance by Gods law. But as for the tenth part
(though there are some that say much out of the Scripture for it) yet we
require it as due only by the laws of the Kingdom.

4. Quest. 4.
Are there not some that deal hypocritically in the Covenant? that take it
merely to serve their own turns, to save their credits, or to save their
estates, or to hide their malignancy? That are like unto the Samaritans, of
whom it is reported, that when the Jews were in adversity, they would renounce
the Jewish religion and all alliance with them: but when the Jews were in
prosperity, then they would pretend kindred, and profess themselves to be of
the Jewish Religion. Just so do many Oxford-malignants deal with the
Parliament. While we are in prosperity, they are Covenanters, and for the
Parliament. But if ever God should bring us again into a low condition, they
would quickly appear to be Anti-covenanters and Anti-parliamenters. I have
heard a story of a Jailer, that being required either to take the Covenant, or
to leave his place; he consulted with his fellow drunkard about it; and he
answered, That he could not deny but that the taking of the Covenant was a very
bitter pill: but seeing there was no remedy, his advice was, To swallow it down
and not to think on it. And shall not God be avenged of such a Nation as this?

But the great question, and that which does most nearly concern us that are
here, is;

5. Quest. 5.
Are we not Covenant-breakers? Do we not make the times perilous by our
falsifying of our oath and covenant with God?

In our Covenant we swear to six things.

1. Six things sworn unto in the Covenant.
That we will endeavor to be humbled for our own sins and for the sins of the
Kingdom. But where shall we find a mourner in England for his own
abominations, and for the abominations that are committed in the midst of us?
It is easy to find a Censurer of the sins of the Land, but hard to find a
true mourner for the sins of the Land.

Secondly, we swear that we will endeavor to go before one another in the
example of a real Reformation. But who makes conscience of this part of the
Oath? What sin have thou left, or in what one thing have thou bin reformed
since thou tookest this Covenant? We read, Ezra 10. 3. That they entered into
Covenant, to put away their wives and their children by them: which was a very
difficult and hard duty, and yet they did it. But what bosom sin, what beloved
sin, as dear to thee as thy dear wife and children, have thou left for Gods
sake since thou tookest this Oath? I read Nehem. 5. 13. that the people took an
Oath to make restitution, which was a costly duty, and yet they performed it,
says the Text. But alas! where is the man that has made restitution of his
ill gotten goods since he took this Covenant? I read, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. that
King Asa deposed his mother Maachah, her, even her, from being Queen, after he
had entered into Covenant: and that the people, 2 Kings 11. 18. after they had
sworn a Covenant, brake in pieces all the Altars of Baal thoroughly. But where
is this thorough Reformation, this thorough amendment of life? Indeed here is
much talk of a Reformation, but little practice of a Reformation. We say we
fight for a Reformation; but I fear lest in a little time we should fight away
all our Reformation: or if not fight it away, yet we should dispute it away.
For now all our religion is turned into Vtrum's, into Questions, insomuch as
that there are some that call all religion into question, and in a little while
will lose all religion in the crowd of questions. Inter disputandum veritas,
and religio amittitur. There was a time not many years ago, when God did
bless our Ministry in the City, to the Conversion of many people unto God;
but now there are many that study more to gain parties to themselves, then to
gain souls to God. The great work of Conversion is little thought on. And never
so few (if any at all) converted as in these days wherein we talk so much of
Reformation. And is this to keep Covenant with God?

3. We swear to endeavor to amend the lives, and reform not only our selves,
but all those that are under our charge. But where is this Family-reformation?
Indeed I read of Jacob, that when he went to perform his vow and covenant, he
first reformed his family, Genesis 35. 3. And that Joshua resolved (and performed
it) for himself and his family to serve the Lord. And so did Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
34. And oh that I could add, And so do we! But the wickednesses committed in
our families, proclaim the contrary to all the world. What Noblemans, what
Aldermans, what Merchants family is more reformed since the Covenant, then
before? We speak and contend much for a Church-reformation; but how can there
be a Church-reformation, unless there be first a Family-reformation? What
though the Church-worship be pure, yet if the worshippers be impure, God will
not accept of the worship? And if families be not reformed, how will your
worshippers be pure?

4. We swear to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms,
to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, confession of Faith,
form of Church Government, Directory for worship and catechizing, etc. But are
there not some that write against an Uniformity in Religion, and call it an
Idol? Are there not many that walk professedly contrary to this clause of the
Covenant? There are three texts of Scripture that people keep the quite
contrary way. The first is, Mat. 6. 34. 31. 25. Take no thought what you shall
eat, etc. take no thought for to morrw. And most people take thought for
nothing else. The second text is, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness, etc. And most people seek this last of all. The
third text is, John 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the
meat that endures for ever* etc. And most people labor not for the meat that
endures for ever, but for the meat that perishes. As these three texts are
kept, so do many people keep this part of the Oath; for there were never more
divisions and differences in the Church, never more difformity, and pleading
against Uniformity, then now there is.

5. We swear to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, etc. And yet not withstanding there are some that have taken
this Oath, that contend earnestly for a Toleration of all Religions: which (as
I conceive) is as contrary to this clause of the Covenant as Heaven is to Hell.

6. We swear against a detestable indifferency and Neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, etc. And yet how many are there
amongst us that are like unto Gallio, that care not what becomes of the cause
of God, so they may have peace and quiet? That will not be the backwardest of
all, and yet will be sure not to be too forward, for fear lest if the times
turn, they should be noted amongst the chief of the faction? That are very
indifferent which side prevail, so they may have their trading again? That say
as the Politician, That they will be careful not to come too near the heels of
Religion, lest it should dash out his brains: And as the King of Arragon told
Beza, That he would wade no farther into the sea of Religion, then he could
safely return back to shore?

In all these six particulars let us seriously search and try our hearts,
whether we be not amongst the number of those that make the times perilous.

The third use is for Humiliation. Use 3.
Let the consideration of our Covenant Breaking, Of Humiliation.
be a heartbreaking consideration to every one of us this day. Let this be a
mighty and powerful Argument to humble us upon this day of Humiliation.

There are five considerations that are exceedingly soul-humbling, if God
bless them unto us.

1. Five soul-humbling considerations.
The consideration of the many Commandments of God that we have often and
often broken.

2. The consideration of the breaking of Jesus Christ for our sins, how he was
rent and torn for our iniquities.

3. The consideration of the breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the
wine in the Sacrament, which is a heartbreaking motive and help.

4. The broken condition that the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and that Germany is in at this time.

5. The many Vows and Covenants that we have broken; our Sacrament-Covenants,
our Fasting-Covenants, our Sick-bed-covenants. And especially the consideration
of our often breaking of our Nationall-covenant which you come this day to
renew. This is a sin in Folio, a sin of a high nature: and if ever God awaken
conscience in this life, a sin that will lie like a heavy Incuba upon it. A
greater sin then a sin against a Commandment, or against an Ordinance. A sin
not only of disobedience, but of perjury. A sin of injustice, of spiritual
adultery. A sin of Sacrilege. A sin of great unkindnesse. A sin that makes us
not only disobedient, but dishonest. For we account him a dishonest man that
keeps not his word. A sin that not only every good Christian, but every good
Heathen does abhor. A sin, that not only brings damnation upon us, but
casts such into horrible disgrace and reproach upon God, that it cannot stand
with Gods honor not to be avenged of a Covenant-breaker. Tertullian says,
that when a Christian forsakes his covenant, and the colors of Christ, and
turns to serve as the Devils soldier, he puts an unspeakable discredit upon
God and Christ. For it is as much as if he should say; I like the service of
the Devil better then the service of God. And it is just as if a soldier that
has waged war under a Captain, and afterward forsaking him turns to
another, and after that, leaves this other Captain and returns to his former
Captain. This is to prefer the first Captain before the second. This makes
God complain, Jer. 2. 4. What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me that they
are gone far from me, etc. And in the 11 verse, Has any Nation changed their
Gods, which are yet no Gods? but my people have changed their glory for that
which does not profit. Basil brings in the Devil insulting over Christ, and
saying, I never created nor redeemed these men, and yet they have obeyed me,
and contemned thee, o Christ, even after they have covenanted to be thine. And
then he adds, Equidem ego istam futuram adversus Christum gloriationem hostis
insolentem gravius long esse statuo quam Gehennae supplicia. That is, I esteem
this insulting of the Devil over Jesus Christ at the great day, to be more
grievous to a true Saint, then all the torments in hell. A saying worthy to be
written in letters of gold. Seeing then that covenant breaking is so great an
abomination, the Lord give us hearts to be humbled for this great abomination
this day. And this will be a notable preparation to fit you to the renewing of
your Covenant. For we read that Nehemiah first called his people to fast,
before he drew them into a Covenant. According to which pattern you are here
met to pray, and fast, and humble your souls for your former
covenant breaking; and then to bind your selves anew unto the Lord our God. As
wax when it is melted will receive the impression of a seal, which it will not
do before: So will your hearts when melted into godly sorrow for your sins,
receive the seal of God abidingly upon them, which they will not do when
hardened in sin.

Is every man that sins against the Covenant to be accounted a
Covenant-breaker, Object.
and a perjured, sacrilegious person?

By no means. Answ.
For as every failing of a Wife does not break the Covenant between her and her
Husband; but she is to be accounted a Wife till she by committing adultery
break the Covenant. So every miscariage against the Covenant of grace, or
against this National covenant, does not denominate us in a Gospell-account
Covenant-breakers. But then God accounts us according to his Gospel to break
covenant, when we do not only sin, but commit sin against the Covenant, when we
do not only sin out of weakness, but out of wickedness; when we do not only
fail, but fall into sin: when we forsake and renounce the Covenant, when we
deal treacherously in the Covenant, and enter into league and covenant with
those sins which we have sworn against. When we walk into Anti-covenant paths,
and willingly do contrary to what we swear; then are we perjured, and unjust,
and sacrilegious, and guilty of all these sins formerly mentioned.

The fourth Use presents unto you a Divine, Use 4. An exhortation unto Covenant
keeping.
and therefore a sure project to make the times happy. And that is, Let all
Covenant-takers labor to be Covenant-keepers. It has pleased God to put it in
your hearts to renew your Covenant. The same God enable you to keep Covenant.
It is said, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32. The King made a covenant before the Lord, etc.
And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it.
And 2 Kings 23. 3. The King stood by a pillar and made a covenant before the
Lord, etc. and all the people stood to the covenant. This is your duty, not
only to take the Covenant, but to stand to the Covenant; and to stand to it,
maugre all opposition to the contrary. According (...) to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, etc. That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel,
should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. For it is
not the taking, but the keeping of the Covenant that will make you happy. God
is styled, A God keeping covenant, Deuteronomy: 9. 4. Neh. 1. 5. O that this might be
the honor of this City! That we may say of it, London is a City keeping
covenant with God. Great and many are the blessings entailed upon
Covenant-keepers. Exodus 19. 5, 6. Now therefore if you will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a kingdom
of Priests, and an holy Nation, etc. Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord
are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant, etc. Psalm. 15. 4.

There are three Covenants I shall persuade you in an especial manner to stand
to.

1. Epecially to keep, 1. The Covenant we made to God in baptism.
The covenant you made with God in Baptism. A Christian (says Chrysostom)
should never step out of doors, or lie down in his bed, or go into his closet,
but he should remember that word Abrenuncio; that is, He should remember the
time when he did renounce the Devil and all his works. Oh let us not forget
that which we ought always to remember! Let us remember to keep that Covenant,
as ever we desire God should remember us in mercy at the great day.

2. 2. The covenants we have made in our affliction.
The covenants which we have made unto God in our afflictions. Famous is that
passage of Pliny in one of his Epistles to one that desired rules from him how
to order his life aright. I will (says he) give you one rule which shall be
instead of a thousand; Vt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros esse
profitemur infirmi. That we should persevere to be such when we are well, as we
promise to be when we are sick. A sentence never to be forgotten. The Lord help
us to live accordingly.

3. 3. The solemn League and Covenant.
The covenant which you are to take this day. The happiness or misery of
England does much depend upon the keeping or breaking of this Covenant. If
England keep it, England by keeping covenant shall stand sure, according to
that text, Ezekiel. 7. 14. If England break it, God will break England in pieces.
If England slight it, God will slight England. If England forsake it, God will
forsake England. And this shall be written upon the Tomb of perishing England:
Here lies a Nation that has broken the (...) That it is the brand of a
Reprobate to be a Covenant-breaker, etc. It is the part of a Fool to vow, and
not to pay his vows. And God has no delight in the sacrifice of fools. Better
not vow, then to vow and not to pay, Eccl. 5. 4, 5. It is such an high
profanation of Gods Name, as that God cannot hold a Covenant-breaker
guiltless. It is perjury, injustice, spiritual adultery, sacrilege, etc. And
the very lifting up of your hands this day (if you do not set heart and hand on
work to keep covenant) will be sufficient witness against you at the great
day. We read, Genesis 31. 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 52, 53. That Jacob and Laban entered
into a covenant, and took a heap of stones, and made them a witness, and said,
This heap is a witness, etc. And they called the name of the place Mizpah: The
Lord watch between me and thee, etc. The God of Abraham judge betwixt us, etc.
Such is your condition this day. You enter into Covenant to become the Lords,
and to be valiant for his truth, and against his enemies. And the very stones
of this Church shall be witness against you, if you break covenant. The name
of this place may be called Mizpah. The Lord will watch over you for good, if
you keep it, and for evil, if you break it. And all the curses contained in
the book of the Covenant shall light upon a willing Covenant-breaker. The Lord
fasten these meditations and soul-awaking considerations upon your hearts. The
Lord give you grace to keep close to the Covenant; and in keeping of it to keep
God and a good conscience, with are both lost by covenant breaking.

There are six things which I shall persuade you unto in pursuance of your
Covenant. 6. Things to be done in pursuance of our Covenant.


1. To be humbled for your own sins, and for the sins of the Kingdom; and more
especially, Because we have not as we ought valued the inestimable benefit of
the Gospel, that we have not labored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to
walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us. Gospel-sins are greater then
legall-sins, and will bring Gospel-curses, which are greater then
legall-curses. And therefore let us be humbled according to our Covenant for
all our Gospel-abominations.

2. You must be ambitious to go before one another in an example of real
reformation. You must swear vainly no more, be drunk no more, break the Sabbath
no more, etc. You must remember what David says, Psalm. 50. 16. But unto the
wicked God says, What (...) instruction, and castest my words behind thee. To
sin willingly after we have sworn not to sin, is not only to sin against a
Commandment, (as I have said) but to sin against an Oath; which is a double
iniquity, and will procure a double damnation. And he that takes a Covenant to
reform, and yet continues unreformed, his Covenant will be unto him as the
bitter water of jealousy was to the woman guilty of adultery, which made her
belly to swell and thigh to rot, etc. Numb. 5. 22.

3, You must be careful to reform your families according to your covenant, and
the example of Joshua, and Jacob, and the godly Kings forementioned.

4. You must endeavor according to your places and callings to bring the
churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity
in religion, etc. O blessed Unity! how comes it to pass that thou art so much
slighted and contemned? Was not unity one of the chief parts of Christ's prayer
unto his Father when he was here upon earth? John 17. 11. Is not unity amongst
Christians one of the strongest arguments to persuade the world to believe in
Christ, John 17. 21. Is it not the chief desire of the holy Apostles, that we
should all speak the same things, and that there should be no divisions amongst
us, but that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment? 1 Cor. 1. 10. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. Is not unity the happiness of
heaven? Is it not the happiness of a City to be at unity within it self? Is it
not a good and pleasant thing for brethren to dwell together in unity? How
comes it then to pass that this part of the Covenant is so much forgotten? The
Lord mind you of it this day! And the Lord make this great and famous City a
City of holiness, and a City at unity within it self! For if unity be
destroyed, purity will quickly also be destroyed. The Church of God is una as
well as sancta. It is but one church as well as is it a holy church. And Jesus
Christ gave some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors
and Teachers, etc. till we all come to the unity of the faith. Not only to the
purity, but to the unity of the faith. The government of Christ is appointed
for the keeping of his Church in unity as well as purity. Those things which
God has joined together, let no man put asunder. That government which does
not promote unity as well as purity, is not the government of Christ. Oh the
misery of that kingdom where Church-divisions are nourished and fomented (...)
Would it not be a sad thing to see twelve in a family, and one of them a
Presbyterian, another an Independent, another a Brownist, another an
Antinomian, another an Anabaptist, another a Familist, another for the
Prelatical government, another a Seeker, another a Papist, and the tenth it may
be an Atheist, the eleventh a Jew, and the twelfth a Turk? The Lord in his due
time heal our divisions, and make you his choice instruments according to your
places, that the Lord may be one, and his name one in the three kingdoms!

5. You must endeavor in pursuance of your Covenant to extirpate Popery,
Prelacy, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found
contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness, etc. That so this City
may be a City of holiness, unity, and a City of truth, as is prophesied of
Jerusalem, Zach. 8. 3. Oh blessed truth, how is it that thou art so lightly
esteemed on! Is not truth more precious then gold, and more to be prized then
Rubies? Are we not to buy the truth and sell it not? Did not Christ come into
the world to bear Witness to the truth? Did not grace and truth come by Jesus
Christ? Is not Christ the way, the truth, and the life? How is it then that
truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter? how is it that truth
fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey? Esaias 59. 14,
15. How is it that men bend their tongues like bows for lies, Jer. 9 3.
but they are not valiant for the truth upon earth? The Lord make you lovers of
truth and peace.

6. You must take heed of that cursed monster of Indifferency and Neutrality.
Study these six texts of Scripture, Judge. 5. 23. Judge. 8. 6, 7. 16. Deuteronomy. 23 3,
4. Jer. 48. 10. Mat. 12. 30. Mar. 8. 38. O that these Scriptures were written
in your hearts with a pen of iron! A Neuter in Gods cause is a lukewarm
Christian, whom God will spue out of his mouth; he is a dead member of Christ's
body, fit to be cut off. Oh that the Lord would raise up your hearts this day (
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Well beloved) to a high pitch of zeal
for him and his cause! God has made you instruments to do wonderful things
for this kingdom: you have been the Saviors of the kingdom; you have
vindicated the liberties of the Parliament, and your own liberties; and the
Kings army by your means in a great measure is brought very low. But yet as
Christ said to the young man, so do I to you: There is one thing wanting: and
that one thing is the one thing necessary; The Church is unsettled, Discipline
unerected, Religion is tottering. For Zions (...) stir up your zeal and your
strength. Use your interest and your power in an orderly, and regular, and
peaceable way according to your places. And what can you not do?

You have ventured one arrow already, shoot another, and if that miscarry,
shoot another, you will speed at last. He that cuts down a tree though he cuts
it not down at the first and second blow, yet the first and second and third
blow prepare to the speeding blow, to that blow that cuts it down. You have
delivered one petition already, deliver another, and if that speed not, deliver
another. The speeding petition will come at last. In a word, do your duties
according to your oath, and according to your capacities, (and all in a regular
way) and leave the issue to God.

But some will say, Quest.
How shall I do to get up my heart to this high pitch that I may be a
Covenant-keeper?

I will propound these four helps. Ans.


1. Four helps to keep the solemn League and Covenant.
Labor to be always mindful of your Covenant, according to that text, 1 Chronicles. 16. 15. God is always mindful of his Covenant. It was the great sin of
the people of Israel, that they were unmindfull of the Covenant, Neh. 9. 17.
They first forgot the Covenant, and afterward did quickly forsake it. He that
forgets the Covenant, must needs be a Covenant-breaker. Let us therefore
remember it, and carry it about us as quotidianum argumentum, The Covenant must
be a daily argument against sin, and a daily weapon to beat back all
temptations.
and quotidianum munimentum. First, let us make the Covenant a daily argument
against all sin and iniquity, and when we are tempted to any sin, let us say, I
have sworn to forsake my old iniquities: and if I commit this sin, I am not
only a Commandement-breaker, but an Oath-breaker; I am perjured. I have sworn
to reform my family, and therefore I will not suffer a wicked person to tarry
in my family. I have sworn against neutrality, and indifferency, and therefore
I will be zealous in Gods cause, etc. Secondly, let us make this Covenant a
daily muniment, and armor of defense, to beat back all the fiery darts of the
Devil. When any one tempts thee by promise of preferment to do contrary to
thy Covenant, or by threatening to ruin thee for the hearty pursuing of thy
Covenant, here is a ready answer; I am sworn to do what I do, and if I do
otherwise, I am a perjured wretch.

This is as a wall of brass to resist any dart that shall be shot against thee
for well-doing according to thy Covenant. Famous (...) he required aid of him
against the Romans. When I was 9 years old (said he) my Father carried me to
the Altar, and made me take an Oath to be an irreconciliable foe to the
Romans. In pursuance of this Oath, I have waged war against them those. 36
years. To keep this Oath I have left my Country, and am come to seek aid at
your hands, which if you deny, I will travel over all the world to find out
some enemies to the Roman State. Odi, odioque sum Romany. If an Oath did so
mightily operate in Hannibal, let the Oath you are to take this day, work as
powerfully upon you; And make your Oath an argument to oppose personal sins,
and family sins, and to oppose Heresy, Schism, and all profaneness, and to
endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest
conjunction, and uniformity, etc. And let this Oath be armor of proof against
all temptations to the contrary. And know this one thing, that if the Covenant
be not a daily argument and muniment against sin, it will become upon your
breaking of it, quotidianum testimonium, and aeternum opprobrium. A daily
witness against you, as the book of the law was, Deuteronomy. 31. 26. and an
everlasting shame and reproach unto you and yours.

2. Let us have high thoughts of the Covenant. Actions, and affections follow
our apprehensions. If thy judgment be beleapred with a corrupt opinion about
the Covenant, thy affections and actions will quickly be beleapred also. And
therefore you ought to endeavor according to your places, that nothing be
spoken, or written, that may tend to the prejudice of the Covenant.

3. You must not take it in your own strengths, but in Gods strength. As it is
taken in Gods presence, so it must be taken with Gods assistance, with
selfe-abasing, selfe-denying, selfe-humbling hearts; you must take it joyfully
and tremblingly; rejoicing in God and in his strength, and yet trembling for
fear of your own unworthiness and unstedfastnesse in the Covenant.

4. You must take heed of the cursed sin of self-love, which is placed in the
forefront as the cause of all the Catalogue of sins here named; Because-men
are lovers of themselves, therefore they are covetous, etc. and therefore they
are Covenant-breakers. A selfe-seeker cannot be a Covenant-keeper; this is a
sin that you must hate as the very gates of hell.

(...) of my Sermon to speak on: but the time and your other occasions will not
permit. There is a natural self-love, and a divine self-love, and a sinful
self-love. This sinful self-love is when we make our selves the last end of
all our actions, when we so love our selves, as to love no man but our selves,
according to the Proverb, Every man for himself, etc. When we pretend God and
his glory, and the common good: but intend our selves, and our own private gain
and interest; when we serve God upon politic designs; Of this sinful
self-love the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2. 21. For all seek their own, and not the
things of Jesus Christ. And if we had a window to look into the hearts of most
people, we should find their hearts made up all of this Idolatrous self-love.
Men deal with God as it is reported of Cnidius a great Architectist, who
building a sumptuous Watchtower for the King of Egypt (a Tower to discover the
rocks to Mariners) such was his craft, that he caused his own name to be
engraven'd upon a stone in the wall, in great letters, and over that stone he
caused it to be plaistered with lime and mortar, and upon the outside wrote the
name of the King of Egypt, as pretending that he should have all the honor.
But here was his cunning: he knew that in time the water would consume (as it
did) the plaistering, and afterward his own name and memory should appear and
abide. Just so do most people deal with God and with his religion, and with
the public. If we look without doors, we shall see nothing written but pro
bono publico, etc. All their discourse is for the better promoting of
Godlilinesse: but if we could look within, we should see written, Pro bono
privato, etc. All their designs are for to promote themselves. They monopolize
and ingrosse all to themselves, as if made for themselves. Where this sinful
self-love dwells, there dwells no love to God, no love to thy brother, no love to
Church nor State. This sinful self-love is the Caterpillar that destroys
Church and Commonwealth. It is from this sinful self-love that the public
affairs drive on so heavily, and that Church Government is not settled, and that
our Covenant is so much neglected. Of this sin I cannot now speak: but when God
shall offer opportunity, I shall endeavor to uncase it before you. In the mean
time, the Lord give you grace to hate it as hell it self.


