HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE To the Lord General Fairfax; And His Act and
Proclamation concerning the Army, to be published throughout all the respective
Counties, Cities, and Market towns, within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales.

Also, a Letter from the Army to the King, and their new Propositions touching
his Majesty, and dissolving of the Parliament, and the time prefixed.

With a Declaration of the Lord General Fairfax touching the same.

AGreed upon by his Excellency, and the Council of the Army, and

Signed T. FAIRFAX.

Charles I's royal blazon C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENS DIEV ET MONDROIT

London Printed for Nathaniel Richardson, 1648.

THE DEMANDS OF THE ARMY Presented to His Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax,
concerning the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament.
May it please your Excellency,
WHereas we have a long time beheld the sad and bleeding condition of this poor
distressed and languishing Kingdom, and our hearts being burdened with the
unsettled condition thereof, we therefore thought requisite, to declare the
resentment of the Army (under your Excellencies immediate conduct) and to
present these ensuing Proposals; to the end, they may be speedily communicated
to both Houses of Parliament, viz.

1 That present provision be made for constant pay of the Army. 3 That a period
may be set for this present Parliament to end as soon as may be with safety,
and provisions made for future Parliaments to meet certain without Writ or
Summons. 3 That Rules may be set down between the People and their
Representatives. 4 That Laws may be made in things civil to bind all men, so
that men in no case of offense may be freed from the Law whereunto another is
subject. 5 That all those common grievances and desires expressed in the London
Petition, be speedily granted and redressed. 6 That the supreme power may be
declared and determined, that the want thereof may not be the ground of future
(as it has been of these former) wars. 6 That speedy and impartial Justice
may be executed upon all fomenters, contrivers, and actors in the first and
late war. 7 That the heavy burden of free quarter may be taken off. 8 That in
as much as the Assesments fall short to pay the Army; that therefore there may
be additionall supplies out of the Estates of the old and new Delinquents, that
there be no more tax or charge to the Commonwealth. 9 That forthwith an
account be called for from all persons that have been betrusted with any thing
for the State, that the Kingdom may be satisfied therein. 10 That the Deanes
and Chapters Lands may be given to pay the Soldiers Arrears, seeing the
Parliament have given away the Delinquents Estates that should have done it.

These things being the sense and resolution of the whole Army, they desire to
have the said Proposals communidated to the view both of King and people. And
in consideration thereof, his Excellency has declared their resentment to the
Committee of the Army,

Desiring that the intolerable burden, and many pressures now lying upon the
Kingdom, occasioned by free quarter, may be removed, And his Excellency further
declared, that he hoped ere this they should have received some good fruit of
their last consultations with the Council of the Army, the matters then agreed
on, being of such public concernment, and so much requiring expedition.

Further intimating, that he earnestly desires that the two Houses would be
pleased to improve their utmost endeavor for a quick dispatch in providing
effectually for the Army, to prevent those ill consequences, which otherwise
delay therein may produce.

THese Resentments and Declaration from his Excellency, were Ordered to be
printed and published, and communicated to both Houses of Parliament assembled
at Westminster.

Signed T. FAIRFAX.

The Armies Message to the KING.
May it please your Majesty,
MAy it please your Majesty, Whereas, the Officers and Soldiery under the
immediate conduct of his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, are possessed with
diverse fears and jealousies, that they cannot be safe for the future, unless
speedy Justice be executed upon the capital Offenders of this Nation; and that
this present Treaty may not conclude a peace with his Majesty, without care
taken to preserve the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of this Nation; the
which, being granted and confirmed, we do declare, that none shall be more
isntrumental for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace, then our
selves. And that so soon as your Majesty shall be pleased, to enact and make
provisions for us. We shall use our utmost endeavors for the reinthroning of
your Royal person.

An Abstract from Sea.
ON Sunday November. 12. Letters from the Navy say, That there has been a late
Fight aboard the Princes Fleet between the English Commanders and the Dutch,
the manner thus. Prince Rupert having received Commission from the Prince of
Wales, to command in chief aboard His Highnesses Fleet, the Mariners began to
mutiny, and resisted his power, denying submission to his Orders; whereupon the
Prince, and the rest of his Irish and Dutch Commanders, called a Council, and
disputing the quarrel, resolved to make he chief Fomenters thereof exemplary;
but the Seamen unanimously resolved to live and dye together, and upon the
Princes Demands, to have some of the Ringleaders delivered up to answer it
before the Prince of Wales, they gave him a volley, killed two of the Irish
Commanders, wounded Rupert, and took prisoners Cap. Hamon, and Cap. Fog, and
forced the rest of the Royalists ashore; it is thought they will speedily come
in upon Indemnity.

His Majesty's Declaration.
Right Honorable,
SInce the return of the Parliaments Commissioners here has happened very sad
accidents, occasioned by a Disputation between the Royalists and he
Parliamenteers, the manner thus: On Thursday night last Diverse of the Royal
party resorted to the George Tavern, where they began their Sovereigns health
lustily; and upon a conference touching his Majesty's last Concessions to the
Bill of abolition of Archbishops, etc. they resolved to declare to the
contrary, and thereupon made great Protestations to avenge their quarrel upon
some of the chief Instruments thereof: But beidg diskovered in the height of
their Arguments, four Files of Musketeers were sent to apprehend them, and to
bring them before the Governor; but upon their motion to secure them, the
Royalists resisted, drew their swords, and discharged their pocket pistols,
insomuch that a bloody conflict began to ensue, both parties engaging and
disputing the place with great resolutenesse and gallantry, for the space of
half an hour, till at last Ensign Smith entered the Room where they where,
killed two of them, and secured the rest, with the loss of three men; which
done, he guarded them to Carisbrook, and upon examination were ordered to be
committed to safe custody.

And his Majesty being informed of the said Riot and Commotion, declared a
great dislike thereof, saying, That He desired justice to be executed upon all
such Contemuers and Covenant-breakers.

His Majesty (since the Commissioners departure from hence) has declared a
very good liking of the Army, touching their constancy and great fidelity to
the trust reposed in them.

Dated from Newport in the Isle of Wight, the 13. of October. 1648.
November. 14. 1648.
LEtters from the Isle of Wight say, That his Majesty has sent a Letter to the
Lord Genesis Fairfax, intimating, His earnest desires for peace, requiring his
Excellency, and the Council of the Army to be instrumenall therein, promising
upon his Royal Word to satisfy all things by them desired, and to enact and
make proclamation thereupon, throughout all Cities, Counties, and Market
towns, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

FINIS.

