THE Godly Man's Ark OR, City of Refuge, in the day of his DISTRESS.

Discovered in diverse SERMONS, The first of which was Preached at the Funeral
of Mistress Elizabeth Moore.

The other four were afterward preached, and are all of them now made public,
for the supportation and consolation of the Saints of God in the hour of
tribulation.

Hereunto are annexed Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected
by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness.

By ED. CALAMY, B. D. and, Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

London, Printed for Jo. Hancock (Brother to the late deceased Eliz. Moore) to
be sold at the first shop in Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill.

And for Tho. Parkhurst at the three Crowns over against the Great Conduit at
the lower end of Cheapside. 1657.

TO Those of Aldermanbury-Parish, together with all others, who attend
constantly upon the Word of God there preached, and more especially to such of
them, who are admitted to partake of the Lords Supper there administered.
Beloved in the Lord;
I Need not spend much time in giving you an account how these ensuing Sermons
come to be made public. It is not because they are more worthy than those
which you hear weekly; Nay, I may truly say (without boasting) they are less
worthy (though I think none of them much worth) than many others. It is not
because. I desire to be in print; But it is

1 To present you with the Pattern of a Woman whom God did pick out to make an
example of great affliction, and great patience, that when you come into great
troubles, you may be comforted with those comforts, with which she was
comforted.

2 To acquaint you with the pains she took, and with her diligence in time of
health to make her salvation sure; That so you may be provoked to lay up
suitable, seasonable, and sufficient provision against an evil day, and not have
your Evidences for Heaven to get in the hour of adversity.

It is the grand sin of most people to delay and prorogue their solemn
preparation for affliction and sickness, till they come to be sick, and in
affliction. There are many in Hell, who purposed to repent, but were prevented
by death; therefore Bernard says, good purposes Bona proposita gehe^nam
intrant, bona opera coelum.
go to Hell, and only good performances lead into Heaven.

To prevent your delaying and deferring, to provide for affliction, these
Sermons are printed, and to persuade you, that whatsoever you do for Heaven,
you would do it speedily, and with all your strength.

The Subjects handled are so plain and easy, and the style so rude and
unpolished, that I was resolved to ^ave buried them in perpetual oblivion, had
I not been conquered by this following ( together with the forementioned)
consideration, that they are calculated only for people under great troubles,
at which times learned debates about Discipline, and controverted points of
Divinity, painted Eloquence, and curious Language, are of very little esteem,
and account. Afflicted consciences are oftentimes puzzled, but never comforted
with doubtful disputations. Neat and elegant expressions may skin over, but
cannot cure spiritual diseases. Nothing can heal a wounded conscience, and keep
a man from sinking into dispondency in the day of great tribulation, but a
real, right, and particular Application of the Promises, to help a doubting
Christian to perform this great work, there are thirteen plain Rules and
Directions laid down in the following Treatise. My prayer is, that they may
prove useful and successeful.

Seneca indeed comforts his friend Polybius, and persuades him to bear his
afflictions patiently, because he was the Emperors Favorite, and tells him,
That it was not lawful for him to complain, while Caesar was his Fas tibi non
est de fortuna conqueri salvo Caesare.
friend: But this was but a poor Cordial: For Caesar himself a little while
after, was so miserable, that he had not a friend to help him, much less was
he able to help his friend. The Word of God affords a better Cordial. It bids
a true Child of God not to be over much dejected under the greatest
affliction, Fas tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Deo, and salvis
promissionibus Dei.
because he is Gods Favorite; It tells him, that it is not lawful for him to
complain, while God is his friend, and the Promises of God his rich portion,
and inheritance. Though Job lost all he had, yet he lost nothing, because he
lost not his God, who is All in All, and they who have him, have All.

My purpose at first was only to have printed the Sermon preached at Mris.
Moors Funeral, together with her Evidences for Heaven, collected by her in the
time of her health. But the importunity of friends has overswayed me, and
caused me to add four more, preached immediately afterward on the same Text.

And now (Dearly Beloved) having this fair opportunity to speak to you in
writing, give me leave to propound and lay before you some cautions and
admonitions; some Rules and Directions for the right ordering of your lives and
conversations in these dangerous and divided times, that so you may be able
after my decease, to have them in perpetual remembrance.

1 Take heed of mistaking in the great work of Believing, and Repenting. Faith
and Repentance are the two great Gospel-graces: And the reason why so many
miscarry to all eternity, is not for want of them (such as they are) but upon a
pure mistake, in thinking they have them, when they have but a shadow of them.
Where one goes to Hell by desperation, hundreds go thither by presumption. O!
quam multi cum hac vana fide, and vana spe ad aeternos labores descendunt; How
many thousands go to hell with a vain faith, and hope of Heaven! And therefore
be much in examination, whether your Faith be right or no. Examine your
selves, whether ye be 2 Cor. 13. 5
in the Faith, prove your own selves. To be mistaken in the great work of
Believing, is to be necessitated to damnation. Mark. 16 16
For he that believes not, shall be damned. Ask your souls often, whether
your Repentance be of a right stamp, or no; whether it be a Repentance unto
life, a Repentance never to be repented on. To be mistaken in purchasing of
Lands, can but hurt your outward estates; but to be mista^en in the graces of
Faith and Repentance, will undo your souls to all aetenity. What the Characters
of a true Faith, and true Repentance are, you have frequently heard, I will not
now repeat them. Only remember that self-flattery, is self-mockery; that
soul-delusion, is soul-damnation. Pray unto God to deliver you from that great
murderer of souls, the sin of Presumption.

2 Take heed (as I have said) of delaying, and putting off the great work of
providing for Heaven, till sickness or oldage. The Lord Christ commands you to
seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, etc. First, before other
things, first, more than other things. You must seek after Heaven in the first
and chief place, and if you seek it in the least and last place, you will
never obtain it. In matters of weight delay is dangerous, Abigail made haste to
prevent David's fury. Rahab made haste to hang out her Scalet thread. The
salvation of your souls ^s a matter of the greatest concernment, and to delay
providing for it, is not only a sin against the command of Christ, but a
sleighting of the Heaven of Christ. How justly may God deny to you (who refuse
when he calls) either space, or grace, to turn to him, and say to you, as it
is reported, he said to a man, who desired to repent in his old age, ubi
consumpsisti farinam, ibi consume furfurem; Where you have spent your flower,
there go spend your branne; Therefore let my Counsel be acceptable to you.
Make Christ your unum necessarium, your one thing necessary, and Heaven your
primum quaerite; Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. Say
with David, I made haste, and delayed not to keep Psalm. 119. 60
thy Commandments.

3 Take heed of resting in the Ministry of man, You must not despise the
teachings of Orthodox Ministers lawfully called (for he that despises them,
despises Christ; he that is above their teachings, is above the teachings of
Christ, for Christ teaches by them. Ephesians. 2. 17 2 Cor. 5. 20
They are his Ambassadors, and they preach not only in his name, but in his
stead) yet you must not rest satisfied with the teachings of men, but pray,
That while the Minister speaks to your ears, God would speak to your hearts.
That God would fulfill that blessed Promise, Isa. 54. 13. And all thy Children
shall be taught of God. That he would give you an unction from the 1 John 2.
20
Holy One to teach you all things. Psalm. 68* 24.
That you may see the goings of God in his Sanctuary, you may behold the beauty
of the Lord, and see his power and Psalm. 27.4
glory in his holy Temple. In a word. Psalm. 63.2
That God would give you, not only the presence of Ordinances, but his presence
in them. That you may experimentally know, what it is to enjoy communion with
God in Gospel-Administrations,

4 Take heed of formality, customariness, and carelessness in the performance of
holy duties. He that serves God carelessly, brings a curse upon himself,
instead of a blessing. For cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. He that serves God formally and customarily does not serve him,
but mock him. If the Israelites had brought the skin of a beast for sacrifice,
instead of a beast, it would have been counted a mocking of God, rather than a
worshipping of him. So do they who serve God negligently and formally.

5 Be not contented to have a name to be godly and religious, but labor to
be really such as you are supposed by others to be. Remember what Christ
says of the Church of Rev. 3.2.
Sardis. That she had a name to live, but was dead. What will it profit you to
be thought by men to be godly, if God knows that you are ungodly? What will
it advantage you to seem to go to heaven, and yet at last to miss of it? O
labor to be Christians not only in word, but in deed, and in truth, not
only by outward profession, but by a holy conversation: Rest not satisfied
with a less degree of grace, than that which will bring you to heaven. It will
be a double hell, to go within an inch of heaven, and yet at last to miscarry.

6 Remember what Christ says of Capernaum. The Capernaites were not so bad as
the Gadarens, who desired Christ to depart from them: much less as the
Nazarites who thrust Christ out of their Coasts. For they heard him Luke 4.29
Luke 4.32
preach every Sabbath Day, and were astonished at his Doctrine. And yet because
they did not sincerely practice what was taught them, Christ pronounces a
heavy doom against them, Matthew. 11.23, 24. And thou Capernaum which art exalted
unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this
day. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee. It is not enough to praise the
Sermons you hear, to admire, and stand astonished at the Doctrine delivered. If
you do not practice what is preached. If you do not live Sermons, as well as
hear them, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha at the day of judgment
than for you.

7 Take heed that the love of the world, does not eat out the heart of
Religion, and at last, Religion it self out of your hearts. Remember what 1 Timothy 6. 10
the Apostle Paul says, That the love of money is the root of all evil, which
while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows. 1 John 2.15
And what the Apostle John says, Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. There is no sin so contrary to true Saintship as worldly-mindedness: A
Saint is one who has much of heaven in him, and is much in heaven. A Saint is
one whose original is from heaven, he is born from above, his name Joh: 3.3
(...).
is written in heaven, his meditations, affections, and conversation is in
heaven. He is one who is elected to things above, and called to partake of
heaven, and eternal happiness. And for such a man to mind things earthly, is a
sin of the first magnitude. Therefore Ephesians. 5.3
the Apostle would not have covetousness so much as named amongst Christians.
There is no sin more defiles the soul. It will besmear you, and make you
spiritual Blackamores, and Chimnysweepers in Gods sight. There is no sin does
more dead and dull the heart in the doing of good duties. It hinders Mar: 22: 5
a man both from, and in Ordinances. The Farmer, and Merchant made light of the
call of Christ, and one went to his Farm, the other to his Merchandise. There
is no sin will more eclipse the light of Gods countenance from shining upon
you. The Moon is never in the Eclipse, but when the earth comes between us and
the Sun. A child of God is feldome without the light of Gods countenance,
unless it be through the overmuch love of the world. No sin will more hinder
your flight up to heaven. The Ostrich cannot fly high, because of the
greatness of her wings. Jacob was forced in his traveling toward Canaan to go
slowly and softly, because of his multitude of children, of flocks, and herds.
And Genesis 33. 13, 14
therefore let me again beseech you to take heed of worldly-mindednes; This
will quickly betray you into Apostasy from Christ, and from the truths of
Christ. A man who loves the world, will (Judas-like) betray Christ for thirty
pieces. He will part with his Religion, rather than with his estate. This sin
is the root of all evil, it exposes a man to all temptations, to hurtful
lusts, to all errors, and all 1 Timothy 6. 9
kind of sorrows. It will drown your souls in perdition. He that seeks things
(...).
below, shall have his Heaven below. The Apostle says expressly, that they who
mind earthly things, their Phil. 3.19
end is damnation. Therefore let me once again repeat it; Take heed lest you
be like the Thorny ground. Let not the cares, riches, and pleasures of the
World choke the good seed that is weekly sown in your hearts.

8 Let it be your morning and evening thought what shall become of you
Momentum unde pendet aeternitas.
to all eternity, and labor so to use things temporal, as not to lose the
things that are eternal. Remember that this life is a moment upon which
eternity depends, and according as you spend this Momentancum* quod delectat,
aeternum quod cruciat.
moment, so you shall be for ever happy, or for ever miserable. Remember that
the pleasures of sin are but for a moment, but the punishments of sin are
everlasting.

9 Look upon Sin as the greatest of evils, greater than poverty, imprisonment,
banishment, or death it self; choose the greatest affliction, rather than commit
the least sin. If Hell Anselme.
were on the one side, and Sin on the other, choose rather to go into Hell, than
to sin against God. For Sin is a greater evil, than Hell, because it is the
cause of Hell, and more opposite to God (who is the chiefest good) than Hell
is. For God is the Author of Hell (which he has provided for all unbeleevers,
and impenitent persons) But it is blasphemy in the highest degree, to say, That
he is the Author of Sin, Look upon Christ as the greatest good, greater than
health, wealth, liberty, or life. Love Christ, more than you love your estates,
or lives: He that loves Christ, more than the world, will not for sake Christ
to embrace the world. He that fears sin more than affliction, will not sin to
avoid affliction.

10 Rest not contented with that measure of grace you have attained unto, but
labor to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Remember that the Scripture does not only persuade you to get into Christ, but
to grow up into Christ; not only to be Righteous, but to be filled with the
fruits of Righteousness, etc. Remember Ephesians. 4.1^ Phil. 1.11
that saying of Christ; to whom much is given, of them much is required. Luke
12. 48
God has given you much, you have plentiful means of salvation, and you have
had them for many years; he expects from you, not only good fruit, but much
good fruit; not only thirty-fold, and sixty-fold, but an hundredfold. Where
the Husbandman bestows most cost, he expects most fruit. The more a Merchant
adventures by Sea, the greater return he looks for. God has done more for
you, than for many others, and therefore he expects that you should do some
singular thing for him. He looks you should be more humble, more heavenly,
more knowing than others. If the Sun should give no more light than a little
Candle, to what purpose has God given it so much light? If you that have
Sun-like abilities do no more good, than those who have but half your
abilities, to what purpose have you them? It is a true saying, As our
Crescentibus doni^ crescunt rations donorum.
gifts increase, so must our account increase. You shall answer at the great
day, not only for your gifts, but for the measure of them. Remember that God
does not only require service from you, but service proportionable to the
means, and mercies you enjoy.

He that has but one Talent, shall answer but for one; but you that have
five, or ten Talents, must be answerable, according to the quantity, as well
as the quality of them.

11 Labor to diffuse those grace^ which God has given you, and to communicate
them to those with whom you converse. True grace i^ of a spreading nature, and
therefore compared to leaven, which diffuseth i^ self into the whole lump, and
to Salt, that seasoneth all those things with which it is mingled. As Soon as
the woman of John 4. 29. 30
Samaria had found out the Messiah, she leaves her water-pot, and goes into
the City, to tell others what God had done for her. As Soon as Cornelius had
received the Message from the Angel, to send for Peter; he calls together his
kinsmen and near friends, that they, together with him, might be made
partakers of Gospel Grace. A true Act. 10* 24
Christian is like a Needle touched with the Loadstone. A Needle (truly
touched) draws another, and that will draw another, and that, another:
Whosoever has his heart truly touched by effectual grace, will labor to
convert others, and they, others. Philip will draw Nathaniel, Andrew will draw
Peter. And Peter being converted, will labor to strengthen his Brethren: There
is a natural instinct in all creatures to make others like themselves (as fire
will turn all things that come near it, into fire) and there is a spiritual
instinct in all converted Christians, to convert others. It is as natural to a
true Christian to make others true Christians, as it is for a man to beget a
man. True grace is not only of a communicative, but of an assimilating nature.

See then that you labor by seasonable and religious admonitions, and
exhortations; by communicating of experiences, and especially by the shining
pattern of a holy life and conversation, to bring all those with whom you
converse unto Jesus Christ. That man has not grace in truth, who put sit in a
dark Lantern.

12 Labor to be good in your Relations, good Husbands, and good Wives, good
Parents, and good Children, good Masters, and good Servants. Remember that that
man cannot be a good man, who is not good in his Relation. He cannot be a
good Christian, who is not a good Husband, or a good Child, or a good Father,
etc. She cannot be a good Christian, who is not a good Wife; and so of the
rest; and the reason is: Because the same God who commands the Husband to love
God, commands him to love his Wife; the same God who commands the Woman to obey
God, commands her to obey her Husband. There is the same stamp of authority
upon our duties toward our Relations, as upon our duties toward God;
therefore be sure to make conscience of relative duties.

13 Join works of mercy and charity together with your profession of piety and
holiness. For God hates a penurious, niggardly, and covetous professor of
Religion. Let that saying of David abide upon your hearts, God forbid I should
serve the Lord with 2 Samuel, 24.24
that which cost me nothing. God hates your obedience to the first Table, Isa,
1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
if it be not joined with obedience to the second. Works of mercy and charity
are made in Scripture the touchstones of the truth of our piety and holiness.
This is pure Religion (says the Apostle) and James 1. 27
undefiled before God, and the Father, to visit the Fatherless, and Widows in
their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. If any man say
(says Saint John) I love God, and hates his Brother, he is 1 John 4. 20
a liar, for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? An unmerciful and an uncharitable man, is a
wicked and an ungodly man. Let it be the care of all those amongst you, who
are rich in estate, to be rich in good works. Let every man lay up for the
poor, according as God has prospered him; remembering 1 Cor. ^^. 2
that saying of Christ, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and
ye took me in, naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me,
I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

14 Take heed of separating from the public Assemblies of the Saints. I have
found by experience, that all our Church-calamities have sprung from this root.
He that separates from the public worship, is like a man tumbling down a
hill, and never leaving till he comes to the bottom of it. I could relate
many sad stories of persons professing godliness, who out of dislike to our
Church-meetings, began at first to separate from them, and after many changes
and alterations, are turned some of them Anabaptists, some Quakers, some
Ranters, some direct Atheists. But I forbear; you must hold communion with all
those Churches, with which Christ holds communion; you must separate from the
sins of Christians, but not from the Ordinances of Christ. Take heed of
Unchurching the Churches of Christ, lest you prove Schismatics instead of
being true Christians.

15 Though you never live to see the times settled, yet labor to get your
consciences settled: Pray for the Spirit of Truth, to guide you into all Truth
in these erring days. Remember that saying of Christ, If thine eye be evil,
thy Mat. 6. 23
whole body shall be full of darkness; if therefore the light that is in you
be darkness, how great is that darkness. God has given you your
understandings, to be the guide of the whole man. As the Eye is the guide of
the body, and the Sun of the world, so is the understanding of the man;
therefore you must in praying, pray that God would give you a right
understanding in all things. Pray not only for the grace of Sanctification, but
of Illumination. Avoid as soul-poison all Doctrines

1 Which tend to liberty, open a door to profaneness, and are contrary to
godliness. 2 Which hold forth a superstitious strictness above what is required
in the Word. 3 Which are Antimagistratical, and Antiministerial. 4 Which lift
up corrupt nature, and exalt unsanctified reason. 5 Which preach free grace, to
the utter ruin of good works. 6 Which lessen the privileges of Infants, and
makes their condition worse under the New Testament, than under the Old. 7
Which are contrary to the Analogy of Faith, the ten Commandments, and the
Lords Prayer.
16 Take heed lest being led away with the error of the wicked, you 2 Pet. 3.
17
fall from your own stedfastness. Take heed of a threefold Apostasy, of which
this Nation is deeply guilty.

Of Apostasy

1 In your Judgments, from the Truths of Christ, and from the Faith once
delivered to the Saints.

2 In your Affections, from that ancient love, desire, and delight, which the
Saints of God have had heretofore, and you your selves once had, in, and
toward the Ordinances of Christ, and the godly and learned Ministers of Christ.

3 In your conversations, from that humble and exact walking with God in all
good duties, both toward God, and man, which was the credit, and honor of the
good old Puritan in former days. Let me speak to you in the words of the
Apostles Paul and Peter. Wherefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast 1 Cor.
15. ^^
and unmovable, etc. The God of grace, who has called you into his eternal
glory by Jesus Christ, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you.

17 Remember that it is the will of Jesus Christ, that you who partake of the
same word of life, and of the same Sacramental Bread and Wine, should admonish
one another, exhort one another, watch over one another, bear the burdens of
one another, provoke one another to love and good works; seek the good of one
another, and not your own good only. That you should warn the unruly, comfort
the feebleminded, and support the weak That this is your duty appears, from
Col. 3* 16. Phil. 2.4. Heb. 1. 24. Gal. 6. 1* Romans 15. 2. Romans 14. 7. 2 Cor.
5.15* 1 These. 5. 11, 13, 14. The 12th. verse. speaks of Ministerial and
authoritative admonition, but the 13, and 14. verses of fraternal and
charitative. These Texts will rise up in Judgment against thousands of
Christians at the last day. I do not say that you are to admonish none but
those of your own Society. Admonition is an act of mercy; It is spiritualis
Eleemosyna, spiritual Alms, and you are bound by the royal law of charity, by
the communion of Saints, the communion of Churches, and communion of natures,
to distribute these spiritual alms to all that need them, as God shall give
occasion. But this I say, you ought especially to admonish them, and watch over
them. This is novum, though not solum vinculum. Some Divines think that one
chief reason why the Israelites were punished for Achans sin, was because they
did not admonish him, and watch over him: For the Israelites were commanded in
the plural number, Josh. 6.18. Keep your selves from the accursed thing, etc.
He was one of the body, and because they did not watch over him, they
communicated in his sin, and in his punishment. There is an excellent Law in
this Nation, That every Parish shall provide for its own poor. And by parity of
reason, it is as just and equal, That every Congregation should chiefly and
especially look to the souls of their own members, to warn them, admonish them,
exhort them, and watch over them.

That you may the better discharge this duty, you must labor to be acquainted
one with another, as far as your callings and relations will give you leave. It
is a great and common sin, and much to be lamented, That there is so little
knowledge and acquaintance, between those that are of the same congregation.
They sit in the same Pew together, partake of the same Sacrament, and yet
converse no more together, than if one lived at York, and the other at London.
And when they do converse together; it is a mere civil and outward converse,
as amongst sober heathens; But there is very little religious society between
them, for the spiritual edification one of another. Now this must needs be a
great sin; For how can you watch over one another, edify, and admonish one
another? How can you support the weak, comfort the feeble-minded, if not
spiritually acquainted one with another.

And yet it is not my opinion that every member of a Congregation is bound to
know every fellow-member. I believe it was not so in the Church of Jerusalem,
or of Samaria. It is incredible, to think that they all knew one another. I
should be loath to lay such a clog upon your consciences, as to say, That
every maidservant, and manservant is bound to know, and to be acquainted with
all those with whom they communicate in the Lords Supper. Indeed the
Church Officers are the eyes of the people, and are to know all, and to be
acquainted with all: But yet notwithstanding this, I say, It is the duty of
every member, to endeavor according to his place and calling, to grow up in
spiritual acquaintance one with another, as God shall offer occasion, and not
to be so strange and unacquainted, but to walk in love one toward another, to
bear one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2.

And this you ought the rather to do, that so you may contribute to the keeping
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper pure in the Congregation to which you
belong. There is much complaint amongst many (and not without just cause) of
mixed communions, and of an universal liberty which some take in giving the
Sacrament promiscuously to all that come, though grossly ignorant, and
notoriously scandalous, and in making (If I may so speak) the Chancel-door, as
wide as the Church-door. This in my judgment is a great iniquity.

1 It is to give holy things to Dogs, and to cast Pearls to Swine. It is a
profanation of the Ordinance, in giving it to those who are visibly unworthy
to receive it, and to whom we know Christ would not have us to give it.

2 It is an act of great uncharitableness, to those who are grossly ignorant,
and scandalous. For it is to give them that which we know will further their
damnation.

3 It makes the Church Officers (who have power to hinder them, and do not use
it) partakers of other men's sins.

4 It is an Act of cruelty to the Nation: For because we have been Prodigal of
Christ's blood, therefore he has been Prodigal of ours.

5 It is a great scandal to the truly godly, and a stumbling block to weak
Christians, causing them (though unadvisedly) to separate from our
Congregations.

6 It is to walk contrary to the practice of most (if not all) of the Churches
of Christ in the Christian world.

To prevent this Sacrament-prophanation; there are some Ministers, who wholly
surcease from administering it. This I allow not, unless in case of absolute
necessity. For this is (as it were) to suspend the whole Congregation, and to
deny Children their bread, for fear of giving it to Dogs. The best way is to
follow the advice which our Lord Jesus Christ gives, Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17. where
he propounds Rules and Directions fort he removing of scandals out of the
Church. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee (says Christ) go and tell
him his fault between thee and him alone. He does not say, go, and separate
presently (For this is to rend the Church, not to heal it; This is to hinder
thy Brother from Christ, rather than to gain him to Christ. He does not say,
God and tell others (for this is to backbite thy Brother. This is to reproach
him, rather than to reprove him) But he says, Go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
etc. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church (that is, to
such who are empowered by Christ to redress offenses) but if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him, etc. Hence learn,

That all Church-reformation, and Sacrament-purity must begin from
Church Members, and proceed from them in Christ's way, unto Church Officers:
That if any man who is called a Brother, be a fornicator, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or guilty of any other scandalous sin: It is your duty, who are
members of the same body with him, and know his guiltiness, to labor by
private admonition to gain him to God, not to shame him by telling others, but
to gain him, by telling him alone. But if he will not hear you, then you are
in an orderly way, to bring it to the Church, which if you neglect to do, the
sin of Church-pollution is your sin, and not the sin of your Church Officers.
If there be three doors to get into an house, he that keeps me out of the
first, keeps me out of the other two. All Sacramentreformation begins with
you, you are the first door at which it enters; if you fail of your duty, the
sin lies at your door, not at ours. It is the custom of all people (though
otherwise godly) if a scandalous sinner be admitted to the Lords Supper, to
charge the sin of it upon the Minister, and in the mean time to forget that the
sin is theirs, not his, because they have not done what Christ would have them,
for the gaining of him, and for the inabling of the Church, to proceed against
him by censures, if he prove obstinate. The Lord give you hearts to think of
this, and give you grace (instead of murmuring against, and complaining of mixed
communions, and of separating from us because of them) to contribute your
utmost toward the purging of our Congregations, and to practice all those
duties which Christ requires of you in order thereunto.

I have much more to say of this particular, but I perceive that the Epistle
swells to too great a bigness, and therefore I shall defer what I have
further to say, till God shall offer me another such opportunity.

18 Labor to maintain peace, and unity amongst your selves. It is a good and
pleasant thing for brethren to dwell together Psalm. 133
in unity. Have Salt in your Mark. 9. 50.
selves, and peace one with another. Labor to get your fouls seasoned with the
grace of humility, self-denial, and mortification; and this will keep you in
peace. Remember the saying of Christ, Blessed are the Peacemakers. Now, I
beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in 1 Cor. 1. 10
the same mind, and in the same Judgment.

19 Study often and often the quatuor novissima, The four last things, Death,
Judgment, Hell, and Heaven. The meditation of Death, will prepare you for
Death; The meditation of Heaven, will make you heavenlyminded; The meditation
of Hell, will keep you from Hell: Therefore Bernard Descendamus viventes, ut
non descendamus morientes.
persuades us to go often down to Hell by meditation while we live, and we
shall not go down to it when we dye. The meditation of the day of Judgment,
will be both fraenum, and calcar, a bridle to curb you from sin, and a spur
to incite you to all godliness, that so you may give up your account with joy
at that terrible day.

20 Study the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, make a
Catalogue of them, meditate on them, and labor to apply them to your own
souls, for your everlasting comfort. And for this purpose, read over these
Sermons, and study them in time of health, that you may enjoy the benefit of
them in the time of sickness.

Lastly, Let me entreat you to praise God in my behalf; that he has been
pleased out of his free love to uphold me amongst you in my Ministerial
employment for these eighteen years; And to continue your earnest prayers unto
him, that he would make my labors more useful, and successful, that he would
guide me, that I may guide you, that he would not only make, but keep me
faithful in these backsliding times, and teach me so to preach, and so to
live, that I may save my self, and those that hear me.

Your Servant in the work of the Ministry. E. C.

The Reader is entreated to correct these following Errata's, or else he will
scarce understand some passages in the Book.
PAge 12, for 2. r. 20. pig. 25. dele 1. page 29. for chasteneth r. chastenest.
page 32. for buld r. build. p. 48 for imittantur r. immittantur. p. 65 for
policarp r. Politian. p. 73 for Cranmor r. Cranmer. p. 79 dele 1. p. 85 for
John r. Jehu. p. 150 for those r. these. p. 161 for third Sermon r. fourth
Sermon. p. 167 for tells r. tell. p. 167. for contest r. fear. p. 199 for
appliable r. applicable. p. 222 for sixth r. fifth.

Here follows the Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mris. Elizabeth Moore,
the 27th. of February last, at Aldermanbury.

The Godly man's Ark, OR, City of Refuge in the day of his Distresses.
SERMON I.
PSALM. 119. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have
perished in mine affliction.
THis Psalm (out of which my Text is taken) exceeds all the other Psalms, not
only in length, but in excellency, so far (in the judgment of Ambrose) as the
light of the Sun excels the light of the Moon. As the Book of Psalms is styled
by Luther, An Epitome of the Bible, or a little Bible: So may this Psalm fitly
be called, An Epitome of the Book of Psalms. It was written (as is thought) by
David in the days of his banishment under Saul, but so penned, that the words
thereof suit the condition of all Saints. It is penu doctrinae publicum
unicuique apta and convenientia distribuens, A public storehouse of heavenly
doctrines, distributing fit, and convenient instructions to all the people of
God, and therefore should be in no less account with those who are spiritually
alive, than is the use of the Sun, Air, and Fire, with those who are naturally
alive: It is divided into two and twenty Sections, according to the Hebrew
Alphabet and therefore fitly called A holy Alphabet for Sions Scholars. The A,
B, C. of godliness, Sixtus Senensis calls it, An Alphabetical Poem. The Jews
are said to teach it their little children the first thing they learn, and
therein they take a very right course, both in regard of the heavenly matter,
and plain style fitted for all capacities. The chief scope of it, is to set out
the glorious excellencies and perfections of the Law of God. There is not a
verse (except one only, say some learned men in Print, but are therein
deceived; but I may truly say, Ames Couper.
Except the 122. and the 90. verses) in this long Psalm, wherein there is not
mention made of the Law of God, under the name of Law, or Statutes, or
Precepts, or Testimonies, or Commandments, or Ordinances, or Word, or
Promises, or Ways, or Judgments, or Name, or Righteousness, or Truth, etc.

This Text that I have chosen, sets out the great benefit and comfort, which
David, found in the Law of God in the time of his affliction -- It kept him
from perishing. Had not thy Law been my delights, I had perished in my
affliction.

The word Law is taken diversely in Scripture, sometimes for the Moral Law,
James 2.10. Sometimes for the whole Economy, Polity, and Regiment of Moses,
for the whole Mosaical dispensation by Laws, partly moral, partly Judicial,
partly Ceremonial, Gal. 3.23. Sometimes for the five Books of Moses, Luke 24.
44. Sometimes for the whole Doctrine of God contained in the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, John 7. 49. By Law in this place is meant, all those Books of
the Scripture which were written when this Psalm was penned. But I shall handle
it in a larger sense, as it comprehends all the Books both of the Old and New
Testament. For the word Law is sometimes also taken for the Gospel, as it is
Micah 4.2. Isa. 2.3. The meaning then is, Unless thy Law, that is, Thy Word,
had been my delights, I should have perished in mine affliction.

David speaks this (says Musculus) of the distressed condition he was in when
persecuted by Saul, forced to fly to the Philistines, and sometimes to hide
himself in the rocks and caves of the earth. Hic vero simile est, fuisse illi
ad manum codicem divinae legis, etc. It is very likely (says he) that he had
the Book of Gods Law with him, by the reading of which, he mitigated and
allayed his sorrows, and kept himself pure from communicating with the Heathen
in their superstitions. The Greek Scholiasts say, That David uttered these
words, A Saul pulsus, and apud Philistaeos and impios homines agere coactus,
when driven from Saul, and compelled to live amonst the wicked Philistines, etc.
for he would have been allured to have communicated with them in their
impieties, had he not carried about him the meditation of the word of God.
Unless thy Law had been my delights, etc.

In the words themselves, we have two Truths supposed, and one Truth clearly
proposed.

1 Two Truths supposed.
1 That the dearest of Gods Saints, are subject to many great and tedious
afflictions. 2 That the word of God is the Saints darling, and delights.
One Truth clearly proposed.

That the Law of God delighted in, is the afflicted Saints Antidote against
ruin, and destruction.

1 Two Truths supposed.

The first is this:

Doct. 1. That the best of Gods Saints are in this life subject to many great
and tedious afflictions.

David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet he was a man made up of
troubles of all sorts and sizes, insomuch as he professes of himself, Psalm.
69. 1, 2, 3. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul, I sink
in deep mire where there is no standing, I am come into deep waters, where the
floods overflow me; I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes
fail while I wait for my God. And in this Text he professes that his
afflictions were so great, that he must necessarily have perished under them,
had he not been sustained by the powerful comforts he fetched out of the
word. There is an emphasis in the word Then, I should then have perished. That
is, long before this time, then, when I was afflicted, then I should have
perished. Junius and Tremelius translate it, Jam diu periissem, etc. I should
long ago have perished. Job was a man eminent for godliness, and yet as eminent
for afflictions. Nay Jesus Christ himself was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3.
Insomuch as that it is truly said, God had one Son without sin, but no Son
without sorrow.

This our dear Sister, at whose Funeral we are met, was a woman full of many
and great afflictions, which (no doubt) would have quite drowned, and swallowed
her up, had not the word of God supported her, therefore it was that she
desired that this Text might be the subject of her Funeral Sermon.

Quest. But why does God afflict his own children with such variety of long and
great afflictions?

Ans. 1. God does not do this, because he hates them, but because he loves
them, For whom the Lord loves he chastises, etc. Heb. 12.6. Did the Lord
hate them, he would suffer them to go merrily to hell. There is no surer sign
of Gods reprobating anger, than to suffer a man to prosper in wicked courses.
God threatens this as the greatest punishment, not to punish them, Hos. 4.14.
And therefore because God loves his children, he chastises them in this
world, that they may not be condemned in the world to come, 1 Cor. 11.33.

2 God does not do this, because he would hurt them, but for their good, Jer.
24 5. The good figs were sent into captivity for their good. Heb. 12.10 He for
our profit, etc. God has very gracious and merciful ends and aims in
afflicting his people. Give me leave here to enlarge my discourse, and to give
you an account of some of these divine aims.

1 Gods design is to teach us to know him, and to trust in him, and to know our
selves. It is a true saying of Luther, Schola crucis, est Schola lucis, the
School of Affliction is a School of Instruction; Gods (...) are (...), His rods
(when sanctified) are powerful Sermons to teach us,

1 To know God, And this is life eternal to know him, Joh. 17. 3. It is said of
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. Then Manesseh knew that the Lord he was God. Then,
when he was caught among the thorns, bound with fetters, and carried to
Babylon; before that time he knew not the Lord: Afflictions teach us to know
God, not only in his power and greatness, in his anger and hatred against sin,
but also in his goodness and mercy; For God does so sweeten the bitter cup of
affliction, that a child of God does many times taste more of Gods love in one
months affliction, than in many years of prosperity, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 7.
4. Add to this. Afflictions teach us to know God Experimentally and
affectionatively, not cerebraliter (as Calvin says) but cordialiter, so to
know him, as to love and fear him, and to fly unto him as our rock and
hiding place in the day of our distress. It is said, Cant. 3. 1. By night I
sought him whom my soul loves, etc. Some by the word Night, understand the
night of divine desertion, and from the words Gilbertus has this saying; Qui
quaerit in nocte, non quaerit ut videat, sed ut amplectatur; He that seeks
after God in the night of adversity, does not seek to see him, and know him
formally and superficially, but to embrace him, and to love him really and
cordially: And therefore the Church never left till she had found Christ, and
when she had found him, she held him, and would not let him go, Cant. 3. 2, 3,
4.

2 Not only to know God, but also to trust in him, 2 Cor. 1. 9. We had the
sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but
in God, which raises the dead. Note here, 1 That an Apostle is apt in time of
prosperity, to trust in himself. 2 That God brings his children to the gates of
death, that they might learn not to trust in themselves, but in God, which
raises the dead, that is, from a dead and desperate condition.

3 Not only to know God, but to know our selves, which two are the chief parts
of Christian religion: It is said of the Prodigal, that when he was in
adversity, then he came to himself, Luke 15. 17. And when he came to himself.
He was spiritually distracted, when he was in prosperity: Afflictions teach us
to know that we are but men, according to that of David, Psa. 9. 2. Put them
in fear O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men. Caligula and
Domitian, Emperors of Rome, who in prosperity would be called Gods, when it
thundered from Heaven, were so terrified, that then they knew they were but men.
In prosperity we forget our mortality. Adversity causes us to know, not only
that we are men, but frail men, that God has us between his hands, (as it is
Ezekiel. 21. 17.) and can as easily crush us, as we do moths; That we are in
Gods hands, as the Clay in the hands of the Potter: That he has an absolute
sovereignty over us, and that we depend upon him for our being, wel-being, and
eternal being. These things we know feelingly and practically in the day of
affliction. And it much concerns us to know these things, and to know them
powerfully. For this will make us stand in awe of God, and study to serve and
please him. He that depends upon a man for his livelihood, knowing that he
has him at an advantage, and can easily undo him, will certainly endeavor to
comply with him, and to obtain his favor. The ground of all service and
obedience is dependence. And did we really and experimentally know our
dependence upon God, and the advantages he has us at, we could not, we
would not but comply with him, and labor above all things to gain his love and
favor.

2 Gods aim in afflicting his children, The second design of God in afflicting
his children.
is either to keep them from sin, or when they have sinned, to bring them to
repentance for it, and from it.

1 To keep them from sin; This made him send an Angel of Satan to buffet Paul,
lest he should be lifted up in pride, and exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

2 When they have sinned, to bring them to repentance for it, and from it God
brings his children low, not to trample upon them, but to make them low in
their own eyes, and to (humble them for sin, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. God brings them into
the deep waters, not to drown them, but to wash and cleanse them, Isa. 27. 9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to
take away sin, etc. Afflictions (when sanctified) are divine hammers, to break
and as Moses his rod, to cleave our rocky hearts in pieces.

1 They open the eyes to see sin, Oculos quos culpa claudit, paena aperit. When
the Brethren of Joseph were in adversity, then they saw (and not before) the
greatness of their sin in felling their Brother, Genesis 42. 21.

2 They open the ear to discipline. In prosperity we turn a deaf ear to the
voice of the charmer, though he charm never so wisely. But adversity opens
the ear, and causes us to attend; When God spoke upon Mount Sinah in a
terrible manner, then the people said unto Moses, Speak thou unto us, all that
the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it, Deuteronomy.
5. 27. Memorable is that Text, Jer. 2. 24. A wild Ass used to the Wilderness,
that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her
away? all they that seek her, will not weary themselves, in her month they
shall find her; in her month, that is, when she is great with young, and near
her time. A wicked man in the day of his prosperity, is like a wild Ass used
to the wilderness, he snuffeth at any that shall reprove him, he is of an
uncircumcised ear, and a rebellious heart, but in his month, that is, when he
is big with afflictions, then he will be easily found; this will open his
ear to discipline.

3 They will open the mouth to confess sin, Judge. 10. 15.

4 They will command us to depart from iniquity, Job 36. 8, 9, 10.

Afflictions are Gods furnaces, to purge out the dross of our sins, Gods files,
to pare off our spiritual rust, Gods fannes, to winnow out our chafe. In
prosperity we gather much soil, but adversity purges and purifieth us. This
is its proper work, to work out unrighteousness, Dan. 11. 35. Dan. 12. 10.

3 Gods end is not only to keep us The third design.
from sin, but to make us holy and righteous, therefore it is said, Isa. 26. 9.
When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. And Heb. 12. 10. -- he for our profit, that we may be
partakers of his holiness. As the waters that drowned the old world, did not
hurt the Ark of Noah, but bare it up above the earth, and as they increased, so
the Ark was lifted up nearer and nearer to Heaven: So afflictions (when
sanctified) do not prejudice the Saints of God, but lift them up nearer unto
God in Holiness, and heavenly-mindednesse.

4 Gods design in afflicting his children, is to make the world bitter unto The
fourth design.
them, and Christ sweet. 1 To imbitter the world: There are two lame legs upon
which all worldly things stand, uncertainty, and insufficiency. All earthly
things are like the earth, founded upon nothing. They are like houses made of
wax, that quickly melt away. Riches, and honors, wife, and children, have
wings, and fly away; they are like unto Absoloms Mule, they will fail us, when
we have most need of them; They may puff up the soul, but they cannot
satisfy it, inflare possunt, satiare animam non possunt: They are all vanity
and vexation of spirit, so says the Preacher; but most people in time of
health will not believe these things; but when some great sickness betides
them, this is as a real Sermon, to make out the truth of them; then they see,
that a Velvet slipper cannot cure the Gout, nor a golden cap the head ach,
Prove. 10. 4. That riches avail not in the day of wrath, and this imbitters the
world.

2 To make Christ sweet and precious. When Christ and his Disciples were in a
ship together, Mat. 8. 25. it is said, that Christ was asleep, and as long as
the Sea was calm, his Disciples suffered him to sleep, but when they were ready
to be drowned, then they awoke Christ, and said, Master, save us, we perish.
Even the best of Saints, when fatted with outward plenty and abundance, are
prone to suffer Christ to lie asleep within them, and so neglect the lively
actings of Faith upon Christ: But when the storms of affliction, and outward
calamity begin to arise, and they are ready to be overwhelmed with distresses,
then none but Christ, none but Christ.

5 Gods design in afflicting his children, is to prove, and improve their
graces.

1 To prove their graces, Rev. 2. 10. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. to prove the truth, and the
strength of them. 1 The truth and sincerity of their graces; For this cause he
loaded Job with afflictions, to try whether he served God for his Cammels, and
Oxen, or for love to God. As Solomon's sword tried the true Mother from the
false; So the sword of affliction discovers the sincere Christian from the
Hypocrite. Distresses are divine touchstones, to try whether we be true or
counterfeit Saints; That grace is true, which upon trial is found true. 2 To
try the strength of our graces. For it requires a strong faith to endure great
afflictions. That Faith which will suffice for a little affliction, will not
suffice for a great one. Peter had faith enough to come to Christ upon the Sea,
but as soon as the storm began to arise, his Faith began to fail, and Christ
said. Why art thou afratd, O thou of little Faith? Matthew. 14. 30, 31. It must
be a strong Faith that must keep us from sinking in the day of great distress.

2 To improve our graces. It is reported of the Lioness, that she leaves her
young ones, till they have almost killed themselves with roaring and howling,
and then at last gasp, she relieves them, and by this means they become more
courageous. So God brings his children into the deeps, and suffers Jonah to be
three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale, and David, to cry till
his throat was dry, Psa. 69. 3. and suffers his Apostles to be all the night
in a great storm, till the fourth watch, and then he comes and rebukes the
winds, and by this means he mightily increases their patience and dependence
upon God, and their Faith in Christ. As the Palmtree, the more it is depressed,
the higher, stronger, and fruitfuller it grows; So does the graces of Gods
people.

Lastly, Gods aim in afflicting his people, is to put an edge upon their
prayers, and all their other holy services.

1 Upon Prayer: What a famous Prayer did Manasseh make, when he was under his
iron fetters. It is thrice mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13, 18, 19. When Paul was
struck off his horse, and struck with blindness, then he prayed to purpose.
Therefore it is said, Act. 9. 11. Behold he prays! In prosperity we pray
heavily and drowsily, but adversity adds wings to our prayers, Isa. 26. 16. The
very heathen Mariners cried aloud to God in a storm. It is an ordinary saying,
Qui nescit or are discat navigate. There are no Saylors so wicked, but they
will pray when in a great storm.

2 Upon Preaching. Prosperity glutteth the spiritual appetite, adversity
whetteth it.

3 Upon a Sacrament. How sweet is a Sacrament to a true Saint after a long and
great sickness?

4 It makes God, and the word of God precious. If God sets our Cornfields on
fire (as Absalom did Joabs) then he shall be sure to cause us to come running
to him; And how sweet is a Text of Scripture to a child of God in the hour of
his distress?

By all this it appears that God afflicts his children not to hurt them, but to
help them, and that God has many glorious and gracious ends and aims in
afflicting of them. Therefore it is that David says of himself in the 71.
verse of this Psalm; It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes. He never said, It is good for me that I have been
in prosperity; but he rather says the contrary in the 67. verse. Before I
were afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word. Gods people will
bless God as much (if not more) in Heaven, for their adversity, than for their
prosperity.

Use 1 Let us not pass rash censures upon persons under great afflictions. Say
not, such a woman is a greater sinner than others, because more afflicted. This
was the fault of Jobs friends, and God expresses his anger against them for
it, Job. 42. 7. My wrath is kindled against thee, and thy two friends for you
have not spoken the thing that is right, etc. This was the fault of the
Barbarians, Act. 28. 4. When they saw the venomous beast hang upon the hands of
Paul, they said among themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer, etc. But
remember they were Barbarians. It is a sign of a Barbarian, not of a Christian
to pass a rash censure upon persons in affliction. Think you (says Christ)
that those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloan fell and slew them, that they
were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem. I tell you, nay; but except
you repent: ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 4, 5. Think you that they
which have the stone and gout in extremity, that have cancers in their faces,
and breasts, are greater sinners than others. I tell you, nay, etc. For my
part, if I would censure any, it should be such as live wickedly, and meet
with no affliction. These have the black brand of reprobation upon them. These
are men designed to damnation. Ambrose would not tarry a night in the house of
a Gentleman that had never in all his life been afflicted, for fear (as he
said) lest some great and sudden judgment should betide it. But when I see a
godly woman afflicted, then I say, this is not so much for her sin, as for her
trial; this is not to hurt her, but to teach her to know God, and to know her
self, to break her heart for Sin, and from sin, to make the world bitter, and
Christ sweet. God has put her into the fire of affliction, to refine her, and
make her a vessel fit for his use. God is striking her with the hammer of
affliction, that she may be squared, and made ready to be laid in the
heavenly Jerusalem.

Use 2 Here is rich comfort to the children of God under the greatest
afflictions. For the best of Saints are subject to the worst afflictions: This
is the lot of all Gods children, Christ himself not excepted. Afflictions
(indeed) considered in their own nature, are evil things, and so are called,
Amos 5. 13. They are part of the curse due to sin, the fruit of Gods revenging
wrath; they are as a biting and stinging Serpent. And to a wicked man,
remaining wicked, they are the beginning of Hell: Unsanctified afflictions
parboil a wicked man for hell and damnation. But now to a child of God, they
have lost both their name, and nature, they are not punishments properly, but
chastisements, not (...) but (...), They are not satisfactory, but castigatory.
Jesus Christ has taken away the sting of these Serpents; they are not fiery,
but brazen Serpents, they have a healing, not a hurting power. Christ has
removed the curse, and bitterness of them; as the wood sweetened the waters of
Marah, Exodus 15. 25. So Christ's Cross has sweetened the bitterness of
afflictions.

There are eight comfortable considerations, to cheer the heart of a child of
God in the day of his distress.

1 God never afflicts his people, but out of pure necessity, 1 Pet. 1. 6.
though now for a season, if need be, ye are in Heaviness. 1 As a most loving
Father, never corrects his child, but when he is forced to it. He willingly
provides for his child, but punishes him unwillingly. So God freely loadeth
with his blessings, but he never chastises his children, but when forced to
it, therefore he says expressly, Lam. 3. 33. he does not afflict willingly,
Isa. 27. 1. Fury is not in me. It is we that put thunderbolts in Gods hand.
If the Sun did not first draw up the vapors from the earth, there would never
be any thundering or lightening. God would never thunder from Heaven with his
judgments, if our sins did not first cry to Heaven for punishment. As Christ
whipped the sellers of Oxen and Sheep out of the Temple with a whip made (in all
probability) of their own cords; So God never scourges us, but it is with a
whip made of our own sins, Prove. 5. 22. Romans 2. 5. -- thou treasurest up to thy
self, etc. God has a double treasure, a treasure of mercy, and a treasure of
wrath; his treasure of mercy, is always full, but his treasure of wrath is
empty, till we fill it by our sins. And therefore when God punishes his
children, he calls it a strange work, and a strange act, Isa. 28. 21. It is
observed of the Be, that it never stings, but when provoked; Sure I am, that
God never afflicts his children, but out of pure necessity,

2 Not only out of pure necessity, but out of true and real love; as I have
showed, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.

Object. Do not divine afflictions proceed out of anger? was not God angry with
Moses for speaking unadvisedly with his lips? and angry with David for his
adultery, and thereupon afflicted both of them?

Answ. This anger was a Fatherly anger, rooted in love; It was not ira quae
reprobat, but ira quae purgat: It was not ira hostilis and exterminativa, but
ira paterna and medicinalis. As it is a great punishment, for God sometimes not
to punish, Isaiah 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14. So it is a great mercy, sometimes for God
to withdraw his mercy.

3 Afflictions are a part of divine predestination. That God which has elected
us to salvation, has also elected us unto afflictions, 1 These. 1. 3. That no
man should be moved by these afflictions: for you your selves know, that we
are appointed thereunto. The same love with which God elects us, and bestows
Christ, and his spirit upon us, with the very same love he afflicts us.

4 They are part of the gracious Covenant which God has made with his people,
Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33. In which words we have three things considerable.

1 A supposition of sin; if his children forsake my Law, etc. For sin is
always causa sine qua non, the cause without which God would never chastise
us, and for the most part it is the cause for which.

2 We have a gracious promise, Then I will visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes.

3 We have a merciful qualification: Nevertheless my loving kindness will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my Covenant
will I not break, etc. Afflictions are not only mercies, but Covenant-mercies;
Therefore David says, Psalm. 119. 75. -- and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted me. God would be unfaithful, if he did not afflict his children.

5 Consider that afflictions are part of the Saints blessedness, Job 5. 17.
Behold! happy is the man whom God corrects, etc. Behold (says Eliphaz) and
we had need behold, and consider it, for there are few that believe it, and
yet it is most true. That afflictions (when sanctified) when they are not only
corrections, but instructions, then they are evidences that we are in a
blessed condition. Eliphaz his saying must be interpreted by what David says,
Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chasteneth, O Lord, and teach out
of thy Law; it is not correction simply, but correction joined with
instruction, which intitles us to happiness. Job even while he was upon the
dunghill, wonders that God should set his heart so much upon him, as to visit
him every morning, and try him every moment, Job 7. 17, 18. Job upon the
dunghill was happier than Adam in Paradise. Adam in paradise was conquered by
the Devil; but Job upon the dunghill overcame the Devil. Lazarus in his rags
was happier than Dives in his robes; Philpot in his Cole-house, than Bonner in
his Palace; and godly Mr. Whitaker upon his bed of pain, than a wicked man upon
his bed of down. There were many in Christ's time who would never have known
him, or come to him, had it not been for their bodily diseases.

6 Consider the gracious and merciful ends, aims, and designs that God has in
afflicting his people, what these are, ye have heard already.

7 The sweet and precious promises, which he has made to his children in the
day of their adversity, to comfort them, and support them; what these are, you
shall hear afterward.

8 Consider that all afflictions shall work at last for the good of Gods
children, Romans 8. 28. Though they are not bonae, yet they shall be in bonum;
Though they are not good in themselves, yet they shall turn to their good. God
beats his children, as we do our clothes in the Sun, only to beat out the
Moths; God puts them into the fiery furnace, not to hurt them, but only to
untie the bonds of their sins, as he dealt with the three children, Dan. 3.25.
God will either deliver them out of their afflictions, or send them to Heaven
by them; Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

Use 3 If the best of Saints are subject in this life unto many, great, and
tedious afflictions, then let us, 1 Expect Afflictions. 2 Prepare for
Afflictions. 3 Improve Afflictions.

1 Let us expect Afflictions; for Christ has said expressly, Joh. 16. 33. In
the world ye shall have tribulation. There is in every child of God,

1 Sufficiens Fundamentum, A sufficient Foundation for God to buld a house of
correction upon: There is sin enough to deserve affliction.

2 There is sufficiens Motivum, Motives sufficient to prevail with God, to
chastize them when they sin against him; some of these you have heard already,
let me add one more. Because he is more dishonored by the sins of his own
children, than by the sins of wicked men: As it is a greater discredit to an
earthly Father, when his own children, than when other men's children live
wickedly; so it is a greater disparagement to our heavenly Father, when his own
Sons and Daughters, than when the Devils children transgress his Law: And
therefore God will chastize them sooner, surer, and more than others. 1 Sooner,
Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of
the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. First the Jew, and then the Gentile. 2
Surer than others, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the
earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. 3 More than others,
Lam. 4. 6. The punishment of the iniquity of the Daughter of my people, is
greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, etc. Dan. 9. 12. under the
whole Heaven has not been done, as has been done upon Jerusalem.

3 There is sufficiens necessitas, sufficient necessity to provoke God to
afflict them. It is needful that the Wheat be winnowed, that so the chafe may
be separated from it. It is needful that the Wind blow upon the Wheat, to
cleanse it, and that Gold be put into the furnace, to purge and purify it.
When the Sheep of Christ are divided one from the other in judgment, and
affections, when separated in Doctrine, worship, and Discipline. It is very
needful that God should send afflictions and distresses, which may be (as the
Shephearas dog) very serviceable and instrumental, to unite them together, and
to gather them into one Sheepfold. And therefore let the Saints of God expect
afflictions.

2 Let us prepare and provide against Gods people are to prepare for
afflictions.
the day of tribulation. Let us provide,

1 A stock of graces. For sickness is a 1 A stock of graces.
time to spend grace, but not to get grace. A Christian in sickness without
grace, is like a soldier in war without armor, like a house in stormy
weather without a foundation, and like the men of the old world, when ready to
be drowned without an Ark. Woe be to that person that has his graces to get,
when he should use them! And therefore if we would be comforted in the day
of tribulation, we must provide aforehand a furniture of graces.

1 A true Faith, (for a painted Faith will avail no more than a painted helmet,
or a painted ship) and not only a True, but also a strong Faith. A little faith
will faint under great afflictions; when the winds began to blow fiercely,
Peter's little Faith began to fail, Matthew. 14. 30. 2 A great measure of patience
to enable us to wait quietly, and contentedly, till God come in with help, for
many times he tarrieth till the fourth watch of the night, as he did, Matthew.
14. 25. And therefore we have need of patience to keep us from murmuring or
repining.

3 A great stock of Self-denial, humility, repentance, contempt of the world,
and heavenly-mindednesse. He that is furnished with grace in an evil hour,
will be as safe and secure, as Noah was in the Ark, in the time of the deluge,
or as those-were who had sufficiency of corn in the time of the seven years
dearth in Egypt.

2 A stock of Assurance of salvation; For though a man has never so much 2 A
stock of Assurance.
grace, yet if he wants the assurance of it, he cannot receive any comfort by
it in the day of his distress. Jacob was not at all quieted in his spirit for
Joseph's being alive, till he came to know of it: And therefore we must not
only provide grace, but the assurance of grace, that we may be able to say
with confidence, as Job did upon the dunghill, Job 19. 25. I know that my
Redeemer lives, and with the holy Apostle, Romans 8. 38, I am perswaswaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. That man who has got a Scripture assurance of his salvation, will
be more than a conqueror in the day of his distress.

3 A stock of divine experiences. Happy 3 A stock of divine experiences.
is that man that lodges up in his heart all the former experiences he has
had of Gods love and mercy toward him, and knows how to argue from them in
the day of calamity; Thus did Moses in his prayer to God, Numb. 14. 19. Pardon
I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of
thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even until now.
Because God had forgiven them, therefore Moses entreats him to forgive them;
this argument is drawn from former experience. And thus David incourageth
himself, 1 Samuel 17. 37. The Lord has delivered me out of the paw of the Lion,
and out of the paw of the Bear, and he will deliver me out of the hand of
this Philistine. Thus also Paul reasons, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who delivered us from
so great a death, and does deliver, and in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us! Divine experiences are the Saints great encouragements in the day
of Affliction. Blessed is the man that has his quiver full of these arrows.

4 A stock of Sermons. We must do 4 A stock of sermons
with Sermons, as the Tradesmen do with the money they get; some of it they lay
out for their present use, and some of it they lay up against the time of
sickness. That man is an ill husband, and an unthrifty tradesman that makes
no provision for old age; or for an evil day; and that man is an unprofitable
hearer of the word, who does not stock and store himself with Sermons, whereby
he may be comforted in the hour of affliction. And therefore the Prophet
Isaiah advises us, Isa. 42. 23. to hear for the time to come, or (as it is in
the Hebrew) for the after-time. Sermons are not only to be heard for our
present use, but to be laid up for aftertimes, that when we lie upon our
sick-beds, and cannot hear Sermons, we may then live upon the Sermons we have
heard.

5 And lastly; We must prepare 5 A stock of Scripture promises.
and provide a stock of Scripture-promises, which will be as so many reviving
Cordials, to cheer us, and as so many spiritual Anchors, to uphold us from
perishing in the day of our tribulation. What these promises are, you shall
hear afterward: These upheld David in the hour of his distress, and therefore
he says in the Text, Unless thy Law had been my delight, I had perished in
mine affliction. If this our dear Sister had not had this stock, she had been
quite overwhelmed under the grievousnesse of her tormenting pains. Be wise
therefore, O ye Saints of God, and prepare these five provisions in the time
of health, that so you may live joyfully in the time of sickness.

3 As we must expect and provide for afflictions, so also we must labor 3
Gods people are to improve afflictions.
(when afflicted) to improve them for our spiritual benefit and advantage, We
must pray more for the sanctification of them, than for their removal: It was
not the staff of Elisha that revived the dead child, but Elisha himself. It
was not the troubling of the waters of the Pool of Bethesda, that made them
healing, but the coming down of the Angel. It was not the Clay and spittle
that cured the blind eyes, but Christ's anointing them with it. It was not the
cloak of Elijah that divided the waters, but the God of Elijah: Troubles,
strokes, blows, afflictions, and distresses will do us no good, unless the Lord
be pleased to make them effectual; And therefore let us pray unto God that he
would give us grace together with our affliction. That he would add
instruction to his correction, that he would make us good scholars in the
school of afflictions, and enable us to take out all those excellent lessons,
which he would have us to learn in it, that thereby we may come to know God
more powerfully, and experimentally, and to know our selves, and our own
frailty, and our absolute dependence upon God more effectually, that thereby we
may be more purified and refined, that the wind of temptation may cleanse us
from the chafe of our corruption, that we may learn righteousness by Gods
judgments, and be made partakers of his holiness. Such a good Scholar was
Manasses, he got more good by his Iron chain, than by his Golden chain: Such
another was the Prodigal child, who was happier amongst the Swine, than when in
his Fathers house; Such was Paul, his being stricken down to the ground, raised
him up to Heaven, by the blindness of his body, his soul received sight, and
he was turned from a persecuting Saul, to a persecuted Paul. Such another was
David, who professes of himself, that it was good for him that he was
afflicted; and such Scholars ought we to be.

There are some that are arrant dunces in this School, that are like unto the
bush which Moses saw, which burned with fire, but was not consumed; the fire
did not consume the thorny bush. Many such thorny sinners are burnt up with the
fire of divine afflictions, but their sins are not consumed. Of these the
Prophets complain, Amos 4.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. -- yet they have not
returned, etc. Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved;
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; they have
made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return. Rocks and
stones by hewing and polishing may be made fit for a building: But there are
some men who by no afflictions will be amended. The Mountains melt at the
presence of the Lord, and the rocks rend asunder, when he is angry: But there
are some that have made their faces harder than the Rocks, and the Mountains,
and are not at all affected with Gods anger. Of such as these Bernard
complains. Multi humiliati, pauci humiles, corripimur, sed not corrigimur,
plectimur, sed non flectimur; Multo facilius fregeris, quam flexeris. Non
cessant vitia civium usque ad excidia civitatum; Prius est interire quam
corrigi. Prius ipsos, quam in ipsis vitia non esse.

There are others that are the worse for their afflictions, like the Smiths
Anvil, the more they are stricken, the harder they are: Such a one was King
Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. In the time of his distress he did trespass yet more
against the Lord: There is a brand put upon him -- This is that King Ahaz, that
wicked King Ahaz, that reprobate King Ahaz. As Pearls put in Vinegar lose their
color and beauty, so many, when under Gods hand, lose all their glory and
excellency, and begin to distrust Gods providence, to call his justice into
question, to murmr and repine against Gods dealings, and to use unlawful
means for their deliverance. Of these the Prophet Isaiah complains, Isa. 1. 5.
Why should you be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more; Such was
Ahaziah, a King. 1.2. that sought for help from Baalzebub the god of Ekron; and
such was Saul, who sought to the Witch of Endor for health in the day of his
distress.

Both of these sorts are in a sad and miserable condition; For God has two
furnaces, the furnace of affliction, and the Furnace of hellfire. If the first
Furnace will not purge us, the second will everlastingly consume us. As the
Roman Consuls had a man appointed to go before them, carrying a Rod and an Axe;
A Rod for the punishing of corrigible offenders, an Axe for the destruction of
incorrigible; So God has his Rod, and his Axe, his Pruning-knife, and his
Chopping-knife, his Warning-peeces, and his Murdering-peeces. Afflictions are
his Rods to correct us for our sin, his Pruning-knife to pare off our luxuriant
branches; his Warning-peeces to call upon us to repent.

But if his Warning-peeces will do us no good, we must expect his
Murdering-peeces. If his Pruning-knife will not amend us, his Chopping-knife
will confound us. If his Rods will not reclaim us, then his Axe will hew us
down, and cast us into everlasting fire. God has three houses, the house of
Instruction, of Correction, and of Destruction. The place where Gods people
meet to hear his word, is his house of Instruction. And if we profit in this
house, he will never carry us unto the house of Correction. But if we be
stubborn and rebellious in the house of Instruction, then he will send us to
the house of Correction. And if we profit in this house, he will never send
us into the house of Destruction. But if we continue incorrigible in the house
of Correction, he will inevitably send us to the house of Destruction, that
is, unto hell fire.

And therefore whenever God brings us into the School of Affliction, let us
labor to be good Scholars in it; and to answer all those ends, aims, and
designs which God has in afflicting of us. Let us pray to God that our
afflictions may be Divine Hammers, to break our hearts for sin, and from sin,
may make the world bitter, and Christ more precious, may prove, and improve our
graces, and may put an edge upon all holy duties.

There are two things I would have you in an especial manner to labor after.

1 Labor when afflicted, to know the meaning of Gods Rod. Gods people are to
labor to know the meaning of Gods Rod.
2 That the good you get by afflictions, may abide upon you after your recovery
from them.
1 You must labor to know the meaning of Gods Rod, and what the particular
arrant is, which he has to you in the day of your distresses, you must do as
David did, 2 Samuel 21.1. he inquired of the Lord to know the reason why he
sent a Famine amongst them. So must you, you must pray as Job does, Job 10. 2.
Show me, O Lord, wherefore thou contendest with me? When the cause of a
disease is found out, it is half cured. Your great care therefore must be to
study to know the particular cause and reason, why God turns your prosperity
into adversity. The Prophet Micah tells us, Micah 6.9. That the Rod has a
voice, and that the man of wisdom shall see Gods Name upon it. There is a
great measure of spiritual Art and Wisdom required, to enable a man to hear
this voice, and to understand the language of it. A spiritual Fool cannot do it.

Quest. What must we do, that we may understand the voice of the Rod? How we
may know the meaning of Gods Rod.


Answ. You must know, that the Rod of God ordinarily speaks three languages; it
is sent for correction for sin, for the trial and exercise of Grace, and for
instruction in holiness; Sometimes indeed it is sent only for trial and
instruction, and not at all for sin. Upon this account was Job afflicted, and
the blind man, Joh. 9. 3. But for the most part it has a threefold voice; it
is appointed for instruction, probation, and also for correction. Lam. 3. 39.
Isa. 42. 24. Luke 1. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 30.

Quest. How shall a man know whether his afflictions be only for trial and
instruction, and not at all for sin?

Answ. The safest and best way for a Christian in this case, is to believe that
all his afflictions are both for trial and instruction, and also for sin:
Indeed when he sees another man, who is very godly, grievously diseased, he
may charitably believe, that this is for his trial, and not for his sin, but
when it is his own case, then (as D. Ames says most excellently) aequissimum,
tutissimum, and Dea gratissimum est, ut in afflictionibus omnibus peccata
nostra intueamur, quae illas vel direct procurarunt, vel saltem promeruerunt.
Quamvis enim omnes afflictiones non imittuntur semper direct, and precipue
propter peccatum, peccatum tamen est omnium afflictionum fons and fundamentum,
Romans 5. 12. -- It is most equal, most safe, and most acceptable to God, to have
an eye upon our sins, which have either directly procured them, or at lest
deserved them. For though afflictions are not always sent directly and
especially for sin, yet sin is the original and foundation of all afflictions.

Quest. What course must we take to How to find out the particular sin for
which God afflicts us.
find out what that sin is in particular, for which God corrects us?

Answ. 1 Sometimes we may read our sin in our punishment. Adonibezek, though a
Heathen King, did this, Judge. 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings, having their
Thumbs, and their great Toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I
have done, so God has requited me. I read of holy Ephrem, that he was
converted by the sutablenesse of his affliction, unto the sin he had
committed, for he saw clearly that his misery came not by chance, but from God
immediately, and for sin. As a man may sometime gather the disease of the
Patient by observing the Physicians bill, so he may guess at his sin by
considering his punishment.

2 Consider what that sin is for which thy conscience does most of all accuse
thee. Conscience is Gods Vicegerent, his bosom Preacher. And when we slight
the voice of conscience, God seconds it with the voice of his rod, which speaks
the very same language that conscience does.

3 Consider what is the sin of thy Complexion, and Constitution, what is thy
Dilectum delictum, thy peccatum in delitiis, thy beloved sin, what is that sin
to which thou art most of all inclined, and if that sin prevail over thee, and
thou can not say with David, Psalm. 18. 23. I have kept my self from mine
iniquity. It is very probable that for the subduing of that sin, thou art
corrected of God.

4 If ever thou have been at the gates of death, despairing of life, consider
what that sin was, which did then most of all trouble and perplexe thy
conscience; or if ever thou have been in a dream, supposing thy self to be
dying, and breathing out thy last; what was that sin which did then most of all
affright thee. It is very likely that God by afflicting thee, intends to get
that sin more conquered and mortified.

5 Consider what those sins are for which thy godly Minister (under whose care
thou live) does reprove thee, and of which thy true and real friends do
accuse thee; for, if thou have slighted the voice of thy faithful Minister,
and friends; surely God out of his love to thee, follows their advice with
the voice of his Rod, that thereby he may open thine ear to discipline, and
command thee to depart from those iniquities.

But if thou can not find out that particular sin, for which God afflicts
thee, labor to repent of every sin, and then thou will be sure to repent of
that sin. If thou can not find out the Be that stings thee, pull down the
whole hive, or the thorn that pricks thee, pull down the whole hedge. Do that
out of wisdom, which Herod did out of malice, who because he could not find
out the Babe Jesus, killed all the children in Bethlehem from two years old,
and under, that so he might be sure to kill Jesus. Let us seek the utter
ruin and death of all our sins, and then we shall be sure to destroy that
sin for which God afflicts us, and when the cause is removed, the disease will
forthwith be cured, and the Almighty pacified, and reconciled unto us.

2 Let us labor that the good we reap by our afflictions, may abide upon us
after The good we get by our Afflictions must remain with us after our
recovery.
our recovery from them. There are very many who while they are under the Rod,
seem to be very penitent, and do purpose and promise to amend their lives, but
as soon as the Rod is removed, they return like the Dog to the vomit, etc. Such
was Pharaoh, whilst he was plagued he confessed his sin, and prayed for
pardon, but as soon as ever the judgment was gone, he hardened his heart.
Such were the Israelites, Psalm 78.34, 35, 36, 37. They were not steadfast, they
turned back. Just like a truantly Schoolboy, who while his Master is whipping
him, will promise any thing, but when it is done, forgets presently to do what
he promised: Or like unto water, which while it is upon the fire is very hot,
but as soon as ever it is taken off the fire, presently grows cold. I knew a
man who in the time of his sickness, was so terrified in his conscience for his
sins, that he made the very bed to shake, upon which he lay, and cried out
all night long, I am damned, I am damned, and made many and great Protestations
of amendment of life, if God would be pleased to recover him. In a little
while he did recover, and being recovered, was as bad, and as wicked as ever
before.

And therefore let us labor that the good we get by our afflictions, may not
vanish away with our afflictions, but may abide on us after we are recovered,
that we may be able to say with David, It is good for me that I was
afflicted, not only that I am, but that I was. David praises God in health,
for the good he had got in sickness, and which still abode with him. Let us
say with the same Prophet, Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will go into thy house with burnt
offerings, I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth
has spoken, when I was in trouble. Let us pray unto God that his afflictions
may not only skin over our spiritual diseases, and coup up our sins; but
mortify them, and so change our natures, that we may never return to folly.

I will conclude this point with a famous saying of Plinius Secundus, worthy to
be written in letters of gold. A friend writes to him, and entreats him to
give him advice how to frame his life, so as he might live as becomes a good
man. He returns him this answer: I will not prescribe many rules, there is
this one only which I commend to thee above all other. Ut tales esse
perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi. Let us labor to
continue and persevere to be such, when we are well; as we purpose, and
promise to our selves to be, when we are sick. There is hardly any man so
wicked, but he will in sickness make many and great promises of a new life,
and of universal reformation if God would restore him. Now then if we not
only be such, but continue to be such when restored, as we promise to be
when sick, then we shall be excellent Scholars, in the School of Affliction,
and God will either (as I have already said) deliver us out of affliction, or
send us to heaven by affliction. So much for the first Truth supposed.

The End of the first Sermon.
THE Word of God is the Saints Delights.
SERMON II.
PSALM. 119. 2. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have perished
in mine Afflictions.
NOw I come to speak of the second truth supposed in the Text.

That the Word of God is the Saints darling and delights; not only their
delight, but in the plural number, their delights, that is (as our Annotations
say) a Saint does greatly delight in Gods Law, or as Junius. All the delight of
a Saint is in Gods Law; Gods word is the center of his delights; Nisi lex tua
erat omnis oblectatio mea: Many were the troubles and sorrows of David's life,
but against them all he found as many comforts and delectations in Gods Word;
therefore he says, verse. 29. Thy Testimonies are my delights, etc. and 143.
Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me, yet thy Commandments are my
delights; And in the Text, unless thy Law had been my delights, etc. Whilst
others delight in vanity and iniquity, whilst others take pleasure in hunting,
hawking, carding, dicing, eating, and drinking, the Saints of God, can Reasons
why the Saints take so much delight in Gods Law.
say with Austin, Sacrae Scripturae tuae sunt sanctae deliciae meae, Thy holy
Scriptures are my holy delights.

Quest. Why do the Saints of God tale such delight in the Law of God?

Answ. 1 Because they are spiritually illightened; their eyes are opened to
behold the glory, and beauty, and to understand the deep mysteries of the Law;
therefore David prays, verse. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law, As the Apostle says of the Jews, 2 Cor. 3. 14,
15, 16. That to this day there is a vail over their hearts, when Moses is read,
and when they shall turn to the Lord, this vail shall be removed: So it is
with Christians, when a wicked man reads the word, there is a vail over his
eyes, and over his heart, and over the Scriptures, The God of this world has
so blinded his eyes, that he cannot behold the beauty and glory of them; but
the True Saint has this vail removed, Christ has anointed his eyes with his
spiritual eye salve; he sees a surpassing excellency in the Word of God, and
therefore cannot but delight in it.

2 Because they are not only illightened, but regenerated; And as children new
born, by the instinct of nature, have a natural appetite to milk for
conservation of their life; so the new born Saint, by the instinct of grace,
has a spiritual appetite to the Word of God, according to that of Saint Peter,
1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that you
may grow thereby: The Word of God is the Saints food, and as it is impossible
for a child unborn to desire food, so for a man unregenerated to hunger after,
and take true pleasure in the Word; and as it is impossible for a new born
child, not to delight in Milk, so it is as impossible for a regenerate
Christian, not to delight in the Law of God.

3 Because a true Saint has the Law of God written in his heart, according to
that precious promise of the Covenant of grace, Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. A Saints heart is the
counterpane to Gods Law. The Law is within his heart, Psalm. 40.8. and as it is
in the Hebrew, in the midst of his bowels, in medio vtscerum. God has infused
a principle of grace into his inward parts, whereby he is not only inclined,
but enabled to walk in all the Commandments of the Law blameless. A true Saint
hides the Law in his heart, as a choice Jewel in a most precious Cabinet, as
David says verse 9. I have hid thy Law in my heart. Hid it as a rare treasure.
So does every Saint, and therefore cannot but delight in it.

4 Because the same holy Spirit that wrote the word, dwells in every true
Saint. It is certain that all Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, and that the
holy men of God spoke, as they were guided by the Holy Ghost. And it is as
certain, That the same Holy Ghost dwells in every Saint, Romans 8. 11. And by
virtue of the in-dwelling of the Spirit, they are sweetly and powerfully drawn
to make the Law of God their chiefest delight.

5 Because it is Gods indictment and invention. This reason is brought in the
Text, Unless thy Law, etc. It is the Law of that God in whom they delight. It
transcribes the mind and heart of God. A true Saint sees the Name, Authority,
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God in every letter of it, and therefore cannot
but take pleasure in it. It is an Epistle sent down to him from the God of
heaven. It is one of the greatest Lovetokens that ever God gave to his Church.
There are two great gifts that God has given to his people. The Word Christ,
and the Word of Christ. Both are unspeakably great. But the first will do us no
good without the second.

6 A true Saint cannot but delight in the word of God, because it is his
Inheritance, verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever,
for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Therefore they were the rejoicing of
his heart, because they were his everlasting Inheritance.

7 Because he finds a sweetness in it. Delight is nothing else but a passion
of the soul, arising from the sweetness of the object that we enjoy. Things
that are good, present, suitable, and sweet, are the object of our delights,
such is the word of God to every true Saint. It is sweeter than the honey, and
the honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. So also Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words
unto my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. A Saint must needs delight in
it, it is so suitable, and so sweet.

8 Because he loves the Law. Now that which we love, we cannot but delight
in, when we come to enjoy it. A true Saint does not only love the Law, but
he loves it exceedingly, Psalm. 119.167. My soul has kept thy testimonies, and
I love them exceedingly. A true Saint can say with David, Psalm, 119.97. Oh how
do I love thy Law! and verse. 127. I love they Commandments above gold, yea
above fine gold; and verse. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than
thousands of gold and silver. Now because the Saints of God are so inamoured
with the Law of God, therefore it is that they cannot but delight in it, as
David says, Psalm. 119.47. I will delight my self in thy Commandments, which I
have loved. He that loves the Commandments (as all Saints do) cannot but
delight in them.

Use. This shows that there are but few true Saints amongst us. There are many
bastard Saints, and nominal Saints, but few true and real Saints. We live in
an age, wherein there were never more Saints, and never fewer, never more by
outward Profession, and never fewer by a holy Conversation. It is the property
of a true Saint to make the word of God his darling and delights.

But where shall we find such Saints? It is easy to find out men that can
say, Eating and drinking is my delight, carding and dicing is my delight,
reading of vain and trifling books is my delight; to satisfy the lusts of the
flesh is my delight. But where is the man that can truly say as David does? The
Law of God is my delights, and the joy and rejoicing of my heart for ever.
Austin professes of himself, that before his conversion, he took no pleasure
in the word of God. His proud heart (as he says) would not stoop to the
humble expressions of it. After his conversion, he was ravished with the
beauty and excellency of the Scriptures, but before his conversion, he saw no
excellency in them. Policarp (though a great Scholar, yet a notorious Atheist)
professes most blasphemously, that he never lost more time than in reading
the Scripture. And it is reported of Plato, that when he had read the first
Chapter of Genesis, he said, Hic vir multa dicit, sed nihil probat. This man
says many things, but proves nothing. Where shall we find the man that puts
a due estimation upon the word of God? That prizeth it above gold, yea above
much fine gold? That rejoyeeth in thy word as much as in all riches, verse. 14.
That can appeal to God, and say as David, verse. 159. Consider, Oh Lord, how I
love thy Precepts? and verse 97. Oh how do I love thy Law? There are some men
that can delight in any thing but in God, and his Word, and his Ordinances;
They can delight in the creatures of God, but cannot delight in the Ordinances
of God. They can delight in the gifts of God, in riches, and health, and
honors: But they cannot delight in the God of these gifts. They can delight in
books of Philosophy, and humanity, but they cannot delight in the word of God.

Mark the sad condition that these are in.

It is a certain sign that there is a vail over their eyes and hearts, that
they are not yet anointed with Christ's eye salve; that the God of the world
has blinded their eyes that they cannot see the glorious excellencies of the
Law of God.

It is certain that they are not born anew, for if they were new born babes,
they would desire the sincere milk of the word.

It is certain that the Law of God is not yet written in their hearts, and that
the Spirit of God does not dwell in them. It is certain that they have no part,
nor portion in the word of God, that they never tasted the sweetness that is in
it, and that they have no true love to God, nor to his word. It is a true
saying, Qui regem amat, legem amat, he that loves a King, will love his Law.
And I may say, Qui Deum amat, legem Dei amat: He that loves God, will love the
Law of God, which is nothing else but his Image, and his Picture, his last Will
and Testament, his blessed love-token. And therefore if you delight not in the
Law of God, it is evident you do not delight in the God of this Law. And if you
delight not in God, he will not delight in you; unless it be to laugh at your
destruction, as it is Prove. 1.26.

Q. But how shall I know whether I do delight in the word of God, or no?

Answ. You shall know it by these notes.

1 He that delights in Gods Law, will be very frequent in meditating and
reading of it, and very often in speaking of it. Thus says David, Psalm. 1.2.
His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein he will meditate day and
night. And Psalm 119.97. Oh how do I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the
day. So also verse. 15, 16. 23. He that takes pleasure in the Law, he will be
often thinking of it, as Christ says, Matthew. 6.21. Where the treasure is,
there the heart will be also: If the word of God be thy treasure, thou will
meditate on it, Cogitatione crebra, longa, and profunda. Thou will frequently
think of it, and when thou beginnest to think of it, thou will dwell upon the
thought of it, as a Be dwells (as it were) upon the flower to suck out the
sweetness that is in it, and thou will think of it with deep and serious
meditations, and contemplations, thou will dive into the unsearchable riches
and treasures that are in the Word. And as thou will meditate on it, so thou will be often, and unwearisome in reading and perusing of it, and discoursing
about it. A man that delights in hunting, is never weary of talking of hunting,
and he that delights in the world, of speaking about the world; and if you did
delight in Gods word, you would be very frequent, and indefatigable in
discoursing of it.

2 If you did delight in the Word of God, you would delight in the Ministers
and Ambassadors of the Word lawfully commissionated by Christ: For the great
work of the Ministry is to expound and apply the Word; and therefore if you
dis-respect the godly learned lawful Ministry of the Word, you take no delight
in the Word.

3 They that delight in the Word, will be at any cost to bring the Word to
their congregations, they will part with thousands of gold and silver, rather
than with the Word; He that esteems the Word above thousands, will be
willing to part with hundreds for the Words sake. He will account a famine of
the Word more bitter than a famine of bread; by how much the soul is better
than the body, by so much will he be more troubled for a soul-famine, than a
bodily.

4 He that delights truly in the Law, will sincerely labor to obey it, and
be much grieved when it is disobeyed. 1 He will sincerely labor to obey it,
he will make the Word of God the man of his counsel, verse. 24. Thy Testimonies
are my delight; but how does he prove that? in the following words, and my
counselors: He will make the Word a Lamp to his feet, and a light to his
paths, verse 105. In all his undertakings, he will inquire what God would have
him to do, and he will make Gods Word his compass to sail by, and pray with
David, verse 35. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein
do I delight. 2 He will be much grieved when others transgress the Law of
God. Thus David, verse. 53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy Law, and verse. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine
eyes, because they keep not thy Law;

And therefore you that delight in sin, you cannot be said to delight in the
Word; and you that are not pained and grieved when others sin, you are not
amongst the number of those that take pleasure in Gods Law, or in whom God
takes pleasure.

Use 2 Let us make it appear that we are Saints indeed and in truth, not only
Saints in Man's, but in Gods Calender, by following the example of holy David,
set down in the Text. Let us make the Law of God our joys, and our delights.
Let me speak to you in the words of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of
God dwell richly in you, etc. not only with you, but in you, And in the Words
of Christ, John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for therein you hope to find
eternal life. The Greek word signifies to search, as men do under ground for
treasures, or to search, as men who dive under water for something that is at
the bottom. Let us with Job 23. 12. Esteem the Word of God above our necessary
food. Let us love it above gold, yea, above fine gold; let it be dearer to us
than thousands of gold and silver, sweeter than the honey, and the honeycomb.

You that are Gentlemen, remember what Hierom reports of Nepotianus, a young
Gentleman of Rome, qui long a and assidua meditatione scripturarum, pectus suum
fecerat bibliothecam Christi, who by often and assiduous meditation of the
Scriptures, made his breast the library of Christ. Remember what is said of
King Alphonsus, that he read over the Bible fourteen times, together with such
Commentaries as those times afforded.

You that are Scholars, remember Cranmor and Ridley; the former, learnt the
New Testament by heart in his journey to Rome, the latter in Pembrook-hall
walks in Cambridge. Remember what is said of Thomas a Kempis, that he found
rest no where, nisi in angulo, cum libello; but in a corner with this book in
his hand. And what is said of Beza, that when he was above fourscore years
old, he could say perfectly by heart any Greek Chapter in Paul's Epistles.

You that are women, consider what Hierom says of Paula, Eustochiam, and other
Ladies, who were singularly vers't in the holy Scriptures.

Let all men consider that hyperbollical speech of Luther, That he would not
live in Paradise without the Word and with it he could live well enough in
Hell. This speech of Luthers must be understood cum grano salis.

Qu. May not a wicked man delight in the Word of God? is it not said of Herod,
Mark. 6. 20. that he heard John Baptist gladly, and of the stony ground, Luke
8. 13. that it received the Word with joy? Is it not said of the Israelites
remaining wicked, that they delighted to know Gods ways, and took delight in
approaching to God, Isa. 58. 2. and of the Jews, Joh. 5. 35. that they were
willing for a season to rejoice in the Light; held forth by the preaching of
John Baptist.

Answ. There is a wide and vast difference between the joy and delight which a
true Saint takes in Gods Word, and that which may be found in an hypocrite.

1 The delight of a godly man, is orderly and seasonable. It is the consequent
of conviction and humiliation; For though Joy be the great work of the Spirit,
yet it is not the first work. First, The Spirit by the Word convinces and
humbles, and then comfort; therefore Christ says, Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are
those that mourn, for they shall be comforted; and David says, Psalm. 126. 5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. But the joy of an hypocrite is
unseasonable and disorderly. It is his first work. It is said of the stony
ground, that when they heard the Word, they received it immediately with
gladness, Mark. 4. 16. It is not said, they received it first with sorrow, and
then with gladness. Here is mention of joy without any antecedent humiliation.
Nay, the Text says expressly, Luke 8. 6. it lacked moisture, and therefore it
withered away. There are many Professors in our days that skip from sin, to
joy at first, that all in an instant are in the highest form of sin, and in the
highest form of comfort, that skip out of the lap of the Devil, into the lap of
joy: These are as the stony ground. These are wanton Christians: They sow
before they plough; they know not the bitterness of sin, and therefore in time
of temptation fall away.

2 The delight that a godly man takes in the Word, is a well-rooted delight. It
is rooted in an humble, good, and honest heart, as is said of the good ground,
Luke 8. 15. But the delight of an hypocrite is shallow and superficial; as his
graces are slight and formal, so are his delights. Therefore it is said of the
seed that fell upon the stony ground, that it had no root, Luke 8. 13. and
Matthew. 13. 5. it wanted depth of earth, and therefore when the Sun arose, it
was scorched. The Apostle hints this, Heb. 6. 4. -- and have tasted the good
Word of God. The delight of a wicked man in the Word, is but a tasting and
sipping, no soaking; a floating aloft in the river of Christ's blood, no diving
down to the bottom. A man may taste a thing, and not like it, taste, and like
it, and yet not come up to the price of it, as the young man, Matthew. 19. 22.
He was very desirous to enjoy eternal life, but he would not part with his
possessions for the obtaining of it. A Cook tastes of the meat he dresseth,
but they only that are invited eat of it.

Tasting does not imply habitual grace. A man may taste that which he never
digesteth, nor concocteth. The Israelites tasted of the first fruits of the
Land of Canaan, and yet did not enter into Canaan. Such is the joy of the
hypocrite. It is outward and superficial: But the delight of a true Saint is
inward, solid, and substantial. Jeremy says, that the Word of God was the joy
and rejoicing of his heart, and that he did eat it, Jer. 15. 16. he did not
only taste it, but eat it. And Paul says, Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of
God after the inward man; His delights had depth of earth, they were well
digested, and concocted.

3 It is superlative and overtopping. A godly man delights more in God, and
his Word, than in any worldly thing whatsoever. Lord lift thou up (says David,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7.) The light of thy countenance upon us, thou have put gladness in
my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased. So
also, Psalm. 43. 4. -- unto God my exceeding Joy, Psa. 137.6. If I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief Joy. And Psalm. 119.72.127. The delight of a Saint in
Gods Word overtoppeth all his creature delights, and enjoyments, and for the
joy he finds in it, he will fell all he has to purchase it, Matthew. 13. 44.
But the joy of a wicked man is of an inferior nature, he rejoices more in
Corn, Wine, and Oil, etc. And when it comes into competition, he will leave
his spiritual and heavenly, rather than lose his creature and carnal pleasures.
Thus Herod rejoiced in the word that John Baptist preached, but he rejoiced
more in his Herodias; and when it came to the trial, he chose to behead John
Baptist, rather than to part with Herod^as.

1 The stony ground, when persecution arose, parted with all its joy and faith,
rather than it would lose its estate, or life. As a godly man rejoices in
worldly things, as though he rejoiced not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. So a wicked man
rejoices in spiritual things, as though he rejoiced not. In the old Law those
Fouls that did both fly and swim, were unclean: A wicked man would many
times fly aloft in spiritual delights, but he would also bathe himself, and
swim in carnal pleasures, and his heart is more affected with worldly
advancement, and bodily-recreations, than with heavenly, and this is a sign
that he is an unclean Christian, and that his delights in God, and his Word are
not right, because they are not overtopping and superlative.

4 It is powerful and soul-strengthening, full of life, vigor, and activity;
it will enable the soul to do and suffer any thing for God, it turns a prison
into a Paradise, it makes Martyrdom to be as a bed of Roses, it is armor of
proof to steel us, and make us fit to endure Afflictions, both for God, and
from God; therefore David says in the Text. Unless thy Law had been my
delights, I should then have perished in mine Affliction. His delight in the
Law supported him from sinking. It is like Oil to the Wheels, like Sails to
the Ship, and wings to the bird; but the delight that a wicked man has in the
Word is a powerless, dead, fruitless, and strengthless delight. It is as a
paper helmet, and a painted fire, it will not support him in the hour of
adversity: The persons represented by the stony ground, fell away,
notwithstanding their joy, as soon as ever persecution arose for the Gospel. But
the joy of a true Saint is soul-supporting, and soul-upholding. The joy in the
Lord is their strength, Ne. 8.10.

5 The delight that a godly man has in the Word, is sin-excluding. It cannot
consist with a delight in any sin; therefore David says, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy
Word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Sin is as a
wooden window, to shut out the true joys of the Spirit. But now a wicked man,
though he may delight in the Word, yet he also delights in sinning against
the Word. Although Herod heard John Baptist gladly, yet he kept his Herodias,
And though the Israelites delighted to know Gods ways, yet they did not
delight to walk in his ways. They were as a Nation that did righteousness, he
does not say, they were such, but quasigens, etc. as a Nation that did
righteousness. And though they delighted to approach to God, yet they did not
delight to obey that God, before whom they approached; they took pleasure in
sinning against God, as well as in serving of God, Isa. 58. It was not a
sin-excluding joy, and therefore it was false and counterfeit.

6 It is grace-increasing. The more a Saint delights in the Word of God, the
more careful he will be to obey the Will of God, and to grow and increase in
the grace of God; therefore David says, Psalm. 119. 167. My soul has kept thy
testimonies, for I love them exceedingly. And Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy
Will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart; because the Law was written in
his heart, therefore he delighted to do it. He that delights to keep Gods
Law, God will give him more grace to keep it according to that remarkable Text,
Psalm. 119. 55, 56. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, and have kept thy Law,
this I had, because I have kept thy Precepts. What had David for keeping Gods
precepts? He had power to keep his Law, that is, to grow and increase in
keeping of it. As the Prophet, Hos. 6.3. speaks of the knowledge of God. Then
shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, that is, if we industriously
labor to know God, we shall have this reward, to be made able to know him
more. So may I say of the grace of God. He that delights to keep Gods Law,
shall have this reward, to be inabbed to keep it more perfectly.

A true delight in Gods Word is Grace increasing. Grace is the Mother of all
true joy, Isa. 32* 17. and joy is as the Daughter; and the Mother and Daughter
live and dye together. True, spiritual delight, ebbs and flows as grace ebbs
and flows. As the wood is to the fire, oil to the flame, the shadow to the
body, so is joy to grace. Quantum crescis in gratia, tantum dilataris in
fiducia. But now a wicked man, though he may have a kind of delight in Gods
word, yet it is not a delight of the right kind. It does not argue that he
has true grace in him.

An hypocrite is all joy, and no grace; a Giant in joy, and not so much as a
dwarf in grace, like a green bough tied to a dead tree. He is in the highest
form of joy, and not so much as in the lowest form of grace.

7 The delight that a godly man has in the word, is not only a delight in
spiritual things, but a spiritual delight, grounded upon spiritual aims and
reasons. But the delight of a wicked man, though it be in spiritual things,
yet it is but a natural delight. As a godly man spiritualizeth carnal things;
So an ungodly man carnalizeth spiritual things. Austin before his conversion,
rejoiced much to hear Ambrose preach, but it was because of his eloquence (as
he says) not upon a spiritual account. A wicked man may follow a Preacher,
and delight in his preaching, because of his elegant words, and Rhetorical
expressions, because he is unto him as a very lovely song of one that has a
pleasant voice, etc. as it is Ezekiel. 33.32. Or, out of novelty, because newly
come (as the Israelites delighted in Manna at first, but afterward loathed it)
or because he loves his person; or out of a desire to obtain a form of
knowledge in heavenly things. The Pharisees delighted to do many spiritual
things out of vainglory. John delighted to do the will of God, but it was for
his own ends. Pauci quaerunt Jesum, propter Jesum. Stella is of opinion, that
the Devil persuaded Herod, to hear John Baptist gladly, and to reverence him,
and to do many things, that so he might hold him the faster in his possession.
The Devil had him sure by one sin, and therefore he provoked him to do some
good things, that so he might rock him asleep in presumption, and by his good
things he might quiet his conscience, and put a fair gloss upon his incestuous
practices. A man may rejoice in spiritual things upon sinful grounds and
reasons. But now a true Saint delights in the word upon a spiritual account,
because it is Gods word, and God would have him delight in it, because it is
his guide to glory, the way by which he is sanctified. It is both concha and
canalis. A Cistern to contain the glorious mysteries of salvation, and a
Conduit to conveigh God and grace into his soul.

In a word, he delights in it, because it is holy and pure, he can say with
David, Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
This no wicked man can truly say.

8 The delight that a godly man takes in the word, is without any reservation
or distinction. He delights in the whole word of God, in the commanding and
threatening word, as well as in the promising word; he beholds God, and his
wisdom, and goodness in every verse, and therefore he can say with Hezekiah,
Isa. 39.8. Good is the Word of the Lord. He has the whole Law written in his
heart, and rejoices in every tittle of it. But a wicked man has his
reservations and distinctions, he may delight in the promising word, but he
undervalues the commanding word, and turns a deaf ear to the threatening word.
It is said of the Jews, That they rejoiced in the light of John Baptist, but it
is not said, They rejoiced in his heat: He was a burning, and a shining light,
they rejoiced in his shining, but not in his burning. It is hardly possible for
a wicked man, remaining wicked, to rejoice in the burning zeal, holiness, and
strictness of a John Baptist. But a godly man delights both in the light, and
heat of the word.

9 It is an abiding delight, 2 Thessalonians. 2.18. Everlasting consolation, Joh. 16.
22. Your joy no man takes from you. It is as a fixed star. But the delight of
a wicked man in the word, is as the crackling of thorns upon the fire, and as
the Corn that grew on the stony ground, which quickly sprung up, and as quickly
withered, Job. 27.8. Therefore it is said of the Jews, Joh. 5.3. They rejoiced
in his light for a season. In the Greek it is, (...), for an hour. A wicked
man's delight in the word, is but as a blazing star, which is quickly
extinguished. He may rejoice in the word while he is hearing of it, but it
quickly vanishes away. He is like to a man that comes into a pleasant Garden,
and is delighted with the smell of it while he is there. But a child of God
makes a Posie of these Flowers, to refresh him when he is out. He delights to
read, and to keep the Law of God continually, for ever and ever, Psalm. 119.45.

Let us (I beseech you) labor, with all labor, for this superlative,
well-rooted, powerful, spiritual, sin-excluding, grace-increasing, and abiding
delight, in the whole word of God.

Quest. What must we do that we may be enabled thus to make the Law of God
our delights?

Answ. 1. You must seriously study the excellency of Gods word, this made David
prize it so much, and love it so much, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The word of
God, has God for its Author, and therefore must needs be full of infinite
wisdom, and eloquence, even the wisdom and eloquence of God. There is not a
word in it, but breathes out God, and is breathed out by God. It is (as Ireneus
says) (...), an invariable rule of faith, an unerring and infallible guide to
heaven. It contains glorious revelations and discoveries, no where else to be
found. It has a manifesting, convincing, soul-humbling, soul-directing,
soul-converting, and soul-comforting power, and efficacy in it, as appears by
these Scriptures, Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 1 King. 21.29. Psalm. 119.105. 2
Cor. 3.6. Psalm. 119.50. And therefore to delight in the word, and the God that
made it, is not only our duty, Psalm. 37.4. But it is recorded in Scripture as
our privilege, and as the great reward that God would bestow upon those that
keep holy the Sabbath Day, Isa. 58. 13, 14. Then thou shall delight thy self in
the Lord. This shall be thy great reward.

2 You must fixedly ponder the necessity of practicing this duty: For if you
delight in Gods Law, God will delight in you. If the Law be your beloved, you
are Gods beloved; If you take no pleasure in his word, his soul will take no
pleasure in you.

3 You must pray for the grace of Illumination. Whenever you take the Bible
in your hand to read in it, pray David's prayer, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine
eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. Philosophers observe,
that Lumen est vehiculum influentiae, Light is the Chariot of influence, as it
begets the flower in the field, the gold in the mineral; so the foundation of
all regeneration, is illumination. Pray that God would open your eyes that you
may understand the Scriptures, as he did to his Apostles Luke 24. 45. That he
would take away the vail that is upon your hearts.

4 Pray that he that made you creatures, would make you new creatures, that as
newborn babes you may desire the sincere milk of the word.

5 Pray that God would fulfill that excellent promise, Jer. 31.33. That he
would put his Law in your inward parts, and write it in your hearts, and then
you cannot but heartily delight in it.

6 Pray to God to give you the same Spirit that wrote the word, to enable you
to delight in it.

7 Pray for a spiritual palate, that you may not only delight in spiritual
things, but have a spiritual delight in spiritual things. It is said of the
Lioness, that when she has once tasted of the sweetness of man's flesh, she
is never satisfied till she has more of it. He that has tasted of the good
word of God, and not only tasted, but eaten it, and digested it into good
nourishment, he will not only delight in it, but he will delight in it above
gold, yea above fine gold, and he will never be satisfied, till he be
filled with the fullness of that God that made it.

The End of the second Sermon.
THE Excellency and Usefulness OF THE WORD.
SERMON III.
PSALM. 119. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have
perished in mine Afflictions.
NOw I come to speak of the Proposition that is clearly held forth in the Text.
Doct. 3 That the Word of God delighted in, is the Afflicted Saints Antidote
against ruin and destruction. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should,
etc. The Word of God is the sick S^^^ts salve, the dying Saints cordial; a most
precious medicine to keep Gods people from perishing in time of affliction?
This upheld Jacob from sinking when his Brother Esau came furiously marching to
destroy him, Genesis 32. 12. And thou said I will surely do thee good, etc. The
promise of God supported him. This also upheld Joshua, and enabled him
courageously to fight the Lords battles, because God had said, He would never
leave him, nor forsake him, Josh. 1. 5. Melancthon says, that the Lant-grave
of Hessen told him at Dresda, that it had been impossible for him to have born
up under the manifold miseries of so long an imprisonment, nisi habuisset
consolationem ex Verbo divino in suo cord, but for the comforts of the
Scriptures in his heart.

There are eight things may be said (amongst many other) in commendation of the
Word of God.

1 It is the Magazin and storehouse of all comfort and consolation. There is no
condition (but one) that a man can be in, but he may find soul supporting
comfort for it our of the Word. Indeed if thou resolvest to go on in sin, the
Word cannot comfort thee; it threatens hell and damnation to all such. If the
God of Heaven can make such miserable, they shall be miserable: But excepting
this one, there is no condition so miserable, but a man may fetch a cordial out
of the Word, to support him under it. Art thou as empty of riches, and as full
of diseases, as Job under the Old Testament, and Lazarus under the New
Testament? are the (sins with which thou art willing to part) many and great?
Is thy conscience exceedingly wounded and disquieted? does the Devil roar upon
thee with hideous temptations? let thy condition be never so sad, the Word of
God is able to afford thee comfort under it. For it is the Word of that God,
who is the God of all consolation. There is no kind of true comfort, but here
it is to be had, here are cordials of all sorts. Comforts under bodily
troubles, and comforts under soul-troubles. There is no Monarch can furnish his
table with such variety of delicates, as God has furnished his Word with
variety of comforts.

2 The Word of God is not only the Magazin of all true comfort, but the
Fountain from whence it is derived. All the comfort that you receive by reading
of good books, is fetched out of this book. All the refreshings that the
Ambassadors of Christ administer to you, are borrowed from this Fountain. As
the King of Israel answered the woman (that cried out, saying, Help my Lord O
King) If the 2 King. 6. 26, 27.
Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee. So will all the true
Ministers of Christ say to any distressed soul that cries out for comfort: How
can we comfort you, if the Word of God does not comfort you? All our comforts
must be fetched from thence.

3 It will comfort us at such a time, when no outward thing can comfort us. And
that is, when we are under soul-agonies, and when our soul sits upon our lips,
ready to depart, when we are sailing into the Ocean of eternity, then, even
then, the promises of the Word will comfort us: When gold and silver, Father
and Mother, friends, and Physicians are miserable comforters, then will one
promise out of the Word fill us full of joy unspeakable, and glorious.

4 The Comforts of the Word exceed all other comforts, for they are pure, and
purifying, sure, and satisfying; they are soul-supporting, soul-comforting, and
soul-ravishing; they are durable and everlasting. The comforts of the world are
not worthy to be named that day, in which we speak of the comforts of the
Word. They are not consolationes, but consolatiunculae. At best they are but
bodily, unsatisfying, and transitory. Many times they are sinful, and
soul-damning.

5 The Word of God is not only a Magazin, and a Fountain of comfort, but also a
touchstone, by which we must try all our comforts, whether they be true and
real, or no. All joys, hopes, and assurances, must be tried by the Word, and
if not rightly grounded thereupon, are false, and soul-delusions.

6 It is as an Apothecaries shop, or a Physicians dispensatory, out of which
we may fetch all manner of Medicines, to cure all the diseases of our souls.
Art thou spiritually lame, blind, or dumb? etc. The Word will open blind
eyes, make the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk. If dead in sins and
trespasses, the Word, when it is the sword of the spirit, will quicken thee. It
is as a corrasive to eat sin out of thy heart; therefore David says, I have
hid thy Word in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

7 It is a spiritual Armory; out of which we may fetch all manner of weapons,
to conquer the Devil, and his temptations, 2 Cor. 10. 4. It is that little
brook, out of which every David may fetch five smooth stones to destroy the
Devil. These five smooth stones, are five texts of Scripture, three of these
Christ took out of the brook of the Word, by which he subdued the Devil,
Matthew. 4. 4. 7, 10.

8 It is the Sun of the Christian world. As the Sun is the light of the natural
world, and without it, the world is but a Chaos, and a dungeon full of
darkness. So is the Word of God, the light of the spiritual world, without
which a Christian is under an eternal night. Therefore David says, Thy Word is
a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path, Psalm. 119. 105. What would all
the world avail, if no Sun to illighten it, and what comfort would all the
wealth of it afford us, if, no word to instruct, and counsel us? For this is
the Christians compass to sail to Heaven by, his staff to walk withal to
Heaven, his spiritual bladders to keep his soul from drowning. The Cork, to
keep up the net of his soul from sinking. Afflictions are like the lead of the
net, which weighs it down, but the Word is as the Cork, which keeps it up,
that it sinks not. So says David in the Text, Unless thy Law had been my
delights, etc.

Use If the Word of God be of such invaluable excellency, absolute necessity,
and of such admirable use.

1 Let us bless God exceedingly for revealing his will unto us in the Word.
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. And it is our great happiness that we
have not only the same Oracles of God which they have, but an addition of the
New Testament, for the clearer discovery of the mysteries of salvation unto us.
If God be to be praised for every crumme of bread we eat, much more for
giving us his Word, which is the bread of life, and the only food of our
souls. Blessed be God, who has not only given us the book of the Creatures,
and the book of Nature to know himself, and his will by, but also, and
especially the Book of the Scriptures, whereby we come to know those things of
God, and of Christ, which neither the Book of Nature, nor of the creatures can
reveal unto us.

Let us bless God, not only for revealing his will in his word, but for
revealing it by writing. Before the time of Moses, God discovered his will by
immediate revelations from Heaven. But we have a surer word of Prophecy, 2
Pet. 1. 19. surer (to us) than a voice from Heaven; For the Devil (says the
Apostle) transforms himself into an Angel of light. He has his apparitions 2
Cor. 11. 14.
and revelations, he is Gods ape, and in imitation of God, he appears to his
Disciples, and makes them believe it is God that appears, and not the Devil.
Thus he appeared to Saul in the likeness of Samuel. And if God should now at
this day discover his way of worship, and his divine will by Revelations, how
easily would men be deceived, and mistake diabolical delusions, for divine
Revelations; and therefore let us bless' God for the written word, which is
surer and safer (as to us) than an immediate Revelation. There are some that
are apt to think that if an Angel should come from Heaven, and reveal Gods will
to them, it would work more upon them than the written word; but I would have
these men study the conference between Abraham and Dives, Luke 16. 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. Habent Mosen and Prophetas, etc. They have Moses and the Prophets, if
they will not profit by them, neither would they profit by any that should come
out of Hell, or down from Heaven to them. For it is the same God that speaks by
his written Word, and by a voice from Heaven. The difference is only in the
outward clothing; and therefore if Gods speaking by writing will not amend us.
No more will Gods speaking by a voice. O bless God exceedingly for the written
Word! let us cleave close to it, and not expect any Revelations from Heaven of
new truths, but say with the Apostle, Gal. 1. 8, 9.

Use 2 Let us prize the Word of God above gold, yea above fine gold: Let us
read it, diligently, reverently, praying to God to give us the same spirit,
that wrote it, to enable us to understand it, and conscienciously to practice
it. Let us make it the joy and rejoicing of our heart, and as it is in the
Text; Let us make it our delights, but of this I spoke in the former point. The
only motive I shall now use to persuade you to make the Word your delights,
shall be this in the Text. Because it will keep you from perishing in the time
of your greatest affliction. It will comfort you when you have most need of it
(that is, under heart-sinking afflictions, and at the hour of death) and it
will comfort you when all outward comforts, and creatures fail. It will be
food, to strengthen your weak Faith; physic to cure the remainders of
corruptions, it will be a cordial to revive your drooping spirits, and
fainting souls. It will make you more than conquerors over all temptations and
distresses.

Quest. But now the great question is, How a child of God ought to manage and
make use of the word of God, so as to make it a conduit of support and comfort
in the day of his greatest afflictions?

Answ. To be able to do this, there is a great deal of spiritual wisdom and
understanding required. For the word to many people is like Saul's armor to
David, which was so cumbersome to him, that he could not wear it.

There are many know not how to use the Word, so as to be comforted by it. As
the woman of Samaria told Christ, Joh. 4. 11. The well is deep, and thou have
nothing to draw with. So may I say; The word of God is a deep well, Isa. 4.
it is a well of salvation, but it is deep, and the deeper, the sweeter, but
most people want buckets to draw with; they want a spiritual Art to fetch out
of these wells of salvation, divine supportation and consolation; and therefore
to help you in this great work you must know,

That the word of God may be divided into three parts; Into Commanmandements,
The word of God divided into the commanding, threatening, and promising Word.
Threatenings, and Promises: And though a Christian must not neglect the
commanding, and threatening word, yet if ever he would make the word a channel
of divine comfort, he must study the promising word, for the promises are a
Christians magna charta for Heaven. All comfort must be built upon a Scripture
promise, else it is presumption, not true comfort. The promises are pabulum
fidei, and anima fidei, the food of faith, and the soul of faith. As faith is
the life of a Christian, so the promises are the life of Faith: Faith is a dead
Faith, if it has no promise to quicken it; As the Promises are of no use
without Faith to apply them, so Faith is of no use without a promise to lay
hold on. And the great reason why the people of God walk uncomfortably in their
afflictions, is, because they do not chew the promises; they are rare cordials,
but as a man cannot taste the sweetness of a cordial, unless he chew it, no
more can we receive any spiritual refreshment from the promises, unless we
meditate on them. The promises are as a Mine full of rich treasure, but as
Mines, unless we dig deep into them, we can never get the gold and silver
hid in them: no more can we enjoy the soul-ravishing comfort, of the promises,
unless we dig into them by a serious consideration of them. They are as a
garden full of rare flowers, able to sweeten any condition. But because we do
not walk in this garden, and pick out these flowers; hence it is that we live
so disconsolately and dejectedly under our afflictions. There are many rare
stories declaring the comfort that some of Gods Saints have received from the
promises in the day of their distress. Mr. Bilney that blessed Martyr was much
wounded in conscience, by reason of the great sin he committed, in subscribing
to the Popish errors, but he was much comforted by reading those words, 1 Timothy,
1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of which I am the chief. Beza was
supported under his troubles, by the words of Christ, John 10.27, 28, 29. Mr.
Bolton tells us of one, that was upheld under great affliction, and comforted
from Isa. 26. 3. Of another, from Isa. 57.15. I knew a young maid that went
triumphantly to Heaven, by the refreshing she found in that well known Text,
Matthew. 11. 28. and many that have been wonderfully cheared by reading the eight
chapter of the Romans, and by that Text, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren. The truth is, there
is no promise, but if God be pleased to illighten it, and show us our interest
in it, will afford a harvest of joy. It is with promises, as it is with
Sermons: That Sermon which once heard, did not at all work upon us, the same
Sermon heard at another time may exceedingly affect us. And the same Text of
Scripture, which sometimes does not at all comfort us, may at another time
convey much comfort to us. Two men troubled in conscience, may both of them
read the same chapter, and hear the same Sermon, and one of them may have his
troubled mind pacified, and the other continue troubled, and the reason is,
because the Spirit of God makes the Word effectual to one, and not to the
other. How often has a distressed Saint, read Mat. 11. 28. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Joh.
10. 27, 28. Isa. 26.3. Isa. 57. 15, 1 John 3. 14. and found no comfort in
reading of them; But if the Spirit of God did come in, and open his eyes to
behold the rich mercies wrapped up in these promises, and his interest in them,
they would fill him with comfort above expression. And therefore if ever you
would make the Word of God, Gods instrument to conveigh, support and comfort to
you in the time of soul-sinking afflictions, you must study the promises, and
pray unto God that his Spirit may irradiate them, and show you the fullness of
them, and your interest in them.

Quest. How must we improve the promises, so as to make them spiritual
bladders, to keep us from being drowned in the deep waters of Affliction?

Ans. You must do three things.

1 You must make a Catalogue of the Promises. Three things to be done by those
that would improve the promises.
2 You must seriously ponder and meditate on them. 3 You must apply them to
your own souls, as belonging to you in particular.
1 You must make a Catalogue of the Promises, you must gather them up, as they
lie scattered in the Word, into a spiritual Nose-gay, and bind them together:
You must do as they that gather up ends of gold and silver; you must lose none.
Every promise is as a ray of gold, as a star in the firmament. And though there
are stars of diverse magnitudes, differing from one another in glory, yet every
star has its beauty and benefit: So though some promises are more glorious
than others, (like the Sun, in comparison of the Moon) yet every promise has
its beauty, and luster, and as starlight in a dark night is very comfortable;
so in the dark night of affliction, every little promise will afford
unspeakable comfort to a troubled soul.

To help you in making this Catalogue, give me leave to suggest three things.

1 Be sure to make it in time of health. Woe be to those that have their
promises to gather, when they should make use of them! You that slight the
promises in prosperity, shall receive no comfort from them in adversity.

2 Forget not to treasure up all those promises which God has made to his
children, in the day of their adversity. As for example, God has promised in
all our afflictions to be with us, Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow
thee, etc. he will be with you to protect and direct you, to support and
comfort you. If three Saints be put into the fiery furnace, the Son of God
will make the fourth, Dan. 3. 25.

2 God will be afflicted in all our afflictions, Isa. 63. 9. he suffers in
all our sufferings, Act. 9. 4.

3 He will make our beds in our sicknesses, Psalm. 41. 3. he will condescend
to the lowest office for our ease and refreshment.

4 He will know our souls in adversity, Psalm. 31. 7. he will know us to pity
us, and to succor; and to help us.

5 He will keep us from the evil of all afflictions, Job 5. 19. God has not
promised to keep his people from afflictions, but to keep them from the hurt of
them. Though they are not good in themselves, yet he will turn them to our
good, Heb. 12. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 32. Jer. 24. 5. The good figs were carried into
captivity for their good. God has promised, that all things shall work
together for our good, Romans 8. 28. not only all ordinances, etc. but all
afflictions, etc.

6 God has promised to lay no more upon us, than we are able to bear, but
either to give us less pain, or greater patience, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And though in
a little wrath he hide his face from us for a moment, yet with everlasting
kindness will he have mercy on us, etc. Isa 54. 7, 8. These, and many such like
promises; will be as so many spiritual cordials, to revive our fainting
spirits, and as so many Pillars to uphold us under the greatest affliction.

3 For the completing of this Catalogue, you may make use of many excellent
books wtitten for this purpose, Mr. Lee on the Promises. Mr. Ball. Mr. Bulkley.
wherein you shall have promises of all kinds, both spiritual and temporal
gathered together: Yet let me advise you, not to rest satisfied with the
collections of others, but when you read the Bible, and meet with a suitable
promise, with which God is pleased to affect your hearts, take the pains to
write it down, and one such promise of your own writing, will work more
powerfully upon your souls, than many others of another gathering. So much for
the first, viz. Make a Catalogue of the Promises.

The End of the third Sermon.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
Reader,
THis and the following Sermon contains a large discourse about the Promises,
which because it may be thought by some to be impertinent to the Text, and
rather a digression from it, than an explication of it; I crave leave to inform
thee of two things.

1 That the Promises are the Principal grounds of Comfort to a child of God,
in the day of his Adversity. They are his chief City of Refuge, when all
Creature Comforts fail; when he suffers Shipwreck of all humane props; these
are his planks upon which he swims safe to the shore of Heaven. All Comfort
that is not founded upon a Promise, is delusion, not true Consolation. And
therefore a discourse about them, cannot rationally be interpreted eccentrical
to the Text.

2 That there are diverse particulars added to these Sermons, concerning the
Nature, Necessity, Excellency, and Usefulness of the Promises, which were not
mentioned in the preaching of them. And if any of them shall appear to be
Heterogenial to the Text, yet if they prove serviceable to heighten thy esteem
of the Promises, and to quicken thee to a more serious and frequent Meditation
on them, and Application of them. I hope thou art not at all injured; and I may
justly desire, that thou would not be offended.

It is reported of Saint Austin (in his life written by Possidius) that by a
digression (in one of his Sermons) from his Text, he converted an Heretic
from his erroneous opinions. If any passage in these two Sermons prove useful
to turn thee from thy sinful negligence, and to awaken thee to a more diligent
study of the precious Promises, I shall account it a happy and blessed
Digression; For herein especially consists the difference, between a
Religious Christian, and a Moral Man. A Moral Man will abstain from the outward
acts of sin, But he knows not what it is to live upon Promises, He never
tasted any sweetness in a Promise. He lives upon Creatures, not upon
Promises, and therefore when Creatures fail, his heart sinks like a stone, and
he is at his wits end, and Faiths end. But a Religious Christian lives upon
Promises, and not upon Creatures, and therefore when Creatures fail, he has
the Promises to live on; He labors to taste the sweetness that is in them.
He lives upon Promises, when Providence seems to run cross to Promises. They
are his fiery Chariot, to carry him up to Heaven. If then these ensuing
Sermons, inflame thy affections with a greater love to the Promises, and a
greater care to meditate on them, and to get an interest in them, thou have
cause to bless God, and to pray for

Thy unworthy Servant in Christ E. C

MEDITATE ON THE Promises.
SERMON IV.
PSALM. 119. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have
perished in mine Affliction.
He that would improve the Promises, so as to make them spiritual bladders, to
keep him from being drowned in the deep waters of affliction, must not only
make a Catalogue of the Promises, but he must also

2 Fixedly and seriously meditate on them; first, he must treasure up these We
must not only make a Catalogue of the Promises, but meditate on them.
Jewels in his heart, and then unlock them by meditation; first he must make
his Nose-gay, and then smell of it. The Word of God (as I have said) is as a
Garden full of excellent Promises, as so many choice flowers. And it is our
duty to walk often in this Garden, to gather up all the flowers that lie
scattered in it, into several Nose-gayes, to bind them together (if I may so
speak) with the thread of Faith, and then every day to smell of them. The
Promises are the Saints Legacies left them by Christ in his last will and
Testament: The Saints are called, the heirs of the Promises, Heb. 6. 17. And if
they would be filled full of joy in the day of their distress, they must be
frequent in reading these Legacies: The Promises are (as it were) the breasts
of God, full of the Milk of grace and comfort. And it is our duty to be
sucking out (by meditation) the milk of grace and comfort contained in them.
That which the Prophet says of the Church of Christ, may as truly be said of
the Promises of Christ. Rejoice O ye people of God, and be glad all ye that
have an interest in the Promises; Rejoice for Isa. 66.10, 11.
joy, all ye that are mourners in Sion; that ye may suck and be satisfied
with the breasts of their consolations, that ye may milk out, and be
delighted with the abundance of joy and comfort contained in them. The Promises
are the Saints aqua vitae, (as one calls them) the Saints cordials, the Saints
plank, to swim to Heaven upon, the Saints fiery Chariot, to carry them up to
Heaven. And the great reason why they walk so uncomfortably, so disconsolately,
and so unbeleevingly in the time of their tribulation, is because they do not
smell of these Nose-gayes, they do not chew these cordials, they do not read
over these spiritual Legacies, they do not by serious meditation and
consideration, suck out the comfort comprehended in them. For as fire will not
warm us, unless we tarry at it, and a Be cannot suck out the honey that is in
a flower, unless she abide upon it; no more can any child of God receive
supportation and consolation from the Promises in the hour of temptation,
unless he seriously and solemnly ponder and meditate on them.

There is a double difference between a presumptuous sinner, and a poor,
humble, distressed child of God.

1 A Presumptuous sinner studieth The difference between a presumptuous sinner,
and a true child of God in relation to the Promises.
nothing but the promising Word. He sleights the commanding, and the
threatening Word. The Word commands him to keep holy the Sabbath day, not to
love the world, not to lust, but he turns a deaf ear to it. The Word
threatens to wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes on in his
wickedness, but because God is patient, and long suffering, therefore he
regards it not. But as for the Promising Word, he snatcheth at it, he does
not truly lay hold on it, but snatcheth at it, before it belongs to him, and
spiderlike, sucks the poison of sin out of it, and makes of it a cradle to rock
himself asleep in sinful courses. Because God has promised, that whenever a
Sinner turns from his sins which he has committed, he shall surely live, and
not dye, therefore he delays, and prorogues his turning from sin.

But now a poor, distressed, humble Christian, fails on the contrary part; he
pores upon the commanding and threatening Word, but never ponders the promising
Word. God (says he) commands me to love him with all my heart and soul, to
wash my heart from iniquity, to love my enemies, to cut off my right hand, and
pluck out my right eye, etc. But I cannot perform these commands, therefore
surely I shall never be saved. God (says he) has threatened to curse every
one that continues not in every thing that is written in his Law, to do it,
and therefore surely I am accursed. But he never studies, nor ponders the
promising Word, for if he did, he Three observeable things about the Promises.
would quickly know three things for his everlasting comfort.

1 That there is nothing required by God in his Word as our duty, but God has
either promised to bestow it upon us as his gift, or the Saints have prayed to
God for it as his gift. God commands us to love him, but he has promised to
circumcise our hearts to love him, etc. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. God commands us to fear
him, to turn our Ezekiel. 18. 31.
selves from our transgressions, and to make our selves a new heart, and a new
spirit. But he has promised to give Ezekiel. 36. 26. Jer. 32.40
us a new heart, and a new spirit, to put his fear in our hearts, that we
shall never depart from him, and to turn us Mic. 7. 19 Romans 6. 14.
from our evil ways. The Saints of God also have prayed unto God for this, as
the fruit of his free mercy, Jer. 31. 18. Lam. 5. 21. There is nothing
commanded in the Covenant of works, but God has promised in the Covenant of
grace, in some measure to work it in us, for he has promised to work all our
works in us, and to write his Law Isa. 26.12
(not one Commandment of it only, but the whole Law) in our hearts, and to put
it in our inward parts, and to cause Jer. 31. 33 Ezekiel. 36. 27.
us to walk in his ways.

2 That God under the Covenant of grace, will for Christ's sake accept of less
than he requires in the Covenant of works. He requires perfection of degrees,
but he will accept of perfection of parts, he requires us to live without
sin, but he will accept of our sincere endeavors to do it. If there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

3 That though he cannot in his own person perform all that God commands, yet
Jesus Christ as his surety, and in his stead, has fulfilled the Law for him,
and that God will accept of Christ's perfect, as a cover for his imperfect
righteousness. That Christ has redeemed him from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for him. That the threatenings of the Law are Serpents without a
sting, and that Christ has taken away the power and force of them.

Did a brokenhearted, and wounded sinner ponder and meditate on these things,
they would fill him full of joy and comfort. He would fly from the Covenant
of works, to the Covenant of grace; from his own unrighteousness, unto the
righteousness of Christ; and from the commanding and threatening word, unto the
promising word: he would say, Lord! Thou command me to walk in thy
statutes, and to keep thy Laws: This I cannot do of my self, but thou have
promised to cause me to walk in thy ways, and to write thy Law in my Domine
da quod jubes, and jube quod vis. Aust.
heart. Lord give me power to do what thou command, and then command what
thou will.

2 A presumptuous sinner is always The second difference.
studying the promising Word, to bolster up himself in sin, but he never
studies his sins and iniquities, to repent for them, and from them. He
meditates on the Promises to harden his heart in sin, but not at all on his
sins to humble himself for them, and to turn from them.

But now on the contrary A poor distressed Christian pores upon his iniquities
and corruptions, but never minds himself of the Promises, and this makes him
live so dejectedly, and disconsolately. A wicked man studieth his corruptions
too little. A distressed Christian too much. If he did study the Promises, as
much as he does his corruptions, he would not walk so uncomfortably.

Wherefore if ever you would make the Word of God a conduit of comfort in the
day of your distress; you must not only meditate on the commanding, and
threatening Word, but on the promising Word. The Commandments and threatenings
must drive you to the Promises; you must not only study your corruptions to
humble you, but also the Promises to comfort you. I do not say, you must not
study your corruptions, but you must join the study of the Promises together
with them. If Abraham had minded only the deadness of Sarahs womb, and of his
own body, he had never believed, etc. but he was strong in Faith, and
staggered not, because he considered not his own body now dead, when he was
about an hundred years old, nor the deadness of Sarahs womb, but was fully
Romans 4. 19, 20, 21
persuaded, that what God had promised, he was able to perform. If Sarah had
considered only that she was past age, she would never have believed that
she should have a child, but she eyed the Promise, and judged him faithful,
who had promised, and that Heb. 11. 11
made her believe. If a Saint of God looks only downwards upon the deadness of
his heart, and meditates only upon his sins and infirmities; he will never be
comforted in the day of his distress. But he must also look upwards unto the
Promises, seriously ponder, and fixedly study them, which will be as strong
Pillars to support him, and keep him from falling into despair, in the hour of
tribulation.

Q. What are the Meditations which we must have in reference and relation to
the Promises in the day of our distress?

Ans. I will rank them into nine particulars.

1 You must meditate upon the three great truths already mentioned. The first
meditation about the Promises.


1 That God commands nothing as our duty, which he has not promised, as his
gift.

2 That God in the Covenant of grace, will accept of less than he requires in
the Covenant of works.

3 That if we truly believe in Christ, God will accept of his righteousness,
as a satisfaction for our unrighteousness.

2 You must meditate upon the excellency and preciousness of the Promises, The
second Meditation, meditate on the preciousness of the Promises. 2 Pet. 1.4.
The Promises are precious in five respects. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
they are called (...), exceeding great and precious Promises; They are
precious in five respects.

1 Because they cost a great price (even the blood of Christ) to purchase them.
They are all made to us in Christ, and for Christ; they are in him yea, and in
him Amen. The Covenant (which is the Pandecta and Cabinet of all the Promises)
was sealed with his blood.

2 Because they assure us of great and precious things; they assure us of our
interest in God, of our justification, reconciliation, adoption,
sanctification, and glorification. Heaven it self is nothing else but the
enjoyment of the Promises, Heb. 6. 12. The Promises are Heaven folded up;
Heaven is the Promise unfolded. For the Promises are nothing else but the
eternal purposes of God toward his children made manifest. The purposes of God
are his concealed Promises; and the Promises are his revealed purposes. The
Promises are the kisses of Jesus Christ, they discover his dear love, and when
he discovers to us our interest in them, then he kisses us with the kisses of
his mouth, and fills us with joy unspeakable and glorious. They are made by
God, and they make over God to us, as our portion, and Christ as our Savior,
and the Spirit as our Sanctifier, and all good things, both here and hereafter
as our inheritance, and therefore may well be called exceeding great and
precious Promises.

3 Because they put a price upon the New Testament; for wherein does the New
Testament exceed the Old, unless it be in this, because it is founded upon
better Promises? Heb. 8. 6. and brings in a better hope, Heb. 7. 19.

4 Because they put a price upon all the blessings of God. A little mercy
reached out to us, as a fruit of a Promise, is more worth than a world of
blessings coming to us merely by way of providence. A man may receive
blessings from God upon a double account, either ex largitate, or ex promisso,
either by way of providence, or by way of Promise. 1 By way of Providence; Thus
God gives the earth to the sons of men, Psalm. 115. 16. Thus he gave one
hundred twenty and seven Provinces to Ahashuerosh. Thus he sets up the basest
of men to rule over Nations, Dan. 4. 17.

2 By way of Promise. Thus he gives health, wealth, and all outward comforts
unto his children. For godliness has the Promise of this life, and that which
is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Now you must know, that a little blessing coming to
us, as a fruit of the Promise, is more worth than a thousand blessings coming
to us, only by way of Providence. And therefore David says, A little that the
righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. And
the reason is,

1 Because blessings given by virtue of a Promise, are signs of Gods special
love, and come flowing to us from the same love with which God gives us Christ,
they are the fruit of Covenantlove.

2 Because we have them as blessings. A man may have a blessing, and yet not
have it as a blessing. The Israelites had Quails sent them immediately from
God, which was a blessing in it self, but was not sent to them as a blessing.
For while the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came Psalm. 78. 30, 31.
upon them. The wicked have blessings, but not as blessings, but as the cup in
Benjamins sack, which proved a snare to him, rather than a mercy. But the godly
have blessings as blessings: They have grace with them to improve them for Gods
glory; they have not only the blessings, but a thankful heart for them, and a
fruitful heart under them, which is a certain sign that they have them as
blessings.

3 Because they are pledges to them of better mercies, and beginnings of
better. They are not merces, but arrha, not their wages, but an earnest of
Heaven. Now a farthing given as an earnest of a thousand a year, is more worth
than many pounds given as a reward. A wicked man has outward blessings as his
portion, his Heaven, his All; but a godly man that has them by virtue of a
Promise, has them as a pledge of Heaven, and as a beginning of eternal mercies.

5 The Promises are precious, because they produce great and precious effects:
They are not only excellent in themselves, but are also very powerful and
operative upon all believers. The Promises (as one says) sealed by the blood
of Christ, ratified by the Oath of God, testified by the spirit of truth,
delivered by the hand of mercy, and received by the hand of Faith, are
operative words, and produce rare effects in the soul. They have 1 A
Sanctifying Power. 2 A Comforting Power.

1 A Soul-sanctifying Power. Therefore they are said to make us partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. I say, of the divine nature; not by the
communication of the divine essence, but by participation of divine graces. Not
in a Familistical sense (as if we were Godded into God, and Christed into
Christ) but in a spiritual sense; we are by the Promises made partakers of the
divine nature, that is, of the divine graces, by which we are made like to God
in holiness. The Apostle tells us, that they have a power to cleanse us from
all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, and to enable us to perfect holiness
in his fear, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

2 A Comforting Power. They are able to comfort us in the worst of days, and
dangers. O how precious is a Promise to a distressed Christian, in the hour of
extremity! The Sun is not more comfortable to a man in a dark dungeon, or food
to a man ready to starve, or water to a man ready to die for thirst. The
Promises of God are always precious, but never more precious than in times of
misery and calamity; and therefore let us in such times especially meditate
upon the preciousness of them.

3 You must meditate upon the Freeness of the Promises. The Promises The third
Meditation, meditate on the freeness of the Promises.
are the outward discoveries of Gods eternal love to his people. Now nothing
moved God to enter into Covenant with them, and to engage himself to them by
Promise; and thereby to become their debtor, but his free love and mercy; and
therefore they are said to be given us of God, 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious Promises. God promises in his Word, not
only to love us, but to love us freely, Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their
backsliding, and love them freely. The reason why God makes us his people, is
not from any worth in us, but only because it pleases him so to do, 1 Samuel 12.
22. The Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake because it
pleased the Lord to make you his people. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
great and fundamental Promise, the root of the other Promises, is freely
tendered in the Gospel, and freely given, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Rev. The fourth Meditation, Meditate
on the stability of the Promises.
22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

4 You must meditate on the firmness, faithfulness, unchangeableness, and
immutability of the Promises: they are the Promises of that God, who cannot
deny himself. Promissa haec tua sunt Domine (says Austin) and quis falli
timet, cum promittit ipsa veritas; Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one
jot or tittle of the Word shall not pass. There Mat. 5. 18
is no Promise which God has made, though never so improbable, and impossible
to flesh and blood, but it shall come to pass in due time, whatsoever he has
promised in his goodness, he will perform by his power. God is not a man, that
he should lie, neither the Son of man, that he should repent: Has he said,
and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
Numb. 23. 19. God has promised that the same bodies that dye, shall rise again
at the last day. This is incredible to natural reason. The Stoics and Epicures
derided it, when it was preached by Paul, Act. 17. 32. But has God said it,
and shall he not do it? Is the Lords hand shortened? Therefore Christ tells the
Sadduces, Matthew. 22. 27. You err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of
God. God is omnipotent, and therefore able to do above what we can ask or
think: God has promised at the Resurrection, to make our vile bodies like unto
the glorious body of Christ. This is impossible to natural reason; but mark
what the Apostle says, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile bodies, and
fashion them like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself. God has promised, that before
the end of the world, there shall be a national conversion of the Jews, that
the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and Savior.
And that Babylon shall fall. These are the Promises of God, who cannot Romans 11.
25, 26. Rev. 11. 15 Rev. 18.2
lie; Faithful is he, who has said it, who also will do it, 1 These. 5. 24.
though the things promised seem impossible to men, yet with God all things are
Mat. 19. 26
possible: Therefore the Apostle proves the future conversion of the Jews by an
Argument drawn from the power of God, Romans 11. 23. God is able to graft them in
again. The like is brought to prove the ruin of Antichrist, Rev. 18. 8. Her
plagues shall come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall
be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, who judges her. The
Promises are a firm Foundation to build our salvation upon: An Anchor, both
sure, and steadfast. When David was taken by the Philistines, he was so
supported by the Promise of God, that he did not fear what man could do
against him; therefore he repeats it three times, Psalm. 56. 3. 10. In God I
will praise his Word, in God I will praise his Word, in God I will praise his
Word (that is, his Word of Promise) I will not fear what flesh can do unto me:
the Scripture builds all the hope and comfort of a Christian upon the
faithfulness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom, etc. 1 These. 5. 23,
24. 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, etc. 2 These. 3. 3. The Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, etc. Heb. 10. 23. for he is faithful that promised. Memorable is
that saying of David, Psalm. 138. 2. For thou have magnified thy Word above all
thy name: Which words are to be understood, (as David Kimh^i, and our English
Annotations say) Hysteron proteron, that is, thou have by thy Word (that is, by
performing thy Word and Promises) Magnified thy name above all things, or as
Ainsworth; Thy word of Promise in Christ, and thy faithfulness in performing of
it does more exalt thy name, than any thing by which thou art made known. O
then let all the Saints of God, who are heirs of the Promises, meditate
frequently upon the preciousness, freeness, firmness, unchangeableness, and
immutability of them.

5 You must meditate upon the fullness and richness of the Promises. The The
fifth Meditation, meditate on the richness of the Promises.
Promises are the Saints Magazin, and spiritual treasure; they are called the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 6. 7. It is one of the greatest titles
belonging to a Saint, to be styled an heir of the Promises. That man Heb. 6.17
who has a right to all the Promises in the Bible, is the richest man in the
Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
world. For God is his (and he that has him that has all things, has all
things) Christ is his (and Christ is all in all) the Spirit is his (and he who
has the Spirit, has all good things, as appears by comparing Mat. 7. 11. with
Luke 11. 13. In the first it is said -- How much more shall your Father in
Heaven, give good things, etc. In the second, How much more shall your Heavenly
Father give the holy Spirit, etc.) Grace, and Glory, and all outward good
things are his. It is said of the Great Duke of Guise, that (though he was
poor, as to his present possessions) yet he was the richest man in France, in
Bills, Bonds, and Obligations, because he had engaged all the Noble men in
France unto himself, by preferring of them. A true and real Christian is the
richest man in the World in Promises and Obligations, for he has the great
God engaged by promise to be his God, and the God of his. As Charles the
first, commanded his Herald in a challenge to Francis the first, King of
France, to proclaim him with all his titles, stiling him Emperor of Germany,
King of Castile, Arragon, Naples, Sicily, etc. But Francis commanded his Herald
to call him so often King of France, as the other had titles by all his
Countries; implying, that France alone was more worth than all his Countries.
So when a wicked man brags of his Lordships, and great possessions, when he
boasts of his thousands a year, a child of God may say, God is mine, God is
mine, etc. I am richer than all the wicked men in the world.

6 You must meditate on the latitude, The sixth meditation, meditate on the
latitude and extension of the promises.
and extension of the Promises: The Promises are the Saints Catholicon, and
Panacea. There is no condition a child of God can be in, but he may find,
not only a Promise, but a suitable and seasonable promise to comfort him in it.
And herein especially consists the spiritual excellency, and heavenly wisdom
of a Christian, not only to study the Promises in general, but to labor to
find out, and having found out, to meditate upon such kind of Promises, which
are most suitable, and most seasonable to the condition he is in. As for
example.

If thou art poor in estate, meditate on Psalm. 34. 10. Matthew. 6. 33. Heb. 13. 5.

If barren and without children, meditate on Isa. 56, 5.

If persecuted for Christ's sake, meditate on Matthew. 5. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13,
14. Psalm. 94. 12.

If sick and under tormenting pains, meditate on Psalm. 50. 15. Isa. 63. 9. Romans
8. 28.

If reproached, standered, and falsely accused, meditate on Matthew. 10.25.
Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Luke 6. 22, 23.

If Satan tempts thee, and thou art not able to resist him, meditate on Romans
16. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Genesis 3. 15. 1 John 3. 8.

If thy corruptions be too strong for thee, meditate on Romans 6. 14. Micah 7.
19.

If God hides his face from thee, and thou sit in darkness, and see no
light, meditate on Isa. 50. 10. Isa. 54. 7, 8.

If ready to faint in waiting upon God, and in expecting the fulfilling of his
Promises, meditate on Isa. 30. 18. Isa. 63. 3. Isa. 40. 28, 29, 30. Mal. 3. 1.

If ready to dye, and full of fears and doubts, meditate on 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56,
57. Hos. 13. 14. Rev. 14. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 8.

7 You must meditate on the variety of the Promises, and their difference and
distinction one from the other. The seventh Meditation, Meditate on the variety
of the Promises.
The Promises are like unto the stars in the firmament,

1 For their multitude, they are very many. The Scripture is bespangled with
Promises, as the Heavens are with stars. It were happy if the Saints would
prove spiritual Astronomers, and make it their work to study the nature of
these stars.

2 For their beauty, excellency, and influence. Every star is beautiful in its
kind, and very useful and advantageous, so are the Promises. And as the stars
are most comfortable in the darkness of the night, so are the promises in the
night of trouble and adversity.

3 And especially for their distinction and difference. For one star differs
from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. There is one glory of the Sun, another of
the Moon, another of the Stars; So do the Promises differ exceedingly one from
the other in beauty and excellency. Some are temporal, some spiritual, some of
things that are eternal. Some are conditional, some absolute, some are Promises
to those that have grace; some are promises of grace, some are general, others
particular. Some are Original, Fundamental, and Fountain-Promises (as the
promise of Jesus Christ, Of God, being our God, and of the holy Ghost) Others
are derivative, depending, and rivolet-promises (as the promises of all outward
comforts here, and of eternal life hereafter) Now it is our duty to take notice
of every ray of gold, to meditate upon all the Promises, both spiritual,
temporal, and eternal, both conditional and absolute, both of grace, and to
grace, both general, and particular; but especially of the Original and
fundamental Promises, the Fountain-promises, from whence all others as so many
streams and rivolets, are deduced and derived.

8 You must meditate on the usefulness, and profitableness of the promimises.
The eight Meditation, meditate on the usefulness of the Promises.
I have already showed you, that they are the conduits of grace, and comfort,
that they have a soul-sanctifying, and a soul-comforting-power. Give me leave
to add; That the Promises are

1 The breathings of divine love and affection. 2 The life and soul of Faith. 3
The Anchor of Hope. 4 The Wings of Prayer. 5 The Foundation of Industry. 6 The
Rays and Beams of the Sun of Righteousness; and upon all those accounts are
very useful and advantageous.
1 They are the breathings of divine The Promises are the breathings of divine
love.
love and affection. It is an Argument of Gods wonderful love to his children,
that he is pleased to enter into a Promise and Covenant, to be their God, and
to give them Christ, and in Christ all blessings here, and hereafter. We read
Genesis 17. 2, 3. when God told Abraham that he would make a Covenant with him,
he fell on his face as astonished at so great a mercy, and as thankfully
acknowledging the goodness of God toward him. The like we read of David. When
God by Nathan made a promise to him, he 2 Samuel 7. 11, 18, 19.
goes into Gods house, and prays, Who am I O Lord, and what is my house, that
the Lord my God should do this! etc. The Promises are the Cabinets of the
tender bowels of God, they contain the dear and tender love of God toward his
elect children. God by promising makes himself a debtor to them. Now that God
who is bound to none (no not to the Angels of Heaven) should enter into bonds,
and bind himself to give grace and glory to his elect children, this is love
above expression. And there is nothing moved God to do this (but, as I have
said) his free grace and mercy. For though God be now bound out of justice and
faithfulness to fulfill his Promises, yet nothing moved him to make these
promises, but his love and mercy; as David says of what God had promised to
him, 2 Samuel 7. 21. According to thine own heart (ex mero motu voluntatis) and
according to thy Word, not for any thing in me, For what am I O Lord! etc.
Thus you see how the promises are the breathings of divine love and affection,
and upon this account are very useful and profitable. For love is loves
loadstone; therefore the Apostle says, We love him, because Magnes amoris
amor. 1 John 4. 19.
he loved us first. The sense of Gods love to us, will kindle a love in us to
God. Even as the beams of the Sun reflecting upon a Wall, heats those that walk
by the Wall. So the beams of Gods love shining into our souls, warms our hearts
with the love of God. The love of God constrains us, as says Paul 2 Cor. 5.
14. There is a compulsive and constraining power in love. What did not Jacob do
for the love of Rachel? How was Mephibosheth affected with the love of David? 2 Samuel 9. 8. It is our duty to love those that hate us, but not to love those
that love us, is more than heathenish, and brutish.

2 They are the life and soul of The Promises are the life and soul of Faith*
Faith. Faith without a Promise to act upon, is as a body without a soul, as a
dead flower which has no beauty, or sweetness in it; But faith grounded upon
the Promises, will enable a Christian to advance in all manner of holiness.
What made Abraham forsake his Country, and his Fathers house, and go, he knew
not whither? Nothing moved him to this, but because God had promised to make
him a great Nation, and he believed it. Of all graces, none so causal of
holiness as the grace of Faith: It is a world-over-comming, heart-purifying,
life-sanctifying, wonder-working grace; and therefore the Promises must needs
be very useful, because they are the life and foul of Faith.

3 They are the Anchor of Hope. The Promises are the anchor of Hope. Heb. 6. 9.
Hope is called an Anchor of the soul, both sure, and steadfast. But the
Promises are the Anchor of Hope. All Hope of Heaven; which is not founded upon
a Promise, is presumption, and not Hope, Presumption is when a man hopes to go
to Heaven, upon no ground, or upon an insufficient ground. But true Hope is a
Hope grounded upon a Scripture-Promise: And Hope bottomed upon divine Promises,
will mightily avail unto purity and holiness. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob lived
as pilgrims and strangers upon earth, because they looked and hoped for a City
which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. The Old Heb. 11. 9. 10.
Heb. 11.35
Testament Saints would not accept deliverance upon sinful terms, because they
hoped for a better resurrection. The Papists and Arminians are much mistaken in
teaching, that the assurance of salvation is an enemy to godliness. The
Scripture says the quite contrary, 1 John 3. 3. He that has this Hope
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. The true Hope of Heaven will make us
live heavenly.

4 They are the Wings of Prayer. The Promises are the wings of Prayer.
Prayer is a divine cordial to convey grace from Heaven into our souls. It is a
key to unlock the bowels of mercy, which are in God. The best way to obtain
holiness, is upon our knees; the best posture to fight against the Devil, is
upon our knees; and therefore Prayer is not put as a part of our spiritual
armor, but added as that which must be an ingredient in every part, Ephesians. 6.
18.
and which will make every part effectual. But now, The Promises are the Wings
of Prayer. Prayer without a Promise, is as a Bird without Wings: And therefore
we read both of Jacob Genesis 32. 12.
and Jehoshaphat, how they urged 2 Chronicles. 20. 8, 9.
God in their prayers with his Promises. And certainly the prayers of the
Saints winged with divine promises, will quickly fly up to Heaven, and draw
down grace and comfort into their souls. And upon this account it is, that the
Promises are so useful to a Christian, because they are so helpful in prayer.
When we pray, we must urge God with his Promises, and say, Lord! have not
thou said, Thou will circumcise our hearts to love thee, thou will subdue our
sins? Thou will give the Spirit to those that ask it? Lord! Thou art faithful,
fulfill these thine own promises: And we must remember this great truth; That
the Promises God makes to us, to mortify our sins for us, are greater helps
against sin, than our promises to God to mortify sin. Many men in the day of
their distress vow and promise to leave sin, and fight against it in the
strength of these promises, and in stead of conquering sin, are conquered by
sin. But if we fight against sin in the strength of Christ, and of his
promises; if we urge God in prayer with his own Word, we shall at last get
victory over it. For he has said, that sin shall not have dominion over us,
Romans 6. 14.

5 They are the foundation of industry. The Promises are the foundation of
industry.
The promises do not make men lazy and idle, as some scandalously say, but they
are the ground of all true labor and industry, therefore the Apostles persuade
us from the consideration of the promises, unto the 2 Cor. 7.1 Heb. 13. 5 1
Cor. 10. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
study of soul-purification, to have our conversation without covetousness; to
flee from Idolatry, and to separate our selves from sinful communion. Divine
promises are great encouragements unto spiritual diligence.

Object. Though conditional promises be the foundation of industry (because
we cannot have the thing promised, unless we perform the conditions) yet
absolute promises (say some) are foundations of laziness, and therefore they
affirm there are no absolute promises in Scripture.

Answ. Absolute promises are made foundations of industry in Scripture, as well
as conditional: The Apostle exhorts us to worke-out our salvation with fear and
trembling, because it is God who works in us, both to will and Phil. 2. 12,
13.
to do, of his own good pleasure. And the reason is, because God performs
nothing which he promises, though never so absolutely, but in the diligent
and conscientious use of the means on our part. God promises, Ezekiel 36. 26.
to give us a new heart, and a new spirit, etc. but then he adds, verse. 37. I
will yet for this, be inquired of by the house of Israel.

6 They are the rays and beams (as The Promises are the rays and beams of the
Sun of righteousness.
one faith) of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, in whom they are founded and
established. As all the lines in a circumference, though never so distant,
carry a man to one and the Dr. Reynolds on the sinfulness of sin.
same center. So all the Promises carry us to Christ the Center. For the
Promises are not made for any thing in us, nor have they their stability from
us, but they are made in, and for Christ unto us, unto Christ in our behalf,
and unto us, so far as we are Members of Christ. Now Jesus Christ is the
ground of all soul-purification, soul-consolation, and soul-salvation, And
therefore I may safely conclude, that the promises are most singularly useful
and advantageous. And that it is the duty of all those that desire to live
holily and comfortably, to consider and ponder the profitableness and
beneficialness of the promises. The ninth Meditation, meditate on the necessity
of getting an interest in the Promises.


9. And lastly, you must meditate on the great necessity that lies upon all
men to get a Scripture interest in the promises. This I add to awaken
Christians to attend diligently to this discourse about the promises, and to
show them the necessity of minding and of studying them. For he that has no
right to them is in a faithless, hopeless, comfortless, desperate, and damnable
condition. All the happiness of a Christian both here and hereafter consists
especially in his right and title to the promises. The Scripture tells us in
express words, that he that is a stranger from the promise, is without Christ,
without God, without hope. Sad Ephesians. 2 12.
is the condition of that man, who has no interest in God, nor in Christ, and
who is without hope. And such is the condition of him who is a stranger to the
Promises; for all hope of Heaven, which is not bottomed upon a promise, is
presumption, and soul-delusion. All comfort and joy which is not grounded upon
a promise, is soul-cousenage; and all Faith not anchored upon a Promise, is
nothing else but flattery, and soul-mockery; Consider this, you that are full
of joy and comfort, and (as you say) rely upon Christ for salvation; Tell me
what promise have you to build this Faith, this hope, this comfort upon? For
there are thousands that flatter themselves into Hell by a false hope of
Heaven; thousands which promise to themselves to go to Heaven, but have no
Promise for it from God. Such were the five foolish Virgins; such was the
Church of Laodicaea, such were they, Matthew. 7. 24. Hos. 8. 2, 3. Micah 3. 10,
11. Remember this, and let it be daily in your thoughts: you that have not
true right to the Promises, your Faith, is faction, your Hope, is presumption,
and your joy is delusion. To be a stranger from the Promise, is to be without
God, without Christ, and without Hope. So much for the second particular, viz.
Meditate on the Promises.

The End of the third Sermon.
RULES FOR THE Right Application of the Promises.
SERMON V.
PSALM. 119. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have
perished in mine Affliction.
NOw I come to the third and last particular. He that would make the Promises
as spiritual bladders to keep him from drowning in the deep waters of
affliction, must not only make a Catalogue of them, and meditate upon them, but
he must make Application of them to his own soul, as belonging to him in
particular. He must (as it is said of the godly Patriarchs, Heb. 11. 13.) be
persuaded of them, and embrace them; (...)
he must hug and kiss them as his rich portion, and glorious inheritance.
And this is the chief of all: For no man can receive any comfort from a
Promise, who is not able to make out his interest in that Promise: As the life
of a Sermon is in the Application of it unto our selves, so the life of a
Promise is in the appropriation of it. Quid est Deus, si non est meus? What am
I the better (says Origin) that Christ took upon him the flesh of a Virgin, if
he took not my flesh? what was the great Prince the better for the miraculous
plenty in Samaria, when the Prophet told him that he should see it with his
eyes, but not eat of it? As the man, who when he was ready to be drowned, saw
a Rainbow (which was a sign that the world should never be again drowned)
said, Quid mihi proderit haec Iris, si ego peream; What am I the better for
this Rainbow, if I perish? So may I say, what is a man the better for the rich
Mine of treasure contained in the Promises, if he has no share in it.

There are three sorts of professors of Religion.

1 Some lay claim to the Promises when they have no right to them; such are
your presumptuous sinners, who take it for granted, that the Promises belong to
them, who presume themselves into Hell by a false hope in the Promises, who
make a Feather-bed of the Promises upon which they sleep securely in sin: As
Thrasilaus (a mad Athenian) laid claim to every Ship that came to Athens,
though he had right to none: So a presumptuous sinner lays claim to every
Promise, though he has right to none; he inlargeth them beyond their bounds,
and makes the conditional Promises to be absolute, and such as belong only to
those that are in Christ, to belong to him, though he be not in Christ. He
sucks the poison of sin, and security, out of the sweet flower of the Promises.

2 Some have an interest in the Promises, and know their interest. These live
in Heaven while they are upon earth, these rejoice in tribulation, and are more
than conquerors over the greatest afflictions. These are secure from perishing
in the day of distress. That man, who taking the Bible into his hand, can say
upon right grounds: All the Promises in this Book are my portion, and I have a
right and title to them, this man is happy above expression.

3 Some have an interest in the Promises, but do not know their interest, and
therefore dare not (in the hour of trouble) apply them for their supportation
and consolation. Such are your brokenhearted, wounded, distressed, and
deserted Christians. Such can receive no comfort from the Promises in the day
of affliction. When they begin to apply them for their support, the Devil
suggesteth to them, and their own doubting hearts tells them, that they
mis-apply them, and that they belong not to them. When a godly Minister (whose
office is to speak a word in season to those that are weary, Isa. 50. 4.)
endeavors by the Application of the Promises to comfort them, their souls
refuse to be comforted, they exclude themselves from having a right to Christ,
and his Promises, though Christ would not have them excluded. They groundlesly
contest that their names are written in the black book of reprobation, and that
all the curses of the Law are their portion; hence it is that they live so
uncomfortably, and disconsolately in the time of affliction. Now then for the
help of such persons, who have a true title to the promises, but know it not,
who walk in darkness, and see no light, who believe they are Hypocrites, when
they are not, and that they are not in Christ, when they are (that I may be
Gods instrument to enable such to make Application of the precious promises
unto their own souls in particular, in the hour of trouble, for their
everlasting supportation and consolation) I shall lay down these ensuing Rules,
and Directions.

Rule 1.
1 Whosoever in a Gospel-sense does obey the commanding word of God, has The
first Rule for the right Application of the Promises.
a real interest in the Promising word of God: Though thou can not perfectly
obey the will of God, yet if thou do truly desire, and industriously
endeavor to obey it in all things. If God has written his Law in thy heart,
and given thee a Gospel-frame, inclining thee to the obedience of all his
commandments sincerely, though not perfectly; this is an infallible evidence,
that thou have a right and portion in all the Promises. This is that which God
says, Exodus 19. 5. If you will obey my voice indeed, then ye shall be a
peculiar treasure, etc. If ye will obey my voice indeed, not only in word, and
in show, but in deed, and in truth. Thus Jer. 7. 5, 7. If ye thoroughly amend
your ways, if ye thoroughly execute judgment, etc. then will I cause you to
dwell in this place, etc. If ye thoroughly amend, etc. not only in some
things, but in all things; not only outwardly, but inwardly also. This Rule is
expressly delivered by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the Promise of
the life that now is, and that which is to come. If thou be a godly man in a
Gospel-sense, that is, one who truly and sincerely indeavoureth to be godly.
If thou make Gods will, thy Rule to live by, and not thine own, Gods glory
thy end, and not thy own carnal interest. Gods love thy Principle. If thy
Rules, Aims, and Principles be godly, all the Promises of this life, and of
the life to come, belong to thee. It is worth observing: that all the Promises
of life and salvation are conditional. Happiness is entailed upon Holiness,
Glory upon Grace. You shall read in Scripture of the blessings of the Covenant,
and of the bond of the Covenant, of the blessings of the Promises, and of the
condition Ezekiel. 20. 37.
of the Promises. If ever you would assure your selves of your interest in the
blessings of the Covenant, you must try your selves by your sincere performance
of the condition. Thus Christ is promised to none but such as believe; pardon
of sin, to none but such as repent; and Heaven to none but such as persevere in
well doing. Tell me then, Can thou say as in Gods presence, that thou have
respect to all Gods Commandments (though thou failest in all, yet thou have
respect to all) that thou obeyest God in deed, and in truth, and that thou
sincerely labourest to be godly: This is a certain sign, that all the Promises
are thy portion; but you that are ungodly, and do not thoroughly amend your
ways, you that slight, undervalue, and despise the commanding Word, you have
no part, no portion in the promising word.

But it may be a distressed Christian, (though without just cause) will say
that he is afraid that he does not sincerely obey the commanding word, and
therefore dares not apply to himself the promising word, wherefore I add

Rule 2.
2 The more thou art afraid, lest thou The second Rule for the right
Application of the Promises.
should have no right to the Promises, the more right thou have (in all
probability) to them. This I speak only to the distressed Christian; not that I
commend his fear: But this I say; This fear which thou art possessed withal,
is a probable sign that thou have an interest in the Promises. For a
presumptuous sinner never doubts of his right to them, but takes it as a Maxim
not to be denied, that they belong to him. It is a comfortable saying of Mr.
Greenhams. When thou hear the Promises, and art in a cold sweat, and have a
fear and trembling seizing upon thee, lest they should not belong to thee,
doubt not, but that they do belong to thee; For Christ has said, Come unto me
Mat. 11.28
all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. And the
Prophet Isaiah calls upon those who are of a fearful heart, to be strong, and
fear not, and tells us for our comfort, Isa. 35. 4
that God will look with an eye of favor upon him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at his word. Isa. 66. 2


Rule 3.
3 The more sensible thou art of thine The third Rule for the right Application
of the Promises.
own unworthiness to lay hold upon the Promises, the more thou art fitted and
qualified to lay hold upon them. For the Promises are (as I have showed) the
fruit of Free Grace. Nothing moved God to enter into a Covenant with his
people, and thereby to become their debtor, but his free love. Free grace
brought Christ down from Heaven, and it is free grace must carry us up to
Heaven. Christ himself is Sola misericordia deducit Deum ad homines, and sola
misericordia reducit homines ^d Deum.
called, the gift of God, Joh. 4. 10. Moses tells the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 7. 7,
8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more
in number than any people, etc. but because the Lord loved you, and because he
would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your Fathers, has the Lord
brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you, etc. God does not love
us, because we are worthy of his love, but because he loves us, therefore he
makes us worthy. We must not bring worthiness to Christ, but fetch
worthiness from Christ. And therefore if thou be sensible of thine own
nothingnesse, emptiness, and unworthiness lay hold upon that excellent
Promise, Blessed are the poor in Mat. 5. 3
spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are those who are
sensible of their spiritual wants, for to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven,
as certainly as if they were already in it.

Rule 4.
4 Study thy interest in the main and fundamental Promise, and that will The
fourth Rule for the right Application of the Promises. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
help thee to make out thy interest in all the other, The main and fundamental
Promise, is the Promise of Christ. For all Promises, whether spiritual or
temporal, are made to us, in and thorough him. God has promised, never to
leave us, nor forsake us, and that all things shall work together for our good;
That is, if we be in Christ, God has said, all things are ours, whether
Paul, or Apollos, whether life or 1 Cor. 3.2
death, whether things present, or things to come; but it is with this promise,
If we be Christ's: Whosoever takes any comfort from any temporal promise, and
is not in Christ, does but delude and cheat himself. This then is thy work; O
Christian! study thy interest in Christ, make out that, and make out all. If no
interest in Christ, no interest in the promises; If an interest in Christ, an
interest in the Promises; let this then be thy daily business to make it out
to thy soul, that Christ is thine.

Quest. How shall I be able to do Three things to be fludied in order to the
making out of our interest in
this?

Answ. For this purpose you must diligently study three things.

1 The Universality of the Promise of Christ. 2 The Freeness of it. 3 The
condition upon which he is tendered.
1 The Universality of the promise of First the universality of the Promise of
Christ. Mark. 16. 15, 16.
Christ. Christ Jesus with all his benefits is promised to every one who is
willing to lay hold on him, as he is tendered in the Gospel. The Apostles are
commanded to go into all the world, and to preach the Gospel to every creature;
he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, etc. If thou have a heart
to believe, be thy sins never so great, it is for the honor of Jesus Christ
to pardon them. As the Sea covers great Rocks, as well as small, so the Mercy
of God in Christ will pardon great sins, as well as little. It will cost Christ
as little to wash away the guilt of great sins, as of small. Christ is a great
Physician. Magnus de caelo venit medicus; quia magnus in terra jacebat aegroms.
Aug.
And David prays, pardon my iniquity, for it is great, Psalm. 25. 11. Though
thy sins be never so bloudily circumstanciated, though never so often
reiterated, though thou be never so loathsome, yet if thou can believe;
There is a Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness; and therefore let no man exclude
himself from a right to Christ, who is willing to take Christ upon Christ's
terms. He that excludes himself, offers the greatest injury imaginable,

First, Unto Jesus Christ, for he makes him a liar; Christ has said, If any
man come to me, I will in no wise cast him out; and he says, John 6.37
Christ will cast me out, although I do come to him

Secondly, Unto his own soul. For he necessitates himself unto damnation: For
Christ has said expressly; He that believes not shall be damned.

Object. But I am afraid that I am a Reprobate, and that God has excluded me
from having any interest in Christ.

Ans. Who told thee so? It is one great sign thou art not, because the Devil
would persuade thee that thou art. But howsoever; Secret things belong to God,
but those things which are revealed, to us, and our children. God has kept the
black book of Reprobation secret. He opens the whole book of Election to
some of his children, but he keeps his black book unrevealed. It is a sin for
any man to think himself a Reprobate (unless he can prove that he has sinned
the sin against the Holy Ghost) for this thought would hinder him from the use
of means for his salvation, and cause him to despair, which is a sin of the
first magnitude; and therefore take heed of complementing thy self into Hell by
a sinful modesty, in refusing to believe in Christ: Take heed of dallying, or
delaying in the great work of laying hold upon Christ upon Christ's terms.
Remember, God excludes none from Christ, but such as exclude themselves by
unbeleef. And remember, Whosoever believes not the John 3.36
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

2 You must study the Freeness of Study the freeness of the Promise of Christ.
Isa. 55. 1
the Promise of Christ. God promises Jesus Christ freely; Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy,
and eat, yea, come buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price, etc.
Christ is offered in the Gospel, sine precio, sine merito, sine motivo, without
price, without merit, and without any motive inducing on our parts. Therefore
the Holy Ghost says, Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
Rev. 22. 17.
Let not then thy undeservednesse hinder thee from laying hold upon Christ, as
thy portion. Say not, I am not worthy that Christ should own me. Christ will
own thee, not because thou art-worthy, but because he delights in mercy, Micah
7. 18. Say not, I am not humbled enough, and therefore I dare not lay hold upon
Christ. For humiliation is not required to make us precious to Christ, but to
make Christ precious to us, and if thou be so far humbled, as to be willing
to take Christ upon Christ's terms, thou art humbled enough unto divine
acceptance, though not unto divine satisfaction. Every stung Israelite, who
was enabled to look up to the brazen Serpent, was healed, though he was not
stung to that proportion that another Israelite was.

3 You must study the condition upon which Christ is promised. It is Study the
condition upon which Christ is promised.
certain Christ is not tendered absolutely without any condition. Christ is not
offered to a proud sinner, resolving so to continue, or to a drunkard,
resolving to persevere in his drunkenness. Those Texts which declare the
Freeness of the offer of Christ, do also mention a condition to be performed
by those that will have him, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 15. In both places the
condition of thirsting is expressed. Let him that is a thirst come. Ho every
one that thirsts.

Quest. Does not the mentioning of a condition take away the freeness of the
tender of Christ?

Ans. By no means. The reason is, Because this very condition is the free gift
of God. The Apostle says, Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might
be by grace. The condition of Faith does not make the offer of Christ, not to
be of grace, but therefore it is of Faith, that it might be of grace, for as
Christ, so also Faith is the gift of God. We do not Ephesians. 2.8
preach conditions unto justification in a Popish sense (as if they merited out
of congruity the pardon of sin) or in an Armintan sense (as if we could do any
thing by our free will (without grace) to dispose our selves unto
justification) but in a Scripture sense: we say, That all those on whom God
intends to bestow Christ freely, he freely opens their eyes to see their
undone condition out of Christ, he humbles them under the sense of their sad
condition, and out of his free mercy, inables them by Faith to lay hold upon
Christ, and to accept of him upon his own terms; Faith is not the cause for
which, but the cause without which, God will not give us Christ.

Quest. But what is the condition upon which Christ is promised?

Ans. There is (if I may so speak) conditio praeparans, and disponens, and
conditio applicans, the condition required to the preparing and disposing us
for an interest in Christ, and the condition applying Christ to us, and
bringing him into our possession.

1 The condition required to the disposing, preparing, and fitting us for an
interest in Christ. And this is the sight of our sins, the sense of them, and a
real willingness to part with them. There is no man qualified according to the
Gospel, to rest upon Christ for pardon of his sins, who is not really willing
to part with them. And no man will be willing to part with his sins (which he
naturally loves as himself) unless he see the sinfulness and cursedness of
them, and feels in some measure the smart of them. The woman who had the bloody
issue, never thought of coming to Christ, till all her money was spent in vain
among other Physicians. The Prodigal child would never have returned to his
Father, had he not seen himself utterly undone by wandering from him.

2 The condition applying Christ to us, and bringing him into our possession.
This is Faith, which therefore is the proper condition of the Gospel, upon
which Christ is tendered. Now this Faith is not a bare receiving and taking of
Christ. For there are many who take him, and mistake him. (There is no man but
is willing when he is dying, to take Christ, as the men of the old world were
willing to go into the Ark when the flood came) but this taking and receiving
of Christ (if it be right) has six properties.

1 It is a receiving of Christ with all his appurtenances, Christ and disgrace,
Right receiving of Christ has six properties.
and reproach, and poverty. Christ and his cross: There are many would be glad
of Christ, but they will not take up his cross. They would take Christ down
from the cross (as Joseph of Arimathea did) and leave the cross behind them.
But he that takes Christ aright, will be as willing to wear a crown of thorns,
for his sake, as a crown of gold.

2 It is a receiving of Christ in all his Offices, as our King, Priest, and
Prophet. A true Believer is as willing to receive Christ into his soul, as he
is that Christ should receive him into Heaven, he is as willing to have Christ
reign over him, as he is to reign with Christ in Heaven. He desires not only
to be saved, but to be healed by Christ.

3 It is a receiving of Christ into every room of the soul; for Christ will
come into every room, or into never a room. A true believer opens every door
unto Christ, he gives him the lock and key of the whole man, and desires that
he would come and reside in every room.

4 It is a receiving of Christ, and him only. For Christ must rule alone, or
not at all. An Hypocrite would compound with Christ, and together with the
false Mother, divide the child, but a true believer says with the Prophet, O
Lord our God! other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us; Isa. 26.13
but now by thee only will we make mention of thy name. And with the true
Mother he will give the whole to God.

5 It is a receiving of Christ in health, as well as in sickness; in
prosperity, as well as in adversity; in youth, as well as in old age; in life,
as well as in death. Most people make use of Christ, merely as a shelter
against a storm for their own ends (as the Athenians did of Themistocles) and
when the storm is over, for sake him. Most people fly to Christ in their
distress, as Joab did to the horns of the Altar, and when they can serve the
Devil no longer, then they begin to think of serving of God; but a true
believer will give his best days to God, as well as his worst, he desires not
only to die in Christ, but to live for Christ, he receives Christ in health,
etc.

6 It is a receiving of Christ, not only for an hour, or a day, or a year, but
for ever. True Faith marries the soul to Christ, never to part. Once a member
of Christ, for ever a member.

Now there is no child of God of what size soever, (though he be but as a toe
in Christ's body) who cannot truly say, that he is willing to receive Jesus
Christ with all these properties, to receive all Christ with all his
appurtenances, and to receive him only in every room, in health, and for ever.
And therefore let not the Devil, or thy mis-giving heart, or thy
melancholique-phancy, keep thee off from believing that Christ Jesus is thy
portion, and that thou have an interest in the main and fundamental Promise,
and by that, in all the other. Do to Christ, as the Shunamitish woman did to
the Prophet, lay fast hold on him; and suffer not the Devil to cause thee 2
King. 4. 27.
to let go thy hold. Oh that there might be this day a blessed and happy
marriage between Jesus Christ, and every distressed Christian.

Object. But suppose I am willing to take Christ upon Christ's terms, can I
rest assured that Christ will receive me?

Ans. Yes doubtless. For he has John 6.37
said, he will; and he is truth it self, and cannot lie. Indeed a poor
wounded Isa. 55.1 Rev. 22.15
sinner will sometimes confess that he is willing with all his heart to
receive Christ upon his own terms; but he is afraid lest Christ should refuse
to receive him. But this is a needless fear. For Christ will in no wise refuse
those that come to him. To as many as receive him, to all those he will give
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. He
that believes John 1. 12
has everlasting life, and shall never come into condemnation, but is passed
John 5.24
from death to life. So much for the fourth Rule.

If these Rules and Directions already named, will not enable thee to apply the
Promises, so as to keep thee from perishing in the day of distress; let me
add,

Rule 5.
5 If thou can not lay hold upon the The fifth Rule for the right Application
of the Promises.
Promises made to those, who are in the highest form in Christ's school, lay
hold upon the Promises made to those who are in the lower forms. In Christ's
school there are diverse sorts of Scholars; some are in the high form, some in
the middle, some in the lowest, some are babes in Christ's school, some are
grown Christians, some are as tall Cedars, some are as low shrubs. Now you must
know that it is our duty to labor to be of the highest form. He that says
he has Qui dixit sufficit, deficit. Non progredi, est regredi.
grace enough, has grace little enough. He that stints himself in his
endeavors after grace, never had true grace. We must labor to be perfect,
as God is perfect. But yet you must also know, that he that is a real Scholar
in Christ's school, is in an happy condition, though he be not the best
scholar. And that it is our duty so to eye the eminent graces, which are in
others, as to be thereby incited to a further progress in grace, but not so as
to be thereby disheartened and discouraged. There are many distressed
Christians like to those who gaze so long upon the brightness of the Sun, that
when they come into their houses, they cannot see at all, they pore so much
upon the transcendent excellencies which are in their Brethren, that they are
stark blind in their own concernments, and cannot see any grace in themselves,
and hereupon are apt to conclude, that they are out of Gods favor. But this is
a non sequitur. The foot must not say, that it is no part of the body, because
it is not so eminent a part as the head, or heart. We must rather say with the
Martyr, Blessed be God that I am a member in Christ's body, though but the
weakest and lowest. We must not rest satisfied with being low Christians, but
yet we must not therefore say, we are no Christians. And when we are under
great tribulations and temptations, if we cannot apply to our selves for our
comfort those Promises which are made to eminent Saints of the highest form,
let us apply those which are made unto true Saints, though to such who are the
lowest of the lowest form; and hereby we shall (through Gods blessing) find
our souls marveilously supported and comforted. As for example. Christ has
said, Blessed are the poor in spirit, Mat. 5. 3
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore though thou art not rich
in grace, yet if poor in spirit, thou art blessed. Christ says, Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Mat. 5. 4
Though thou can not live without sin, yet if a mourner for thine own, and
other men's sins, thou art blessed.

Christ says, Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6
etc. Though thou find an exceeding great want of righteousness in thee, yet
if thou hungrest and thirsts after it, thou art blessed.

Christ says, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
Mat. 11. 28.
will give you rest. This Text is as an Alabaster box full of precious
consolation. If thy sins be a burden to thee, Christ will give thee rest; if
thou carriest them about thee, not as a golden chain about thy neck, but as an
Iron chain about thy feet; if thou be heavy laden with them; Christ will
take them off thy shoulders, and put them upon his.

Christ says, That he will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Mat. 12. 20.
flax, till be send forth judgment unto victory. If thou have grace but as a
smoking flax, Christ will not quench it, but assist it, till it come to a
great flame.

Christ says, That the whole have no Mat. 9.12, 13.
need of the Physician, but they that are sick. And that he came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance. If thou art a sin-sick-sinner, thy
name is in Christ's commission, he came to save thee.

Christ says, The Son of man is come Mat. 18. 11.
to save that which was lost. If thou apprehendest thy self to be in a lost
condition, thou art amongst the number of those whom Christ came to save.

The Apostle says, There is no condemnation to those who are in Christ, Romans
8.1
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Though thou have much
flesh in thee, and art sometimes overtaken with sin, yet if thou do not walk
after the flesh, as a servant after his Master, if thou walk after the
Spirit, there is no condemnation to thee.

The Apostle says, If we confess John 1. 9
our sins, God is faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. If we confess our sins out of a detestation of sin, with
bleeding hearts, and a sincere purpose of forsaking them, God is bound by
virtue of his promise to forgive us, else he were unfaithful.

The Apostle says, That he that has begun a good work in us, will perform
Phil. 1.6.
it until the day of Jesus Christ, And therefore if thou have truth of grace,
though but as a grain of Mustardseed, do not doubt, but that God in the
diligent use of means, will enable thee to persevere.

I might add, Nehemiah 1. 11. where God promises to be attentive to the
prayers of those who desire to fear his name. And Isaiah 26. 11. Isa. 26. 3.
Isa. 65. 1. Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 15. Joh. 6. 37. But I forbear.

Rule 6
If thou can not apply to thy self The sixth Rule for the right Application
of the Promises.
for thy comfort in affliction, the conditional Promises, lay hold upon the
absolute Promises. I have formerly told you that there are some Promises
conditional, others absolute, some to grace, others of grace; some to those
that are godly, others, to make us godly: God has not only promised to pardon
those that repent, but to give repentance; Act. 5. 31 Phil. 1. 29 Deuteronomy. 30.6
Jer. 32. 40
not only to justify those who believe, but to give us to believe; not only to
give Heaven to those that love him, but to give us grace to love him; not only
to save those that persevere, but to enable us to persevere: and therefore if
thou can not lay hold upon the Promises to those that are godly, apply those
which are made to make us godly. If not those which are made to those who
repent, believe and persevere, apply those wherein God promises to give us to
repent, believe, and persevere. If not the conditional, lay hold upon the
absolute.

There are these differences, and agreements, between conditional and absolute
promises.

1 For Conditional promises.

1 All promises of life and salvation are conditional.

2 Conditional promises, are the fruit of free grace, as well as absolute. It
is free grace which inableth us to perform the conditional, and free grace
which moved God to promise such great mercies upon such conditions.

3 They are the fruit of rich grace, and rare mercy, as well as absolute
promises.

4 They are of great use to quicken a lazy Christian, and to encourage him to
diligence; for no man can obtain the blessing promised, but he that performs
the condition enjoined.

5 They are rare touchstones to try our interest in the promises; For he that
neglects to perform the condition, cannot challenge an interest in the blessing
promised upon the performing of it.

2 For Absolute promises.

1 Though promises to grace be conditional, yet promises of grace are
absolute, and are made by God unto Christ in the behalf of his elect children,
according to that of David, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Psalm. 2.8.


2 There are no promises so absolute, as to exclude all endeavors on our part.
God will do the things promised for us, but by us. We work, but it is God who
works all our works in us, and for us.

3 Absolute promises are foundations of industry, as well as conditional. The
truth of this I made out in the former Sermon.

4 Absolute promises are demonstrative arguments of special election, and of
the perseverance of the Saints. There are some peculiar ones to whom God has
promised (in the use of means) absolutely to write his law in their hearts, to
cause them to walk in his ways, to give them infallibly, and infrustrably
repentance, faith, and perseverance. The promise of the first grace, and of the
crowning grace is absolute. And therefore the Doctrine of Special Election, and
of Perseverance must needs be true.

5 Absolute promises are mighty helps to wounded consciences, and rare cordials
for fainting and despairing Christians. When thou art in the dark, and see no
light, fly from the conditional promises, to the absolute, say, Lord thou have
not only promised to give pardon to those who repent, but thou have exalted
Christ for to give repentance. Thou have not only promised to justify those
who believe, but to give grace to believe. Lord fulfill thine own promise unto
thy servant, etc.

Object. All my fear is that these absolute promises, do not belong to me.

Answ. Take heed of making desperate conclusions against thy self. Say as the
King of Nineveh, Who knows but God may turn, and have mercy? Exclude not thy
self. Neither man, nor Angel can say thou art excluded. No man ought to believe
himself to be a reprobate (as I have showed) these promises belong to all that
can lay hold on them as they are tendered. As the brazen Serpent belonged to all
those who were able to look upon it; so do these promises to all that can by
faith look up that they may be healed. Say as the four Leapers in 2 King. 7.
another case, If I go on in unbeleef, I am certainly damned. And therefore I
will venture upon Christ; I will fly to this Ark, and if I perish, I will
perish believing.

If these Directions will not suffice to comfort thee in the day of adversity,
let me add.

Rule. 7.
All promises made in Scripture to the Saints in general, are appliable to The
7 Rule for the right application of the promises.
every Saint in particular. God promises to Solomon, 1 King. 8.37.40. And
Jehoshaphat applied this to his own particular condition, 2 Chronicles. 20. 9. God
promises to the Saints in general, that he will give them grace and Psalm.
84.10 Psalm. 34.10 Mat. 6.33.
glory, that he will withold no good thing from them, that they shall want
nothing that is good, and that all outward blessings shall be added to them.
Now there is no Saint but he may as justly lay hold upon those promises, as if
his name were named in them. And the reason is, because all the promises do
meet in Christ, as all lines in a center. And every Saint has all Christ. And
therefore promises made to those that are in Christ, belong to all that are in
Christ.

Rule 8.
All promises made to particular The 8 Rule for the right application of the
promises. Josh. 5.
Saints are applicable to all Saints in the same condition. God promises to
Joshuah, that he would never leave him, nor forsake him. This is applied by
the Apostle for the comfort of every Saint. Christ tells Peter, Luke Heb. 13.5.
22. 32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. This is applicable to
every Saint: Christ prays for thee, and me, and therefore he adds, When
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Therefore the Apostle Paul says,
That God comforted him in his tribulation, that he might be able to comfort
those who are 2 Cor 1. 4. James 5. 10, 11.
in trouble by the comfort wherewith he was comforted. And the Apostle James
propounds the example of the Prophets in general, and of Job in particular, to
persuade unto patience in affliction. And therefore when thou art in any
strait, consider what God has promised unto others, in thy condition, and what
God has done to them, he will do to thee; for he is unchangeable. And say
not, If I were a Paul, a Peter, or a Job, God would do to me, as he did to
them; but I am a poor, weak, unworthy creature, not worthy to be named that
day in which these are named. But consider, If thou be a member of Christ's
body (though but as the Toe) Christ will have a care of thee. If a child of
God (though but weak and sickly) thy heavenly Father will provide for thee. A
Father is tender of every child, and a man of every member of his body; so
will God be of all those who belong to him, though but babes in Christ.

Rule 9.
The promises of the Gospel are all concatenated. If thou have a true The ninth
Rule for the right application of the promises. Jam. 2. 10.
right to any one promise to which heaven is annexed, thou have a right to all
the other. As the Commandments of God are chained together (he that breaks
one, breaks all, and he that sincerely labors to keep one, Quicquid propter
Deum fit aequaliter fit. Mat. 5.3, 8
will labor to keep all, according to that Rule. Whatsoever is done for God,
is done equally.) And as the graces of God are linked together; (and therefore
heaven is sometimes promised to our grace, because he that has one saving
grace, has all) so also are the promises joined together, he that has a
right to one, has a right to all: For they are all but one and the same for
substance. They are all the fruit of the same free love in God, They are all
the branches of the same covenant of grace. (And therefore if thou have a right
to the Covenant, thou have a right to all the Promises) they all carry us to
Christ, and meet in Christ, and are in him, yea, and in him Amen; and therefore
if thou have a right to Christ, thou have a right to all.

This is a point of singular comfort in the worst of days and dangers. For
sometimes a child of God under great afflictions, can lay hold upon one
promise, and not upon another, and some can apply those which others cannot,
and others those which they cannot. Let all such know for their great comfort:
That he that has right to one branch of the Covenant, has right to all: he
that has let fall a chain of gold consisting of diverse links, into the water;
if he can catch hold upon any one of the links, he will easily get out the
whole chain. The Promises are like to a golden chain with diverse links, lay
hold upon one aright, and this will assure thee of thy interest in all the rest.

I have known many (yea, very many) who have died with a great deal of comfort
from the application of that one Text, 1 John 3. 14. unto their own condition.
We know that we have passed from death, unto life, because we love the
Brethren. When all other evidences failed them, and all other Texts of
Scripture afforded them no comfort: here they anchored, here they found rest
for their souls. They blessed God that they could say, that they loved the
Brethren, and loved them, not for any outward respects, but because of the
image of God in them, and they loved them when poor, as well as when rich; and
the more they had of God, the more they loved them; and they loved them even
when they were reproved by them of their faults. And upon this one plank they
swamme safely, and comfortably unto the haven of eternal happiness.

Rule 10.
If thy condition be so sad, and thy melancholy so excessive, that thou can
The tenth Rule for the right Application of the Promises.
not lay hold upon any promise, yet notwithstanding look toward it. Say as
Jonah, when he was in the Whales belly, Jonah 2. 4. Then I said, I am cast out
of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. The Temple was a
type of Christ. Though thou can not apply Christ to thy soul for thy comfort,
yet look toward him; and if thou can not come to him, he will come to thee;
if thou can not apprehend him, he will apprehend thee: Phil. 3. 12
As the Loadstone will draw the Iron, though the Iron cannot draw the
Loadstone, so will Christ (thy heavenly loadstone) draw thee to the Promise,
though thou can not draw thy self to it. No man can come to me (says
Christ) except the Father draw him: pray therefore with the Church, John 6.44
Can. 1.4. Draw me, and we will run after thee.

Rule 11
Pray unto God to give thee spiritual eyes, to behold thy interest in the The
eleventh Rule for the right Application of the Promises.
Promises: For as it is God who makes them, so it is he only who can irraditate
them, and open thy eyes to see thy right in them. It is with Promises, (as I
have said) as with chapters, and sermons. A man may read a Chapter, and hear a
Sermon, and taste no sweetness in them at one time, and at another time taste
much sweetness in them, as God is pleased to cooperate with the reading of
the one, and hearing of the other. So it is with the Promises, and therefore
pray unto God to lighten thine eyes, that thou sleep not the sleep Psalm. 13.3
Rev. 3. 18
of death. Pray unto Christ to anoint thine eyes with his spiritual eye salve.
And to cause thee to hope in his Word of Promise, according to that excellent
prayer of David, Remember the Word unto thy Servant, upon which Psalm. 119. 49.
thou have caused me to hope. It is God must cause us to hope and trust in his
Promises, or else we shall never be able. God has given thee eyes to see thy
misery; O pray for eyes to see his mercy. The Church of Laodicea wanted eyes to
see her misery. She was miserable, Rev. 3. 17
and naked, and knew it not. Thou have eyes to see thy undone condition out of
Christ. Pray for eyes to behold the riches of mercy that are in Christ, and his
willingness to receive all that come to him.

Rule 12
Pray unto God, not only to give The twelfth Rule for the right Application
also of the Promises.
thee spiritual eyes to see thy interest in the Promises, but a spiritual hand,
to enable thee to apply them to thine own soul in particular. By this spiritual
hand, I mean, A Christ-appropriating Faith. Justifying Faith is (as it were)
the hand of the soul, by which we appropriate Christ, and all the Promises; as
belonging to us in particular. Now Faith is the gift of God. Pray for the
Spirit of Faith. And for your encouragement, Ephesians. 2.8
consider, that the Spirit is called, The Promise of the Father, and that holy
Spirit of Promise: And Act. 1. 4 Ephesians. 1. 13.
God has promised to give the Spirit to those who ask for it. If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
Luke 11. 13
your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. The office of
the holy Spirit is first to seal grace, and then to seal to grace: First, the
Spirit sanctifies us, then it witnesses to our Ephesians. 1. 13
Spirits, that we are sanctified. Pray therefore unto God that he would not
only work grace in you, but witness unto the grace which he has wrought. Pray
for the sanctifying and sealing work of the Spirit. That he would not only
fit you to have an interest in the promises, but assure you of your interest in
them.

Rule 13.
Study thy interest in the promises in the time of health, and outward The 13.
Rule for the right Application of the Promises,
prosperity; For I find by experience that a child of God (under outward
affliction, or divine desertion, or extreme melancholy) is many times like a
man in the dark. A man in the dark cannot (though never so learned) read in a
book of the clearest print, or fairest character, he cannot (though never so
active) undertake any thing of weight. No more can a child of God in the hour
of distress; read his evidences for heaven, much less study to find out
evidences; he looks upon all the promises with a black pair of spectacles, and
wants light to see his interest in them. When Sion was in distress, she said,
God had forsaken Isa. 49. 14. Psalm. 116. 11.
her, and her Lord had forgotten her. When David was persecuted by Saul, he
said in his haste, All men were liars, and when Samuel himself, who had told
him that God would bestow the Kingdom on him, he Psalm. 31. 22. Psalm 88. 3.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
said in his haste he was cut off from before Gods eyes, Thus did Heman.
Christ himself cried out, when he was upon the Cross, with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? As men in Agues and Fevers are not
fit judges of meats and drinks, (whether they be good or bad) because their
pallats are out of taste. So a distressed Christian, (when under extreme
melancholy, divine desertion, or some great affliction) is no fit judge at such
a time of his interest in the promises. And therefore my advice is, Make out
thy interest in time of prosperity, and live upon it in time of adversity. Make
and read over thy evidences for heaven in time of health, and learn then by
heart, that when thou come into a dark condition, thou may neither have
them to make, or to read. Do as Tamar did, Genesis 38. 18. 25. When Judah her
Father in law, lay with her, she took as a pledge his signet, bracekets, and
staff. And afterward when she was in great distress, and ready to be burned
as a Harlot, she then brought her staff, and signet, and bracelets, and said,
By the man whose these are, am I with child, and thereby she saved her life.
So must you do. In time of health study thy interest in the promises, and in
time of sickness live upon what thou have studied, then bring forth thy staff
and bracelets, etc. then produce thy evidences, and make use of them as
spiritual butteresses to keep thee from falling into despair. Mrs. Diggons
dwelling with Mr. Moor in Aldermanbury.
I knew a very godly woman (not unknown to many here) who in her life time had
taken a great deal or pain to compose, and write down her evidences for heaven,
and who also kept a Diary of her life, and wrote down how she spent every day;
when she lay upon her deathbed, it pleased God to withdraw himself from her
for a while, and to let the Devil loose, who tempted her to despair, told her
she was an Hypocrite, a Formalist, and that she had no true grace in her.
She sent for me, made her bitter complaint to me, and sadly bewailed her
condition. Then she told me (which before I knew not) how she had spent her
life, how careful she had been in searching her ways, in observing how she
spent every day, and how exact in collecting evidences for heaven, the book was
sent for, I read a great part of it to her, and took much delight and content
in what I read. And it pleased God to come in to her with comfort in the
reading of it. She showed her staff, and her bracelets, and thereby quenched
the fiery darts of the Devil.

Thus I have in three Sermons taught you how to make use of Scripture-promises,
as conduits of soul-supportation, and soul-consolation, in the day of distress.
When you hereafter read the Bible, remember the promising-word, (as well as the
commanding and threatening word) make a Catalogue of the promises, meditate upon
the pretiousness, freeness, usefulness, latitude, richness, and immutability of
them. They are as certain as God himself, they have the strength of God, the
comforts of God, and assistance of God in them. Above all labor to make
application of them to your own soul. For this purpose, study these thirteen
Rules and Directions. Pray unto God to give thee spiritual eyes, to see thy
interest in them, and spiritual hands to reach out after them. Pray to God to
give thee spiritual ability, to act faith upon the promises, to draw virtue
from them, as the woman who had the bloody issue, did from Christ; to suck out
all the sweetness that is in them, to hang upon them, as the woman did upon the
Prophet, and as a Be does upon a flower, and by application of them to thy
soul, to live in God, and on God here, till thou come to enjoy the blessings
promised with God for ever in heaven.

There is one Objection behind, which when I have answered, I have done. For a
distressed Christian will object, and say,

Object. Though the promises are rare cordials, and shall all of them be
certainly fulfilled, yet God is oftentimes long before he fulfills them, and
while God is fulfilling of his promises, I may in the mean time perish in my
affliction.

Ans. It cannot be denied, but that God is oftentimes very long in fulfilling
his promises. He promised that the seed Genesis 3.15. Luke 18.7. 8.
of the woman should bruise the Serpents head; but it was Four thousand years
before that promise was actually accomplished. He promises to avenge his
elect of all their enemies, to do it speedily. And the souls under the Altar
cry, How long Lord, when wilt Rev. 6.10.
thou avenge our blood? etc. But this is not yet fulfilled.

Nay, I must add, That God is not only a long time performing his promises,
but sometimes instead of performing them, he seems to the eye of flesh and
blood to walk contrary to them. Sometimes the Providence of God run cross to
his Promises. God promised to make David King; instead of this, he is
persecuted by Saul, as a Partridge upon the mountains, he is driven to that
extremity that he begins to doubt of Gods promise, and to say, That one day
he should dye by the hand of Saul. God promised to Joseph, That the Sun, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Moon, and Stars should worship him, and that his sheaf should be lifted up
above the sheaf of his brethren. But he finds the quite contrary, his
brethren seek to slay him, sell him into Egypt, and there he is put in prison
as one quite forsaken of God. But yet notwithstanding all this, you must know,
That though the way of God, in performing his promises, be very mysterious and
secret, yet he will at last perform every (...), and tittle of them. Thus
David was at last made King of Israel, and Joseph Lord of Egypt, and his
brethren came all to worship him.

Quest. How must we carry and behave our selves at such times, when
Providence seem to run cross unto Gods promises?

Answ. At such times there are three things required of us.

1 It is our duty to wait patiently, and beleevingly, till Providence and
Three duties to be practiced when providence run cross to promises. Isa.
28.16.
Promises meet together. He that believes makes not haste. The Prophet there
speaks of a glorious promise, and adds, That a true Saint will wait Gods time,
which is the fittest and best time, he will patiently expect, till God fulfill
his promise. He will do as the Martyr did, who might have escaped privately
out of prison, and was tempted to it by his friends; But answered: He would
not go out of prison when his enemies would have him, for they would make him
tarry longer than he should, nor yet when his friends would have him, for they
would make him tarry a lesser time than he should; but he would come out when
God would have him. Gods time is the best; and they are soon enough delivered,
who are delivered in Gods way, and at Gods time. This then is thy great duty (O
Christian) to wait patiently, and beleevingly, and not to seek by unlawful
ways to be rid of thy miseries, as David did by going to the Philistims; and
as many in Queen 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Mary's days did, by yielding to the Popish superstitions. To help you to wait
Gods leisure, holding Faith and a good conscience; you have

1 Many rare and precious Promises made to those that wait upon him, which I
have formerly named.

2 You have four attributes in God to support you, his faithfulness,
almightiness, infinite goodness, and wisdom. He is faithful, and not one
tittle of his Word shall fall to the ground; he is Almighty, and able to do
whatsoever he has promised; he is infinitely wise, to know the best time and
season, and infinitely good and loving to his children, and does not willingly
afflict them, but will make Lam. 3.35
haste to help them.

2 It is our duty to live upon Promises, while Providence seem to run cross to
Promises. This is the meaning of Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by Faith. They
shall live by Faith, when they have nothing else to live on. When sense and
reason tell them, they are undone, then shall they live by Faith in the
Promises, and not only live patiently, but comfortably, and joyfully, as the
same Prophet, Hab. 3. 17, 18, 19. says, Although the Fig tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, and the field shall yield no
meat, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. This life did Paul live, when the ship in which he was, was ready to
be drowned, when Act. 27. 20, 23, 24
there was neither Sun-light, nor Starlight, yet he was exceedingly cheerful,
because God had promised to preserve him, and those with him. By living this
life, God is much honored, and our souls much quieted and refreshed.

3 It is our duty to continue praying, till providence and promises meet
together: For it is prayer, and prayer only, which will at last reconcile Gods
Promises, and Gods dispensations, and cause them to meet, and to kiss one
another: For as the Promises are the ground and rule of our prayers; so our
prayers are the divine ways and means for the obtaining of the Promises. I say
as the Promises are

1 The ground of our prayers. For we cannot pray in Faith, unless we have
some promise to bottom our prayers upon; therefore David often charge God in
his prayers with his promise. He harps eight times upon Psalm. 119. 28, 38, 41,
65, 76, 107, 142, 149.
the same string in one Psalm, to teach us, that the greatest Rethorick and
Oratory we can use in our prayers, is to urge God with his promise.

2 They are not only the ground, but the rule of our Prayers; As we must pray
for nothing but what God has promised, so we must regulate our prayers
according to Gods Promises. Those things which he has absolutely promised,
we must pray for absolutely, and where God has put conditions, and
exceptions, there our prayers must be conditional.

Now as the Promises are the ground and rule of our prayers, so our prayers are
divine means and helps for the obtaining of the promises: Though God has made
many glorious and precious promises to his children, yet he will perform none
of them, but to those who by prayer seek them at his hands. When Nathan told
David what great things God had promised to him, he went into Gods house to
pray for them, 2 Samuel 7. The Prophet Isaiah mentions a glorious promise, Isa.
43. 25. but he adds, Put me in remembrance, verse. 20. Thus Ezekiel 36. 37. I
will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, and therefore when
you read the Promises of the Bible, remember whatsoever God makes a promise,
you must make a prayer; and that prayer will hasten the fulfilling of the
promises: You must continue to pray, and faint not; for the vision is but for
an appointed time, though it tarry, wait for Hab. 2. 2
it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. This did Daniel when he
understood the time approached, etc. he prayed, Dan. 9. 2. 3. Thus did David,
Psalm. 56.9, 10.57. 1, 2. Thus must you do. These are the three great duties
which the Lord requires of us at all times, but more especially in these our
days wherein the providence of God seem to run quite cross unto his promises.
The Lord give us grace to practice them. So much for this Text.

The End of the sixth Sermon.
A Brief Repetition of what was said of Mris. Elizabeth Moore at her Burial.
THough I have finished my Text, yet I have another Text remaining, of which I
must speak a few words, and that is, The party deceased, at whose funeral we
are here met.

She was a Woman (I verily believe) truly fearing God, and yet throughout her
whole life loaded with many and great troubles. God picked her out to be a
pattern of afflictions, as he had not long before that rever end, and godly
Minister, Mr. Jeremiah Whitakers.

This Pattern teaches us three lessons.

1 That all things come alike to all in this world, and that no man knows
love or hatred by any thing that is before him. The best of Saints sometimes
are upon the Dunghill, when the vilest of men are upon the Throne. The best of
men are afflicted, when the worst of men are in prosperity.

2 That there is not so much evil in affliction, or so much good in prosperity,
as the world imagines. For if there were, God would not bestow so much
prosperity upon the wicked, and exercise his dear children with so many
afflictions.

3 That there will come a rewarding day, in which it shall certainly be well
with the Righteous. When I see a wicked man prosper, I say, Surely there will
come a punishing day, in which the wicked shall be turned into Hell. When I
see a godly man in adversity, I say, Verily there is a reward for the
Righteous, verily there is a God that judges in the earth. Such examples Psalm.
58.
prove that there is another life besides this. And that if the godly had hope
only in this life, they were of all people most miserable.

I will not trouble you with a relation of her Christian carriage in the time
of her health, because it is sufficiently known to most here present. I shall
only take notice of her great care and diligence in making her calling and
election sure. She had not her Ark to build when the flood came, nor her Corn
to get when the seven years of Famine came: She had laid up a stock of graces,
and comforts against the evil hour; She had not her evidences for Heaven, to
get at the hour of death. But she had collected and composed them in the time
of her life, and when she came to die, she had neither her graces, nor her
comforts, nor her evidences for Heaven to seek, she had nothing to do but to
dye.

Her sickness was very long, and very painful, concerning which I shall briefly
acquaint you with these few particulars.

1 God moved the hearts of very many godly people, to take compassion of her
sad and afflicted condition, and to contribute liberally (she being poor)
toward her relief; this merciful providence wonderfully comforted her; She saw
Gods love in it, and was so much affected with it, that she was (for a little
while) really and exceedingly afraid (notwithstanding her great torments by
reason of a cancer in her breast) lest she should have her heaven in this life,
and lest this mercy should be all her portion. The Lord recompense that labor
of love and that Christian charity a thousand fold into the bosoms of those
who manifested so much kindness to her.

2 Her Patience was very great. As God increased her pains, he increased her
patience, even to the admiration of such of us as were frequent spectators of
it. She was brought to such a sweet frame of spirit, as to be willing to live
under all her torments, as long as God pleased, and to dye whenever he
pleased.

3 She was a woman of a very fearful nature, and in the time of her health had
many doubts and scruples (notwithstanding all her care forementioned) about her
salvation. But in her sickness, all her doubts vanished. God chained up Satan.
The Devil had no power to tempt her, she felt a great calmness in her soul,
and had much inward peace, and enjoyed more of God, and his consolations, in
the time of her sickness, than in the time of her health.

4 She was very forward in spreading and diffusing those graces which God had
bestowed upon her, and in giving good counsel to those who visited her. I have
heard her often, and often persuading her friends to prize health, and to
improve it for the good of their souls, to lay up against an evil day, and to
stock themselves with grace before sickness come. She would frequently say, O
the benefit of health! O prize health! praise God for health, and improve
health for your eternal good.

5 She was very well vers't in the Scriptures. The Law of God was her delight;
and this kept her from perishing in her affliction. She was continually
fetching cordials out of the Word, to comfort her under her great pains, and to
preserve her from fainting. The twelfth Chapter of the Hebrews was a precious
cordial to her, so was the eight of the Romans, and the 2 of the Corinthians
the 4. Chapter and the 17, 18. verses. For our light affliction which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;

While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal.

1 Cor. 15. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57.

For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall
have put on immortality; then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, death is swallowed up in victory.

O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law;

But thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself.

A little before her death she said, In the Lord Jehovah there is
righteousness, and strength; righteousness for justification and strength for
supportation. She said, that the Word of God was the best cordial in the
world: And that one minutes being in Heaven, would make amends for all her pain
and misery.

6 And lastly, I cannot but take special notice of the happy close of her life,
and of the blessed end she made. It is said of Job, James 5. 11. Ye have
heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, etc. This our
Christian Sister did in a great measure, partake both of Jobs pains, and Jobs
patience, and made as happy an end, as he did, though in another kind. In the
morning of that day in which she dyed, she fell into a slumber, in which she
heard (as she thought) one saying to her, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Immediately she awaked full of joy, and though hardly able to speak,
yet she uttered it to those who stood by, and was much comforted with it. Now
though I am far from putting any confidence in dreams, and doubt not that a man
may dream he shall go to Heaven, and yet be cast into Hell. Though I do not
think that comfortable dreams are sufficient evidences of salvation. (Nay, when
they are brought as proofs of erroneous opinions, I account them Diabolical
delusions; and when wicked men have them, pleasant presumptions.) Yet
notwithstanding when a woman who has spent many years in the service of God,
and is visited by God for above a year, with great and most grievous pains,
shall at the close of her life, (when she is upon the very brink of eternity)
have such a sweet, refreshing, and heartchearing impression upon her spirit;
when heart fails, and flesh fails: When she can hardly speak to express the
greatness of her joy, then to hear a voice (as it were) saying to her, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise. This (in all probability) was the
voice of God, and not of man. This was the Lords doing, and it is marveilous in
our eyes. I for bear saying any more. She is gone from a prison, to a palace;
from a purgatory, to a Paradise. She is at rest with God, where all tears are
wiped away from her eyes: The Lord fit us by has grace, to follow her in due
time into the Kingdom of glory: Amen.

Mris. Elizabeth Moors EVIDENCES FOR HEAVEN: Collected by her self in the time
of her health, in such manner and method, as they are here presented to Public
view.
1 Her Design in this Collection.
IN the examination of my self, I find that my Aims and Ends, why I desire to
gather together, and clear up my Evidences for Heaven (if my deceitful heart
does not deceive me) are these following.

1 THat hereby (as a means) I may be enabled to glorify God in the great work
of believing, that hereby (with Gods blessing) the dim eye of my Faith may
more clearly see the Lord Jesus Christ to be a Peacemaker, and Reconciler, and
Surety, for me, even for me, who am by nature a firebrand of Hell. The time
was, I am sure, when I was the Devils picture, and had the black brand of
Reprobation upon me, and therefore it does nearly concern me to search and
try what Evidences I have to prove that God fetching Arguments out of his own
bowels, and the riches of his free grace, has redeemed me out of this lost
estate.

2 MY Aim is to strengthen that grace of Assurance. A grace, which though it
be not of absolute necessity for the being and salvation, yet it is of
absolute necessity for the well being and consolation of a Christian; without
this grace I can neither live nor dye comfortably; and I have been often
exhorted by Gods faithful Ambassadors, to gather together my Scripture
Evidences, and to have the approbation of some godly and experienced Minister
or Christian; and this by Gods blessing may be a means to strengthen
Assurance: Yea, I find in Scripture, that the Lord says, that the Priests
lips shall preserve Mal. 3.7.
knowledge, and thou shall seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the Messenger
of the Lord of Hosts.

3 MY Aim is to obey God in his Word, who has commanded to work out my own
Phil. 2.12 2 Pet. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
salvation with fear and trembling; and to give all diligence to make my
calling and election sure: And I am exhorted to examine my self, and prove my
self, whether I be in the faith or no, know ye not (says the Apostle) that
Christ is in you, except you be reprobates: And if any man be in Christ be
is a new Creature; old things are passed away, and all things are become new.

Now then to prove whether I be in deed and in truth born again is my desire
at this time, the Lord help me, and give me a sincere and upright heart; and
guide me herein by his holy Spirit, for the honor of his holy Name.

2 A brief Collection of her Evidences for Heaven.
Blessed be God, who has through his free mercy begotten me to a hope,
regenerated and born from above, and converted unto God.

Reason, Because the Lord has gone the same usual way with me, as with those
he pleases to convert to himself; and this I shall make to appear in five or
six particulars.

1 The Lord by his Spirit accompanying the preaching of his Word, caused the
scales to fall from my eyes, and opened them, and set up a clear light in my
understanding, and made me to see sin, to be exceeding sinful, out of measure
sinful, and to look on it as the loathsomest thing in the world, and on my self
as a loathsome creature in Gods sight, and in my own sight, by reason of the
Leprosy of sin, wherewith I was overrun.

2 The Lord brought me to see the misery that I was in, by reason of my sins.
I thought I was utterly forsaken of God, and I thought that God would never
accept of such a wretch as I saw my self to be. I could not think otherwise,
but that hell was my portion, and that I, by reason of my sins must go thither,
expecting every day when the Lord would glorify himself in my damnation. I saw
my self in more misery, because of my sins than I could then, or now express
to any body. I looked upon God as a consuming fire, and on my self as stubble,
ready to be consumed by him, etc.

3 The Lord brought me to a spiritual astonishment, that I cried out, What
shall I do to be saved! and said with Paul, Lord! what would thou have me
to do? Do but make known to thy poor creature what thy will is, and I thought I
could do any thing, or suffer any thing for the Lord. But since I have had some
more knowledge of the holy Will of God, woe is me! what a barren and
unfruitful heart have I! a heart that can neither do, nor suffer any thing for
the Lord, as I ought to do: But this I can say, that the astonishment I was in
by the sight of my sins, and the misery I was plunged into, put me on the
performance of holy duties, especially prayer.

4 The Lord took me off my own bottom, off my own righteousness, and made me
to see that that was but a sandy foundation, and would not hold out. I was not
taken off from the performance of holy duties; no, I thought with my self that
I am commanded by God to perform holy duties, which is the way and means
whereby we may meet with God (For he is ordinarily to be enjoyed no where
but in his own ordinances) but the Lord took me off from resting and trusting
in Ordinances. And as he made me to see that without the practice of them he
would not accept of me; so also he made me to know that it was not for holy
duties, for which I was accepted. The sins that cleave to my best performances,
are enough for which the Lord may justly condemn me, if I had no other sins.

5 The Lord brought me to see a Superlative beauty and excellency in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and my soul was deeply in love with him, even with whole Christ,
in all his offices, and (if I know any thing at all of my own heart) I desired
Christ as much to be my King, and Prophet; to teach, and guide me, and subdue
me to himself, and rule over me, as to be my High Priest, to make atonement
by offering up of himself for me, and washing me in his blood, by which I
must be justified.

6 The Lord brought me to see a soul-satisfaction in the Lord Jesus Christ
alone; and I think I should be as fully satisfied with Christ alone, as my
heart can desire. If I know my heart, it pants after Christ, and Christ
alone: None but Christ, none but Christ. The whole world in comparison, or
competition with Christ, is nothing to me: But in him I see full contentment.
To see and know my interest in him, and to enjoy communion with him, is that,
which if the Lord would bestow upon me, I should with Jacob say, it is enough;
and with old Simeon) Now let thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen
thy salvation.

Now I desire to set down some other Scripture Evidences, that I find upon
search and examination of my heart, by laying it to the Rule; The Word of God.

My Second Scripture Evidence is Mark. 2. 17. Where Christ says, They that are
whole have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick, and he came not
to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance. Now through Gods mercy I can
say, that I am a sin-sick-sinner (the Lord make me more sick) I am not
righteous in mine own eyes, but a Sinner, and see my self undone for ever,
without the righteousness of Christ be imputed to me, and therefore I hope I
am amongst the number of those whom Christ was commissionated by his Father to
come to save.

From Matthew. 11. 28, 29. I am weary heavy laden; now Christ has promised to
give ease to such. And I am willing to take his yoke upon me, and would fain
learn of him the lesson of meekness and lowliness, and therefore am invited
to come unto him.

I can say with David, that my sins heavy burden to me, they are too heavy for
me, Psalm. 38. 4. and I can say that I mourn, because I cannot mourn no more
for my sins; now Christ says Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted, Matthew. 5.4.

From Matthew. 5. 3. I think (if my poor in spirit; now theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, says Christ.

From Matthew. 12 20. I am a bruised reed, and smoking flax, and therefore break
such a reed, nor quench the smoke of grace, if it be true grace, but he will
increase it more and more (as he says) until judgment break forth into
victory: And he came to set at liberty them that are bruised, Luke 4. 18.
Therefore I hope I am such a one as he came to bind up, and set at liberty;
yea, and that he was anointed and sent by his Father to me, and such as I am,
Isa. 61. 1.

From 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
(says Paul) That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: And so say
I too; it is worthy all acceptance, that Christ should come from the bosom of
his Father, who was infinitely glorious and happy, that he should come into
the world to save me, me a sinner, me the chief of sinners; me, that if
saved, I do verily believe, there is none in Heaven, nor any that ever shall
come thither, that has, or will have the cause to magnify and adore free
grace, as I shall have. And herein does God commend his love toward me -- For
if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10.

I can say with Paul, that I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man,
and I am grieved that I cannot keep it. I find that spiritual war in me,
between flesh and spirit, which Paul complains of, and I can say, that Paul
does confess over my heart in his confessions, Romans 7. And I can go along with
him there, from verse. 9. to the end of the chapter; and from hence I gather,
that there is some spiritual life in my soul, and an endeavor to walk after
the spirit, and therefore I hope and desire to conclude with him, that there
shall be no condemnation to me, but that the Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus shall make me free from the law of sin, and death. I find Romans
8. 1, 2.
an earnest desire wrought in my soul, to be made like unto Jesus Christ, and
that it may be my meat and drink to do and suffer his will, as he would have
me.

I can say, that the Lord has in

I can say with the Church to Christ, Cant. 1. 7. O thou whom my soul loves!
and (if I know any thing at all of mine own heart) Christ is altogether lovely,
and most desirable to my soul. I think I can truly say with David, that I have
none in Heaven but thee, and there is nothing on earth that I desire besides
thee, in comparison of thee, in competition with thee. Though all that is
dearest to me in the world should forsake me, yet if God whom I have chosen
for my portion will not forsake me, I have enough. It Is my desire and
endeavor more and more to account all things but loss and dung, that I may win
Christ. I can with Peter make my appeal to him, and say, Lord, thou who know
all things, thou know that I love thee, and that it is the desire of my soul
to love thee more, and to love thee for thy self, because thou art holy, and
good, and gracious, and the chiefest amongst ten thousand; Yea, God in Christ
alone is worthy to be beloved, and it is my highest privilege that he will
give me leave to love him, who only can satisfy my soul, and redeem it from
death eternal, who has justified me by his blood, and sanctified me by his
spirit, whom therefore I love with all my heart, and all my soul, and all my
might, and all my strength. Finding therefore, that God has drawn out my heart
to love him, and make choice of him alone, I from hence gather and ground my
hope, that God loves me; according to that Scripture, 1 John 4. 19. We love
him, because he first loved us.

I find my heart much inflamed because they are Gods children, and the more I
see, or find or hear of God in them, the more I find my heart cleaving to
them; and I think I can truly say with David, that my delight is in the Saints,
and those that excel in grace; not because they are friends to me, or I have
relation to them in regard of outward obligations, but because they bear the
image of God upon them, and manifest it in their holy conversation. I love
them, whether rich or poor. And though I did never know some of them, but only
hear of their holiness, and piety, yet I could not but exceedingly love such.
Therefore I hope that I am passed from death to life, because I love the
Brethren, 1 John 3. 14.

I do not only love God, and the keep his Commandments, and they are not
grievous to me. But I pray with 1 John 5. 3
David, O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! Lord enlarge my
Psalm. 119. 5. v. 32, 34
heart, and I will run the ways of thy Commandments: Give me understanding,
and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart; for
therein do I delight.

I find I am one that is very thirsty after Jesus Christ, and the grace of
transplanted into Christ, and therefore I long and endeavor after a true and
lively Faith, because that Grace is a soul transplanting and uniting grace. Now
Christ has promised to satisfy the thirsty, Matthew. 5. 6. and such Christ has
earnestly invited to come, though they have nothing to bring but what may make
against themselves, yet to come empty, and he has promised to fill them, Isa.
55. 1, 2.

I am willing to confess, and with all my heart to forsake all my sins. I am
malefactor, and judge my self worthy of the just condemnation of the righteous
Judge of all the earth. And I do not only confess my sins, but with all my
heart I desire to forsake them, and to turn to the Lord: Now he has said, he
will have mercy on such, and will abundantly pardon them. For his thoughts are
not as our thoughts, nor his ways, as our ways, Isa. 55. 7, 8. It is my
constant endeavor to dye to sin, to live to newness of life. And this is my
comfort and hope, that he who has begun a good work in me, will perfect it.
For it is he that works all our works in us, and for us, Isa. 26. 12. and
he that has wrought in me to will to do that which is pleasing in his fight,
will work in me to do also, and that of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.

I hope I am one whom God has taken into Covenant with himself, because fruits
of the Covenant, because he has circumcised my heart to love him, and has
put his fear into me, and has wrought an universal change in me; and has
given me a new heart, and a new spirit; yea his own spirit which he has put
within me, even the Spirit of Truth, which will guide me into all Truth. It
is his own promise to give his holy Spirit to them that ask it of him (as I
have done often) Luke 11. 13. and I hope that God will make it in his due time,
a witnessing and a comforting Spirit. I will wait upon him for the
accomplishment of all his promises, both of grace, and to grace: He has said,
he will be a sun and a shield, he will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. And he has promised
to subdue our sins for us; and has said, that sin shall not have Dominion over
us, Romans 6. 14. that he will be our God, and we shall be his children, and
he will save us from all our uncleanness. I hope I have a share in this
blessed Covenant of free grace.

As for my Affliction that lies upon sanctification of it, than the removal. I
earnestly labor to learn all those lessons which God teaches me by
affliction. I know I should not be scourged, nor be in tribulation, but that
I have need of it; it is for my profit to make me partaker of his holiness.
Afflictions are an evidence of Sonship, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. God has promised
that all things shall work together for good to them that love and fear Romans 8.
28.
him. And I have had much experience of his faithfulness, who has not suffered
me to be tempted above what he has enabled me to bear; therefore I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. He has
chastized me less than mine iniquities deserve. He chastizeth me here, that
he may not condemn me hereafter.

Faith is the condition of salvation. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe in
his Act. 16.31 1 John 3. 23.
Son Jesus Christ: Now I find nothing so hard to me as to believe aright: to
cast away all my own Righteousness as dung, in point of justification, and to
cast away all my unrighteousness, so as that be no bar to me, and to role,
and cast, and venture my immortal soul upon Jesus Christ and his Righteousness,
for life and salvation by him alone, and to see my self complete in him; this
is supernatural. Yet I must and will give glory to God, and say, Lord I
believe, help thou my unbeleef. And by this I prove that this precious grace of
Faith is wrought in me, because Jesus Christ is to me very precious: and I
find in the Word, that to them that believe he 1 Pet. 2.7.
is precious: and I am willing to take Christ upon his own terms, as he is
tendered in the Gospel; and am willing to give up my self soul and body wholly
to him; and my love to God, and to the children of God, is a fruit of my Faith,
as also my desire to be made like unto him: For he that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. And I trust that I am
kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. I know whom
I have believed, and I am perswadad that he is able and willing to keep that
which I have committed unto him, which is my immortal soul. 2 Timothy 1. 12.


Thus I have according to the Apostles exhortation endeavored to give a reason
of the hope that is in me. What have I but what I have received? The desire of
my soul is, that God may have all the glory. And if I be deceived, the Lord
for Christ's sake undeceive me, and grant that if I have not true grace, I may
not think I have, and so be in a fools Paradise. And the Lord that is my
heart-maker, be my heart-searcher, and my heart-discoverer, and my
heart-reformer. Amen.

FINIS.

