A NEW CATECHISM COMMANDED To be set forth, for the instructing of all those,
who still affect a reading Ministry, and the Common Prayer; but remains
opposite to the true Directory of CHRIST.

Wherein is contained, Six remarkable Branches of the Church of England, viz.
The great Vow in Baptism, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments, etc.

By a Reverend Divine.

march 22th LONDON: Printed by B. Alsop, dwelling in Grubstreet, near
Cripple-Gate, 1467.

A new Catechism, etc.
Question. MVst people frequent the preaching of Gods World that they may be
saved?

Answ. 1.PAUL said to the Romans, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you, for I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; for it is the power of God unto
Salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.15, 16. 2. It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. 3. Preachers
of the Word, are the Ministers of God, by whom ye believe, that ye may be saved
by Faith, 1 Cor. 3.5. 4. A Preacher by constant and painful teaching of God
Word, with a life agreeable to the same, shall both save himself, and those
that hear him, 1 Timothy 4.16. 5. The preaching of the Gospel, is the Stewardship,
and Preachers are the Stewards of the grace of God, that brings Salvation to
all men, Ephesians. 3.2. 6. The Devil himself did once acknowledge that the
Preachers of God Word, were the servants of the living God, which show unto us
the way of salvation, Act. 16.17. 7. The Word of God is the Mortal Seed; the
Preachers of the Word are the spiritual Fathers in Christ, preaching of the
word is the means appointed by God, whereby we are born again, without which,
we cannot be saved, as our Savior Christ says, except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.


Q. Shall those people be damned, that will not hear, and obey the Word God
sends among them by Preachers?

A. 1. Moses said to Israel; if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord
thy God, to do all his commandments, which I command thee this day, all these
curses shall come upon thee: cursed shall thou be in the City, in the field, in
thy basket, in thy store; yea, in all thou set thy hand unto for to do,
until thou be destroyed etc. Deuteronomy. 28.15. to the end. 2. Christ said unto his
Disciples, when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel [Whosoever shall not
receive you, nor hear your words when ye depart out of that house or city,
shake off the dust of your feet for a testimony against them, that shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for that
Cit. Mat. 10.14, 15. Mark 6.11. 3. A Prophet said unto King Amariah, I know
that the Lord has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and
has not hearkened to my council, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. 1 Samuel 2.25. 4. The Lord said
to the Prophet Ezekiel, If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his iniquity: to dye in
sin, is to be damned, Ezec. 3.19. 5. Paul said to certain Jews, ye put the
Word of God from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, Act. 13
46. 6. Esa said of some people, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the
flame consumes the chafe; so their root shall be rottenness, and their
blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law of the Lord,
and despised the word of the holy one of Israel.


Q. May not we be saved by our good prayers at home, although we do not hear
Gods Word spoken by the Preachers amongst us?

A. 1. He that turns this ear away from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall been an abomination, Prove. 28.9. 2. The word of the Lord came to
Zachariah, but the people refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears, that they should not hear, yea, they made their hearts, as
an adamant stone, least they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord
sent in his spirit by the former Prophets; therefore came their a great wrath
from the Lord, and therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they
would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts,
Zach. 7.8, 11, 12, 13. 3. How can you expect God should hear your prayers
twice a day, when as ye refuse to hear Gods word once a week. 5. Our persons
and our prayers are acceptable to God only in Christ; and therefore how can
those people hope, that God will hear their prayers, when they will not hear
Christ in the preachers of his word, but despise him and them, as Christ taught
his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel, He that hears
you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, etc. Heb. 13.15.


Q. Shall those people be damned that liveunler a wicked Minister, that does
teach them err^^rs and false Doctrines?

A. 1. The Lord himsef answers, the leaders of this people cause them to err,
and they that are led of them are destroyed, Esa 9.14, 15, 16. 2. A wonderful
and horrible thing is done in the Land, the Prophets prophecy falfly, the
Priests bear rule by their means, any people love to have it so, and what will
they do in the and thereof, Ier. 5.30, 31. 3. Christ also gives an answer, Wot
be to you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye compass Sea and land to make one
Proselite, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell,
then your selves, Mat. 23.15. 4. About 400. Prophets, did persuade Ahab the
King of Israel, to go to battle against Ramoth Gilead, promising him victory,
but he was there slain, 1 King. 22. 5. Antichrist that man of sin, and child
of perdition, and those that are finally deceived with his false doctrines, and
miracles, shall be damned, and cast into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone day and night for ever. 2 These. 2.3. to 13.


Q. Are those people in danger to be damned, who live under an ignorant or
wicked Minister, that cannot or will not teach the Word of God

A. 1. Such people are in great danger to be damned; Christ does answer, if the
blind does lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. Mat. 15.14. 2. The
Lord faith to every Minister, as to the Prophet Ezechiel, I have made thee a
Watchman to the people, and therefore hear the word of my mouth, and give them
warning from me, when I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou
give him not warning, nor speak, to warn the wicked from his wicked way to
save his life, The same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will
I require at thy hands: to die in sin, is to be damned Ezekiel 3.17* 18. 3. The
Lord says in Esa of such people: All ye Beasts of the field shall come to
devour; yea all the Beasts in the Forest: His watch men are blind, they are
all ignorant, they are like dumb dogs, they cannot bark and their shepherds
cannot understand Esa 56.9, 13, 11.12. 4. Where there is no vision; that is, no
word of God preached or taught, the people perish, Prove. 29.18. 5. For a long
time Israel has been without God without a teaching Priest, and without the
Laws, 2 Chronicles. 15 13. 6. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will
send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of
hearing the Word of the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from
the North, even to the East, they shall run to and fro, to seek the Word of the
Lord, and shall not find it, Amos 8.11, 12. Mal. 2.7,


Q. But some people will say, we have a Minister that does read the holy
Scriptares and Common Prayer amongst us, may not we certainly hope to be saved
as well as othurs, though we have no Preacher, and go not to Sermons, and
though we are not taught the Word of God as others are?

A. 1. God does command and commend the reading and searching of the holy
Scriptures, by all sorts of people at all times, and has promised his blessing
upon it, Deuteronomy. 17.19.

But God did never appoint, or approve in the Law or Gospel any men to be
Priests or Misters of his Word and Sacraments unless they were able and
willing to teach the people the Word of God.

For, the Lord says in time of the Law. First, the Priests lips shall keep
knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. this was
their duty, Deuteronomy. 30.10. and practice, 2 Chronicles. 7.9. Nehem. 8.8. Secondly, I
will give them Pastors, according to my own heart, which shall feed them with
knowledge, and understanding, Ier. 3.14. Thirdly, because thou have rejected
knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me, Hosea
4.6. Fourthly, the Lord calls ignorant Ministers blind Watchmen, dumb-dogs,
foolish and idle Shepherds, Esa 56.10.

And in the time of the Gospel.
First, Christ himself was sent to preach the Gospel, Luke 4.18. this was his
practice, Mat. 9.35. Mat. 26.55.

Secondly, as Christ himself was sent, so he sent his Apostles to preach the
Gospel to every creature to teach all Nations, John 20.21.

Thirdly, as the Apostles themselves were sent to teach, and preach the Gospel;
so they sent other Ministers to succeed them, and appointed and gave
commandment, that such should be made and honored as the Ministers of Christ
that were able to teach others, to preach the Gospel, to divide the Word of God
aright, to feed the people with knowledge and understanding of Gods will
revealed in his Word, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, the Church of England does ordain, or appoint, no men to be
Ministers of the Word of God and Sacraments, and to have the spiritual charge
of any people, but such that upon trial, are sound to be both able and willing
to teach the people the Word of God; for we read

In the Book set forth for ordering and making Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
The Bishop first knowing, either by himself, or by sufficient testimony, any
person to be of virtuous conversation and after due examination and trial,
finding him to be learned in the latin tongue, and suficiently instructed in
the holy Scriptures, may admit a Deacon in the preface. 2. It appertains to
the Office of a Deacon to instruct the youth in the Catechism, and to preach,
if he be admitted by the Bishop. 3. The Bishop delivers to every one that is
made Deacon, the New Testament; saying, Take thou authority to read the Gospel
in the Church of God, and to preach the same, if thou be thereto ordinarily
commanded.
And concerning Priests.
First, Priests cannot by any other means compass the doing of their work,
pertaining to the salvation of Man; but with doctrine and exhortation taken out
of the holy Scriptures, and with a life agreeable to the same. Secondly, he
that is to be made Priest, says, he is determined by Gods grace with the
Scriptures, to instruct the people committed to his charge, and he does promise
by the Lords help to teach the people the Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline
of Christ. Th^rdly, the Bishop delivers to every one that is made Minister, a
Bible; saying, Tak^ thou authority to preach the Word of G^d and to minister
the holy Sacraments in the Congregation, where thou shall be so appointed.
And concerning Bishops.
First, he that is to be made Bishop, says that he is determined by Gods grace
with the Scriptures, to instruct the people committed to his charge: He does
promise by the help of God, faithfully to exercise himself in the holy
Scriptures, so as he may be able by them, to teach and exhort with wholesome
Doctrine; and to withstand and convince the gainsayers. Secondly, the
Archbishop delivers to him that is made a Bishop, a Bible, saying; G^ve heed
unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine; think upon those things contained in
this book, be diligent in them, that the increase, coming thereby, may be
manifest to all men; take heed unto thy self, and unto teaching, and be
diligent in doing them; for by doing this, thou shall save thy self, and those
that hear thee; be to the flock of Christ a Shepherd, and not a Wolf; feed
them, and devour them not.


And in the Ecclesiastical Canons.
First no Bishop shall admit any person into sacred Orders, to be Deacon or
Priest, except he has taken some degrees of School in either of the
Universities of this Realm, or at the least, except he be able to yield an
account of his Faith in Latin, according to the Articles of Religion, approved
in the Synod of the Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, 15.62. and to confirm
the same by sufficient testimony out of the Holy Scriptures, Canon. 34.
Secondly, no Bishop shall institute any to a Benefice, except he shall appear
upon due examination to be worthy of his Ministry, Can. 39. Thirdly, no
license or dispensation for the keeping of more Benefices then one, shall be
granted to any, but always provided, that he have under him in the Benefice
where he does not reside a Preacher lawfully allowed, that is able sufficiently
to teach and instruct the people, Can. 41, 43, 47. Fourthly, every beneficed
man, having no lawful impediment, shall preach one Sermon every Sunday in the
year, wherein he shall soberly and sincerely divide the Word of Truth, to the
glory of God, and best edification of the people, Canon 45. Fifthly, every
Person, Vicar or Curate, upon every Sunday and Holiday before Evening Prayer,
shall, for half an hour, or more examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his Parish, in the Ten Commandments, the Articles of Belief, and
in the Lords Prayer, and shall diligently teach them the Catechism, and if any
Minister shall wilfully neglect his duty herein, he is first to be reproved
sharply by the Bishop next to be suspended, and the third time excommunicated,
and so remain until he be reformed, Can. 59. So that a Minister wilfully and
obstiaately neglecting to teach and instruct his Parishioners, is not after due
execution of those Ecclesiastical censures upon him, to do any thing
appertaining to the Office of a Minister, but to remain as a suspended and
excommunicated person, not fit for any good Christians company.


And in the Book of Homilies.
First, the Church is the place where the lively Word of God (and not Man's
invention) ought to be read and taught, and with all diligence the people are
bound to resort thither. Secondly, by these places, Act. 13.5, 14, 15. Act.
15.21. Act. 17.2. Ye may see the usage of reading the holy Scriptures among the
Jews in their Synagogues every Sabbath Day, and Sermons usually made upon the
same. How much more then is it convenient, that the Gospel of our Savior
Christ should be expounded unto us that are Christians in our Churches,
especially our Savior Christ and his Apostles, allowing this most godly and
necessary usage, and by their examples confirming the same in the Homily of the
right use of the Church, Page 3, 4.


In the Book of Common Prayer.
First, every Minister that administers the Sacraments of the Lords Supper, and
every Mister that is appointed to visit the sick, ought to be a discreet and
learned Minister of Gods Word, able to give ghostly council, advise and
comfort, that men's doubtful and distressed consciences may be quieted and
relieved. In the second exhortation before the Communion. In the visitation of
the sick. In the Rubrics for the Communion of the Sick. Secondly, it is the
duty of Godfathers and Godmothers, to call upon the children that are baptized
to hear Sermons, so soon as they shall be able to learn, that they may the better
know this Vow in Baptism, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments,
and all other things which christian people ought t^ know and believe, to their
souls health, the last exhortation after Baptism.


You are not to think, that the hearing the reading of Common prayer is
sufficient, ^o^ your salvation, without the preaching, or teachin of the word
of God; for, Christ himself says, Not every one that says unto me, Lord*
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 7.21.

From God be the Blessing: To God be all the Glory, through Jesus Christ. Amen.
FINIS.

