HIS MAJESTY'S most Gracious DECLARATION From the Isle of Wight, concerning the
settling of a General peace, the safety of his person, His Engagements with the
Army, And for free Intercourse between himself and the PARLIAMENT.

And Col. Hammonds Letter sent to the Parliament, concerning Mr. Ashburnham,
and the rest of the Gentlemen attending His Majesty, that were sent for to be
brought up PRISONERS.

With His desires to both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Kings Majesty.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Isle of Weight.
Honored Sir,
I Have sent you here enclosed the Copy of a Letter which Colonel Hammon our
Governor has sent to the House of Peers, and the like to the House of
Commons, And also a Declaration by His Majesty since His coming hither,
mentioned in the said Letter, which Papers will inform you of the state of
things here, from

Your Honors most Humble servant, WILL. GROSS.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE THE KINGS MAJESTY'S
DECLARATION At the Isle of VVYGHT November. 19. 1647.
C. R.

HIs Majesty does Declare, That He came from Hampton Court, for no other
cause, but for the preservation of his person. which was (as he apprehended) in
such danger, that he could not with safety continue longer there. That if he
could have been there with safety, he would not have departed thence, nor from
the Army: And that He chose this place rather then any other (when he was at
liberty to have gone whether he pleased) that he might still continue under the
protection of the Army: (Coll: Hammond being a Member thereof) and that He
might have convenience of free intercourse, between himself and the Parliament,
for the settlement of a general peace, to which he professes a very great
inclination and desire; And that there shall be nothing wanting on His part,
that may be reasonably expected from Him.

And His Majesty does further Declare, That in case these Gentlemen be taken
from Him, and punished as evil doers, for councelling Him not to go out of
the Kingdom, but rather to come to the place where He now is, for the ends
aforesaid; and for their indevouring accordingly, in attending Him hither: He
cannot but himself expect to be dealt with accordingly, His case being the same.

Carisbrooke Castle, November 19. 1647.
For the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore.
My Lord,
THis morning I received, by the hands of a messenger from the General, a
paper of Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, bearing date Die
Martis, 16. November, 1647. relating to the security of His Majesty's person,
which although they came not to me with directions from the Houses, yet I
thought it my duty to take notice of them (by what hand soever received) as
their commands, and accordingly to see them put in execution.

As concerning that Vote, not permitting such as have been in Arms, or
assisted against the Parliament, to come into this Island, it tending much to
the security of His Majesty's person, and the preserving the peace of the
Island, I have (as I acquainted your Lordships in my last letters, before I
received these Votes) given orders to that effect (which are carefully put in
execution) commanding all masters of Boats belonging to Hampshire and this
Island, that they land neither persons nor goods, in any part of this Island,
save only at Yarmouth Castle, Cowes Castle, and Ride: at which place I have
also appointed a guard, to whom order is given (as to the other two Castles)
for the examining of all persons so landing, and to detain and secure any that
cannot give a very good account of themselves and their business.

As concerning your Lordships other Votes (now they are come to my hands) I
shall with the best of my endeavors see them put in execution.

My Lord,

Yesterday there came to me an Officer, belonging to the Sergeant of the House
of Commons, with particular warrants for the apprehending and bringing up in
safe custody the persons of Mr. John Ashburnham, Mr. William Leg, and Sir John
Barkley, who came hither with the King. The said warrants requiring my
assistance to him in the execution of them, but with no order to me from either
or both Houses to that purpose.

And finding the matter to be of every great importance, I have desired the
messenger to forbear the execution of his said warrants till I have given the
Houses to understand that in case the said warrants should be served and put in
execution, it would be impossible for me to answer the expectations and
commands of Parliament in preserving the person of the King in security to be
disposed by them, unless I should keep him close prisoner, which is a
business of that nature, that it is neither fit nor safe for me to do,
espeeially of my self.

The grounds from whence I gather this, are plainly thus:

The King has declared himself to me, That he came from Hampton Court for no
other cause but for the preservation of his person, which was (as he
apprehended) in such danger, that he could not with safety continue longer
there: That if he could have been there with safety, he would not have
departed thence, nor from the Army: And that he chose this place rather then
any other (when he was at liberty to have gone whither he pleased) that he
might still continue under the protection of the Army (my self being a member
thereof) and that he might have convenience of free intercourse between
himself and the Parliament for the settlement of a general peace, to which
he professes greater inclinations and desires then ever, and that there shall
be nothing wanting on his part, that may be reasonably expected from him.

He further says, that in case these Gentlemen be taken from him, and punished
as evil doers, for councelling him not to go out of the Kingdom, but rather
to come to the place where he now is, for the ends aforesaid, and for their
endeavoring accordingly in attending him hither; he cannot but himself expect
to be dealt with accordingly; his case being the same.

And from such apprehensions your Lordships may easily judge, what he will do,
by his former actings: He having that liberty which has ever been allowed him
since he has been disposed of by the Parliament.

My Lord,

I shall further let you know, that besides the care I shall always have of
these gentlemen, they have engaged their honors, not to depart from me, so
that I am most confident of their security.

And truly were not their ends the same with their pretenses (in relation to
the peace of this Kingdom) I am confident they would never have advised nor
conducted the King to this place.

Besides, were they at this time removed from the King* there would be none
left for his attendance, which (besides the offense) how great the
inconvenience would be to him, your Lordships cannot be ignorant.

And further give me leave to add (if so unworthy a servant of your Lordships
as I am (and that which concerns my honor were at all worthy your
consideration) whither it would not much reflect upon me in case these
gentlemen should be thus removed from hence: The King and themselves having
freely thrown themselves upon me for safety upon confidence (as they please
to say) of my honor and honesty, and the satisfaction they expect it would
have given the Parliament, The King being necessitated to remove.

My Lord,

My duty to you and the Kingdom (whose good and peace I most desire and shall
most faithfully endeavor) calls for this account, which (with my self and
these gentlemen) I leave to your Lordships consideration with this conclusion;
That whatever is commanded by Authority (especially that of Parliament) though
never so contrary to my sense or honor, shall never be disobeyed by.

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and humble Servant TO. HAMMOND.
Carisbrooke Castle, Nov. 19. 1647. My Lord,
Since the conclusion of my letter, I received the letter, and Votes of both
Houses, of the 16. present, which shall be carefully put in execution by,

Your Lordships most faithful and humble servant TO. HAMMON.



November 24. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.


