HIS Majesty's PRAYERS Which He used in time of h^^ SUFFERINGS. Delivered To
Doctor Juxon, Bishop (...) London, immediately before his Death, With his
several Speeches to hi^ Children, (Viz.) the Duke of Gloucester, and the Lady
Elizabeth.

And A Letter from the Prince to the King his Father.

April 16 Printed at London, Anno. Dom. 1649.

A Prayer in time of Captivity.
O Powerful and Eternal God! to whom nothing is so great that it may resist;
or so small, that it is contemned; look upon My misery with thine eye of Mercy,
and let thy infinite power vouch-safe to limit out some proportion of
deliverance unto Me, as to thee shall seem most convenient; let not injury, O
Lord, triumph over Me; and let My faults by thy hand be corrected; and make not
My unjust Enemies be Ministers of thy Justice: But yet My God, if in thy
wisdom, this be the aptest chastisement for My unexcusable transgressions; if
this ingratfull bondage the fittest for My over-high desires; if the pride of
My (not enough humbled) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto Thy
will, and cheerfully embrace what sorrow Thou will have Me suffer: Only thus
much let Me crave of Thee (let My craving O Lord, be accepted of since it even
proceeds from Thee) that by Thy goodness which is Thy self, Thou will suffer
some beam of Thy Majesty so to shine in My mind, that I, who in My greatest
afflictions acknowledge it My Noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still
depend confidently on Thee. Let Calamity be the exercise, but not the overthrow
of My virtue. O let not their prevailing power be to my destruction. And if it
be Thy will that they more and more vex Me with punishment, yet, O Lord, never
let their wickedness have such a hand, but that I may still carry a pure mind
and steadfast resolution ever to serve Thee, without fear or presumption, yet
with that humble confidence which may best please Thee; so that at the last I
may come to Thy eternal Kindome, through the Merits of thy Son our alone
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another PRAYER.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, look down upon Me Thy unworthy servant,
who here prostrare My self at the Footstool of Thy Throne of Grace, but look
upon Me, O Father, through the Meditation and in the Merits of Jesus Christ, in
whom thou art only well pleased; for of my self I am not worthy to stand
before Thee, or to speak with my unclean lips to Thee most holy and eternal
God; for as in sin I was conceived and borne, so likewise I have broken all thy
Commandments by My sinful motions, unclean thoughts, evil words, and wicked
works; omiting many duties I ought, todo, and committing many vices which thou
have forbiden under pain of thy heavy displeasure: as for My sins, O Lord, they
are innumerable; wherefore I stand here liable to all the miseries in this
life, and everlasting torments in that to come, if Thou should deal with Me
according to My deserts. I confess O Lord, that it is thy mercy (which
endures for ever) and Thy compassion (which never fails) which is the cause
that I have not been long ago consumed: but with Thee there is mercy and
plenteous Redemption; in the multitude therefore of Thy mercies, and by the
merits of Jesus Christ, I entreat Thy divine Majesty, that thou would not
enter into judgment with Thy servant, nor be extreme to mark what is done
amiss, but be thou merciful unto Me, and wash away all My sins with that
precious blood that My Savior shed for Me. And I beseech Thee, O Lord, not
only to wash away all My sins, but also to purge My heart by thy holy Spirit,
from the dross of My natural corruption; and as thou do add days to My
life, so good Lord, I beseech thee, to add repentance to my days, that when I
have past this mortal life, I may be partaker of thy everlasting Kingdom,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer by Confession, made in and for the time of affliction.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, as it is only Thy goodness that admits of
our imperfect Prayers, and the knowledge that Thy mercies are infinite, which
can give us any hope of thy accepting or granting them; so it is our bounden
and necessary duty to confess our sins freely unto Thee; and of all men
living, I have most need, most reason so to do, no man having bin so much
obliged by Thee, no man more grievously offending Thee: that degree of
knowledge which thou have given Me, adding likewise to the guilt of My
transgressions. For was it through ignorance, that I suffered innocent blood to
be shed by a false pretended way of justice? or that I permitted a wrong way of
Thy worship, to be set up in Scotland? And injured the Bishops in England? O
no; but with shame and grief I confess, that I therein followed the
persuasions of worldly wisdom, forsaking the dictates of a right informed
Conscience. Wherefore, O Lord, I have no excuse to make, no hope left, but in
the multitude of thy mercies; for I know My repentance is weak, and My prayers
faulty: Grant therefore merciful Father, so to strengthen My repentance, and
amend My prayers, that Thou may clear the way for Thine own mercies, to
which O let thy Justice at last give place, putting a speedy end to My deserved
afflictions. In the mean time give Me patience to endure Constancy against
temptations, and a discerning Spirit, to choose what is best for Thy Church and
people, which Thou have committed to My Charge. Grant this, O most merciful
Father, for Thy Son Jesus Christ's sake our only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of iminent Danger
O Most merciful Father, though My sins are so many and grievous, that I may
rather expect the effects of Thy anger, than so great a deliverance, as to free
Me from My present great dangers; yet o Lord, since Thy mercies are over all
thy works, and thou never failest to relieve all those who with humble and
unfeigned repentance come to Thee for succor, it were to multiply, not diminish
My transgressions, to despair of thy heavenly favor: wherefore I humbly desire
Thy Divine Majesty, that Thou will not only pardon all My sins, but also free
me out of the hands, and protect Me from the malice of My cruel Enemies. But
if thy wrath against My hanious offenses will not otherways be satisfied, then
by suffering Me to fall under my present afflictions, Thy will be done, yet
with humble importunity, I do, and shall ever leave to implore the assistance
of thy heavenly Spirit, that My cause, as I am Thy Vicegerent may not suffer
through my weakness, want of courage. O Lord so strengthen and enlighten all
the faculties of My mind, that with clearness I may show forth thy Truth, and
manfully endure this bloody Trial, that so My sufferings here may not only
glorify Thee, but likewise be a furtherance to My salvation hereafter. Grant
this, o merciful Father, for his sake who suffered for Me, even Jesus Christ
the Righteous. Amen.

FINIS.
A Copy of a Letter which was sent from the PRINCE to the KING; Dated from the
Hague Jan. 23. 1648.
SIR,
HAving no means to come to the knowledge of your Majesty's present condition.
but such as I receive from the Prints, or (which is as uncertain) report, I
have sent this bearer Seamour to wait upon your Majesty, and to bring me an
account of it: that I may withal assure your Majesty, I do not only pray for
your Majesty according to my Duty: but shall always be ready to do all which
shall be in my power, to deserve that blessing which I now humbly beg of your
Majesty upon

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Son and servant CHARLES.
Hague Jan. 23. 1648.
The Subscription was thus, For the King.
Monday 29 January, 1648.
A true Relation of the RINGS Speech to the Lady Elizabeth, and the Duke of
Gloucester, the day before his Death,

HIs Children being come to meet Him, He first gave His blessing to the Lady
Elizabeth, and bad her remember to tell her brother James, when ever she
should see him, That it was his Fathers last desire, that he should no more
look upon Charles as his eldest brother only, but be obedient unto him, as his
Sovereign, and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers
enemies. Then said the King to her, Sweetheart you will forget this: No (said she)
I shall never forget it while I live: and pouring forth abundance of Tears,
promised Him to write down the particulars.

Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon His knee, said, Sweet heart,
now they will cut off thy Fathers Head, (upon which words the Child looked very
steadfastly on him) Mark Child what I say, They will cut off my Head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, You must not be a King, so long
as your brother Charles and James do live. For they will cut off your Brothers
heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at the last: and
therefore I charge you, do not be made a King by them: At which the Child
sighing, said, I will be torn in pieces first. Which falling so unexpectedly
from one so young, it made the King rejoice exceedingly

Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeth's own Hand.
WHat the King said to me the 29 of Janua. 1648. being the last time I had the
happiness to see Him, He told me, He was glad I was come, and although he had
not time to say much, yet somewhat he had to say to me, which he had not to
another, or leave in writing because He feared their cruelty was such, as that
they would not have permitted Him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve
and torment my self for Him, for that would be a glorious death that He should
die, it being for the Laws and Liberties of this Land, and for maintaining the
true Protestant Religion. He bid me read Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hockers
Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bishop Lauds Book against Fisher, which would
ground me against Popery. He told me he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped
God would forgive them also, and commanded Us, and all the rest of my Brothers
and Sisters to forgive them. He bid me tell my Mother, that His thoughts had
never strayed from Her, and that His love should be the same to the last.
Withal He commanded me and my Brother to be obedient to Her, and bid me send
His blessing to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendation to all
His friends: so after He had given me His blessing I took my leave.

Further, He commanded Us all to forgive those people, but never to trust them,
for they had been most false to Him, and to those that gave them power, and he
feared also to their own souls, and desired me not to grieve for Him, for he
should die a Martyr, And that he doubted not but the Lord would settle His
Throne upon His Son, and that we should be all happier, than we could have
expected to have been, if he had lived: With many other things, which at
present I cannot remember.

ELIZABETH.

Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeth.
THe King said to the Duke of Gloucester, that he would say nothing to him but
what was for the good of his soul: He told him, that He heard that the Army
intended to make him King, but it was a thing not for him to take upon him, if
he regarded the welfare of his soul, for he had two Brothers before him, and
therefore commanded him upon His blessing, never to accept of it, unless it
redounded lawfully upon him and commanded him to fear the Lord and he would
provide for him.

FINIS.

