His Majesty's PAPER Containing several Questions propounded to the
Commissioners Divines Touching Episcopacy. With an humble Answer returned to
his Majesty by Mr. Marshall, Mr. Vines, Mr. Carill, and Mr. Seaman 4. October
1648.

Published by Authority. DIEV ET MON DROIT



London printed by Moses Bell, 9 October. 1648.

SIR:
I Have received your Letter of the 28. of September, for which I give you many
thanks, and to satisfy you that the Treaty goes on; I have sent you what
has passed here of late, which is as follows: Upon occasion of debate upon
the Proposition of the Church, in which his Majesty makes diverse scruples of
Conscience, there was a concession that our Ministers, (that is, Mr. Marshall,
Mr. Vines, Mr. Carill, and Mr. Seaman) should attend his Majesty, to remove
such objections as he should please to make, and accordingly on Monday morning
they waited on his Majesty, to whom the King delivered these enclosed
Questions; whereunto they have returned this Answer now also sent. These
Propositions of the Church are still under debate, and will take up this week
or more in the consideration of them: which being once granted (as some are of
opinion they will be) we may thereby hope for a very speedy consent to all the
rest. Commend me to all my friends, whose names I purposely omit, and rest

Newport in the Isle of Wight, 4. of October, 1648. Yours to Command: W. M.

Charles R.

I Conceive that Episcopal Government is most consonant to the Word of God,
and of an Apostolical institution, as it appears by the Act. 14. 23 Acts 6. 6
1 Cor. 16. 1 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor 5. 3 3 John 9. 10 1 Timothy 5. 22. Titus 1. 5 Rev.
2. 3 Chap. 1 Timothy 5. 19. Tit. 3. 10
Scripture, to have been practiced by Apostles themselves, and by them
committed, and derived to particular persons as their Substitutes or Successors
therein (as for ordaining Presbyters and Deacons, giving rules concerning
Christian Discipline, and exercising Censures over Presbyters and others) and
has ever since to these last times been exercised by Bishops in all the
Churches of Christ, and therefore I cannot in Conscience consent to abolish the
said Government; notwithstanding this my persuasion I shall be glad to be
informed, if our Savior and the Apostles did so leave the Church at liberty as
they might totally alter or change the Church Government at their pleasure:
which if you can make appear to me, then I will confess that one of my great
Scruples is clean taken away: And then there only remains;

That being by my Coronation Oath obliged to maintain Episcopal Government,
as I found it settled to my hands: whither I may consent to the abolishing
thereof until the same shall be evidenced to me to be contrary to the Word of
God.

Newport, 2. October. 1648.
An humble Answer returned to your Majesty's Paper delivered to us, October. 2.
1648.
May it please Your Majesty:
WE do fully agree without haesitation, That these Scriptures cited in the
margent of your Paper, Acts 14. 23. Acts 6. 6. 1 Cor. 16. 1. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor.
5. 3. 3 John 9. 10. do prove, That the Apostles did ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, give rules concerning Christian Discipline, and had power of
exercising censures over Presbyters and others; and that these places of
Scripture, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 19. Titus 3. 10. do prove, That
Timothy and Titus had power to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, and to exercise
Censures over others; and that the second and third Chapters of the Revelations
do prove, That the Angels of the Churches had power of governing of the
Churches, and exercising Censures: But that either the Apostles, or Timothy and
Titus, or the Angels of the Churches were Bishops, as Bishops are distinct from
Presbyters, exercising Episcopal Government in that sense; or that the
Apostles did commit and derive to any particular persons as their Substitutes
and Successors, any such Episcopal Government; or that this is proved in the
least measure by the Scriptures alleged, we do as fully deny; And therefore
do humbly deny also, That Episcopal Government is therefore most consonant to
the Word of God, and of Apostolical institution, or proved so to be by these
Scriptures. None of these were Bishops, or practiced Episcopal Government, as
Bishops are distinct from Presbytery; neither is such an Officer of the Church
as a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, to be found in the new Testament (by
which we humbly conceive, That our faith and conscience touching this point
ought to be concluded: The Name, Office, and work of Bishop and Presbyter
being one and the same in all things, and never in the least distinguished, as
is clearly evident, Tit. 1. 5, 7. For this cause left I thee in Creete, that
thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters
in every City, as I had appointed thee, for a Bishop must be blameless. In
which place the Apostles reasoning were altogether invalid and inconsequent, if
Presbyter and Bishop were not the same Office, as well as they have the same
name.

The same is manifest, Acts 20 17, 28. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and
called the Presbyters of the Church, to whom he gave this charge, verse. 28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flocks over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Bishops; to feed and govern the Church of God: Where we
observe, That the Apostle being to leave these Presbyters, and never to see
their faces more, verse. 38. does charge them with the feeding and governing of
the Church, as being Bishops of the Holy Ghosts making: But that the Holy Ghost
did make any superior or higher kind of Bishops than these common Presbyters,
is not to be found in that, or any other Text.

And that under the mouth of two or three witnesses this assertion of ours may
stand; we add to what we have already said, That in the first of Peter 5. 1,
2. The Presbyters which are among you, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter, feed
the flock of God which is among you; Performing the Office of Bishops. Where it
appears plain to us, That under the words used in this place, is expressed
whatsoever work the Presbyters do, more for the Government or good of the
Church, otherwise than is there expressly enjoined unto Presbyters. By all which
that has been said, The point is rendered most clear to the judgment of most
men, both ancient and of latter times, That there is no such Officer to be
found in the Scriptures of the new Testament, as a Bishop distinct from a
Presbyter: Neither does the Scripture afford us the least notice of any
qualification required in a Bishop, that is not required in a Presbyter; nor
any Ordination to the Office of a Bishop, distinct from a Presbyter; nor any
work or duty charged upon a Bishop, which Presbyters are not enjoined to do;
nor any greater honor or dignity put upon them. For that double honor which
the Apostles speak of, 1 Timothy 5. 17. As due to Presbyters that rule well, is
with a note of especially affixed to that act or work of laboring in the Word
of Doctrine; which is not that act wherein Bishops have challenged a
singularity or peculiar eminency above the Presbyter.

To that which your Majesty does conceive, That Episcopal Government was
practiced by Apostles themselves; We humbly answer, That the Apostles, as they
were the highest officers of the Church of Christ, so they were Extraordinary
in respect of their Commission and gifts, and office, and distinguished form
all other officers, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church; First
Apostles, Secondly Prophets, Thirdly Teachers Ephefians. 4. 1. 1. Christ gave
some Apostle, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pasters, and
some Teachers; Whereby the Apostles are distinguished from Pastors, and Teachers
who are the ordinary Officers of the Church for Preaching the word, and
Government: that they had power and authority to ordain Church Officers, and
to exercise censures in all Churches we affirm, and withal, that no other
Persons or Officers of the Church may challenge or assume to themselves such
power in that respect alone, because the Apostles practiced it, except such
power belong unto them in common, as well as to the Apostles, by warrant of the
Scripture, for that Government which they practiced was Apostolical, according
to that peculiar Commission and Authority which they had, and no otherwise to
be called Episcopal; then, as their Office was so comprehensive as they had
power to do the work of any, or all other Church Officers; In which respect
they call themselves Presbyteri, Deaconi, (but never Episcopi in distinct
sense) and therefore we humbly crave leave to say, That to argue the Apostles
to have practiced Episcopal Government, because they ordained other Officers,
and exercised censures, is, as if we should argue a Justice of Peace to be a
Constable, because he does that which a Constable does in some particulars. Its
manifest that the Office of Bishops and Presbyters were not distinct in the
Apostles, they did not Act as Bishops in some Acts, and as Presbyters in other
Acts; The distinction of Presbyters and Bishops being made by men in after
times.

And whereas your Majesty does conceive, That the Episcopal Government, was by
the Apostles committed and delivered to particular persons, as their
Substitutes or Successors therein (as for ordaining Presbyters and Deacons,
giving rules concerning Christian Discipline, and exercising censures over
Presbyters and others) seeming by the alleged places of Scriptures to
instance in Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the Churches. We humbly answer*

1 And first to that of Timothy and Titus, we grant, That Timothy and Titus had
authority and power of ordaining Presbyters and Deacons, and of exercising
censures over Presbyters and others, though we cannot say they had this power
as the Apostles Substitutes or Successors in Episcopal Government, nor that
they exercised the power they had, as being Bishops in the sense of your
Majesty, but as extraordinary Officers or Evangelists, which Evangelists were
an Office in the Church, distinct from Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians 4. 11.
And that they were Evangelists, it appears by their being sent up and down by
the Apostles, or taken along with them in company to several Churches, as the
necessity and occasion of the Church did require; the one of them being
expressly called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. And neither of them being any where
in Scriptures called Bishop, neither were they fixed to Ephesus and Creet, as
Bishops in the Churches committed to them, but removed from thence to other
places, and never, for ought appears in Scriptures, returned to them again:
And it seems clear to us, that neither their abode at Ephesus and Creet was
for any long time, nor so intended by the Apostle, for he imployes them there
upon occasional business, and expresses himself in such manner, (I besought
thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou might
charge some, that they teach no other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 13. For this cause
left I thee in Creet, Titus 1. 5. As does not carry the fixing or constituting
of a Bishop in a place as a perpetual Governor: And it is as manifest, that
they were both of them called away from these places, 2 Timothy 4. 9 Do thy
diligence to come to me shortly, Titus, 3. 12. Be diligent to come to me to
Nicapolis; so that they may as well be called Bishops of other City, or Church
where they had any considerable abode, as they are pretended to have been of
Ephesus and Creet, as they are called by the Postscripts of these Apostles, the
credit of which Postscripts we cannot build upon in this point.

2 Secondly, to that of the Angels of the Churches, the Ministers of the
Churches are called Stars and Angels, which Denominations are Metaphorical and
a Mystery, Rev. el 1. 20. The Mystery of the seven Stars, Angels in
respect of their mission or sending; St^^^ in respect of their station and
shining. And it seems strange to us, that so many express testimonies of
Scriptures, and allegorical denominations or mysteries should be opposed;
These Angels being no where called Bishops in vulgar acceptance* nor the word
Bishop used in any of John's writings, who calls himself Presbiter, nor any
mention of superiority of one Presbiter to another, but in Diotrophes effecting
it. And as to that which may be said that Epistles are directed to one; We
answer that an number of persons are in the mysterious and Prophetique writings
expressed in singulars. And we humbly conceive that being written in an
Epistolary style (for they are as Letters or Epistles to the Churches) these
writings are directed as Letters to collective or representative bodies use to
be; that is to one, but are intended and meant to the body in meeting
assembled* which that they were so intended, is clear to us, both because
there were in Ephesus Bishops, and Presbiters one and the same, to whom the
Apostle at his farewell commended the Government of the Church, and by diverse
expressions in these Epistles, as Revel. 2. 24. To you and to the rest in
Thyatira, by which distinction of you and the rest, we conceive the
Church-governments (which were more then one) and the people to be signified,
and so cannot consent that any singular person had majority over the rest, or
sole power of exercising Church censures and Government spoken of in these
Chapters.

Having thus (as we humbly conceive) proved by pregnant places of Scripture
compared together, that the Apostles themselves did not institute or practice
Episcopal Government, nor commit and derive it to particular persons as their
substitutes or successors therein. We shall in further discharge of our duty
to, and for, the more clear and full satisfaction of your Majesty in this
point, briefly declare into what Officers hands, the ordinary and standing
offices of the Church were transmitted and derived by, and from the Apostles.
The Apostles had no Successors in eundem gradum: The Apostolical office was
not derived by succession, being instituted by Christ, by extraordinary and
special commission; but for the ordinary and standing use and service of the
Church, there were ordained only two orders of offices, viz. Bishops and
Deacons, which the Apostle expresses, Phil. 1. 1. To all the Saints in Christ
Jesus which are at Phillipi, with the Bishops and Deacons; And only of them
does the Apostle give the due characters of Officers: I Tim. 3. 2. 8: From both
which places of Scripture we conclude with ancient Expositors both Greek and
Latin, that Bishops are the same with Presbiters, and besides Presbiters,
there is no mention of any other Order, but that of Deacons; of both which
Orders there were in the Apostles times, in one City more then one, as in
Philippi and Ephesus. And we humbly offer to your Majesty as observable; That
though one order might be superior to another order, yet in the same order of
Officers, there was not any one superior to others of the same order; No
Apostle was above an Apostle, no Evangelist above an Evangelist, no Presbiter
above a Presbiter, no Deacon above a Deacon: And so we conclude this part, that
since Church Officers are instituted and set in the Church by God, or Christ
Jesus; And that Ordination by or in which the Office is conveyed is of no other
Officers but of Presbyters and Deacons; therefore there are no other orders of
ordinary and standing Officers in the Churches of Christ.

As for the ages immediately succeeding the Apostles, we answer,

First, Our faith reaches no further then the holy Scriptures; no humane
testimony can beget any more then an humane faith.

Secondly, We answer, that it is agreed upon by learned men, as well such as
contend for Episcopacy as others; that the times immediately succeeding the
Apostles, are very dark in respect of the History of the Church.

Thirdly, That the most unquestionable record of those times, gives clear
testimony to our assertion, viz. The Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians, who
reciting the Order of Church Officers, expressly limits them to two Bishops, and
Deacons; And they whom in one place he called Bishops, he always afterward
names Presbyters. The Epistles of Ignatius pretend indeed to the next
Antiquity, but are by some suspected as wholly spurious, and proved by Videlius
to be so mixed, that it is hard if not impossible to know what parts of them
are genuine. Besides Bishop Usher in his last observations on them. Cap 18.
Page, 238. confesses that of the twelve of his epistles, six are counterfeit,
the other fix mixed, and none of them in every respect accounted sincere and
genuine.

Fourthly, We grant that not long after the Apostles times, Bishops in some
superiority to Presbiters, are by the writers of those times reported to be in
the Church, but they were set up not as a Divine Institution, but as an
Ecclesiastical, (as afterward both Archbishops and Patriarchs were,) which
is clear by Doctor Reynolds his Epistle to Sir Francis Knowles, wherein he
shows out of Bishop Jewel, that Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, and
many more holy Fathers, together with the Apostle Paul, agree that by the word
of God there is no difference between a Presbyter and a Bishop; And that Medina
in the Council of Trent affirms not only the same Fathers but also another
Jerome; Theodoret, Primatius, Sedulius, and Theophilact, to be of the same
judgment: and that with them agreed Occuminius, Anselme Archbishop of
Canturbury, and another Anselme; Gregory and Gratian, and after them many
others; that it was inrol'd in the Canon Law for sound and catholic doctrine,
and publicly taught by learned men, and adds, that all who have labored in
the reformation of the Church for these five hundred years, have taught that
all Pastors, be they instituted Bishops or Priests, have equal authority and
power by Gods word. The same way goes Lumbard Master of the sentences, and
Father of the Schoolmen, who speaking of Presbyters and Deacons, says the
Primitive Churches had those Orders only; and that we have the Apostles precept
for them alone; with him agree many of the most eminent of that kind, and
generally all the Cannonists; to these we may add Sextus Senensis, who
testifies for himself and many others, and Cassander who was called by one of
the Germane Emperors, as one of singular ability and integrity, to inform him
and resolve his conscience in questions of that nature, who saits it is agreed
among all in the Apostles times, there was no difference betwixt a Bishop and a
Presbiter.

For a conclusion we add, that the doctrine which we have here in propounded
to your Majesty concerning the identity of the Order of Bishops and Presbiters,
is no other then the Doctrine published by King Henry the eight, 1543. For all
his Subjects to receive, seen and allowed by the Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, with the nether House of Parliament: of these two Orders only (so
says his Book) that is to say, Priests and Deacons, the Scripture makes
express mention, and how they were conferred of by the Apostles by prayer, and
imposition of their hands; by all which it seems evident that the order of
Episcopacie, as distinct from Presbiters, is but an Ecclesiastical
Institution, and therefore not unalterable.

Lastly we answer, that that Episcopal Government which at first obtained in
the Church did really and substantially differ from Episcopal Government,
which the Honorable Houses of Parliament desire the abolition of. The Bishop
of these times was one presiding in, and joining with the Presbytry of his
Church ruling with them, and not without them, either created and made by the
Presbiters choosing out one among themselves, as in Rome and Alexandria, or
chosen by the Church, and confirmed by three or more of his neighbors of like
dignity within the same precinct. Lesser Towns and Villages had and might have
had Bishops in them as well as populous and eminent Cities, until the Council
of Sardis decreed that Villages and small Cities should have no Bishops, least
the name and authority of a Bishop might thereby come into contempt; but of one
claiming as his due and right to himself alone, as a Superior order or
degree, all power about Ordination of Presbiters and Deacons, and all
jurisdictions either to exercise himself, or deligate to whom he will of the
Laity or Clergy, as they distinguish according to the judgment and practice of
these in our times; we read not till the latter and corrupter ages of the
Church.

By all which it appears, that the present Hierarchy, (the abolition whereof
is desired by the Honorable Houses may accordingly be abolished;) and yet
possibly the Bishops of these Primitive times might be, they are so far
differing one from another.

In answer to that part of your Majesty's Paper, wherein you inquire whether
our Savior and his Apostles did so leave the Church at liberty, as they might
totally alter or change the Church Government at their pleasure; we humbly
conceive, that there are substantials belonging to Church Government, such are
appointed by Christ and his Apostles, which are not in the Churches liberty to
alter at pleasure: But as for Archbishops etc. we hope it will appear unto
your Majesty's conscience, that they are none of the Church Governors
appointed by our Savior and his Apostles; we beseech your Majesty, rather to
look to the original of them then Succession.

FINIS.

