royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the King.

A Proclamation for obedience to the Laws ordained for establishing of the
true Religion in this Kingdom of England.
HIs MAJESTY considering that it is a duty most beseeming, and that most
obliges Sovereign Authority in a Christian King, to be careful (above all
other things) of preserving and advancing the Honor and Service of Almighty
God, and the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church, to which end His Majesty
with His Parliament has it under consideration, how all just scruples might be
removed. And being in the mean time sensible that the present division,
separation and disorder about the Worship and Service of God, as it is
established by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, in the Church of England,
tends to great distraction and confusion, and may endanger the subversion of
the very essence and substance of true Religion; Has resolved for the
preservation of Unity and Peace (which is most necessary at this time for the
Church of England) to require Obedience to the Laws and Statutes ordained for
establishing of the true Religion in this Kingdom, whereby the Honor of God
may be advanced to the great comfort and happiness both of His Majesty and
His good Subjects.

His Majesty does therefore charge and command, That Divine Service be
performed in this His Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, as is
appointed by the Laws, and Statutes established in this Realm, and that
obedience be given by all His Subjects Ecclesiastical, and Temporal to the
said Laws, and Statutes concerning the same. And that all Judges, Officers, and
ministers Ecclesiastical, and Temporal according to Justice, and their
respective duties do put the said Acts of Parliament in due execution against
all wilful Contemners, and Disturbers of Divine Service, contrary to the said
Laws, and Statutes.

His Majesty does further command, That no Parsons, Vicars, or Curates in
their several Parishes shall presume to introduce any Rite, or Ceremonies
other then those which are established by the Laws, and Statutes of the Land.

Given at His Majesty's Palace of White Hall, the tenth day of December, in
the seventeenth year of his Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


