THE KINGS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS MESSAGE SENT To His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax; wherein He declares His gracious will and pleasure, concerning His
coming to London; as also some remarkable Passages touching the General and
His ARMY.

CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for Lawrence Gibson 1647

The Kings MAJESTY'S Gracious MESSAGE SENT To his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, concerning the proceedings of the Citizens of London, etc.
SIR,
HAving seriously weighed and considered the late distractions within the City
of London, and the great aspersions that have been cast upon the Kings Royal
Majesty, concerning the late tumults in the said City, I thought my self
oblieg'd, to represent unto you these ensuing lines, for the better clearing of
this great scandal and dishonor said upon his Royal person, all which is
false, for his Majesty ever detested all tumults, and never had the least
thought of complying with the new raised Army, as will appear by this ensuing
Message, sent from the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax; which Message was brought by Sir John Ashburnham, consisting of
these particulars, as follows:

1. That His Majesty does really acquit hims^lf^ of the great scandal cast
upon Him by the d^s^ffected Party within the City of London, and elsewhere,
concerning the late tumults raised within the said city.

2. That his Majesty does disclaim the said tumults, testifying a great
dislike thereof, accounting it a dishonorable action if he should have thought
to be brought to London in such a tumultuous manner.

3. That he d^sires rather to rely on his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
the Army under his immediate command, concerving that to be more safe and
honorable.

It is said, that his Majesty writ this Letter with his own hand, a day or two
before the Agr^ement betwixt the City and Army, and that He were resolved to
have sent it speedily to the General, but that it could not be finished time
enough.

But after the said Letter was fully finished, the Kings Majesty immediately
dispatched Sir John Ashburnham with it to his Excellency, that so the General
might more fully understand the real intentions of his Majesty's heart. One
thing makes the Souldie^y very pleasant (although they have many weary march)
viz. that diverse times when they are drawn up in a Body, his Maj. will ride to
the head of every Troop, giving them many a Princely smile, etc. But upon their
march, it is somewhat tedious for them, for his Maj. continually keeps upon
his hand gallop, especially when he is mounted upon his Dun Nag.

A further Relation of the proceedings of the Kings Majesty, touching the
present affairs of the Army, etc.
SIR,
HIs Majesty is very pleasant, and merry, and (as it is said) very well pleased
and satisfied with the present affairs of the army, saying, that it is a far
more honorable action, to rely on his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
army under his immediate command, touching his coming to London, then to have
harbored the least thought of being conveyed to London by any of the contrary
party, who were active in the late design against the army. Although diverse
times his Majesty has been pressed thereunto by many great Ones who have
repaired to the Court, oftentimes moving his Majesty therein.

But He always disclaimed the same, testifying a great dislike thereof, and
(as it is reported) was the first that discovered their private intentions, and
wicked design, of conveying his Majesty from the army.

Whereupon, notice being given to diverse of his Excellencies Commanders there
present, it was ordered that all such persons, that held correspondency with
the adverse Party, then under command of Poyntz and Massy, should immediately
depart the Court, which was accordingly performed; for one Mr. Wood, a
Reformado under the command of our renowned Lieutenant General Cromwell, were
very active in the executing of this order, and would not suffer a man to
recide at Court, which was found any ways diseffected to the public good, and
peace of this Kingdom.

His Majesty is desirous to see London, and we expect orders daily when we shall
march which is supposed to be speedily, so soon as the distractions with you
can be settled, and the late differences composed, which we desire may be
speedily.

The Kings servants are very loving to the Soldiery, giving them all the
respects and accommodat^o^ that may be, both in the Celler, and elsewhere; for
every night we have plenty of Beer upon the Guard, and all other necessaries
which can with convenience be afforded. Thus having given you a brief account
of the present proceedings, I remain,

Windsor 6. of August. 1647. Yours to his power, John Wilson.

FINIS.

