THE KINGS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious LETTER TO HIS Son, his Highness JAMES
Duke of York: Written with his Majesty's OWN HAND. Read in both Houses of
Parliament. ALSO A Letter from his Highness Prince Charles, sent from France,
to the Estates and Common Council of (and concerning) Jersey, and the managing
of Designs for the Kings Majesty, and those who have adhered to Him.

And a Declaration from the Agitators in the name of the whole Army under His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax (to their fellow Soldiers) of their
Representations and Desires.

July 15. 1647.

THese are true Copies, and that from the King was written with his Majesty's
own hand, and read in both Houses of Parliament. Signed, CHARLES REX.

LONDON Printed by Moses Bell near Christ-Church, and Robert Ibbitson in
Smithfield mere Hosier Lane end. 1647.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S most Gracious LETTER TO HIS Son, his Highness James,
Duke of York, written with His Majesty's own Hand; Read in both Houses of
PARLIAMENT.
CHARLES R.

JAMES, I am in hope, that you may be permited, with your Brother, and Sister,
to come to some place, betwixt this and London, where I may see you:

To this end therefore; I command you, to ask leave of the two Houses, to make
a journey (if it may be) for a night or two.

But rather then not to see you; I will be content that ye come to some
convenient place to dine, and go back at night.

And foreseeing the fear of your being brought within the power of the Army,
as I am, may be objected, to hinder this my desire:

I have full assurance from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Chief Officers, that
there will be no interruption, or impediment, made by them, for your return,
how, and when ye please.

So God bless you.

Casam 4 July 1647. Your loving Father Charles Rex.
Postscript,
Send me word as soon as you can of the time, and place, where I shall have
the contentment of seeing you, your brother; and sister.



A LETTER FROM His Highness Prince Charles, sent FROM FRANCE.
Charles P.

TRusty and well-beloved, greeting; we are so abundantly satisfied of your
good affections, and fidelity to us (of which we have had a full experience)
and we have so great an Interest to the tranquillity and safety of your Island:
That we are now no less vigilant to prevent any dangers, or disturbances that
may threaten it, then at the time when we were in person with you. Therefore
being advertised (by the intellegences that we have received from London) that
those seditious fugitives of the said Island (who have confiscated their lives
and Estates, to the King our Father) now residing with the Rebels, do pretend
to have a firm, and assured correspendency, and a party in the Island, ready
to join with them (by which they hope to procure, that forces may be sent to
invade the said Island.) We have commanded our trusty and well-beloved Servant
Sir George Carteret Knight (Vice Chamberlain of our House, and Leivetenant
Governor of the said Island) to use the greatest deligence, and industry that
possibly he may, for the discovery of such ill affected persons yet remaining
there, with whom it is most probable that those fugitives have correspondency:
And that all such persons who may be justly suspected to be affected toward
them, and that (in case of any attempt) would probably join with them, be
imprisoned forthwith, or expelled out of the Island during this Summer; the
which being faithfully effected (of which we doubt not your accomplishment) it
will the better give those of London to understand, how little assistance they
are to expect from the Inhabitants of the same. And (by that means) further
mischeife will be prevented. And (to the end that this design may the more
regulerly be proceeded in, and exactly put in execution: We have thought it
convement: (and by these presents we desire and require you) that you join,
and give all assistance (that possibly you may) to the said Sir George Carteret
Knight, to put in execution these our commands, so necessary: there being no
expedient more apparent to prevent all troubles, and inconveniences, that may
happen unto you, then such public declaration of unanimitie and perfect
resolutions amongst your selves, under our protection. And be ye assured that
if any attempt be made against you, we shall be as careful to assist,
preserve, and defend you, as if we were our selves with you. And as your
fidelity to the King my Father, to the Crown of England; and your particular
affections toward our person, has been (more than ordinary) eminent: We think
therefore that we have not done our part until that (besides our gracious,
and general acceptance) we have set a notable mark of the esteem that we
have of that Island and the Inhabitants thereof, that may be public to the
view of the world, and everlasting to posterity. And so we bid you farewell.

Given at the Castle de Louver in Paris Ma. 22. 1647.
To our well-beloved Subjects, the Estates And Common Council of the Island of
Jarsey.
A Declaration from the Agitators in the name of the whole Army under his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax (to their fellow Soldiers) of their
Representations and Desires.
Gentlemen and fellow Soldiers;
YOu being Members of the same Body with us, it cannot besupposed that we
should be altogether insensible of your sad sufferings and pressing grievances,
or distrustful of your Fidelity and Constant Resolutions, to stick unanimousty
to us in pursuance of our Just and Lawful Designs, tending to our and your
timely relief, and the Peace and welfare of the Kingdom. We are not ignorant
of the temptations whereunto you are liable, having so many discouragments by
reason of your want of Pay and distance from us, as also the mis-representation
of us and our proceedings, whereby you may be in danger, either to leave your
Station, and seek redress elsewhere, or to desert us and our Just Cause
through misinformation; we have therefore thought fit to present our selves to
you thus, viz.

WE seeing our selves and the whole Kingdom laid open to oppression and injury
through the malice and wicked contrivances of unjust Men, have been
necessitated to put on Man-like Resolutions, and accordingly to act for our
Lives, and the Lives of our Fellow Soldiers, who have faithfully served the
State, which were wickedly sold into the Jaws of Tyranny and unheard of
Cruelty, to satisfy the unlimited Lusts of perverse men: And finding no other
remedy left us but with our Swords in our hands, to prosecute the Enemies of
our Peace, and endeavor to bring them to condign punishment. We have folemnly
engaged our selves not to disband until we have obtained some security of our
Lives and just Liberties, and settled this distracted Nation in Peace and Quiet.

But least our intentions should be presented to you in a false Glass, we have
thought good to let you see the inside of our undertakings, and the sincere
intentions of our hearts in our present proceedings. It is not our own
interests, or setting up of our own advantage, or the feeding of our own
Lusts, that is in our eye or aim; But it is the glory of God, the just
preservation and safety of the Kings Person, the just Privileges of
Parliament, the redeeming of the Lives and Liberties of the Free-People of
England, from Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice; the maintenance of just
Laws, and the necessary support and defense of this Kingdom, together with
the free and impartial distribution of Justice to all, which we have made our
aim: And when these our ends shall be obtained, and means for the continuance
thereof established, we shall acquiesse, and be ready either to lay down
Arms, or otherwise to be employed for the service of the Commonwealth; And
that you may be, not only willing, (as we believe you are) but also able to
prosecute effectually the same things with us, we shall offer this advice to
you. I. That you will not suffer your selves to be broken in pieces by any
discouragements, but unite your selves in Love, and strengthen one another in
Resolution to keep your standing, and perform the Trust reposed in you, in
that place of strength and consequence wherein you are. II. That you would not
(upon any pretended Order whatsoever) betray your Trust, or deliver up your
Garrison into the Hands of any, until you shall receive Commands from our
General, whose Warrant only is able to bear you out in it. III. That you
would endeavor to hold correspondence with us, by appointing some faithful
men, who may (at all times) acquaint us with your condition, and receive such
intimation from us as may concern you.


And be you assured, That we shall at all times faithfully stand by you in all
just and lawful proceedings, and make all your sufferings our own, and
endeavor to the atmost of our abilities to manifest our selves the earnest
seekers of your, our own, and the Kingdoms welfare, subscribing our selves

Your and the Kingdom faithful Friends and Servants, chosen to be Agitators
in behalf of the Army. James Berry, Captain. John Clerk, Captain. Edmond
Rolph, Capt. Hen. Prittie, Capt. Waldine Lage, Capt. Agitators of the Generals
Regiment. Ed. Sexby. John Tailor.
Agitators Lievr. Genesis Regiment. William Allin. Samuel Titterington.
Agitators of Col. Rich his Regiment. John Braman. Anthony Wickson. Thomas
Shippard.
Agitators of Col. Whalies Regiment. Philip Eyton. John Young.
Agitators of Col. Thomlinsons Regiment. Barth. Willocke. Richard Clarke.
Agitators of Col. Hortons Regiment. John Willoughby. Tobias Box.
Agitators of Col. Hammonds Regiment. Not. Foxgill. Will. Bridgeman.
Agitators of Col. Wallers Regiment. Rob. Mason. Hen. Anderton.



FINIS.

