royal blazon or coat of arms C R

BY THE KING. Majesty's Proclamation and Declaration concerning a Clause in one
of the late Articles at Reading.
WHEREAS, by Our late Proclamation bearing date the Eighteenth day of April,
We did declare Our gracious Pleasure to grant Our free and general Pardon to
all Captains and Officers (not formerly excepted in any of Our Proclamations
and Declarations) and to all Common-Souldiers then under the Command of the
Earl of Essex, under the Conditions and Limitations expressed in Our said
Proclamation, And that We would look upon such Persons as should return to
their due obedience to Us, as upon Persons seduced by the Cunning and Falsehood
of the Authors of the present Rebellion, and that if such Persons shall be
willing to serve Us, they should be entertained in Our Army, Or, if they be not
willing to serve, That they should have Our Pardon and free Pass, Provided
they would take an Oath never to take up Arms against Us: And whereas by
certain Articles between the Earl of Essex and the Commanders of Our Forces in
Reading concerning their marching out of that Our Town, such Persons were
excepted who had left that Rebellious Army, and betaken themselves to Our
Protection and Service in that Our Town, and so were again upon the matter
delivered up to those whom out of Conscience and Duty to Us they had forsaken;
We have thought fit to declare, And We do hereby declare to all the World,
That We were not privy to, or in the least Degree consented to that exception,
but do hold the same most prejudicial to Our service, and derogatory from Our
Honor, and We should and always shall choose to run any hazard or Danger the
violence or Treason of Our Enemies can threaten, or bring upon Us, rather then
to withdraw or deny Our Protection to any, who being convinced in their
Consciences of their Disloyalty to Us shall return to their duty, and betake
themselves to Our service. And as We have referred to a Court of War the
full examination of all the particular Proceedings in the delivery of that
Town, that so Justice may be done accordingly, so We do farther declare, That
We shall always proceed with all severity against all such as shall by the
like dishonorable conditions expose Our Subjects, and bereave them of Our
Protection, that have returned to their Obedience to Us. And We do therefore
once more assure all the Officers and Soldiers now in Rebellion against Us
(except only such whom by name We have excepted in any of Our Proclamations or
Declarations) That if they shall yet within six days, after the publishing of
this Our Proclamation, render themselves to Our Lieutenant General, or to any
other Principal Officer of Our Army (so they commit no hostile Act in the mean
time) they shall receive all the Grace and Favor mentioned in Our said
Proclamation of the Eighteenth of April, as if they had observed the time
limited in that Our Proclamation. And We do farther assure all such of Our
good Subjects who shall so put themselves into Our hands, that they shall not
only receive Our Grace and Protection, but that their former Errors shall never
be remembered in the least degree to their disadvantage. And this We promise in
the Word of a KING.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the Twelfth day of May, in the Ninteenth year
of Our Reign.
God Save the KING.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.


