His Majesty's Message to both Houses, concerning the Militia.
HIs Majesty having received an humble Petition of the Lords and Commons, by
the hands of the Earls of Carlisle and Monmouth, returns this answer; That his
dearest Consort, the Queen, and his dear Daughter, the Princess Mary, being
now upon their departure for Holland, He cannot have so good time to consider
of a particular Answer for a matter of so great weight as this is, therefore He
must respite the same until His return.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons, concerning this Message.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
YOur humble and loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons, have, with a great
deal of grief, received Your Majesty's answer to their just and necessary
Petition, concerning the Militia of the Kingdom; which Your Majesty, by a
gracious Message formerly sent unto them, was pleased to promise should be put
into such hands as Your Parliament should approve of, or recommend unto You the
extent of their power, and the time of their continuance being likewise
declared. That being done, and the persons by both Houses nominated, Your
Majesty, nevertheless, referres Your resolution herein, to a longer, and a
very uncertain time, which (the present dangers and distractions so great and
pressing) is as unsatisfactory and destructive, as an absolute denial.
Therefore we once again beseeeh Your Majesty to take our desire into Your
Royal thoughts, and to give us such an answer, as may raise in us a confidence
that we shall not be exposed to the practices of those who thirst after the
ruin of this Kingdom, and the kindling of that combustion in England, which
they have, in so great a measure effected in Ireland; from whence (as we are
daily informed) they intend and endeavor to invade us, with the the assistance
of the Papists here amongst us.

Nothing can prevent these evils, nor enable us to suppress the Rebellion in
Ireland and secure our selves, but the instant granting of that our humble
Petition; which we hope Your Majesty will not deny to those who must in the
discharge of their duties both to Your Majesty and the Commonwealth, represent
unto Your Majesty what they find so absolutely necessary; for the preservation
of both which the Laws both of God and man enjoin them to see put in execution,
as several Counties, by their daily Petitions, have desired of us, and in some
places, begun already to do it of themselves.

Resolved upon the Question, and assented unto, and Ordered, That Master Hollis
carry it up to the Lords, to desire their concurrence herein.

February 22. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott.


