C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for a solemn Fast on Wednesday the Fifth of Februarynext, upon
occasion of the present Treaty for Peace.
WHere as Almighty God in his Justice to punish the Common and Crying sins of
the Land, has sent a Civil Sword throughout all Our Dominions, which has
miserably wasted and threatens a speedy and utter desolation to the same. And
now in the height of these Calamities, a Treaty is assented to, to begin at
Vxbridge on Thursday the Thirtieth day of this Instant January, touching the
Composing and ending of those unhappy differences and distractions, about which
so much blood has been already spilt, which Treaty, may by the blessing of
God (who is the disposer of all men's hearts and of all events) be a means to
produce a Peace. And whereas it is the duty, and has been the practice of
Christians under affliction, to set apart some time for public and solemn
Humiliation and Prayer, for removing of Gods judgments, and particularly for a
blessing and good success to the means conducing to their deliverance. We do
therefore by this Our Proclamation appoint and straightly Charge and Command,
that on Wednesday being the Fifth of February next ensuing, a solemn Fast be
kept in all places within Our Dominions, whether the notice of this Our
Proclamation shall or may come before that time, that both Prince and People
may then join together in a true Humiliation and Devout and earnest Prayers to
God, that he would be pleased so to bless and prosper this intended Treaty,
that it may produce a happy Peace in all Our Dominions, such as may be for his
honor and the good of his Church, and of Us and all Our Subjects. And We do
hereby charge and require all Our Subjects, of what degree or condition soever
they be, which shall have notice of this Our Proclamation, That they do
religiously prepare and apply themselves to a due observation of the same, by
Fasting, Humiliation, and Prayer on that day, and in hearing of Gods word, as
they will answer to God their neglect of this Christian duty, and as they will
answer to Us the neglect of this Our Just and necessary Command. And for the
better and more orderly observation of this Fast, We do hereby appoint, that
the Form of Prayer and Service of God set forth in the Book heretofore
published for the Monthly Fast, with such alterations and additions as shall be
prepared and fitted for this present purpose, and published in Print before the
said day, shall be used in all Churches and Chappells where this Fast shall be
kept.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this 27 day of January, in the Twentieth year
of Our Reign. 1644.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1644.


