THE KINGS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious MESSAGE In Four LETTERS:

One of which His Majesty received from London, and three written by His
Majesty's own Hands: The first to Col: Whaley, the second to the Lord
Mountague, and the third A Declaration to all His Majesty's Subjects of both
Kingdoms; Concerning his going away, with His Majesty's desires to the
Parliament, the Army, and the Kingdoms.

With a perfect Narrative of the manner of his Majesty's going from Hampton
Court, and the several circumstances both before and after.

HIs Majesty desires that his Declaratory Message may be communicated to the
Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England, at Westminster, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, and to all His Majesty's Subjects
of what degree or calling whatsoever.

November. 13. 1647, Subscribed, Charles REX.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbort.





C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by
the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and
thistle on the other

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

depiction of King Charles I of England

A Letter from Hampton Court, of the manner of His Majesty's departure.
Right Honorable,
YEsterday the Scotch Commissioners were with his Majesty, and Mr. Cheesly
(newly come from Scotland with them) and had audience Sir Edward Ford, Sir John
Bartlet, Mr. John Ashburnham, and Mr. Denham, had lately passes to go beyond
the Seas: This day his Majesty was not so pleasant at dinner as usually, and
spent most part of this day in writing in the Bedchamber privately with
himself only; About four a clock at night, his Majesty called for lights, Mr.
Maul (then newly come from London carried in candles, a while after his Majesty
called for snuffers: Some desired to speak with his Majesty, but his Majesty
refused, desiring to be private; one of the Commissioners knocked again, his
Majesty said he was busy, and desired to be private, and that he would nor
sup that night: After supper one of them knocking, his Majesty answered not;
then the Commissioners went in, and Colonel Whalley, and found his Majesty's
cloak there and four letters lying on the table (the copies whereof I have
sent your Lordship here enclosed) his Majesty being gone in his shoots and
stockings, it was supposed he might be in the garden, down the back scares;
but it seems his Majesty was gone through the garden and park, and so away,
some think for Scotland, others for London, some for Jersey: others (which is
more probable) not far from hence: some Gentlemen passed this night over
Kingston bridge, supposed to be his Majesty, with Sir Edward Ford, Sir John
Bartles, Mr. Ashburnham, and Mr. Denham. Messengers are sent out, and ports to
be stopped. My Lord, in haste I conclude my self,

Your Lordships humble servant, Edward Helaw.
Hampton Court Nov. 11. 1147.
A Letter which His Majesty received from London, left upon the table in his
Majesty's Chamber.
May it please your Majesty,
IN discharge of my duty, I cannot omit to acquaint you that my brother was at
a meeting last night with eight or nine Ad^utators, who in debate of the
obstacle which did most hinder the speedy effecting of their designs, did
conclude, it was your Majesty, and so long as your Majesty does live, you would
be so, and therefore resolved for the good of the Kingdom to take your life
away; and that to that account they were assured that Mr. Del and Mr. Peter's
(two of their creatures) would willingly bear them company, for they had often
said to these Adjutators, your Majesty is but a dead dog: My prayers are for
your Majesty's safety, but do much fear, it cannot be whilst you are in those
hands.

I. wish with my soul your Majesty were at my house in Broadstreet, where I am
confident I could keep you private till this storm were over, but beg you
Majesty's pardon, and shall not presume to offer it as advice; It is my
constant zeal to your service, who am

9. Novem. 1647. Your Majesty's dutiful subject E. R. To your sacred Majesty.

His Majesty's Letter to Colonel Whaley, Commander in chief of the Forces at
Hampton Court for His Majesty's guard, left upon the table in his Majesty's
Chamber.
Colonel Whaley,
I Have been so civilly used by you, and Major Huntington, that I cannot but by
this parting farewell, acknowledge it under my hand, as also to desire the
continuance of your courtesy, by your protecting of my household and movables
of all sorts, which I leave behind me in this house, that they be neither
spoiled nor imbezelled; only there are three Pictures here which are not mine,
that I desire you to restore, to wit, my wives Picture in blue, litting in a
chair you must send to Mrs. Kirk; my eldest daughters picture copied by
Belcam, to the Countess of Anglesey, and my Lord Stanops picture to Carry
Rawley; there is a fourth which I had almost forgot, it is the original of my
eldest daughter (it hangs in this chamber over the board next to the chimney)
which you must send to my Lady Obigney. So being consident that you wish my
preservation and restitution, I rest

Hampton Court the 11. of Novem. 1647. Your Friend, CHARLES REX.
I assure you that it was not the Letter you showed me to day, that made me
take this resolution, nor any advertisements of that kind: but I confess that
I am loath to be made a close prisoner under pretense of securing my life; I
had almost forgot to desire you to send the black grew Bitch to the Duke of
Richmond.



His Majesty's Letter to the Lord Mountague, one of the Commissioners from the
Parliament attending his Majesty at Hampton Court, left in his Majesty's
Bedchamber on the table.
Mountague,
FIrst, I do hereby give you and the rest of your fellows thanks for the
civillities and good conversation that I have had from you. Next I command you
to send this my Message (which you will find upon this table) to the two
Houses of Parliament, and likewise to give a copy of it to Col. Whaley, to be
sent to the General; likewise I desie you to send all my saddle horses to my
son the Duke of York.

As for what concerns the resolution that I have taken, my declaratory Message
says so innch, that I refer you to it, and so rest,

Hampton Court the 11. of Novem. 1647. Your assured Friend, CHARLES REX.

A Declaration by the Kings Majesty, left upon the Table in his Majesty's
Bedchamber.
LIberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now, is the
common Theme, and desire of all men. Common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity, and yet I call God and the world to witness,
with what patience I have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had
any hopes that this sort of my sufferings might conduce to the Peace of my
Kingdom, or the hindering of more effusion of blood; I did willingly undergo;
But now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would
not only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice
than furtherance to the public good:

I thought I was bound, as well by natural as political obligations to seek
my safety; by retiring my self for some time from the public view, both of
my friends and enemies. And I appeal to all indifferent men, to judge if I
have not just cause to free my self from the hands of those who change their
principles with their condition; and who are not ashamed openly to intend the
destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their negative voice, and with whom
the levellers doctrine is rather countenanced then punished.

And as for their intentions to my person, their changing and putting more
strict guards upon me, with the discharging most of all those servants of mine,
who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon me, does sufficiently
declare: Nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall
earnestly and incessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and well grounded
peace, where ever I am, or shall be; And that (as much as may be) without the
effusion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I desired,
pressed to be heard, and yet no ear given to me.

And can any reasonable men think that (according to the ordinary course of
affairs) there can be a settled peace without it; or that God will bless
those who refuse to hear their own King, surely not?

Nay I must further add, That (besides what concerns my self) unless all
other chief interests have not only an hearing, but likewise just satisfaction
given unto them, (to wit the Presbyterians, Independents; Army, those who have
adhered to me, even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles,
it being of my opinion, a sinful presumption, in such cases to expect or trust
to them) be a safe or lasting peace.

Now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my retirement, so I take God to witness that the public peace is no
less before mine eyes; And I can find no better way to express this my
profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring, and urging
that all chief interests may be heard, to the end each may have just
satisfaction, as for example, the Army: for the rest (though necessary yet I
suppose are not difficult to content) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the
liberty of their Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion or Indemnity (which
should extend to all the rest of my Subjects;) And that all their Arreares
should be speedily and duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be
heard, And that I be not hindered from rsing such lawful and honest means, as
I shall choose.

To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall
(instantly) break through this cloud of retirement, and show my self really to
be Pater Patriae.

For the Speaker of the Lords, protempore, to be communicated to the Lords and
Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of
the Parliament of Scotland: And to all my other Subjects of what degree or
calling whatsoever.

Dated at Hampton Court, the 11. of Novem. 1647. Charles Rex.

Finis

