C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Royal coat of arms of Charles I The Kings Majesty's
Speech, Made in the House of PEERS, before he passed the Bill against the Earl
of STRAFFORD: May the 1. 1641.
And the Earl of Strafftords Letter to His Majesty dated from the Tower, May
the 4. 1641. concerning the said Speech.
I Had no intention to speak of this business this day, which is the great
business concerning the Lord Strafford, because I would do nothing that might
seem to hinder your occasions. But now it comes so to pass, that of necessity
I must have part in that judgment I think it most necessary for me to declare
my Conscience in that, because, etc.

I am sure ye all know, I have been present at the hearing of this business,
from the one end to the other; And I must tell you, that, in my Conscience, I
cannot condemn him of high Treason, it is not fit for me to argue this
business, I am sure you will not expect that a positive doctrine best becomes
the mouth of a Prince. Note, The average of tumulta many times does violate the
Law: as witness when the tumultuous lews brought Jesus before pilate, and
Pilate examining the cause, said, I find no fault in this man worthy of death,
then the tumultuous rage was the more. Luke 24. (therefore consider)


That I must tell you three truths, which I am sure no body can tell, so as my
self. 1. That I never had any intention of bringing over the Irish Army, nor
never was advised by any body, so to do. 2ly, There was never any debate before
me, either in public Counsel, or private Committee, of the disloyalty of my
English Subjects, nor ever had I any suspicion of them. 3ly, That I never was
counseled by any, to alter the least of any of the Laws of England, much less
to alter all the Laws; Nay, I tell you, this, I think, no body durst ever be so
impudent to move me to it: for if they had, I should have made them such an
example, and put such a mark upon them, that all posterities should know my
intentions by it; for my intention was ever, to govern according to the Law,
and no otherwise.


I desire to be rightly understood, for I tell you in My Conscience, I cannot
condemn him of high Treason; yet I cannot say, I cannot clear him of
misdemeanour; therefore, I hope, that you may find out a way to satisfy
Justice, and your own fears, and not to press my Conscience.

My Lords I hope you know what a tender thing Conscience is, and I must declare
unto you to satisfy the people, I would do great matters, but in this of
Conscience, neither fear, nor respect whatsoever, shall ever make me go against
it.

Certainly I have.

The Earl of STRAFFORDS Letter, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, dated from
the Tower, the 4. May, 1641.
May it please Your sacred Majesty,
IT has been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your Majesty
and your people; and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private condition considered, it had been
a great madness, since through your gracious favor I was so provided, as not
to expect in any kind to mend my fortune, or please my mind, more, then by
resting where your bounteous hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majesty and your
people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you
and them: no other means to effect, and settle this happiness, but by the
Council, and assent of the Parliament; or to prevent the growing evils upon
this State but by entirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the
loyalty, and good affections of your English Subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, this truth finds little credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed as some thing of
separation between you and your people, under an heavier censure then which I
am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now, I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me,
notwithstanding your Majesty has declared, that in your Princely opinion, I
am not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied in your conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great straight, there in before me the ruin of
my Children, and Family, hitherto untouched, in all the branches of it with any
foul crimes. Here is before me the many ills, which may befall your sacred
person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self, and parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, then is necessaty for the preservation both of
King and people. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared, by
mortal man, Life, or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less
man, than God knows, mine infirmities give me. And to call a destruction upon
my self, and young Children, where the intentions of my heart (at least have
been innocent of this great offense) may be believed, will find no easy
content from flesh and blood.

But with much sadness I am come to a resolution, of that which I take to be
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self, which
doubtless is the prosperity of your sacred Person, and the Commonwealth,
infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the honor, and
justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that Declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me
to their Lordships; so now, to set your Majesty's conscience at liberty, I do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, in prevention of mistakes which may happen,
by your refusal, to pass this Bill; And by this means remove (praised be God)
I cannot say, this accursed (but I confess) this unfortunate thing forth of
the way, toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust, shall ever
establish between you and your Subjects.

Sir, my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, than all the world can do
besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Gods grace, I
forgive all the world with a calmnesse and meekness of infinite contentment to
my dislodging soul; So Sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your favors. And
only beg that in your goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your gracious
regard upon my poor Son, and his three Sisters, less, or more, and no
otherwise, than as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter appear
more or less guilty of his death.

God long preserve Your Majesty. Your Majesty's most faithful, and humble
Subject, and Servant, STRAFFORD.
Tower, 4. May, 1641.
To the Reader.
THe Reason that I represent this His Majesty's Speech, with the Earl of
Straffords Letter, is to give a clear testimony to the whole world, how His
Majesty's Conscience was pressed and wounded in passing the Bill against that
honored Earl, which did much trouble His Majesty's mind, as you may read in
His second Meditation, and in that Religious Speech on the Scaffold before that
violent and cruel Blow was struck on his sacred Person; His Posterity and His
three Kingdoms which is, and ever will be much lamented by His Majesty's
religious and royal hearted Subjects. I shall only speak a word or two may be
to some, whose guilty Conscience will take it to themselves. As first, when the
kingly Prophet David had King Saul in the Cave at advantage, some of King
David's evil Counselors then said as some now in these days did, saying, that
the Lord had delivered their Enemy into his hand by providence, therefore bid
David smite Saul: 2 Samuel 1.14, 15, 16.
so David cut the skirt of Saul's garment; in so doing, David was troubled in
his heart, saying, How can I lay violent hands upon the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless? 1 Samuel 24. David said to the man who killed Saul, Wast thou not
afraid to put forth thine hand to destroy the lords Anointed? etc.
We read here, that yet his evil Counselor Abithai said unto David again, God
has closed thine Enemy into thy hand this day, now therefore I pray thee let
me smite him once with a spear to the earth. And David said, Destroy him not:
for who can lay his hands on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? The Lord
keep me from laying mine hands upon the Lords anointed. David checked Abner
which was chief General to King Saul, because he slept, and did not guard his
Master the King. Here see how David was much troubled in cutting the skirt of
king Saul's garment: yet David was a king. Much more should it trouble the
hearts of those Subjects, who have laid violent hands in cutting off the life
of the Lords Anointed, and their only lawful King, and Defender of the faith.
But it is now so as St. Paul says, for as they regarded not to know God; Romans
1.28, 29, 30, 31.
even so God delivered them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient: Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covertousnesse, maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of
debate, of deceit, taking all things in the evil part; whisperers, backbiters,
haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things,
disobedient to parents, without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without
natural affection, such as can never be appeased, merciless. Which men though
they know the Law of God, how they that commit such things are worthy of death,
yet not only do the same, but also favor them that do them. (therefore) Hear
the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel It may now be said, England.
: for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because
there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing,
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood
touches blood. Therefore shall the land mourn. Hosea 4.1, 2, 3.
So St. Paul says, The Spirit speaks evidently that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to the spirit of errors, and
doctrines of devils: which speak lies though hypocrisy, and having their
conscience burned with an hot iron. 1 Timothy, 4.1, 2.
To conclude with that last Speech of His Majesty, saying, Give God his due,
and the King his due, which is my Successor, and the people their due: And so
with that saying in the Proverbs, Chap. 24. ver. 21, 22. My son, fear God and
the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their
destruction shall rise suddenly.

LONDON: Printed 1649.


