HIS MAJESTY'S REASON Why He cannot in Conscience consent to abolish the
Episcopal Government.

Delivered by Him in writing to the Divines that attend the Honorable
Commissioners of Parliament at the Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wight,
October. 2. 1648.

With the Answer of the said Divines delivered to His Majesty in writing.
October. 3. 1648.

LONDON, Printed, for Abel Roper at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1660.

His Majesty's Reason why He cannot in conscience consent to abolish the
Episcopal Government.
Charles R.

I Conceive that Episcopal Government is most consonant to the word of God,
and of an Apostolical institution, as it appears by the Scripture to have been
practiced by Apostles themselves, Acts 14.23. Acts 6.6. 1 Cor. 16.1. 1 Cor. 14.
1 Cor. 5.3. 3 John 9.10
And by them committed, and derived, to particular Persons, as their
Substitutes, or Successors therein (as for ordeyning Presbyters, and Deacons,
giving rules concerning Christian Discipline, 1 Timothy 5.22. Titus 1.5. Revel.
2.3. 1 Timothy 5.19. Titus 3.10.
and exercising censurs over Presbyters and others) And has ever since till
these last times been exercised by Bishops in all the Churches of Christ; And
therefore I cannot in conscience consent to abolish the said Government.

Notwithstanding this my persuasion, I shall be glad to be informed, if our
Savior, and the Apostles did so leave the Church at liberty, as they might
totally alter or change the Church Government at their pleasure, which if you
can make appear to me, then I will confess that one of my great scruples is
clean taken away, and then there only remains;

That being by my Coronation Oath obleiged to maintain Episcopal Government,
as I found it settled to my hands, whether I may consent to the abolishing
thereof, until the same shall be evidenced to Me to be contrary to the Word of
God:

Newport 2. October. 1648.
The Answer of the Divines to His Majesty's Reason, why He cannot in Conscience
consent to the abolishment of Episcopal Government.
May it please Your Majesty.
WE do fully agree without hesitation, that these Scriptures cited in the
margin of your paper, Act. 14.23. Act. 6.6. 1 Cor. 16.1. 1 Cor. 14.1 Cor. 5.3.
3 John 9 and 10. do prove that the Apostles did ordeine Presbyters and Deacons;
give rules concerning Christian Discipline, and had power of exercising
censures over Presbyters, and others. And that these places of Scripture, 1 Timothy 5.22. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.19. Titus 3.10. do prove that Timothy and Titus
had power to ordeine Presbyters and Deacons, and to exercise censures over
Presbyters and others. And that the second, and third Chapters of the
Revelation do prove; That the Angels of the Churches had power of governing of
the Churches, and exercising censures.

But that either the Apostles or Timothy and Titus, or the Angels of the
Churches were Bishops, as Bishops are distinct from Presbyters, exercising
Episcopal Government in that sense. Or that the Apostles did commit and derive
to any particular persons as their substitutes, and successors, any such
Episcopal Government: or that this is proved in the least measure by the
Scriptures alleged, we do as fully deny. And therefore do humbly deny also,
That Episcopal Government is therefore most consonant to the word of God, and
of Apostolical institution, or proved so to be by these Scriptures. None of
these were Bishops, or practiced Episcopal Government, as Bishops are distinct
from Presbyters. Neither is such an Officer of the Church as a Bishop distinct
from a Presbyter to be found in the New Testament (by which we humbly conceive,
that our Faith, and Conscience touching this point ought to be concluded.) The
name Office, and Work of Bishop and Presbyter being one and the same in all
things, and never in the least distinguished, as is clearly evident, Titus 1.5,
7. For this cause left I thee in Creete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every City; as I had
appointed thee. For a Bishop must be blameless, In which place the Apostle his
reasoning were altogether invalid, and inconsequent, if Presbyter and Bishop
were not the same Office, as well as they have the same Name.

The same is manifest, Acts 20.17, 28. and from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and
called the Presbyters of the Church, to whom he gave this charge, verse 28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Bishops, (...), to feed and govern the Church of God. Where
we observe, That the Apostle being to leave these Presbyters, and never to see
their faces more, verse 28. does charge them with the feeding and governing of
the Church: as being Bishops of the Holy Ghosts making. But that the Holy Ghost
did make any superior, or higher kind of Bishops, than these common
Presbyters is not to be found in that, or any other Text.

And that under the mouth of two or three witnesses this assertion of ours may
stand; we add to what we have already said, that in 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. The
Presbyters which are among you, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter. Feed the
flock of God which is among you, (...) performing the office of Bishops, where
it appears plain to us, that under the words (...) and (...) used in this
place, is expressed whatsoever work the Presbyters are to do. Neither can
Bishops, so called as above Presbyters, do more for the government and good of
the Church otherwise, then is there expressly enjoined unto Presbyters, By all
which that has been said the point is rendered to be most clear to the
judgment of most men, both ancient, and of later times. That there is no such
Officer to be found in the Scriptures of the New Testament, as a Bishop
distinct from a Presbyter: neither does the Scripture afford us the least
notice of any qualification required in a Bishop, that is not required in a
Presbyter, nor any Ordination to the Office of a Bishop, distinct from a
Presbyter: nor any work or duty charged upon a Bishop, which Presbyters are not
enjoined to do: nor any greater honor or dignity put upon them. For that
double honor which the Apostle speaks of 1 Timothy 5.17. as due to Presbyters
that rule well, is with a note of (especially) affixed to that Act or work of
laboring in the Word and Doctrine, which is not that Act wherein Bishops have
challenged a singularity, or peculiar eminency above the Presbyters.

To that which Your Majesty does conceive, That Episcopal government was
practiced by Apostles themselves. We humbly answer, That the Apostles as they
were the highest Officers of the Church of Christ: so they were extraordinary
in respect of their commission, gifts, and office; and distinguished from all
other Officers, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily, Prophets, thirdly, Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Christ gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers. Where the Apostles are distinguished from Pastors and Teachers, who
are the ordinary Officers of the Church for preaching the word, and government.
That they had power and authority to ordain Church Officers, and to exercise
censures in all Churches, we affirm, and withal, that no other Persons, or
Officers of the Church may challenge or assume to themselves such power in that
respect alone, because the Apostles practiced it. Except such power belong unto
them in common, as well as to the Apostles, by warrant of the Scripture. For
that government which they practiced was Apostolical, according to the peculiar
commission, and authority which they had, and no otherwise to be called
Episcopal, than as their Office was so comprehensive, as they had power to do
the work of any or all other Church Officers, in which respect they call
themselves Presbeteri, Diaconi, (but never Episcopi in distinct sense) and
therefore we humbly crave leave to say, that to argue the Apostles to have
practiced Episcopal Government, because they ordained other Officers, and
exercised censures, is, as if we should argue a Justice of Peace to be a
constable, because he does that which a Constable does in some particulars. Its
manifest that the Office of Bishops and Presbyters were not distinct in the
Apostles. They did not act as Bishops in some Acts, and as Presbyters in other
Acts. The distinction of Presbyters and Bishops being made by men in after
times.

And whereas your Majesty does conceive that the Episcopal Government was by
the Apostles committed and derived to particular persons, as their Substitutes,
or Successors therein, as for ordeining Presbyters and Deacons, giving rules
concerning Christian discipline, and exercising censures over Presbyters and
others. Seeming by the alleged places of Scripture, to instance in Timothy,
and Titus, and the Angels of the Churches. We humbly answer, and first, to that
of Timothy and Titus. We grant that Timothy and Titus had Authority, and power
of ordaining Presbyters and Deacons, and of exercising censures over
Presbyters, and others: though we cannot say they had this power as the
Apostles Substitutes, or Successors in Episcopal Government; nor that they
exercised the power they had, as being Bishops in the sense of your Majesty,
but as extraordinary Officers, or Evangelists, which Evangelists were an office
in the Church distinct from Pastors, and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. and that they
were Evangelists, it appears by their being sent up and down by the Apostles,
or taken along with them in company to several Churches, as the necessity, and
occasion of the Churches did require; The One of them being expressly called an
Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4*5. And neither of them being any where in Scripture called
Bishop. Neither were they fixed to Ephesus, and Creet, as Bishops in the
Churches committed to them: but removed from thence to other places, and never
for ought appears in Scripture, returned to them again. And it seems clear to
us, that neither their abode at Ephesus and Creet, was for any long time, nor
so intended by the Apostle. For he imployes them there upon occasional
business, and expresses himself in such manner, ( I besought thee to abide
still at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia, that thou might charge some,
that they teach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. For this cause left I thee in
Creet, Tit. 1.5.) as does not carry the fixing, or constituting of a Bishop in
a place as perpetual Governor. And it is as manifest, that they were both of
them called away from these places, 2 Timothy 4.9. Do thy diligence to come to me
shortly, Tit. 3.12. Be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis. So that they may as
well be called Bishops of other Cities, or Churches, where they had any
considerable abode, as they are pretended to have been of Ephesus and Creete.
As they are called by the Postscripts of these Epistles; the credit of which
Postscripts we cannot build upon in this point.

Secondly, To that of the Angels of the Churches.

The ministers of the Churches are called Stars, and Angels, which
denominations are metaphorical and in a mystery, Rev. 1.20. the mystery of the
seven Stars, Angels, in respect of their mission, or sending, Stars in
respect of their Station, and shining. And it seems strange to us, that to so
many express Testimonies of Scripture, an Allegorical denomination, or
mystery should be opposed. These Angels being no where called Bishops in vulgar
acceptance, nor the word Bishop used in any of John's writings, who calls
himself Presbyter. Nor any mention of superiority of one Presbyter to another,
but in Diotrephes affecting it. And as to that which may be said, that the
Epistles are directed to one, we answer, that a number of persons, are in the
mysterious, and Prophetic writings expressed in singulars, and we humbly
conceive, that being written in an Epistolary Style, (for they are as letters
or Epistles to the Churches,) these writings are directed as letters to
collective Representative bodies use to be. That is, to one, but intended and
meant to that body in meeting assembled; which that they were so intended is
clear to us, both because there were in Ephesus Bishops and Presbyters, one and
the same to whom the Apostle at his farewell commends the Government of the
Church: And by diverse expressions in these Epistles, as Rev. 2.24. To you and
to the rest in Thyatyra: by which distinction of you and the rest, we conceive
the particular Governors, (which were more then one) and the people to be
signified. And so cannot consent that any singular person had majority over the
rest, or sole power of exercising Church Censures, and Government spoken of in
these Chapters.

Having thus (as we humbly conceive) proved by pregnant places of Scripture
compared together, that the Apostles themselves did not institute, or practice
Episcopal Government, nor commit and derive it to particular persons, as their
substitutes, or successors therein. We shall in farther discharge of our duty
to, and for the more clear, and full satisfaction of your Majesty in this
point, briefly declare into what Officers hands the ordinary and standing
Offices of the Church were transmitted, and derived by and from the Apostles.
The Apostles had no successors in eundem gradum: the Apostolical Office was
not derived by succession, being instituted by Christ by extraordinary and
special Commission. But for the ordinary and standing use and service of the
Church, there were ordained only two Orders of Officers, viz. Bishops and
Deacons, which the Apostle expresses, Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints in Christ
Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons; And only of them
does the Apostle give the due Characters of Officers, 1 Timothy 3.2, 8. From both
which places of Scripture we conclude with ancient Expositors both Greek and
Latin, that Bishops are the same with Presbyters, and besides Presbyters, there
is no mention of any other order but that of Deacons. Of both which Orders in
the Apostles times, there were in one City more then one, as in Philippi and
Ephesus. And we humbly offer to your Majesty as observable; That though one
Order might be superior to another Order, yet in the same Order of Officers,
there was not any one superior to others of the same Order: No Apostle was
above an Apostle; No Evangelist above an Evangelist; No Presbyter above a
Presbyter; No Deacon above a Deacon. And so we conclude this part, That since
Church Officers are instituted and set in the Church by God, or Christ Jesus,
and that Ordination by, or in which the Office is conveyed, is of no other
Officers, but of Presbyters and Deacons. Therefore there are no other Orders of
ordinary and standing Officers in the Churches of Christ.

As for the ages immediately succeeding the Apostles, we answer. First, our
Faith reaches no farther than the holy Scriptures. No humane testimony can
beget any more than a humane faith. Secondly, we answer, That it is agreed upon
by learned men, as well such as contend for Episcopacy, as others, that the
times immediately succeeding the Apostles are very dark in respect of the
History of the Church. Thirdly, That the most unquestionable Record of those
times gives clear testimony to our assertion, viz. The Epistle of Clements to
the Corinthians, who reciting the Orders of Church Officers, expressly limits
them to two, Bishops and Deacons, and them, whom in one place he calls Bishops;
he always afterward names Presbyters. The Epistles of Ignatius pretend to the
next antiquity, but are by some suspected as wholly spurious, and proved by
Vedelius to be so mixed, that it is hard, if not impossible, to know what part
of them are genuine: Besides, Bishop Usher in his late observations on them,
chap. 18. page 138. confesses, that of the twelve of his Epistles, six are
counterfeit, the other six mixed, and none of them in every respect to be
accounted sincere and genuine. Fourthly, We grant, That not long after the
Apostles times, Bishops in some superiority to Presbyters are by the writers of
those times reported to be in the Church, But they were set up not as a Divine
Institution, but as an Ecclesiastical, as afterward both Archbishops, and
Patriarchs were; which is clear by Doctor Reynolds his Epistle to Sir Francis
Knowles, wherein he shows out of Bishop Jewel, That Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Jerome, Augustine, and many more holy Fathers, together with the Apostle Paul
agree, that by the Word of God there is no difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter. And that Medina in the Council of Trent affirms not only the same
Fathers, but also another Jerome, Theodoret, Primasius Sedulius, and
Theophylact, to be of the same judgment. And that with them agree Oecumenius;
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and another Anselme, Gregory and Gratian,
and after them many others; That it was enrolled in the Canon Law for sound and
Catholic Doctrine; and publicly taught by learned men. And adds, that all
who have labored in the Reformation of the Church for these 500. years have
taught that all Pastors, be they entitled Bishops, or Priests, have equal
authority and power by Gods word. The same way goes Lumbard Master of the
Sentences, and Father of the Schoolmen, who speaking of Presbyters, and
Deacons, says, The Primitive Church had those Orders only, and that we have
the Apostles precept for them alone. With him agree many of the most eminent in
that kind, and generally all the Canonists. To these we may add Sextus
Senensis, who testifies for himself, and many others. And Cassander, who was
called by one of the Germame Emperors as one of singular ability, and
integrity, to inform him, and resolve his conscience in questions of that
nature; who said, It is agreed among all, that in the Apostles times, there was
no difference between a Bishop, and a Presbyter. For a conclusion, we add that
the Doctrine which we have herein propounded to your Majesty concerning the
Identity of the Order of Bishops and Presbyters, is no other then the Doctrine
published by King Henery the 8. 1543. for all his subjects to receive, seen and
allowed by the Lords both spiritual and temporal, with the nether House of
Parl. Of these two Orders only (so says the Book) that is to say, Priests and
Deacons, Scripture makes express mention, and how they were conferred of the
Apostles by Prayer, and Imposition of hands. By all which it seems evident,
that the Order of Episcopacy, as distinct from Presbytery, is but an
Ecclesiastical Institution, and therefore not unalterable.

Lastly; we answer. That Episcopal Government which at first obtained in the
Church, did really and substantially differ from the Episcopal Government,
which the Honorable Houses of Parliament desire the abolition of. The Bishop of
those times was one presiding, and joining with the Presbytery of his Church,
ruling with them, and not without them. Either created, and made by the
Presbyters choosing out one amongst themselves, as in Rome and Alexandria, or
chosen by the Church, and confirmed by three or more of his neighbors of like
dignity within the same precinct; lesser towns, and villages had, and might
have Bishops in them, as well as populous and eminent Cities, until the
Council of Sardis decreed, that villages, and small Cities should have no
Bishops, least the name and authority of a Bishop might thereby come into
contempt. But of one claiming as his due, and right to himself alone, as a
superior order, or degree, all power about ordination of Presbyters, and
Deacons, and all jurisdiction, either to exercise himself, or delegate to whom
he will of the Laity or Clergy, (as they distinguish) according to the
Judgment and Practice of those in our times; we read not till in the latter
and corrupter ages of the Church.

By all which it appears, that the present Hierarchy, the abolition whereof is
desired by the Honorable Houses, may accordingly be abolished, and yet possibly
the Bishops of those Primitive times be. They are so far differing one from
another.

In answer to that part of your Majesty's Paper, wherein you require whether
our Savior and his Apostles did so leave the Church at liberty, as they might
totally alter or change the Church Government at their pleasure. We humbly
conceive that there are substantials belonging to Church Government, such as
are appointed by Christ and his Apostles, which are not in the Churches liberty
to alter at pleasure. But as for Archbishops, etc. we hope it will appear unto
your Majesty's conscience, that they are none of the Church Governors
appointed by our Savior and his Apostles. And we beseech your Majesty to look
rather to the Original of them, then Succession.

October. 3. 1648.
Imprimatur,

JA. CRANFORD.

FINIS.

