BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the further restraint of Profane Swearing and Cursing, and
the better observing of Prayer and Preaching in His Majesty's Armies, and the
City of Oxford, and in all other parts of the Kingdom.
WHEREAS, by our Proclamation dated the 13. day of June last past, We did
strictly Charge and Command all the respective Officers of our Army, to cause
all our Military Orders against Blasphemy, Oaths, and other scandalous
Actions against the Honor and Service of God, to be duly and severely put in
execution; which our Command, if it had been well observed and the Laws of our
Realm touching those offenses duly executed, (as in duty to God and Us they
ought to have been) there had not been that Liberty taken by those of our Army,
and other persons in the Kingdom, of dishonouring the Sacred Majesty of God,
by horrible Oaths and Execrations, to the high provocation of God's wrath
against themselves and this whole Nation: We therefore out of our tender care
of the honor of God (to whose glory we shall ever devote our Grown) and in
token of our hatred and detestation of this monstrous impiety, do by this out
Proclamation strictly charge all Commanders and Officers of our Armies, and of
all our Garrison Towns, to see that all our Military Orders for the repressing
of profane. Swearing and Cursing by Soldiers, be duly and severely executed
for the time to come, and exemplary punishment done upon offenders therein, to
the terror of others. Which that they may know is by Us expected at their
hands, We do hereby require all Commanders and Officers in our Armies, and
Garrison Towns, and all who do or shall attend Us in our Court, to be virtuous
examples in their own persons to all Soldiers and others, by abstaining from
all such prophanations, as they desire the blessing of God upon Us, upon
themselves, and the whole Land; which if they shall neglect to perform, We do
hereby Declare, That all such persons in our Court, Armies, or Garrison Towns
as shall appear to Us to be notorious Offenders in this kind, We will in some
public way set a character of disgrace upon them, that they may appear to the
whole world to be offensive both to God and Us. And We do further hereby
strictly charge and command all Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, and Head-officers
in all Cities and Towns Corporate within the same, that they, cause the
Statute made in the 21. year of the Reign of our late Father of blessed
memory, for the prevention and Preformation of profane Swearing and Cursing to
be put in due execution and that the forfeiture of Twelve-pence for every
offense be levied according to that Statute, and particularly in our City of
OXFORD, where our Court now is, wherein We strictly charge and require the
Major, and Justices of Peace of our said City (of whom We will require a strict
account) to take especial care of the punishment of all offenders in that
kind, and that children and others, of whom the penalty of Twelve-pence cannot
be Levied or had, be whipped, or set three hours in the Stocks, according to
the form of that Statute. And for the future prevention of these and the like
offenses so opposite to the glory of God by planting his true fear in the
hearts of all men, We do lastly charge and command, That Divine Service and
Sermons (according to the Doctrine and Liturgy of the Church of England
established by Law) be duly and constantly used in all our Armies and Garrison
Towns, and in all Churches and Chappells throughout this Realm. All these our
commands We require forthwith to be printed, and published at the head of every
Regiment of our Army, and in all Garrison Towns and in all Parish Churches
within this our Realm.

Given at our Court at Oxford, the Eighteenth of April. 1644.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1644.


