A ROYAL Message From the Kings most Excellent Majesty to the Honorable
Houses of PARLIAMENT.

With the Answer of the House of Commons concerning the said Message.

Likewise the true Relation of a Bloody CONSPIRACY*

By the Papists in Cheshire.

Jntended for the destruction of the whole Country.

Invented by the treacherous Lord Choomes and Henry Starky his Steward.

Also the Relation of a bloody skirmish between the Train Band of Chester and
the Conspirators, with the number of those that were slain,

Likewise the Confession of the said Henry Starkey being grievously wounded in
the said skirmish.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.

His Majesty's message to the Lords, Knights and Burgesses, of the high and
Honorable Houses of Parliament.
His Royal Majesty, was graciously pleased to send a Message to the upper
house on Friday last being the next day after his Entertainment from Scotland,
on which day he was expected by both houses, but his Royal Majesty being
otherwise disposed, deferd his going till some other time.

Yet nevertheless out of his Royal disposition and clemency toward his
subjects, he was graciously pleased to make the sum of his desires known to
the houses of Parliament, wherefore he sent a Lord to the upper house, to
inform them that it was his Majesty's Royal Pleasure, that the Train bands
should be dischargd, so great is his care of his Subjects and so gracious a
consideration he had of the great care, cost, and damage they sustain, by
reason of the long time that they had continued under command, and had attended
on both houses.

His Majesty's pleasure was made known by the Lords to the house of Commons.

The house of Commons having received this message sent instantly to the Lords,
desiring them to move his Majesty to condescend to their requests so far, as
to give leave that the Train Band might continue their service till such time
as the affairs of the Kingdom were better settled.

Which was granted by the Lords, and a messenger immediately sent to the King
being at his Royal Palace at Hampton Court.

A bloody Conspiracy of the Papists in Cheshire, i^tended for the destruction
of the whole Country.
ALas poor England, how do thy enemies the bloody Romish Catholics plot thy
downfall, how art thou beset with grief and sorrow round about.

But shall the Philistines prevail against Israel for ever? shall their Goliath
still defy the host of God? No no, but Israel trust in the mighty Jehovah,
and pray to him, and he will send a David from the sheepfold to cut off the
insulting uncircumcised Goliah's head, the wicked shall not be able to
withstand the righteous, but shall fall as the corn before the Reaper,
wherefore England still serve the Creator God of Heaven, and he will, as he
has done hitherto defend thee and discover all the wicked designs of these
Treacherous enemies, for God does daily bring them to light, as you shall now
perceive by the plot lately discoverd in Cheshire.

There was an order made by the High Court of Parliament, that all Papists
throughout England should be disarmed, which command the primate Officers in
Cheshire went about to obey, but the Papists there were so resolute that they
told them plainly they would not be disarmed, which answer being carried to
the Major of the City, he very wisely, commanded the Trained Bands to go
search, each one charging his Musket with a Bullet, and those Papists which
would not yield to have their houses searched, presently to shoot down their
house above their ears, which was to be done the next day being the 20. day of
November 1641. which the Papists having intelligence of, gathered themselves
altogether to my Lord Chomes his house, the chief Leader was one Mr. Henry
Starkey, and in the night time some of them having Armor on, the watch heard
the^ to make a very great noise without the City gates, and going, to see what
might be the cause thereof, they discovered fifteen in Arms, battering down
the City walls, at which the watch were very much amazed, and being for the
most part old men, to go to resist them they were fearful, but went into the
City gate again and cried out Treason, Treason, against the City, upon which
the Citizens presently did arise, the Trained Bands presently were in
readiness, but thirteen of the Traitors escaped away, but two of them were
taken, who confess that the others were run to the Lord Chomes his house,
who were presently pursued thither, and taken at the Lord Chomes his house
gate, for the Porter thereof and the Guard thinking them to be some of the
Train Band would not suffer them to enter in thither, away they were carried
to prison, a strong Guard being left at the Lord Chomes his house, that none of
the Papists might issue out there.

So soon as those fifteen were laid fast, the train Bands came to the
aforesaid Lord Chomes his house, and comm^^ded the door to be opened, but they
were denied to have any entrance.

Then ten of the Train Band discharged their Muskets and battered down part
of the house, at which the aforesaid Lord made an escape by a posterne door
which opens into the fields, the Train Band most of them went into the house
and searched it, wherein they were like all to have been slain, for coming
into a private Wood-house there stood 50. Papists with Muskets ready charged,
and so soon as they saw the Train Band they discharged altogether, and slew
25. of the Protestants, and then retreated back and run out of a back door
which led into the Wood-house, but being met by the rest of the Train Band
which were without, between whom grew a bloody skirmish, but at length the
Papists trusted to the swiftness of their feet, but the bullets made great
have after them, and slew nineteen of them, Starky their Leader was wounded in
the thigh which forced him to yield, and was presently committed to prison. A
great uproare there was in the City, and much lamentation of both sides for the
loss of their husbands which were traitorously slain in the aforesaid
Woodhouse, all being still the aforesaid Starkey the Leader of the Rebels was
examined being ready to depart the world by reason of the multitude of his
wounds. Who confessed what their intents were, being urged thereunto by the
Lord Chomes to have beat down privately the greatest part of the City walls,
and before they could be possibly builded, again the Papists in Lancashire and
Cheshire should have had an advantage to use the Protestants as they pleased
themselves, which would have been welcome News to the Rebels in Jreland, much
more he did not confess but dyed, and he together with the other nineteen
Rebels which were slain, running away, were buried in the highway together,
but the Protestants in se^^^all Churches; those Rebels which were taken awaite
the Parliaments pleasure for their judgment, which will be very speedily.

FINIS.

