HIS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION CONCERNING The Magazine in the Tower of London.

Likewise the Parliaments Resolution concerning the same, being resolved to
dispose thereof, as shall be found needful for the present occasion, and by the
Authority of Parliaments.

Together with the Parliaments Declaration July 12. Declaring that none shall
apprehend, or arrest any of His Majesty's Subjects that obeys the Ordinance
of Parliament, under pretense of His Majesty's Warrants.

Also a worthy Speech spoken in the House of Commons by Mr. John Pym, Esquire,
laying open the great ruin and destruction that is like to be fall this
Kingdom, declaring the Authority of Parliaments.

With two humble Motions presented to His Majesty from the High Court of
Parliament.

Ordered that these particulars aforementioned be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com



Printed for J. SMITH July. 14. 1642.

A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN In the Honorable House of Commons, by John Pym Esquire.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THe Distempers of this Kingdom are well known, they need not Repetition; for
though we have good Laws, yet they want their Executioner, if they be executed
it is in a wrong sense: therefore I shall endeavor to apply a Remedy to the
Breaches that are made, and to that end I shall discover first the quality of
the Disease.

I. There is a design to alter Law and Religion, the parties that effect this
are Papists, who are obliged by a Maxim in their Doctrine, that they are not
able to maintain their Religion, but to extirpate all others.

II. The second is our Hierarchy, which cannot mount to the hight they aim at,
without the breach of Law.

To which Religion necessarily ioyns, that if the one the other falls.

III. Agents and Pentioners to foreign State, who see we cannot comply with
them, if we maintain the Religion established with Us, contrary to theirs,
here we intend the Spanish White-gold works, which are of most effect for
Earthly Favorites, as for petty promotion, not Conscience.

And such are our Judges Spiritual and Temporal, such are also our
Councillors of State.

All these settled in their contriv^^ents, that aim at one end, and to this
purpose they walk on four feet, discountenancing of Preachers, and men virtuous
for Religion, persecuted under the Law of purity.

The second is the discountenancing of Preachers, of contrary dispositions.

Thirdly, The negotiating with the Faction of Rome, by frequent preaching, and
instruction to preach of the absolute Monarchy of Kings, here follows
several Heads.



THe political interpretation of the Law to serve the Times, and this to
impose Taxes with the Color of Law.

A Judge said it, when a Habeas Corpus was paid for by keeping the King in
continual want, that He may seek to their Councels for Relief; to this
purpose they keep the Parliament in Distaste that their Council might be
taken. The King himself is brought to this, like a woman that uses her self to
poison, when she might Eat good Meat, Search the Chronicles, and we shall see
no King ever used Parliaments that was brought to this want, Arbitrary
Proceedings in Courts of Justice, we have Law left to the Conscience of a
single man, all Courts are now of Conscience.

Plotters to enforce a war between France and Us, that when we had well wearied
one another, we might be brought to what scorn they pleased, the Partition
wall is only Unity, the punishing of Parliament men to affright them from
speaking what we think, one was committed for not delivering up the Petitions
of the House, a Declaration which slandereth our Proceedings, as full of Lies
as Levites, who would have the first Ground to be our Example, and Papists
under appearance to the King, his best Subjects; for they Contribute money to
the wars, which the Protestants will not do.

The other is the Military, by getting places of Importance into the Papists
hands, as who were Commanders in the late Army, but they who were strong in
Arms, but they to whom their Arms is delivered contrary to the Statute.

Their endeavors are to bring in strangers to billite upon us.

A Letter sent from Mr. Secretary Nicholas to the House of Commons, July 12.
THere came Letters to the House of Commons from Mr. Secretary Nicholas at
York, by Order from his Majesty in answer to a Letter of both Houses to His
Majesty, desiring his consent for the taking of some Arms out of the Tower, to
be sent to Munster, but his Majesty would not Consent thereto, saying that they
had taken one part of his Arms from him by force, and then Petition him to
deliver up the other. Both Houses taking into consideration the said Letter,
Ordered, that there should be such Arms aken, as should be found needful for
the present occasions, and to be disposed of by the Authority of Parliament.

Both houses Ordered also, that there should be these humble Motions presented
to his Majesty. 1. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all
Delinquents.

2. That the general pardon offered by your Majesty may he granted with such
exceptions, as shall be advised by both houses of Parliament.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, That if any Messenger shall be
color of any Command from his Majesty, or Warrant under his Majesty's hand,
arrest, take, or carry away any of His Majesty's Subjects* to any place
vvhats^ever contrary to their Wills, Chat it is both against the Laws of the
Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.



