May the 16. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S RESOLVTION CONCERNING The Establishment of Religion and
Church Government.

ALSO, HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH TO THE GENTRY of the County of York, Attending His
Majesty at the City of York, on Thursday the 12. of May. 1642.

Whereunto is annexed, The Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, May the
12. 1642.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration be forthwith published in Print.

John Brown Cler Parliament.

Printed for I. Tomson, and A. Coe, 1642.

Die Jovit 12. May, 1642.
The Declaration of both Houses of Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, That they are
resolved to maintain those Lords and Gentlemen, Committees of both Houses of
Parliament residing at York, in those things they have done, and shall further
do in obedience of their Commands for the preserving the peace of the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons do Declare, That if any person whatsoever shall Arrest,
or Imprison the persons of those Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them, or any
other member of either House, that are, or shall be employed in the service of
both Houses of Parliament; or shall offer violence to them, or any of them, for
doing of any thing in pursuance of their Commends, or the Instructions of both
Houses, given unto them, shall be held Disturbers of the proceedings of
Parliament, and public enemies of the State. And that all persons are bound by
their Protestation, to endeavor to bring them to condign punishment.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That those of the City of London and all
other parsons that have obaied the Ordinance for the Militia; and done any
thing in execution thereof, Have done it according to the Law of the Land, and
in pursuance of what they were commanded by both Houses of Parliament, and for
the defense and safety of the King and Kingdom, And shall have the assistance
of both Houses of Parl ament, against any that shall presume to question them,
for yiedling their obedience to the said command in this necessary and
important service; And that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the
time to come, shall receive the same approbation and affistance from both
Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parl ament, That the abovesaid
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and Published,

John Brown Cler. Perl.

HIS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION.
Concerning the Laws of this Realm, and the Protestant Profession.
THe humble Desires of the Subject have bin very graciously entertained and
welcomed, and the Petitioners themselves have departed satisfied and contented.

But as yet the sick Church has not bin purged from her malignant distempers,
neither has she as yet taken an Antidote to preserve her from the Venom and
poison of Romes malice.

These manifold Petitions, with the earnest supplications of his Majesty's most
loyal Subjects, did cause a deep impression in his Royal consideration, and
also His Majesty having rightly and consideratly weighed the disquiet of His
Subjects, occasioned by so weighty a cause, knowing that Salus populi is
Suprema Lex, the safety and welfare of the Subject is and ought to be the
Princes greatest care, has bin graciously pleased to Declare himself, and
publish his intention concerning the Government of the Church.

His Majesty has formerly for the satisfaction of the subject, Declared
himself to be a true maintainer of the true and ancient Protestant Religion,
and has denied all coherence with the Church of Rome.

And he has also now of late, to give a full and plenary satisfaction unto
all, resolved upon a general Reformation. And to this purpose has consented,
that the main matters of difference which have occasioned all these
distractions shall be framed, and discussed by a number of grave, wise, and
Religious Divines, which shall be thought fit by the House of Parliament, every
County electing two for this so great and weighty a business, that so all
things being according to Gods true word, scand and examined, by the judicious
and religious Judgments of those worthy persons, the truth may appear, light
and instructions may be given unto Authority, and by their power and uniformity
of Government and worship, agreeable to Gods Word, may be styled in the Church.

And his Majesty did further declare, that it was always his care and desire,
that all offensive and unnecessary adjuncts whatsoever might be removed and
taken away, that so the tender Conscience might not apprehend any cause to
slight and neglect the obeservation of Religious duties

The enemies a against this Kingdom occasioned by the discontented spirits of
the Catholic faction, have at last wakened his confident thoughts, and he now
most seasonably conceives the hazard which was like by that means to seize the
security of the Kingdom.

Wherefore the better to effect and perfect his so well begun Resolution, has
given strict and severe apprehension of all Catholics, for their disarming,
and unless they will take the Oath of Supremacy for their imprisonment.

Neither do his waking and vigilant cares rest here, but out of his tender
respect and affection to his Subjects, will with all speed prevent the growth
of the ensuing dangers, which must succeed the increase of Papists in this
Kingdom.

Whereupon, being moved with the Consideration of those ensuing Evils, he has
taken Order for the expulsion of all Priests, and Jesuits whatsoever from out
of His Majesty's Dominions, and if any shall be taken whose contumacious spirit
shall dare to oppose, and contempt this His Majesty's most Royal Authority,
That then His Majesty will leave them to the Justice of the Law, and will deny
unto them the expression of any favor, but what the Law in Justice and Equity
shall think their contumacious offense may deserve.

They shall not now as in former times rely and depend upon His Majesty's
Clemency, and so take advantage of His Majesty's mournful disposition, to bail
and maintain their Heretical and unjustifiable courses.

He now perceives that his indulgency, their Errors, and his tenderness of
their lives and persons, unwiling to merit the Name of a severe Prince, has
very much encouraged them, whereby they have taken more then civil Liberty to
seduce his loving people, and subvert both the Laws and Liberty of this Kingdom.

Wherefore he is now resolved, that Justice shall take its free and
uncontradicted course against them, and that all favor and clemency shall be
as free-from them, as their practices are from Justice and Conscience.

His Majesty's Speech to the Gentry of the County of YORK, attending his
Majesty at the City of YORK, On Thursday the 12. of May, 1642.
GEntlemen, I have cause of altering what I meant to say when I gave out the
summons for this days appearance, I little thought of these Messengers, or of
such a Message as they brought, the which, because it confirms me in what I
intend to speak, and that I desire you should be truly informed of all passages
between me and the Parliament, you shall here read, First, my Answer to the
Declaration of both Houses concerning Hull, the Answer of the Parliament to my
two Messages concerning Hull, together with my Reply to the same, and my
Message to both Houses, declaring the Reasons why I refused to pass the Bill
concerning the Militia.

All which being read, his Majesty proceeded.
I Will make no paraphrases upon what ye have heard, it more befitting a Lawyer
then a King, only this observation, since Yreason is countenanced so near me,
it is time to look to my safety: I avow it was part of my wonder that men (whom
I thought heretofore discreet, and moderate) should have undertaken this
employment, and that since they came (I having delivered them the Answer: you
have heard, and commanded them to return personally with it to the Parliament)
should have flatly disobeyed me upon pretense of the Parliaments command. My
end in telling you this is, is to warn you of them, for since these men have
brought me such a Message, and disobeyed so lawful a Command. I will not say
what their intent of staying here is, only. I bid you take heed, not knowing
what doctrine of disobedience they may preach to you, under color of obeying
the Parliament. Hitherto I have found and kept you quiet, the enjoying of which
was a chief cause of my coming hither (Tumults and disorders having made me
leave the South) and not to make this a seat of War, as malice would (but I
hope in vain) make you believe; Now if disturbances do come, I know whom I have
reason to suspect. To be short, you see that my Magazine is going to be taken
from me (being my own proper goods) directly against my will; The Militia
(against Law and my consent) is going to be put in execution. And lastly, Sir
John Hothams Treason is countenanced; All this considered, none can blame me
to apprehend dangers. Therefore I have thought fit (upon these real grounds) to
tell you, That I am resolved to have a Guard, the Parliament having had one all
this while upon imaginary jealousies, only to secure my person. In which I
desire your concurrence and assistance, and that I may be able to protect you,
the Laws, and the true Protestant profession from any affront or injury that
may be offered, which I mean to maintain my self without charge to the
Country, intending no longer to keep them on foot, then I shall be secured of
my just Apprehensions by having satisfaction in the particulars before
mentioned.

Printed at York, and now reprinted at London for Andrew Coe. 1642.

FINIS.

