PROPOSITIONS FROM The Kings most Excellent Majesty:

Propounded by The Earl of Devon. The Earl of Newcastle. The E. of
Northampton. The Earl of Lindsey. The Earl of Rivers. The Lord Moubray. The
Lord Rich. The Lord Chapel.


Accompanied with 5000. Horse and Foot for their Guard.

To the Lo: Brooks, and the Gentry and Commonalty assembled at Warwick, on
Thursday last, August 18.

With the Lo: Brooks his Answer to the said Propositions.

Also the Parliaments determination concerning their Resolution, wherein they
declare that they will (to the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes) assist all
those that shall obey their just commands.

Aug. 20.
Ordered that this be printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. 1642.

PROPOSITIONS Propounded from the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to the Lord
Brooks and the Gentry and Communalty or the County of WARWICK.
THe Kings most excellent Majesty had set down his Resolution, that on the 18.
of August, being Thursday, He would go in Person to Warwick, but other
affairs hindering him, or his intention altering, he deferred it till a
further time, only there went up the Earl of Newcastle, with two Troops of
Horse, the Earl of Northampton with a Regiment of Foot, and a Troop of Horse,
the Earl of Lindsey with five Companies and two Troops of Horse, the Earl of
Rivers with a Company of Lancashire-men, which are thought to be for the most
part Papists the Lord Rich with a Regiment of Foot and two hundred Horse, the
Lord Mowbray with a Regiment of Foot, and the Lord Chapel with a Troop of
Horse. Thus they marched from Nottingham, about eleven of the clock at night,
toward Warwick, with a great deal of privacie: Where being arrived, they found
my Lord Brooks provided for to entertain them; for he having given private
intelligence to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County, there were assembled
almost 7000. trained men and others, who suffered them not to come near
Warwick by 2. Miles, but met them coming from Grove-Parke, from Mr. Dormers,
a great Papist; where it seems the Lords had been to refresh themselves.

The Lords seeing my Lord Brooks so well prepared, made a stand, and caused the
Drum to beat a parley, which was answered by my Lord Brooks, and a Trumpet let
(...) to demand the Cause; who was met by a Trumpeter of the Kings party; who
gave information that they desired a conference with my Lord. Brooks, wishing
him to draw out a hundred Horse, and fifty Musketeers for his guard, and they
would do the like.

Also that six men might be exchanged as Pledges for the security of either
party.

Which was agreed on, and speedily effected; which being done, in the middle
way between both Forces, the Lord Brooks gave them a meeting, where after a
salutation, the Earl of Newcastle and the Earl of Lindsey, propounded these
following Propositions.

1. THat the Lord Brooks should immediately lay down his Arms and submit to
his Majesty's mercy, from whom he should receive a gracious pardon. 2. That
the Lo. Brooks should resign the Castle of Warwick into such hands as his
Majesty should think fit. 3. That the Lord Brooks should disavow the Ordinance
of the Militia, and endeavor the execution of the Commission of Array. 4. That
the Lord Brooks should deliver the Magazine of that County into the hands of
the Earl of Northhampton. 5. That the Lord Brooks should immediately repair
to Nottingham, and appeal for his Majesty's Pardon or upon neglect thereof, to
undergo his Majesty's severest censure.
And that if he refused to perform these their honorable demands, they vowed
to make him the Subject of their that days fury.

These threats so far incensed my Lord Brooks, that he was about to leave
them without reply, but after a little consideration he wheeld about, and boldly
marched up to them, speaking as follows.

My Lords, I much wonder that men of judgment, in whose breasts true honor
should remain, should so much derogate from their Ancestors and noble
Predecessors, as to seek (for private ends) the ruin of that Kingdom they
should endeavor to support. Does fond ambition, or your selfe-will'd pride so
much bewitch you, that you cannot see the crown of all your actions? When the
great Council of the Parliament was first assembled, you then were Members; why
did you not continue? Was it because your actions were so bad, you were ashamed
to own them? Had you done evil in some petty kind, Submission might have
quitted you from that, and you have been still honored, loved, and feared; but
by these actions (which tend both to the ruin of King and Kingdom, and your
selves too) you cannot make amends for former evils.

As for these Propositions, take this in Answer:

When that His Majesty, His posterity, and the peace of the Kingdom shall be
secured from you that seek the ruin of them all, I gladly shall lay down my
Arms and Power.

As for the Castle, it was delivered to my trust by the High Court of
Parliament, who reserve it for the Kings use; and dare boldly say will so
employ it, and not like you employ it against the King.

As for the Commission of Array, you know it is unlawful, and like your
actions, destructive both to the Laws and Religion of the Kingdom.

For the Magazine of the County, it was delivered to him both by the
Parliament, and the Country; and although he was not an Earl, yet he dares be
a truer Subject to his King, and a faithfuller servant to his Country; and
being so, he was resolved to keep it till Northampton could show him greater
authority for his delivery of the same.

As touching His Majesty's Pardon, as he was confident that he had not given
any occasion of offense to His Majesty, so he needed not pardon; that being a
duty belonging to offenders, such as themselves; and he advised them to sue out
a pardon with speed, for fear that their offenses being once known, they
prove impardonable; for he doubted not but that in a short time His Majesty
would find who are his best friends. As for their fury, he bade them spit
their venom; for he hoped that Northampton should be translated to Warwick,
and stand centry upon Warwick-castle, to fright crows, kites, and buzzards.

Having thus spoken, they turned their horses, and rode up to their Troops: my
Lord Books thinking that they had intended to have done something, but they
very fairly wheeled about, and marched away, not once so much as taking their
leave; which my Lord Brooks seeing, did the like, and marched with his men to
Warwick: Where after many thanks he read part of the Resolution of the Lords
and Commons to them, animating them on to the same Resolution.

We the Lords and Commons do declare, that this is the true cause for which we
raise Arms, in the defense whereof we are resolved to live and die.

Ordered that this by printed and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Do. Com.


