HIS MAJESTY'S REASONS Against the pretended Jurisdiction of the high Court of
Justice, which he intended to deliver in VVrititing on Monday January 22. 1648.
Faithfully transcribed out of the Original Copy under the Kings own Hand.
HAving already made my protestations not only against the illegality of this
pretended Court, but also that no earthly power can justly call me (who am your
King) in question as a Delinquent, I would not any more open my mouth upon this
occasion, more then to refer my self to what I have spoken, were I alone in
this case concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true
Liberty of my People, will not suffer me at this time to be silent: For, how
can any freeborn Subject of England call life or any thing he possesses his
own, if power without right daily make new, and abrogate the old fundamental
Law of the Land, which I now take to be the present case. Wherefore when I came
hither, I expected that you would have endeavored to have satisfied me
concerning these grounds, which hinder me to Answer to your pretended
impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to it (though
Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will show you the
Reason why I am confident you cannot judge me, nor indeed the meanest man in
England; for I will not (like you) without showing a reason, seek to impose a
belief upon my Subjects.

There is no proceeding just against any man, Hereabout I was stopped, and not
suffered to speak any more concerning Reasons
but what is warranted either by Gods Laws, or the municipall Laws of the
Country where he lives. Now I am most confident, that this days proceeding
cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for on the contrary the authority of obedience
unto Kings is clearly warranted and strictly commanded both in the Old and new
Testament; which if denied, I am ready instantly to prove: and for the question
now in hand, there it is said, That where the word of a King is, there is
Power, and who may say unto him, what do thou: Eccles. 8.4. Then for the
Laws of this Land, I am no less confident, that no learned Lawyer will
affirm that an impeachment can lie against the King, they all going in his
name; and one of their Maxims is, that the King can do no wrong. Besides the
Law upon which you ground your proceedings, must either be old or new; if old,
show it; if new, tell, what authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of
the Land has made it, and when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court
of Judicature, which was never one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I
leave to God and the World to judge; And it were fall as strange that they
should pretend to make Laws without King or Lords-House, to any that have
heard speak of the Laws of England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the people of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plough-man, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended, Commission
without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure, you never went about to seek;
so farlare you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for my own right
alone, as I am your King, but also for the true Liberty of all my Subjects,
which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living under such
Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance of their
lives and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget the
Privileges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceedings does not
only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their Public Faith
that (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the two
Houses: for all the pretended Crimes laid against me, bear date long before
this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in me lay,
and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement there unto, I was suddenly
surprised, and hurried from thence as a prisoner, upon which account I am
against my will brought hither, where since I am come, I, cannot but to my
power defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with my
own just right; then for any thing I can see the higher House is totally
excluded.

And for the House of Commons, it is too well known that the major part of them
are detained or detered from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were
sufficient for me to protest against the lawfulness of your pretended Court.
Besides all this, the peace of the Kingdom is not the least in my thoughts,
and what hopes of settlement is there so long as power reigns without rule of
Law, changing the whole frame of that Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case
this lawless unjust proceeding against me do go on) and believe it the Commons
of England will not thank you for this change, for they will remember how
happy they have been of late years under the Reign Q. Elizabeth, the King my
Father, and my self, until the beginning of these unhappy troubles, and will
have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new. And by
this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up were only
to defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have
supposed my power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your
pretended authority without violating the trust which I have from God, for the
welfare and liberty of my People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince my Judgment, showing me that I am in an error (and then truly I will
readily answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.

This I intended to speak in Westminster Hall on Monday 22. January, but
against reason was hindered to show my Reasons.



Printed in the Year 1648.


