THE SAINTS REST: OR Their happy Sleep in Death. As it was delivered in a
SERMON AT Aldermanbury London, Aug 24. 1651. By Edmund Calamy B. D.

JOHN II. II. Our friend Lazarus sleeps. PSALM. 116. 15. Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints. LONDON, Printed by A. M. Anno Domini,
MDCLI.

THE SAINTS REST.
Act. 7. 60. the later part. And when be had said this, be fell asleep.
THese words contain in them the happy closure and upshot of Stephen life;
wherein we have three particulars, 1. The Person that fell asleep. 2. The
Speech that he made, when he fell asleep. 3. What he did when he had finished
his Speech.


Stephen: He was a man full of faith, and full of the holy Ghost, as you may
see Act.6.5. He was the first Martyr that ever suffered for the cause of
Christ; hence I might gather this Doctrine, viz.

Observe.
That the best of men are subject to violent and unnatural deaths. Stephen that
was full of the holy Ghost, was stoned to death; and John the Baptist that was
full of the holy Ghost from the very womb, was beheaded; Peter was crucified,
and so was Andrew; Isaiah was sawed asunder; Teremiah was stored, and Zacharias
was slain between the Temple and the Altar. But I shall pass this.

The second part of the Text, is the Speech that Stephen made when he fell
asleep, Hoc dicto obdermivit, that is, when he had finished his prayer, He fell
asleep. Hence observe,

Observe.
That it is an excellent way to close up our lives with prayer. To die praying
is a most Christian way of dying. They stoned stephen calling upon God. After
this manner Christ died, he prayed, Father, into they hands I commend my
spirit, and having thus said, gave up the ghost. Luk.23.46.
This he did that it might be a pattern to all Christians.

Prayer is a necessary duty at all times, but especially when we are a dying;
and that for these three Reasons.

1. Because when we are to die, we have most need of Good help, for then the
devil is most busy, and we most weak. 2. Because when we are to die, we are to
beg the greatest boon of God, that is, that he would receive us into his
heavenly Kingdom. Now prayer is the chief means to obtain this mercy, for it is
Porta Coeli, Clavis Paradisi, the Gate of Heaven, a Key to let us into
Paradise. Therefore we have great reason to die praying. 3. Because when a
Saint of God is dying, he is then to take his last farewell of prayer. In
Heaven there is no praying, but all thanks giving; there is no need in Heaven,
therefore no prayer in Heaven. Now a Saint of God, being to take his leave of
prayer, when he is to die, therefore it is sit he should die praying.
I beseech you remember this pattern in the Text, St Stephen died calling upon
the Lord. Let us die praying, as that Emperor said, Oportet Imperatorem stantem
mori; so may I say, Oportet Christianum mori praecantem, it behovesa Christian
to die praying.

Quest. But what was the substance of Stephens prayer?

Answ. He prayed for himself, and he prayed for his persecutors.

1. He prayed for himself, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, ver.59. 2. He prayed
for his persecutors, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, ver.60.
I will not enter upon this part of the Text, for it would swallow up all my
time. Therefore I shall wave it, and come to the third part, which is that,
that (by Gods assistance) I purpose to speek unto, viz. What Stephen did, when
he had finished his prayer, When he had said this, he fell asleep, that is, he
died.

Behold here the magnanimity, the piety, and the Christian courage of Stephen.
The people were stoning of him, and gnashing their teeth upon him; and the good
man dies with as much quietness of mind, as if he had died in his bed, He fell
asleep, while they were stoning him. While he died he prayed, and while he
prayed he died.

But what made Stephen die thus quietly? Read the 55.verse, and you shall see
the reason of it. Being full of the holy ghost, he looked up sted fastly into
Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
Behold, says he, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the
right hand of God. This made him die with such a sweet, quiet and calm temper;
He saw Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, ready to receive his
soul, and that made him die with such an extraordinary quietness of mind.

Death in Scripture, especially the death of Gods children, is often compared
to a sleep. It is said of David, That he slept with his fathers. 1 King.2.10.
And it is said, I These.4.13, I would not have you ignorant concerning them
which are asleep; that is, concerning them which are dead. And I Cor.II.30. For
this cause many are weakly and sick among you, and many sleep; that is many
die. This expression is a metaphorical expression, and will afford us many rare
and precious instructions about death. And therefore (the grace of God
assisting me) I desire to spend the rest of the time in the opening of this
metaphor.

Doct.
The Observation is this, viz. That when a child of god dies, though his death
he never so unnatural and violent, yet it is nothing else but a falling asleep:
Or, The death of a child of God, though stoned to death, though burnt to
ashes, though it be never so violent and unnatural, is nothing else but a
falling asleep. When he had said this, he fell asleep.

Somnus est mortis imago, Sleep is the image of death. There are many notable
resemblances betwixt sleep and death; some of which I shall speak unto at this
time.

1. Sleep is common to all men; there is no man can live without sleep; A man
may live long without meat, but no man can live long without sleep. So it is
true of death, Death is common to all, it is appointed for all men once to die:
And therefore David said, He was to go the way of all slesh; Statutum est
omnibus semel mori, Omnibus est calcanda semel lethivia, All men must sleep the
sleep of death, or else be changed, which is a metaphorical death. 2. As sleep
arises from the vapors that ascend from the stomach to the head, and tie the
senses, and hinder their operations; so death came into the world by Adams
eating the forbidden fruit, and by the poisonfull vapor of sin, that brought
death upon him, and all his posterity. By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,
Rom.5.12. Had Adam never sinned, Adam should never have died: But In illo die,
said God In that day thou eatest the forbidden fruit thou shall die the death.
Sin brings omnimodam mortem, all kinds of death; it brings death temporal,
death spiritual, and death eternal. Now because all men are poisoned with the
poison of sin, therefore all men must sleep the sleep of death; It is sin
that has poisoned all mankind. 3. As a man when he goes to sleep puts off
his clothes, and goes n^ked into bed: So it is with us when we come to die; We
came naked into the world, and we must go naked out of the world; As we brought
nothing with us into the world, so we must carry nothing with us out of the
world; And therefore death in Scripture is called nothing else but an
uncloathing of our selves, 2 Cor.5.4. Death to a child of God, is nothing
else, but the putting off of his clothes. The body of man is animae(...) and
vestimentum, it is the souls clothing; and death is nothing else but the
uncloathing of the soul; it is just like a man going to bed, and putting off
his clothes; St Peter calls it, The putting off our earthly tabernacle, 2
Pet.1.14. Our bodies are the souls tabernacle, and death is the putting off of
this tabernacle.
Beloved, when we come to die, we shall be stripped naked of three things, 1. We
shall be stripped naked of all our worldly honor, riches and greatness. 2. We
shall be stripped naked of our bodies. And 3. Which is above all, we shall be
stripped naked of our sins. And that is the happiness of a child of God, he
shall put off, not only his mortal body, but the body of sin. 4. In the fourth
place observe, As no man knows the time when he falls asleep, a man falls
asleep before he is aware: So no man can tell the certain time when he must
die. There is nothing so certain as that we must die, nothing so uncertain as
the time when we shall die; Death comes suddenly even as sleep comes upon a man
before he is aware. 5. Observe, As children and infants, because they do not
know the benefit of sleep, are very loath to go to sleep, many times the mother
is fain to whip the child to bed; even so it is with most of Gods people,
because they do not study the benefit of death, That death puts an end to all
miseries and sins, and opens a door to let us in unto everlasting happiness,
and that we shall never see God or Christ before we die; I say, because Gods
people do not study the benefit of death, therefore they are like to little
children, loath to die, loath to go to bed. And therefore death is called The
King of terrors. Job 18.14.
Death is terrible to many of Gods children, because they are but infants in
grace, and because they do not know the benefit of death. 6. Observe, As when a
man is fast asleep, he is free from cares, and free from troubles; Let it
thunder (as it thundered not long since, as you know) yet a man that is fast
asleep, while he is asleep he hears it not; Let the house be on fire, while the
man asleep, he fees it not, neither is he troubled at it. So it is with the
death of Gods children, when Gods children sleep the sleep of death, they are
free from the thunders of this world, they are free from all cares, from all
troubles, they go to their graves as to their beds, and rest in quitness, and
are not sensible of any troubles that are in the world, For Abraham knows us
not, Isa.63.16. So 2 King.22.20. Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place. When a child of God sleeps the sleep of death, he does not feel, nor is
he sensible of any of the calamities or sad providence of God upon the earth.
7. When a man goes to sleep; he goes to sleep but for a certain time, in the
morning he awakes out of sleep. So it is with the sleep of death; and therefore
death is called a sleep, becuse we must all awake in the morning of the
resurfection. We are in the grave, as in ourbeds, and when the trumper of God,
and the voice of the Archangel shall found, we shall all rise out of our grave,
as out of our beds. Death is but a sleep for a certain time. 8. Sleep is a
great refreshing to those that are weary and sick, and when the sick man
awakes, he is more lively and cheerful then he was before he fell asleep and
therefore sleep is called Medicus laborum, redintegratio virium, recreator
corporum, The great Physician of the sick body, the redintegration of man's
spirits, the reviver of the weary body. And so it is with death, when Gods
people awake out of the sleep of death, they shall be more active for God, then
ever they were before; when you lie down in the grave, you lie down with mortal
bodies; It is sown a mortal body, it shall rise up an immortal body, it is sown
in dishonor, but it shall rise up in honor, it is sown a natural body, but it
shall rise up a spiritual body I Cor. 15.42, 43.
. 9. As in the morning when we arise out of our beds, we then put on our
clothes. So in the morning of the resurrection, we shall put on a glorious
body, like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ, we shall put on Stolam
immortalitatis, the garment of immortality. 10. As no man when he lays him
down to sleep, knows the direct time when he shall awake. So no man can tell
when the resurrection shall be. They do but cozen you, who say, that the
general resurrection shall be such or such a year; for, as no man can know the
minute when he shall awake out of his natural sleep, no more can any man know
when we shall arise from the sleep of death. 11. As it is a very easy thing to
awake a man out of sleep, it is but jogging of him, and you will quickly awake
him. So it is with the sleep of death, it is as easy for Jesus Christ to awake
us out of the sleep of death, as it is for me, or you to awake a man out of
sleep in bed. Nemo nostrum tam facile excitat dormientem de lecto, quam
Christus jacentem in sepulchro. 12. As when a man arises in the morning,
though he has slept many hours; nay suppose he could sleep twenty years
together, yet notwithstanding, when he awakes, these twenty years will seem to
be but as one hour unto him. So it will be at the day of Judgment, all those
that are in their graves, when they awake, it will be tanquam somnus unius
horae, but as the sleep of one hour unto them. 13. Lastly, and most especially,
As sleep seizes only upon the body, and the outward senses, but does not seize
upon the soul, the soul of man is many times most busy, when the man is
asleep; And God has heretofore revealed most glorious things to his children
in dreams, when they have been asleep; God appeared unto Abraham and many
others in dreams, the body sleeps, but the soul awakes. So it is with the sleep
of death, the body, that dies, but the soul does not die. There are some men
that are not afraid to teach you, That the soul sleeps as well as the body, and
that when the body dies and falls asleep, the soul likewise continues in a dull
Leth^rgy veternoso somno correptus, neither capable of joy nor sorrow, until
the resurrection.


Beloved, This is a very uncomfortable, and a very false Doctrine. They
endeavor to prove it from my Text, they say, That Stephen when he died fell
asleep; It is true in regard of his body, he fell asleep, but his soul did not
fall asleep, that which was stoned fell asleep, which was his body only; for
when he was stoning, he saw Jesus Christ standing ready to receive his soul
into heaven; Lord Jesus faith he, receive my spirit. Stephens soul could not be
stoned, though his body was stoned. So when Jesus Christ was crucified, his
soul was not crucified, I mean, when his body was killed, his soul was not
killed; indeed he did endure torments in his soul, which made him cry out, My
God, my God, why bast thou for saken me? But yet his soul did not die. So when
Stephen died, his soul went to Christ. It is true, when a child of God dies,
the soul goes to sleep, How is that? The soul goes to sleep in a
Scripture-sense, that is, it goes to rest in Abraham's bosom (o blessed sleep!)
it goes to rest in the embraces of God, it goes into the arms of its Redeemer,
it goes to the heavenly Paradise, it goes to be always present with the Lord.
But take heed of that wicked opinion, to say, that the soul sleeps in an
Anabaptistical sense, that is, That it lies in a strange kind of Lethargy,
neither dead, nor alive, neither capable of joy nor sorrow, until the
resurrection. Though Stephens body fell asleep, yet his soul did not fall
asleep, but immediately went unto Jesus Christ in heaven. Thus I have given the
Explication of the words.

Now give me leave to make some Application of all unto our selves.

Use I.
If the death of Gods children be nothing else but a falling asleep, then let
this comfort us against the deaths of our godly friends, though they die
nnnatural and violent deaths, though they be stoned to death, though they be
burnt to ashes, though they be sawn asunder, etc. Here is a message of rich
consolation, which as a Minister of Christ I hold out unto you this day, viz.
That the death of a child of God, let it be after what manner soever it will,
it is nothing else but a falling asleep, he goes to his grave, as to his bed;
and therefore our burying places are called (...), dormitoria, our
sleeping-house. A child of God, when he dies he lies down in peace, and enters
into his rest. And, as a man, when he is asleep, is free from all the cares and
troubles that he has in the day time; So the people of God, when they are
fallen asleep, they are free from all the miseries and calamities, crosses,
losses and afflictions that we are troubled with all; Therefore give me leave
to say to you, as Christ did to the women that followed him to the Cross,
bewailing and lamenting of him, O daughters of Jerusalem, Luk.23.27,28
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. So say I, o
weep not for those that are dead in the Lord, that are fallen asleep in Jesus
Christ, they are at their rests, they do not know the troubles that we are
troubled with all, Abraham remembers us not; They are not sensible of our
miseries and afflictions, let us weep for our selves, and for the miseries that
are coming upon us; and let us know, that when Gods children die they do but
lie in their beds until the morning of the resurrection, and then they shall
put on Stolam immortalitatis, the garment of immortality, and their bodies
shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ. And know one thing
more, which is all in all, viz. That when the body of a child of God falls
asleep, his soul immediately goes into the arms of Christ, and there lives for
ever in the embraces of Jesus Christ; though the body falls asleep, yet the soul
is received into Abraham's bosom. I beseech you, comfort one another with these
words.

Use 2.
Let me beseech the people of God that they would look upon death, not as it is
presented unto us in Nature's Looking-glass, but as it is set down in a
Scripture-dresse. Nature presents death in a very terrible manner; and it is
true, death is very terrible to a man out of Christ; but to you that are in
Christ, the sting of death is taken away, death is nothing else but a quiet and
placid sleep, putting off of our clothes, and a going to bed till we awake in
the morning of the resurrection. Death to a child of God is nothing else but a
putting off his earthly tabernacle. A going from an earthly prison into an
heavenly palace, a hoising up sail for Heaven. The letting of the soul out of
prison, as a bird out of the cage, that it may flee to Heaven: A change from a
temporary hell to an eternal heaven. A going out of Egypt into Canaan, and
therefore called (...) 2 Pet.1.15. is not mors hominis, but mors peccati, not
the death of the man, but the death of his sins. It is Sepultura vitiorum. It
is the pilgrims journeys end, the sea-mans haven; an absence from the body, and
a presence with the Lord. Let all Gods people look upon death through
Scripture-spectacles, and consider it as it is sweetly represented in this
Text! Remember blessed Stephen stoned to death, and yet falling asleep. And
remember also that excellent saying of Austin, That a child of God should be
as willing to die as to put off his clothes, because death is nothing else to
him but a sleep, and a departure from misery to everlasting happiness.

Use 3.
To beseech you all every night when ye go to bed, to remember this Text, and
especially to remember these four things.

First, When you are putting off your clothes, remember that you must shortly
put off your bodies. And

Secondly, When you go into your beds, remember that it will not be long before
you must go down into your graves. And

Thirdly, When you close your eyes to sleep, remember that it will not be long
before death (...) close your eyes. And

Fourthly, When you awake in the morning, remember that at the resurrection you
must all arise out of the grave, and that the just shall arise to everlasting
happiness, but the wicked to everlasting misery.

It is a saying of an Heathen man, That the whole life of a man should be
nothing else but Meditatio mortis, but a meditation of death. And it is the
saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that men were wise, that they understood this,
that they would consider their latter end. Beloved, it is the greatest part of
wisdom every day to remember our later end; That man is the only wise man, and
happy man in life and death, that is ever mindful of his death.

Quest.
But before I make an end, I must answer one Question, viz. Whether the death
of the wicked be not in Scripture compared to a sleep, as well the death of the
godly?

Answ.
I answer, That wicked men in Scripture are said to fall asleep when they die.
It is said of idolatrous Jeroboam, That he slept with his fathers. Of Baasha
and Omri, those wicked Kings, 1 King.16.6, 28.
That they slept with their fathers.

Quest.
But then the Question will be, In what respect is the death of the wicked
compared to a sleep?

Answ.
Even as a man which is asleep, sometimes has no benefit, rest nor ease
thereby; when the sick man awakes he is many times more sick then he was before
he went to sleep: Some men are much disquieted in their sleeps by hideous and
fearful dreams; Nebuchadnezzar when he was asleep, had a most scaring dream,
and when he awoke he was amazed there with. So it is with a wicked man; Death
to a wicked man is a sleep, but it is a terrifying sleep, the soul that goes
immediately to hell, where it is burned with fire that never shall be quenched,
and where the worm that never dies is always gnawing upon it. The body that
indeed lies in the grave asleep, but how? even as a malefactor that sleeps in
prison the night before he is executed, but when he awakes he is hurried and
dragged to execution; so the wicked man falls asleep in death, but when he
awakes, he awakes to everlasting damnation. But now a child of God, when he
sleeps the sleep of death, he sleeps in his Fathers house, and when he awakes,
he awakes to everlasting happiness.

Use 4.
And this makes way for the fourth and last Use, which is a Use of very great
consequence. And it is to beseech you all, that you would labor so to live,
that when you fall asleep, you may sleep an happy sleep. There is the sleep
that the wicked man sleeps when he dies, and there is the sleep that the godly
man sleeps when he dies. Now I beseech you, labor so to live, that when you
fall asleep, your sleep may be an happy sleep unto you, that when you awake in
the morning of the resurrection, it may be an awakening unto you.

Quest.
But then the great Question will be, How shall I do this?

Answ.
I shall give you four or five helps for this,

First, If you would sleep an happy sleep at death, then you must labor to
sleep in Jesus Christ; It is said, 1 Cor.15.18. Then they also which are fallen
asleep in Christ. And 1 These 4 14. If we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. What is
it to sleep in Jesus? To sleep in Jesus is to die in the faith of Jesus Christ.

2. To sleep in Jesus, is to die with an interest in Jesus Christ, to die as a
member of Christ united to him, as our head For you must know, that the dust of
a Saint is part of that man who is a member of Jesus Christ, and every believer
when he sleeps in the dust, he sleeps in Jesus Christ, that is, he lies in the
grave, and his dust is part of Christ mystical, and Christ as an head will
raise it up, and cannot be complete without it. Now then, if ever you would
sleep an happy sleep, labor to get a real interest in Christ, labor to live
in Christ while you live. And then, when you fall asleep, you shall be sure to
sleep in Jesus. There are many would have Christ to receive their souls at
death, and that say with dying Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: But if
ever you would have Christ to receive your souls when you die, you must be sure
to receive him into your souls whilst you live, if ever you would have him to
receive you into heaven, you must receive him into your hearts. No man makes a
will, but he says, Imprimis, I bequeath my soul unto Jesus Christ my Redeemer.
But how do thou know that Jesus Christ will accept of this Legacy? If thy
soul has not Christ's image upon it, if it be not regenerated and renewed,
Jesus Christ will never own it; Thou may bequeath it unto Christ, but the
devil will claim it, if thy soul has the devils image upon it, if it be a
swinish, polluted, unbelieving, unregenerate soul, thou may bestow it upon
God, but the devil will recover it out of Gods hands, pardon this expression,
it is not mine, but St Austins. Beloved, if ever you would reign with Christ
when you die, he must reign in you whilst you live: and if ever you would sleep
an happy sleep, you must live in Jesus that you may sleep in Jesus.

Secondly, In the second place, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep at
death, then you must take heed of overcharging your selves with worldly cares.
A man that is full of cares cannot sleep, therefore when men would sleep, they
lay (as the Proverb is) all their cares under their pillow, they labor to shut
all cares out of their mind: O take heed that you do not murder your souls by
the cares of the world; Beloved, a man that eats out his heart with worldly
cares, will never sleep an happy sleep, the cares of the world will choke all
the good seed of the Word of God; and therefore, as men when they sleep lay
aside all worldly thoughts; So if ever you would sleep an happy sleep, take
heed of overmuch carking and caring for the things of this world; and remember
what you have heard this day, and that will regulate and moderate all your
cares, Naked you came into the world, And naked you must go out of the world;
Why should we we take care for that we know not who shall enjoy after us?

Thirdly, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die, you must take
heed of sucking too much of the pleasures of this life; A man that eats a full
supper, will sleep very disquietly, therefore they that would sleep quietly use
to eat but light suppers; for when a man's stomach is overcharged, it takes
away his sweet sleep from him. So if ever you would sleep an happy sleep when
you come to die, O take heed of sucking too much of the pleasures of this life;
take heed of eating too large a meal of worldly delights, and of creature
comforts, these worldly pleasures will make the sleep of death unquiet unto
you. Oh let not Dalilah's lap, deprive you of Abraham's bosom! Remember that
David by Bathsheba's embraces, lost the embraces of God, I mean, the sense of
the embraces of God, the joy and comfort of them.

Fourthly, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep in death, then labor to work
hard for Heaven while you live. Oh how delightful is sleep to a weary man?
When a man has taken pains all the day, as the Traveller that has traveled
all the day, or the Ploughman that has been at work all the day, how quietly,
how soundly does he sleep in the night? O Beloved! If ever you would sleep an
happy sleep at death, then labor to work out your salvation with fear and
trembling, and give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. The
more you labor for Heaven the better, the sweeter will your sleep be when you
come to die. And remember this, That as much sleeping in the day time, will
hinder a man's sleep at night; So you that idle away the time of your providing
for Heaven in this your day, you that sleep away the minute upon which eternity
does depend, Oh you will have a sad sleep when death seiseth upon you. Take
heed therefore of sleeping whilst you live, that so your sleep in the night of
death may be comfortable unto you.

Fifthly, Lastly, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die, then
take heed of the sleep of sin; Sin in Scripture is compared to a sleep,
Awake thou that sleep, that is, thou that finnest. Sin is such a sleep as
brings the sleep of death. Sin brings the first death, and sin brings the
second death; All miseries whatsoever are the daughters of sin. If you would
sleep an happy sleep, and have an happy awakening at the Resurrection, then
take heed of the sleep of sin, Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead,
and Jesus Christ shall give thee life, Ephesians.5. 14. So Romans 13.11, 12, 13. with
which I will conclude; and I pray you mark it well, for it was a Text that
converted Saint Augustine, Knowing the time, Beloved, that now it is high time
to awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed:
The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light; Let us walk honestly
as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

FINIS.

