A PATTERN for all, especially for Noble and Honorable Persons, To teach them
how to die Nobly and Honorably. Delivered in a SERMON Preached at the solemn
interment of the corpse OF THE Right Honorable ROBERT EARL of Warwick. Who
aged 70 died April 19. And was Honorably buried, May 1. 1658. At Felsted in
Essex.

By Edmund Calamy B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I said, Ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most
High, but you shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes.

Rev. 14. 13. I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, etc.

Illius est nolle mori, qui nolit ire ad Christum. Aug.

Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.

De imperatore Theodosio fertur magis se gaudere quod membrum Ecclesia Dei
esset, quam caput imperii. Aug.

Ultima verba morientis Grynnaei.

Ut nunc triste mori est, sic dulce resurgere: quondam
Christus ut in vita, sic quoque morte lucrum.
In terris labor est, requies sed suavis in urna,
In summo venient gaudia summa Die.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL of WARWICK, Baron of Leeze.
Right Honorable,
THe noble favors which I received from your deceased father, are so many,
that I can never sufficiently express them, and (I hope) shall never be so
ungrateful as to forget them. The chiefest requital I can now make for them, is
to pray for your Lordship, That as you are his heir, and inherit his estate,
so you may also inherit his virtues; And that whatsoever was good in him, may
live in you.

For as it is a happiness, when a son is descended from religious Ancestors
(he being hereby made partaker of their good counsels, prayers, and pious
examples) so also it is an invaluable blessing, when a father has religious
and virtuous Utin^m caelebs vixissem, aut orbus periiss^m. Prorsus faelicem
suturum fuisse (inquit Ausonius) si hunc filium n^n generass^t.
children. It was a sad complaint of Augustus, O that I had lived a Bachelor,
or dyed childlesse! And concerning Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, that he had been
perfectly happy, had he not begotten such a wicked son as Commodus was. And
that he did injure his country in nothing, but in being the father of such an
ungodly child,

Hoc solo patriae, quod genuit, nocuit.
Some children are blots and blemishes to their Parents, as Manasseh was to
Hezekiah. My prayer for your Lordship is, that you may be an honor, glory, and
crown of rejoicing to your Family, and by your godly and virtuous life make
your Father (though dead) to enjoy a kind of happiness upon earth while you
live. And that you may embalme his memory to posterity by the spices, and sweet
odours of your godly life, and conversation.

It ought not to be forgotten, but for ever to be remembered, That your Lordship
may not unfitly be called the Lords Passover. For when he took away by death
your only son and heir, he passed over you, and instead of the Father took
to himself the Grandfather. This remarkable Providence is alone sufficient to
teach you to pass the time of your sojourning here in 1 Pet. 1. 17.
fear; and to purge out the old leaven of sin and iniquity, that you may be
a new lump of sincerity and truth; and thereby have an undoubted interest 1
Cor. 5. 7, 8.
in Christ your Passover, who was sacrificed for you.

This ensuing Sermon was preached at your Fathers funeral, and it is now
dedicated to your Lordship as yours by birthright, and by many other
obligations. It will much conduce (if put in practice) for the encouraging of
you in ways of holiness, and righteousness. For it teaches wherein true
Nobility does consist, and that nothing makes a man truly noble, but piety,
and godliness. Sin defiles a person and makes him vile and loathsome, though
otherwise never so honorable. David calls a sinner a Psalm 15. 4.
vile person, and his son Solomon calls him a loathsome person. Antiochus the
great because Prove* 13. 5.
of his wickedness, is styled by Daniel a vile person. Sin makes us not only
like unto dogs, Dan. 11, 21.
vipers, and swine, but unto devils: Nay, Sin makes us devils. Christ himself
calls Judas a devil: and says, Revelations ^. 10. The devil John 6. 70.
shall cast some of you into prison, etc. meaning thereby wicked and devilish
men. He that is a slave to his lusts is base, and ignoble though a King or
Emperor. Nobility without virtue is but as a scarlet roabe upon a leaprous
body. A true Christian is of a noble extraction. He is the adopted Son of
God, brother to Jesus Christ, heir of God, and co-heire with Christ. He is
partaker of the divine nature, and without all controversy the Noblest man in
the world. The Lord give you grace to believe this, that as you are nobly borne
in reference to your earthly extraction, so you may be borne from above, and
borne of God in reference to your heavenly original.

This Sermon will likewise instruct your Lordship how to dye nobly and
honorably. And that is, to dye in the faith. He that dies in his sins, must
of necessity be condemned for his sins: but he that dies with a true faith in
Jesus Christ, shall certainly live for ever in heaven with Christ. It will
teach you to build your Sepulcher in your earthly Paradises, and in the midst
of your pleasures to remember your latter end. This will be a golden bridle to
keep you from unlawful, and to moderate the use of lawful pleasures. It sets
before you a double pattern for your imitation. The lives of the ancient and
religious Patriarcks, and many commendable, and praiseworthy things in your
Fathers life. And if your Lordship will endeavor to write after these
excellent copies and live as they lived, you will be happy both in life and
death, which that you may be, is, and shall be the prayer of

My Lord, Your humble servant in Christ Jesus. EDMUND CALAMY.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF THE Right Honorable ROBERT EARL of
WARWICK.
Heb. 11. 13. These all dyed in Faith.
THese words are a description of the constancy and perseverance of the Old
Testament Saints in holiness, notwithstanding all the difficulties and
discouragements they met with. They did not only live in the faith, but they
continued in it till death, and dyed in the same faith in which they lived. All
these dyed in the faith.

In the words we have two parts. First, The persons mentioned. Secondly, The
things mentioned concerning these persons.

1. The persons mentioned, these all. That is, (as some would have it) all the
forementioned Saints, Abel, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, etc. (except Enoch who dyed
not, and yet continued in the faith, and in that faith was taken up) These all.
But I conceive that the Holy Ghost Perkins in locum.
principally and directly, intends only such of the forenamed Saints, who were
heirs of the land of promise, and sojourned in Canaan as in a strange Country.
These all. That is, all those who lived in the second world after the flood,
Abraham, and Sarah, Isaac, and Jacob; the Husband, and the Wife; the Father,
the Son, and the Grandchild. These all.

2. The things mentioned concerning these persons.

1. It is said they dyed. These all dyed (...). Though they lived long, and
many score of years longer than we now do, yet they dyed at last. Though they
were very godly, and religious persons, though very noble, and honorable
persons, yet they dyed. These all dyed.

2. It is said, That they dyed in faith, (...). They died according to the
faith in which they lived, (...) is here put for (...), or (...) as ver. 9. 11,
17. Paraus in locum. Vetus juxt^ fidem. Beza, secundum fidem.
They died according to the faith; that is, in the faith, in ^ide, seu ^ide, seu
per fidem. If you would know what this faith was in which they died, you must
take notice of what follows in the text -- not having received the promises,
but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them,
and confessed that, etc. God had promised that the Messiah should come of their
seed, and that in him all the nations of the world Genesis 22. 18.
should be blessed. God had promised that he would give them the land of
Canaun, and not only an earthly, but an heavenly Canuan. Now all these died,
persuaded of the truth of these promises, embracing, (...).
or (as the Greek word signifies) kissing them. They saw them afar off, and
believed them. Even as a Mariner that has been long at sea, when he N^^pe
sicus navigantes terram, Abraham didicerat expectandos quadringentes annos.
Grotius in locum.
sees afar off the desired haven, claps his hands, and skips for joy. So did
these holy men. By the prospective glass of faith, they saw the performance of
that which came not to pass till four hundred years after, and rejoiced in it
as if already fulfilled. They died in the faith of the Messiah, believing not
only that he Per fidem illi morituri videbant and spe quadam amplexabantur
promissa quae non acceperant.

Metaphora a navigantibus qui portum eminus conspicati, laetis acclamationibus
salutant, and contingere gaudent. Paraeus.


should come in the flesh, but expecting salvation, and life everlasting by him
only. They died persuaded of salvation by Christ, and embracing, saluting, and
kissing the Lord Jesus. They died in the faith of the promised land of Canaan,
and they died looking, waiting, and resting upon God in Christ for a better
country, which is an heavenly, ver. 16. In Tria participia, (...), refero ad
promissionis rem significatam, patriam coelestem, quam unice desiderabant.
Hanc, inquit, in sua peregrinatione eminus conspicati sunt, consisi sunt,
amplexati sunt side. Paraeus.
a word, they died believing they should go to that City which has foundations,
whose builder, and maker is God, ver. 10. This was that blessed, happy, and
noble close, and end of days which these godly and honorable Patriarks made.
These all dyed in faith.

From the words thus expounded I shall gather these following inferences.

Doct. 1.
Doctrine 1.
That though a man lives never so long, yet he must die at last. These all
dyed though they lived long. Abraham lived one hundred seventy five years,
Isaac one hundred eighty, Jacob one hundred forty seven, and yet died at
last. Before the flood, some lived seven hundred, others eight hundred, others
nine hundred years* but it is added as the common Epitaph of them all, Mortuus
est, he dyed, Genesis 5. 8, 14, 17, 20, 31. Death is the haven of every man,
whether King, or beggar, rich, or poor. Joannes de temporibus Armor-bearer to
Charles the great, l^ved 361 years, but yet dyed at last in the year 1139. So
the old man of Bengala in the East Indies, who was 335 years old when he came
to the Portugals, from whom for his miraculous age he received a yearly
stipend, dyed at last.
Death is the gulf which will swallow us all up. Length of time cannot
prescribe against death. The longest day will have a night, and the longest
life a death. This life is nothing else but prolixitas mortis (as one says) or
tendentia ad mortem. A lingering kind of death, or a pacing, or journeying to
death. Some have a longer journey than others, but all must come to their
journies end at last. There is a statute in heaven for it, Heb. 9. 27. It is
appointed for all men once to dye. And death is called the house appointed for
all living, Job 30. 23. And the way of all the earth, 1 King. 2. 2. All flesh
is grass, Isa. 40. 6.

Use
Now then, if they who lived so long died at last, much more must we, who are
dwarfes in years in comparison of them, and who are nearer death when first
borne, than some of them were when an hundred years old. Let me beseech you
frequently, solemnly, and seriously to consider, That though we live never so
long and labor by physic, and temperate diet, and wholesome air to prolong
our lives, yet we must die at last. As the King of Persia told Constantine Mira
quidem haec, se^ ut video sicut in Persia, sic Romoe hom^nes moriuntur. Genesis ^.
19. Job 17 14. Heb. 13. 14. Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum, etc.
the Emperor, when he had showed him all the wealth of Rome; These are indeed
(says he) wonderful things which you show me, but I plainiy see, that as in
Persia, so in Rome also men are subject to death. For dust we all are and to
dust we must all return. We must say to corruption thou art my Father, and to
the worm, thou art my Mother and my sister. We have here no abiding City. As
we had a day to come into the world, so we shall have a day to go out of it.
The nature of man is wonderful prone to dream of an eternal abode, and of a
lasting happiness here upon earth. Saint Austin tells us of certain heretics
called Aeternales, because they held the world to be eternal. We have many such
Eternalists, who fancy to themselves a kind of eternity here upon earth, and
are ready to say with the rich fool in the Gospel, Soul Luk* 12 19, 20
take thy ease, eat drink and be merry, thou have goods laid up for many years,
and in the mean time forget what God said to him, Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be which thou
have provided? It is said of wicked men, Psalm 49. 11. Their inward thought is,
that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations, etc. They are ashamed to utter any such thing, but their inward
thought is that they shall abide for ever. Then it follows, ver. 13. This
their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their Ver. 12.
sayings. Nevertheless man being in honor abides not, etc. Though he thinks
he shall abide, yet neither he, nor his heirs shall be continued, but he shall
be like the beasts that perish. Therefore we had all need to pray David's
prayer, Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days Psalm. 39* 4.
what it is, that I may know how frail I am. There are few who know
practically and applicatively how frail they are. Most men say they are
mortal, magis usu quam sensu, more out of custom than feeling; for they live
as if their lives were riveted upon eternity, and as if they should never come
to a reckoning. Heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Aut velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Let us supplicate unto God, That he would teach us effectually to remember our
frailty, and to consider that there will come a dying time, and that it will
come certainly, shortly, uncertainly, suddenly and irresistibly.

1. That it will come certainly. There is an oporte^ for 2 Cor. 5. 10.
it. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. There is
nothing certain in life but death.

2. That it will come very shortly. It is not long, but Punctum est quod
vivimus, et puncto minus. Psalm 39. 5. Jam. 4 14. Job 9. 25, 26.
we must all go down to the house of rottenness. This life is but as an
hand-breadth, as a vapor, etc. swifter than a post, and passes away as the
swift ships, and as the Eagle that hastes to the prey, it is nothing else but
a salve vale.

3. Uncertainly, as to the time when, the place where, and the manner how. Your
Almanacks will tell you when the next Eclipse of the Sun and Moon will be.
But there is no Almanacks will tell you when the Eclipse of your lives will be.
This comes uncertainly; And therefore Ideo dies unus celatur ut expectentur
omnes.
uncertainly, to provoke us to be always ready, because we know not in what hour
the Son of man will come, Matthew. 24. 42, 44.

4. That oftentimes it comes suddenly like a thief in the night, 1 Thef. 5. 2.
Like an evil Babilus the Rom^n General in the very day of his triumph, was
killed with a tile from an house.
net in which the fishes of the sea, and a secret snare in which the birds of
the air are suddenly caught, Eccles. 9. 12. Luke 21. 35. Psalm. 73. 19.

5. That it comes irresistibly like pain upon a woman with child, 1 These. 5.
3. Death will not tarry till we be ready for it. The young man as Gregory the
great relates it) when he saw he must die cried out, Inducias Domine usque ad
mane, Lord tarry till to morrow; but God would not hear. Death comes
unavoidably, and if it finds us unprovided, it sends us to hell without
remedy. Add to this

6. It comes but once. It is appointed for all men once to die. When once dead,
no living again to provide Heb. 9. 27.
better for death. And therefore we had need be careful ut semel pie moriamur
(as Paraeus says) that we may once die Si semel moriendum est omnibus, ne
igitur immortalitatem in h^c vita sam^^em^^ Sisemel ta^tum moriendum* ut semel
pie moriamur operam demus, atque ad (...) omenta nos praeparemus.
well; for we cannot live again upon earth to live better.

7. That after death comes judgment, and after judgment everlasting
happiness, or everlasting misery. Death is nothing else but a passage to
judgment. A thorough-fare to heaven, or hell.

Did we consider these things, and consider them seriously as we ought to do,
it would work very many gracious and most glorious effects in us. Therefore
Moses says Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Psalm. 90. 12.
very emphatically: O that men were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end; and prays very earnestly. So teach us O Lord
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. The very
heathens have been much in the meditation of death. Plato tells us, that true
Philosophy is nothing else but a meditation of death. The Egyptians in all
their great feasts had a deaths-head served in as one dish, to teach them
sobriety and temperance in eating and drinking. This meditation if sanctified
will be

1. A sovereign antidote against all sin. Sum hoc remedium contra omnia
peccata. Would you have a preservative against all sin. Remember thy Mr. Ward
in one of his Sermons in print tells a story of one who gave a Prodigal a Ring
with a Deaths-head, with this condition that he should one hour daily for
seven days together look and think upon it; which bred a strange alteration in
his life.
latter end and thou shall never do amiss. As a copy is then safest from
blotting when dust is cast upon it, so are we from sinning while we remember
that we are but dust. Jerusalems filthiness was in her (...), because she
remembered not her latter end, Lam. 1. 9.

2. It will marvellously weane us from the love of the world. It is the
Apostles argument, 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. Love not the world, nor the things in
the world; -- for the world-passeth away. It passes away as Jonas his gourd
when he had most need of it; And as Absoloms mule which passed from under him,
and left him hanging on the tree. To what purpose do we provide multum viatici,
when we In the Popes inthronization before he is set in his chair, and puts on
his Triple-crown, a piece of tow, or wad of straw is set on fire before him,
and one appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi.
have but parum viae; much victuals, when we have but a short journey? The like
argument is used, 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30, 31.

3. It will make Jesus Christ and his righteousness very precious to us. For it
is Christ only that can unsting death, and sweeten it, and make it comfortable
and desirable. And therefore the Apostle accounts all things dung and dross,
that he might gain Christ and be found in him at that great day, not having
his own righteousness, Phil. 3. 8, 9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousuesse which is of
God by faith. And St. John Rev. 14. 13.
says, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, etc. He that dies in Christ, shall certainly go to Christ.

4. It will exceedingly quicken us to provide effectually, and to speed and
hasten our provisions for heaven. There is nothing will more provoke us to
labor for that life which never shall have an end, than the serious
consideration that this life will shortly have an end. These all died. This is
the first inference.

The second Doctrine.
Doct. 2.
That the best of men must die as well as the worst of 1 Pet. 3. 6. Enoch the
best man in his generation lived the shortest time; when others attained some
to above 900, others above 800, the least above 500, years of him the Text
says, all the days of Enoch were 365. yea^es, G^^. ^ 23.
men. These all died. These godly persons died, as well as others. Abraham the
Father of the faithful, and Sarah the Mother of the faithful. Godly Isaac,
(...) Jacob. These all died. The husband, and the wife. The father, the child,
and grandchild, all godly, and yet all these died. The first that ever tasted
of death was a godly man, even godly Abel. For the godly have the same
principle of mortality within them which others have. They dwell Job 4. 19.
in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. And they have the same
remainders of sin in them to make them liable to death which others have.
They have idem fundamentum mortis, and idem demeritum.

But besides these, there are proper and peculiar reasons why the godly must
die not only as well, but rather than others. For,

1. They shall never be freed from sickness, sorrow, and laborious
employments. They shall never have all tears wiped from their eyes till they
die.

2. They shall never be free from the persecutions of wicked and ungodly men,
and from the temptations of the devil till they die.

3. They shall never be rid of the body of sin, till they put off the body of
the flesh.

4. They shall never be perfected in grace till they die.

5. They shall never see God face to face, never be with Christ in glory till
they die. They shall never be clothed with the house which is from above, till
they be uncloathed of their earthly Tabernacle. Therefore blessed be God that
they must die. For if they had hope only in this life, they were of all people
most miserable.

Use
O that I could persuade the people of God to look upon death with a pair of
Scripture-spectacles. Death in it self considered, is the King of terrors, and
of all (...).
terrible things most terrible. It is as a fiery serpent with a biting and
destroying sting. But to you that are in Christ (...) all comfortable things
most comfortable. It is as a (...) without a sting. It is (as the brazen
Serpent was to the Isralites) not a hurting, but a healing Serpent. It is your
birthday. The birthday of heavens eternity. It is not an annihilation, or
utter extinction of you, 2 Pet. 1. 15. (...). Phil. 1. 23. (...). Luke 2. 29.
(...).
but an (...) as the Apostle Peter calls it, A going out of Egypt into Canaan.
An (...) as the Apostle Paul calls it. An hoysing up (as it were) of the sails
for heaven, a letting out the soul as a bird out of the cage of the body, that
it may fly to heaven. An (...) as old Simeon calls it, a departure from earth
to heaven: a going from your own houses, to your Fathers house: a putting off
of the rags of mortality, that you may be clothed with the robes of
immortality. In a word. It is an outlet to all misery, and an inlet to
perfect and perpetual happiness. It is sepultura laborum, vitiorum and
lachrymarum. The burying of all troubles, sins, and tears. When a godly man
dies, homo non moritur, sed peccatum hominis. The man does not die, but the
man's sins. Nothing dies in him totally and finally but sin. For the soul does
not die at all, but goes to live with God in endless happiness. And the body
(though turned to dust) shall rise again unto A godly man never begins to live
till he dies, and then he lives eternally. It was the Epitaph upon the Tomb of
Joachimus Camerarius, Vita mihi mors est, mors mihi vita nova.
the resurrection of life, and be made glorious, like unto the glorious body of
Jesus Christ. But the bloody issue of sin is totally and finally dried up by
death in every true child of God. Let all that fear the Lord comfort
themselves against the fear of death with these considerations. This is the
second inference.

Doctrine 3.
Doct. 3.
That rich, great, noble, and honorable persons must die, as well as others.
These all died. Abraham a Lord and a mighty Prince or a Prince of God, as he is
called, Genesis 23. 6. One who had three hundred and eighteen trained servants in
his family. Genesis 14. 14. One who was very rich in silver and gold and in
cattle, Genesis 13. 2. even he died. And Isaac his Son and heir a person not
only gr^^^, but very great, even to the envy of those who dwelt near him, as it
is Genesis 26. 13, 14. even he died. And so did Jacob the grandchilde, a man of
honor, and great renown, one who is called a Prince, and as a Prince had power
with Genesis 32. 28. Hos. 12. 4.
God and with men and prevailed over both. These all died. The Cardinal of
Winchester (commonly called the rich Cardinal, who procured the death of the
good Duke of Gloucester in the reign of King Henry the sixth, and was shortly
after struck with an incurable disease,) when he understood by his Physicians
that he could not live; murmuring and repining thereat, cried out, Fie? will
not death be hired? will money do nothing? must I die that have so great
riches? If the whole realm of England would save my life, I am able either by
policy to get it, or by riches to buy it. But yet all would not avail, to keep
him from dying of the same disease. What man is he that lives Psalm. 89. 48.
(says David) and shall not see death? The Hebrew is, What strong man lives
and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?
What Is become of Alexander the great? Pompey the great? Charles the great? Are
they not all dead? This day we have a sad example before us of the death of a
very great, and most Noble person. Wise men die (says David) as well as fools,
and great, as well as small. The mortal sith (says one) is Master of the
Royal Scepter, and it moweth down the lillies of the Crown as well as the
grass of the field. These all died.

And die they must though never so unwilling. I could tell a doleful story of a
great man, who when he saw there was no remedy but he must die, cried out in a
lamentable manner, let me live the life of a toad rather than dye. But yet he
died. And of another, who when he saw he must die, caused himself to be
carried to the place where his baggs of gold and silver were, and taking them
up in his arms, and hugging them, was heard to say, must you and I part? but
part they did though unwillingly. Rich men, and Noblemen must die whether
willing or unwilling.

And when they die they must carry nothing out of the Job 1. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 7.
world with them. Naked they came out of their mothers womb, and naked they
must return thither. They brought nothing into this world, and it is certain
they can carry nothing out. And therefore when a rich man dies the ordinary
saying is, what has he left behind him! for he cannot carry any thing with
him. There is a famous story of Saladine the great Sultan of Egypt, who when he
was dying caused his coffin to be carried thorough the camp where all his
^everus the Emperor looking upon his Urn had this expression, Tu virum capies
quem orbis terrae non capit. Thou shall contain him whom the whole world oun
ot contain. Sceptra ligonibus aequat.
soldiers were, with this saying, Saladinus totus Asiae Dominator ex tanto
imperio tantisque opibus, etc. Saladine the great Ruler of all Asia, of all his
Empire, and all his wealth carries nothing out of the world with him, but his
coffin and his winding sheet. Death is the greatest of Levellers. It levels the
mountains with the valleys. The Skeletons and bones of great men have no
inscriptions, or titles of honor put upon them. Diogenes told Alexander that
he could find no difference between the bones of his Father Philip, and other
men's bones. When the Chesse-men are put into the bag they are all alike.
There is no difference between the dust of an Earl, and of a beggar.

Use
The only use I shall make of this is, To beseech those who are great in estate
and in honors to remember that they must die as well as others. Though they be
as Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
Gods upon earth, yet they must dye like men. It is no easy matter to persuade
rich and noble persons to remember their mortality. Lewis the eleventh King of
France in his last sickness commanded his servants not to name the word Death
unto him; But when he saw there was no remedy, he sent for the Holy water from
Rhemes, together with Aarons rod, as they called it, and other holy relics,
thinking therewith to stop deaths mouth, and to stave him Epit. Hist. Galt.
off; but it would not be. O miser (says one thereupon) hoc assidue times quod
semel faciendum est? hoc times quod in tua manu est ne timeas? Pietatem assume,
superstitionem omit; mors tua vita erit, and quidem beata and aeterna. O
miserable wretch, why do thou daily fear that which one day must come to
pass? why do thou fear that which is in thy power not to fear? leave off
thy superstitions, labor after true piety, and then thy death will become
life, yea a most blessed and eternal life. If I be not mistaken this was one
reason why Ahashueroah would Ester 4. 2.
not suffer any clothed with sackcloath to enter his Courtgates; least his
excessive mirth and jollity should be damped, and interrupted by the sad
thought of death. The wise man tells us, O death how bitter is thy memory to
one who has great possessions! And indeed if the not thinking of death, could
free you from the stroke of death, it were worth the while not to think of
death. But whether you think of it, or not, death will come, and by not
remembering of it your lives prove to be full of abominations, and death is made
a trap-door to let you down into eternal damnation.

(...).
And therefore let me beseech you to imitate Philip King of Macedon, who
appointed a boy every morning to come to him and to say to him, Remember thou
art a man and must die. And the Emperors of Constantinople, who on their
Coronation day, had a Mason appointed to present unto them certain marble
stones, using these ensuing words,

Elige ab his saxis ex quo (invictissime Caesar)
Ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare velis.
Choose (mighty Sir) under which of these stones
Your pleasure is ere long to lay your bones.
Or if you will have a Scripture-example, Let me beseech you to imitate that
rich and great person, Joseph of John 19. 38.
Arimathea who built his Sepulcher in his garden. In the midst of all your
pleasures and pastimes remember you must shortly leave them. It was a wise
speech of Charles the fifth to the Duke of Venice, who, when he had showed him
the glory of his Princely Palace, and earthly Paradise, instead of admiring it,
or him for it, only returned him this grave and serious memento, Haec sunt quae
faciunt nos invitos mori. These are the things which make us unwilling to die.
To prevent this unwillingnesse, build your Sepulchers in your earthly
Paradises, and remember that you must very shortly die, and that after death
comes judgment. And that you must all appear before the tribunal seat of
Christ to give a strict and impartial account of whatsoever you Rev 10. 12.
have done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil. Let great men remember,
That great, and small must stand before the great God of heaven and earth at
the great day of judgment, and that their greatness will nothing at all
avail them at that day. Greatness without goodness will be but as a great
faggot to burn them the more in hell. They that are great in place, and greater
in sin, shall have P^tentes potenter torque^untur.
great damnation. Where God has bestowed great benefits, if they be
accompanied with great iniquities, God will plague them with great punishments.
It is said, Rev. 6. Ingentia b^eficia, ingentia vitia, ingentia supplicia.
15, 16. The Kings of the earth and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, etc. hid themselves in the dens, and in
the rocks of the mountains: And said to the mountains* and rocks Fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne and from the wrath
of the Lamb, etc.

Therefore let rich men labor to be righteous as well as rich, and great men
to be good as well as great! for riches without righteousness is but as a
golden jewel in a swines snout, and greatness without goodness is, but as the
greatness of a man sick of the dropsy which is not his happiness, but his
disease.

Genesis 2. 23.
Remember Abraham* who though he was a Lord and a mighty Prince, yet he was
also a friend of Gods, and the Father of the faithful: Though he was rich in
gold and silver, yet he was richer in faith and obedience. And though he had
three hundred and eightteen trained servants in his house, yet he was exactly
careful to train them all up in the Genesis 18. 20.
ways and Commandments of God. And remember Jacob, and how God himself
changed his name, and called him Israel because he wrestled with God, and as a
Prince had Genesis 32. 28.
power with God and man, and by prayers and tears prevailed over them. When
greatness and goodness meet together, it is like apples of gold in pictures
of silver; It is as an embroidery upon an embroidery. And therefore let great
men labor to be good men. The more you have of holiness the fitter you will be
for happiness. The more you have of grace, the fitter you will be for glory.
This is the third inference.

Doctrine 4.
Doct. 4.
That it is not enough for a Christian to live in the faith, but he must also
die in the faith. This text takes notice of the constancy and perseverance of
these holy men. They persevered in the faith unto the end maugre all
oppositions and temptations to the contrary. They did live in the faith, and
continued living in the faith, and as they lived so they died. These all dyed
in faith. Perseverance in grace is maximum donum Dei (says Austin) the
greatest of Gods gifts, or graces, without which no other gift, or grace, will
avail unto salvation. Therefore Christ says, he that Mat. 24. 13. Rev. 2. 10.
Perseverantia sola coronat. Nemo Christianus nisi qui ad sinem usque
perseverave^it. Ter^^l. de praescript. Fz^k. 18. 24.
endures to the end shall be saved. And be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee the crown of life. No grace will make us worthy to obtain the
crown of glory, but perseverance: he that would go to heaven must not only live
well, but die well. Though a man continue never so long in holiness, yet if he
fall away before his death, all his righteousness that he has done shall not
be mentioned; in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he
has sinned in them shall he dye. If Methuselah who lived nine hundred sixty
nine years had fallen away from grace the last year of his life he had been
undone for ever.

Use
Wherefore my beloved brethren let me beseech you not only to believe, but to
persevere in believing, not only to be holy but to persevere in holiness, and
as the Apostle 2 Cor 7. 1. (...).
says, To perfect holiness in the fear of God. The Greek word is to finish
holiness. The beauty, glory and goodness of every thing is when it is
finished. A garment till it be finished is of no use, nor a shop, nor a house
till finished. A house half built, and half unbuilt is good for nothing. The
excellency of a Christian is not only to be holy, but to finish holiness, not
only to have a good beginning, but a happy closure, and conclusion of his life.

This is a necessary lesson in this Apostatizing age wherein so many sons of
the morning, and children of high illumination are fallen into the darkness of
sin, and error: and many, who in outward appearance were as fixed stars, are
now proved falling stars; in so much, that if Mr. Fox were alive again, he
would see cause rather to write a book of Apostates than a book of Martyrs. And
there are also some risen up amongst us, who (being many of them Apostatized
themselves) begin to preach the Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints. Give me
leave therefore to persuade you, 1. To be rooted and established in the
Doctrine of Perseverance. 2. To practice the Doctrine of Perseverance.


Impossible est quod somel vivificavit Deus, ab ^odem vel ab alio occidi.
Origin. in Jerem. Hom. 1.
1. To be rooted and established in the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the
Saints. And to believe that whosoever is truly united unto Jesus Christ by a
lively faith, shall be so preserved by Christ in the use of all Gospel-means,
that he shall never totally and finally fall away. Christ Jesus at the day of
judgment will have a complete body mystical, as well as natural. He will not
loose any of his real members, for then his body should be incomplete. There
was a book written in King James his days by Bertius, of the Apostasy of the
Saints. This book the forenamed King calls (in a Repertus est ja^ pridem Petrus
quidam Bertius Cacotheologus Leydenfis qui librum edere baud veritus est titulo
^^rte ipso ex^crabile^ de Apostatia sanctorum. Robert. Abbot professor Regius
Dr. Owen. Dr. Kendal. Romans 8. 30. John 8. 35. John 10. 27, 28, 29.
letter written to the States of Holland) A book with a blasphemous title. And a
learned Professor of Oxford calls it a book with an execrable title. And surely
if it was blasphemous and execrable then, it is as bad now. I will notenter
upon the controversy: there are books lately written to very good purpose for
the justification of the doctrine of perseverance. To me it is sufficient; that
God has said it; and shallnot he do it? he has said, whom he justified, them
he also glorified. He has said, The servant abides not in the house for ever:
but the Son abides ever. He has said, my sheep hear my voice and I know
them, and they follow me, and I will give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them o^t of my hand. My Father
which gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out
of my Fathers hand. He has said, I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart Jer. 32. 40. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
from me. He has said, Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, the Lord knows who are his, etc. Though Hymeneus and
Philetas have not stood sure, yet the foundation of God stands sure. He has
Phil. 1. 6.
said, being confident in this very thing, that he that has begun a good work
in you will perform it until the day of Christ. And that we are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. And whosoever is borne of God does
not commit 1 John 3. 9. Luke 22. 32.
sin; for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of
God. He has said, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. And he is
now in heaven at the right hand of his Father making intercession for us. And
the chief end of his intercession is, that God would uphold and continue us in
his favor unto the end: Christ does not intercede (as some would have it) That
God would save us if we persevere. (There is little need of this, and less
comfort in it) But he intercedes, that we may persevere. And God in the
Covenant of grace, does not only promise to give us heaven if we believe, and
persevere; but also to give us in the use of means to believe and persevere.

Now then, if God the Father has decreed the perseverance Sanctam Ecclesiam
Christus secundum praescientiae suae gratiam de in aeternum permansuris sanctis
construxit. Greg. in Cantic. cap. 3.

Aurum, quod pravis Diaboli persuasionibus sterni, ficut lutum, potuerit, aurum
ante oculos Dei nunquam suit; and qui seduci quandoque non reversuri poss^nt,
quasi habitam sanctitatem ante oculos hominum videntur a^ittere, sed came ante
oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt. Gr^g. Mor. lib. 34. cap. 13.


of the Saints; if he has promised that they shall persevere, and that he will
enable them by his power unto it. If God the Son has prayed that the faith of
all those who were given to him by the Father should not fail, and if he ever
lives to make intercession for them, that they may never utterly fall. If God
the holy Ghost be given to the Saints to abide in them for ever, and if the
seed of God abides in them to keep them from total and final Apostasy; then we
may safely conclude; that the Doctrine of the perseverance of the Saints is
most agreeable to Scripture, and that it is our duty to be steadfast and
unmovable in it.

Quest. Did not Saint Austin himself the great Champion of free grace, against
the Pelagians, hold the doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints? For though he
says, That an elect justified person shall never finally fall away, yet he
seems to say, that there are many truly justified who are not elect, and that
justification, and election are not terms convertible. And that many are
justified by a faith working by charity, who (not being elected) fall away
totally and finally.

Answ. I must not deny but that this opinion is charged upon St. Austin by some
learned men; and a Reverend Divine has lately in a book printed about this
subject asserted it as a thing undubitable and without controversy, and for
this end he brings many sayings out of his works which favor this opinion. But
this learned brother may, if he please, read an answer to most of those
quotations long ago given by Bishop Abbot in his animadversions Cap. 8.
upon Tompsons Diatriba de amissione and intercisione justificationis and
gratiae. And he may likewise find many sayings brought out of St. Austin which
do most fully and clearly prove, that he held not only that no elect man can
finally fall away, but also that none but the elect are justified, and that
those who are truly justified can never fall away. As for example. Non ergo
alios, sed quos praedestinavit, ipsos and vocavit; ill^ s^ilicet vocatione
secundum propositum; nec alios sed quos ita vocavit, ipsos and justificavit;
nec alios, sed quos praedestinavit, vocavit, justificavit, ipsos and
glorificavit, illo utique fine, qui non habet fiuem. Depraedestin. sanct. cap.
17.


God (says Austin) calls none with that calling which is according to his
purpose, but such whom he has predestined; and he justifies none, but those
whom he thus calls; and glorifieth none, but those whom he has
predestined, called, and justified, etc.

Again, speaking of the vessels of wrath and of the reprobates he says, That
God brings none of them to sound Istorum (id est vasorum irae five ^eproborum)
^eminem adducit Deus ad poenitentiam salubrem and spiritualem, qua homo in
Christo reconciliatur Deo, sivem illis longior^m* patientiam (quam electis.)
sive non imparem pr^beat. Aug. Contra. Julian. Pelug. lib. 5. cap. 4.
and spiritual repentance, by which a man is reconciled to God in Christ,
whether he waits longer on them, (then on the elect) or shorter.

In another place he says, That God does not forgive the Non ^mnium Deus, s^d
little quos praescivit, and praedestinavit, delicta dimittit. Aug. contra.
adversar. leg. and prophet. lib. 2. cap. 11.
sins of all men, but only of those whom he has foreknown and whom he has
predestined.

-- Non visibilem Baptismum quem possunt habere and alieni qui regnum Dei non
possidebunt, sed hoc donum commendat Spiritus sancti, quod proprium est eorum
tantum, qui reg^abunt cum Christ^ in aeternum. -- Et poste^ multa eni^s munera
Dei possunt habere and alieni, etc. ipsa etiam quae domui Doi data sunt*
nonnulla ex eis habent alieni, id est, non possessuri regnum Dei, etc. Hoc est
ergo donum spiritus sancti proprium sanctorum, unde nem^ communicate alienus.
Hoc deest omnibus malignis and gehennae filiis, etiamst christi baptism^
baptizentur, sicut Simon ^uerat baptizatus, etc. Aug. de unitato Eccl. cap. 23.
Again, he says in another place. That the gift of the holy Ghost, to wit,
the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost is given only to
those who shall reign with Christ for ever in heaven. Strangers (says he)
that is such who shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven, have some of those
things which are given to the house of God. But the gift of the holy Ghost is
proper to the Saints, of which no stranger does communicate, that is, no man
that shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven. This is wanting to all the
malignant, and sons of hell, although they are baptized with the baptism of
Christ as Simon Magus was. Therefore he calls that a peculiar fountain of
waters running down the streets of the Saints, and no where else.

In other places he says, That Christ justifies none but those who are
members of his body. And no man is made alive by the Spirit of Christ, but he
that is a member of his body. And Non justificat Christus nisi corpus suum.
Aug. ep. 5. De spiritu Christi non vivit nisi corpus Christi. Iden in Joan.
Traictat. 26. Non est autem rever a corpus Christi, quod non erit cum ^o in
aeternum. Idem de Doctrine. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 32.
that no man is indeed and in truth a member of Christ's body, who shall not be
with him in heaven to all eternity. These places and many more which might be
brought and are brought by the forementioned Author, are sufficient to prove
that according to the mind of St. Austin none but the elect of God are in time
effectually called, and really justified and pardoned, and made partakers of
the holy Ghost and become real members of Christ's body, and therefore the
effectually called, and justified, etc. can no more fall away than the elect,
which all confess to be under an impossibility of Apostasy in St. Austins
judgment.

2. Let me persuade you not only to believe, but to practice the doctrine of
perseverance: For there are Diverse learned men that are so much scandalized at
the great Apostasy of some eminent professors in our unhappy days, that they
begin to be staggered, and to doubt of the truth of the doctrine of
Perseverance. But these men forget the saying of the Apostle, They went out
from 1 John 2. 19*
us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest,
that they were not all of us. For my part, I conceive, that these Reverend and
learned men should rather doubt of the truth of their graces whom they see thus
foully to A postatize, than of the truth of the Doctrine of Perseverance. But
howsoever, let us take heed of laying this stumbling block: least by our
practical Apostasy men should begin to turn Doctrinal Apostates. Let us labor
to dye well, as well as to live well, to continue and persevere in well-doing.
It is the great commendation of the Saints in the text, That they died in the
faith. These all dyed in faith. Remember what Christ Luke 8. 62.
says, No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking Heb. 10. 38, 39.
back is fit for the Kingdom of God. And what the Apostle Paul says: If any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: but we are not of them
who draw back unto perdition, etc. And what the Apostle Peter says* 2 Pet. 2.
21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Luke 17. 32.
commandment delivered to them, etc. Remember also Lots wife. She did only look
back, she did not go back, and yet she was turned into a pillar of salt. As God
has fire and brimstone for a Sodomite, so he has a pillar of salt for an
Apostate.

Ob.
But why do you exhort us to persevere when as you tell us, that if we be true
Saints we cannot but persevere?

Answ.
1. We do not say, it is simply and absolutely impossible for a Saint not to
persevere. (For if you consider the Saints as they are in themselves, and the
mightiness and multitude of their spiritual enemies, it is impossible for them
not to fall away) But we say it is impossible upon supposition. Considering the
unchangeable nature of God, and the unchangeable decree and purpose of God, and
the unchangeable Mar 24. 24.
Covenant, promises and Oath of God, in this respect we say it is impossible.

2. Scripture exhortations are divine motives and means to persuade and enable
the Saints to persevere, and they are so far from interfering with, or
nullifying of the promises of faith and perseverance, that they are (many of
them) built and grounded upon them. Phil. 2. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Quest.
What means must I use that I may hold out and continue unto the end, and not
only live in the faith, but also dye in it.

Answ.
1. Dig deep in humiliation. The stony ground fell away for want of depth of
earth. Humility is the best preservative of grace. The lower the foundation,
the surer the building. Spiritual pride paves a causey to Apostasy. A chestnut
put whole into the fire will fly out. It is the broken heart only that will
persevere.

2. Labor for sincerity and uprightness of heart. As the firmness of a pillar
is in the uprightness of it (if once it begins to bow, it will quickly break.)
So the firmness and stability of a Christian is in his sincerity and
uprightness. Rottenness of heart betrayeth a man into Apostasy. A rotten apple
will quickly appear so outwardly; So will a rotten Christian. If ever you
would persevere, take heed of making use of Religion for the promotion of your
carnal interest. He that serves God for an earthly Kingdom, when he bath got
what he sought for, will forsake God as Jehu did. He that follows Christ only
for the loaves, will leave Christ when he has got them.

3. Labor for a tender conscience. This will keep us from the least degree of
A postacy. As hot water grow's cold by degrees: first it is lukewarm, before
it is stark cold: So a Christian declines into Apostasy by degrees. Lots wife
first lingered, and then afterward looked back: first we slack our pace in
Religion, then we stand still, and at last turn back. But now a tender
conscience will keep us from the least abatement of zeal and forwardness in
Religion.

4. Be not high minded but fear. I speak not of a fear of diffidence and
distrustfulnesse, but of a fear of diligence and watchfulness. He that would
be secure from fear, let him fear to be secure. Mr. Saunders by his fear of
falling away kept himself from Apostasy: whereas Dr. Pendleton by his
notorious presumption, and over-bold confidence fell away.

5. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. (...) will end in (...): Apostasy is the child
of unbelief. Faith will set us upon a rock higher than us, even such a rock
against which the gates of hell shall never prevail.

6. Take heed of the inordinate love of the world and of the base fear of men.
The love of money is reckoned by the Apostle as the root of all evil in general,
and more especially of Apostasy, 1 Timothy 6. 10. -- Which while some coveted
after they have erred from the faith, etc. And the base fear of men was the
cause which made thousands Apostatize in Queen Mary's bloody days. And
therefore if ever you would persevere, you must labor to love God above your
corruptions, relations, and possessions, and to fear sin more than the loss
of estate, or life. He that loves God above the world, will never forsake God
to gain the world. He that fears sin more than death, will rather dye than
sin.

7. Pray unto God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that they would uphold you
and enable you not only to live, but to dye in the faith. Pray to the Father
that he would keep you by his power through faith unto salvation: that he would
uphold you by his mighty hand and keep you from falling, as it is Psalm 37. ^4.
Psalm 94. 18. That he would put his fear in your hearts that you may never
depart from him. Pray to the Son, that he would apprehend you and hold you so
fast in his arms that none may pluck you out of his hands, and that you may
every day enjoy the benefit of his Intercession. Pray unto the holy Ghost that
he would abide in you for ever, and give you the Ephesians. 1. 14. Ephesians. 4. 30.
earnest of your inheritance, and seal you up unto the day of Redemption. So
much for the fourth inference.

Doctrine 5. Doct. 5.

That to dye in the true faith, is a noble, gallant, blessed, and happy ^anner
of dying; These all died in faith. Herein especially consisted the happy
condition of these godly Patriarks, that they lived, and dyed in the faith. It
is put down by way of commendation, and left upon record as a pattern for us
to learn to die by. They died in the faith of the Messiah, expecting salvation
by him only. They died persuaded of the promises and embracing the Lord Jesus.
Looking, waiting and confidently hoping for a City which has foundations,
whose builder and maker is God.

There is a double manner of dying. 1. A dying in sin. 2. A dying in faith.


1. A dying in sin. Of this we read, John 8. 24. If you believe not that I am
he, ye shall dye in your sins. This is a said manner of dying. If any should
desire me to give him a character of a man in a cursed condition, I would
answer, He is one who is dead in sin while he lives, and dies in his sins when
he dies. It is a happiness to be dead to sin, but to die in sin is misery
unexpressible. For he that dies in his sins shall certainly go into
everlasting damnation. He that dies in his sins dies out of Christ; and he that
dies out of Christ shall never go to Christ.

2. A dying in faith. This is a noble, gallant and blessed manner of dying;
heaven it self bears witness to this, Rev. 14. 13. I heard a voice from
heaven, saying unto me write, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, that
is, united unto the Lord Jesus Christ by a true and a lively faith. Such as
these are happy, if you will either believe a voice from heaven, or the voice
of the Spirit, for it follows in the text -- so says the Spirit. And they
are blessed from the very instant of their death. So it is in the same place --
from henceforth (...) from that very minute: for their souls go immediately to
God to enjoy perfect and perpetual rest and happiness, and their works follow
them.

It is a greater happiness to die in the Lord than to die for the Lord. If a
man die for the Lord, and be not in the Lord, he is not blessed in his death. A
man may die for the Lords cause, and not for the Lords sake, but out of
vainglory. This is hinted by the Apostle, Though I give my 1 Cor. 13. 3.
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. If I do it
not out of love to God, but out of love to my self and mine own praise, it is
nothing worth. But he that dies in the Lord is certainly blessed.

Use
The only use I shall make of this, is to beseech the New Testament Saints to
follow this Old Testament copy and pattern. You have been often taught how to
live well, give me leave to teach you this day how to dye well. It is not long
but you must all die. Let it be your care, that when you come to die, you may
die in the faith of the Lord Jesus. There is a double faith in which you must
labor to die; In fide quae creditur and qua creditur.
1. In the true doctrine of faith. 2. In the saving grace of faith.


2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Acts 15. 24. ^ Tim. 2. 18.
1. In the true doctrine of faith. For there are damnable doctrines as well as
damnable practices. There are doctrines of Devils as well as works of Devils. A
man may go to hell for heresy as well as ^or iniquity. The Scripture tells us
of some opinions which subvert the soul, and overthrow the faith: which
T^rtullian calls doctrines devouring a man's Dogmata salutis devoratoria and
Christianae religionis carcinomata. Jude 3. Heb* 10. 23.
salvation, and the cankers of Christian Religion. And therefore let it be your
care to avoid all soul-subverting doctrines, to contend earnestly for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, and to hold fast the ancient Catholic and
Apostolical faith.

Now if you ask me in what Religion I would have you to die; I shall quickly
return an answer without the least haesitation. In the true Christian
Protestant reformed Sr. Humphry Lynd^.
Religion. This is via tuta ad vitam aeternam, A safe way unto eternal life, as
a learned Knight has sufficiently made known to the world: my soul for yours
he that dies in this Religion, wants nothing in point of doctrine necessary to
salvation. For it is built wholly and only upon the Scriptures; It is purely
Apostolical, and teaches us to deny ungodliness and all worldly lusts, and to
live godly, soberly and righteously in this present world. It requires us to
believe in Christ for justification, and to manifest the truth of our faith by
our holiness toward God, and our righteousness, mercy and charity toward
our neighbor. And when we have done all to account our selves but unprofitable
servants, and to trust only to the merits of Christ for salvation. It has been
sealed by the blood of many Martyrs; and he that professes it and lives
according to the directions of it, may die with a tribunal-proofe confidence of
everlasting salvation. Let us therefore be steadfast and unmovable in this
faith: and take heed of the Arrian and Socinian heresies which unchristianize a
man, and of all doctrines that are contrary to godliness, which drown the soul
in perdition and destruction. Let us abhor the heresy, Idolatry and tyranny
of the Romish Synagogue, always remembering that sad text, If any man worship
the beast and his image, and receive his Rev. 14. 9, 1^.
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out witbout mixture, into the cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with ^^re and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.

Let us be sure, that when we come to die, we may be able to say with the
Apostle Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith. Bishop Jewel in his life.
Though I have lost my liberty, wealth, and honors, yet I have kept the faith;
And with that Reverend Bishop, I can deny my self, my estate, my reputation,
but I cannot deny my faith.

2. In the saving grace of faith. He that dies with faith in Christ, shall
certainly go to live in heaven with Christ. He that dies embracing Christ,
shall go from Christ, to Christ; from Christ by grace, to Christ in glory.

But then you must be sure that this faith be a true justifying-faith. A
heart-purifying, sanctifying, and world-overcoming faith. A painted faith will
never bring you to a real heaven. A dead faith will never please a living God.
O quam ^ulti ^um b^c van. i ^ide ad ater^os labores desce^d^^t.
Faith without works will send a man merrily to hell instead of lifting him up
to heaven. It is faith unfaigned, the faith of Gods elect, the faith which
works by lov^, which will make the hour of death desirable and comfortable.
And let me add

That you must not only labor to die with a true faith, Heb. 10. 22. (...).
but with a full assurance of faith; not only to die bel^eving, but fully
assured that your faith is of a right stamp. This is a heaven upon earth. This
will put you into heaven before you come to heaven. This will cause you to die
rejoycingly and triumphantly, as Stephen did, when he saw the heavens opened,
and Christ standing at the right hand of God ready to receive him; And as old
Simeon did with Christ in your spiritual arms, and singing a Nunc dimittis,
Now Lord let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. This then is thy great work O Christian, industriously to endeavor,
that when thou come to die thou may die in the true doctrine, and true
grace of faith, and in the full assurance of faith, that so thou may 2 Pet.
1. 11.
have an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

Quest.
But what must I do that I may be able to make this gallant and noble end?

Answ.
He that would die in the faith, must first live in the faith. For if you
observe it, it is not said in the text, that all without limitation died in
faith. But all these: that is, all those who lived in the faith, died in the
same faith in which they lived: These blessed Patriarks had not their faith to
get when they came to die, but they had got it in health. They lived a holy
life, and died a happy death.

Life and death for the most part are like the voice and the echo, the body and
the shadow. Such as the voice is, such is the echo. Such as the body is, such
is the shadow. Qualis vita, finis ita. If we would die happily, we must live
holily. If we would die gloriously, we must live graciously. If we would go to
Christ when we die, we must get into Christ while we live. If we would die with
assurance, we must while we live labor to get assurance* Woe be to those who
have their faith to get when they are dying, that begin to amend their lives
when they are putting an end to them. Woe be to those who begin to serve God
when they can do him no service. That begin to live when they are ceasing to
live. And sad is the condition of those, who have their evidences and comforts
to seek when they are going out of the world. And yet

I will not absolutely deny (as some rashly do) but that it is possible for a
man to live a thief and die a Saint, to live wickedly and to repent at death.
We have one, and but one example of this. But this is not Gods ordinary way;
and if I had ten thousand souls, I would not adventure one of them upon a
deathbed repentance. We must not think to dance with the Devil all day, and to
sup with Christ at night. To live all our lifetime in Dalilah's lap, and to go
to Abraham's bosom when we die. The ordinary way to die well, is to live well.
In a word, If you would die as Abraham did, you must live as he did: you must
imitate Abraham's faith, obedience, and heavenly-mindednesse. If you would die
as Jacob did, you must wrestle with God in prayer as he did. If you would
partake of their happiness when you die, you must be followers of their
holiness while you live. This is the fifth inference.

Doctrine 6.
Doct. 6.
That it is an unvaluable blessing when husband and wife, Father and child, and
child's child live and die in the true faith. These all died in faith. Not only
some of them, but all. Abraham the husband, and Sarah his wife. Abraham the
Father, and Isaac his Son, and Jacob his Grandchild. All these died in the
faith. Behold a true noble blood, a holy kindred, a blessed generation. Worthy
is Abraham of all honor who was the root of such a noble and blessed brood.
And worthy are Isaac and Jacob of so good a Father, who stained not their blood
by forsaking their faith, but held it as they received it, and lived and died
in the true faith handed to them by their Father.

Behold here you that are great in place and birth; behold, I say, wherein true
Nobility and Gentry does consist; and what is the fountain of all true honor.
It is to live and die in the true faith. In this faith Abraham died: and Isaac
his son and heir did not only inherit his fathers estate, but his fathers
Religion also. And Jacob the Grandchild follows both his father and
grandfather, and dies in the same faith with them. Behold here Jacob a true
Gentleman in blood. His holiness and Religion is in the third descent. Let
great men learn to adorn their Gentility and Nobility with these ensigns of
true honor.

It is a rare blessing when there is a succession of godliness in a family;
when godliness is entailed upon children, and childrens children. When a man
can say to God as Moses: O God thou art my God, and my Fathers God, and Exodus
15.
my Grandfathers God. There are many families in which there is a succession
of drunkards, swearers, and adulterers, etc. in which sin and iniquity is
entailed, of whom it may be said, my father was an adulterer, a drunkard, a
scoffer at Religion, so was my grandfather and so am I. This is a sad
pedigree. O labor for a holy succession. Let Parents write a fair copy to
their children, let them live and dye in the true faith, and let children
learn to follow such a copy. Let husbands be patterns and examples of
godliness to their wives; and let wives follow their good examples. Let wives
imitate Sarah, Parents Abraham, and children Isaac and Jacob. Let us and ours
so live, that when we come to die, it may be said of us, not that we died in
our sins, but as it is in the text that we died in the faith. These all died in
faith.

I have done with the text. But there is another text of which I must of
necessity speak something. And that is concerning the sad occasion of our
meeting here this day. Give me leave to speak to you in the language of 2 Samuel
3. 31.
David concerning Abner: Know you not that there is a Prince, a great man
fallen this day in Israel? and in the language of the children of Seth
concerning Abraham, Genesis 23. 6.
A Lord and a mighty Prince is this day to be buried: One who had so much worth
and excellency in him, that whosoever will undertake to speak of him needs not
fear (as Nazianzen says of his sister Gorgonia) least he should spea^ too
much, but rather least he should speak too little, and (...).
by coming so far beneath his due deserts, should dispraise him, even whilst
he is praising of him.

For without all controversy he was a person who had not only noble and
honorable titles, but was truly noble and honorable. It is an observable
speech of Gregory the great, A King may cause a man to be called a Nobleman,
but he cannot make a man truly noble. He may command such a man to be called an
Earl, or a Lord; But it is the noble mind which makes the man truly noble.
Such a Nobleman was the Earl of Warwick. He was not only a Nobleman by
Parchment, but he had a noble mind, a large heart, an intrinsecal worth and
excellency in him. His Nobility was inameled with humility. He was great in
place, but humble in carriage, as all who knew him will testify.

There was in him a blessed constellation, and consociation of Nobility,
humility, piety, and charity. He was not only a great man, but that which is
above all, he was (I hope) a godly and religious man.

I should be loath to give flattering titles to any man whether alive or dead;
for in so doing my Maker would soon Job. 32. 22.
take me away as Job says. It was well spoken by that Mr. Vines.
learned Minister who preached at the funeral of the Earl of Essex (a kinsman
of this Earls) That funeral encomiastickes of the dead do often prove
confections of poison to the living; for many whose lives speak nothing for
them, will draw the example into consequence, and be thereby led into hope,
that they may press a hackny Funeral Sermon to carry them to heaven. And St.
Austin if I be not much mistaken, does somewhere bitterly enveigh against those
Ministers who were overlavish in the commendation of the dead, telling us, That
there are many who are Laudantur ubi ^on sunt, and t^rquentur ubi sunt.

Bishop Halt.


commended where they are not, and in the mean time tormented with fire
unquenchable where they are. Sure I am that a learned Bishop does quote a
sharp censure (though in another case) of a Popish Casuist concerning
Noblemens Chaplianes, saying, that few confessors of great men went to heaven,
because by their base flattery they became guilty of soul-murder, and for want
of telling them of their faults, destroyed both their own, and their Patrons
souls. And therefore God forbid that I should say any thing this day for the
hurt and disadvantage of the living, whilst I am speaking in the praise and
commendation of the dead. And yet notwithstanding all this I should be loath to
offend in the contrary extreme. For I am not so straitlaced Dr. Tuckney at the
funeral of Dr. Hill.
or superstitious, as when any man's life has been eminently remarkable and
exemplary, lest I should be guilty of Idolatry in adoring him, to commit
sacrilege in robbing both the dead of his just praise, and the living of an
useful pattern for their imitation. And besides, (as the forementioned author
says) Though common Mr. Vines.
graves have no inscription, yet Marble Tombs are not without some Epitaph.
Heroical examples should not go with a common pass, but with a Trumpet. And
therefore I doubt not, but I may safely say without the lest suspicion of
flattery or falsehood concerning this honorable person,

That I have just ground in charity to believe, that this Noble Earl was not
only under the awe of Religion, but that he had the substance, and power of it
in his heart. And therefore his death is the more to be lamented by us, because
that goodness and greatness do so seldom center in one and the same person.
In the God of heaven they both meet. He is optimus, maximus; infinite in
goodness, as well as in greatness. But in the Gods upon earth they rarely
meet: They are many of them pessimi maximi, greater in vices than in riches. It
was a bold speech of Buchanan to King James, who sent a messenger to him when
he was dying to visit him, and to know how he did; Buchanan desired the
messenger to tell the King, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
That he was going to a place where few Kings come. Indeed the Scripture says,
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.
But yet some are, though not many. Such a one was Job, the greatest, and the
best man in the East. Such were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Such was Joseph of
Arimathea. And such a one was (I hope) Robert Earl of Warwick: And therefore
the loss of him is the greater. For great men are like looking glasses
according to which all the country dress themselves, and if they be good they
do a world of good. Acts 18. 8. Genesis 34.
When Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed, many of the
Corinthians hearing of it believed also. When Schechem and Hamor were
circumcised they quickly persuaded their people to be circumcised.

Let me tell you, That we have lost this day one of the best natured Noblemen
in England, and one who had not only a good nature, but (as I verily believe)
gracious principles, and religious inclinations, and dispositions.

He was religious,

1. In his own person: For he was very exact in closet duties. I have been
often with him at private prayer in his closet in which he was very zealous and
devout. And he has left behind him real manifestations of his personal
piety, by many religious collections written with his own hand for the good of
his soul.

2. In reference to his dear and near relations, both by giving them a good
example, and good instructions. And my prayer to God is; that though the
instructor be deceased, yet the instructions may live, and never die.

3. In his family-government. For he was very constant in his morning and
evening public service of God, and herein a rare pattern to the Gentry of the
Country: He would not suffer any sports or pastimes to divert him from his
daily public devotions. It is a great honor to God, and credit to Religion
when there is a form and outside (though but a form and outside) of godliness
in great families. This is like a candle set upon a hill to illighten all
inferlour families. It is reported of Theodosius the Emperor, that by his
religious carriage in his family, he made all his Court a nursery of religion.
And it is said of the house of George Prince of Anhalt, that for the good
Ecclesia, Academia, Curia.
orders therein observed it was a Church, an Academy, and a Court.

4. In his conscientious observation of the Lords day, and in causing the
Sermons preached to be repeated in his presence to the whole family. In his
frequent attendance when he was at London upon weekly Lectures, and by his
example and encouragement, drawing many persons of quality to our
congregations. And (which is very remarkable) in the Month in which he died,
he went constantly to the Morning-exercise at St. Martins in the fields,
thereby (as by a secret instinct) fitting and preparing himself for his death,
which happened toward the end of it.

5. In his extraordinary care and diligence in preparing himself for the
receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Herein he was very
exact in setting apart a sufficient space of time for selfe-examination. And
besides this, give me leave (without offense) to relate a passage which in my
opinion conduces much to his honor, and may through Gods blessing become an
example to his relations, and to the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Nation.
When he first came to the Sacrament at Aldermanbury, he freely presented
himself to the Minister and Elders to be examined: and although he gave ample
satisfaction, yet being at that time indisposed in body by reason of a sudden
distemper, he afterward wrote me a letter in which he signified, that if we
were not satisfied, he would rather come again, than come without giving full
satisfaction; here was humility in a high degree; here is a pattern to be
admired, and imitated.

6. In his faithfulness to the trust committed to him as in other things, so
more especially in disposing of his Church Livings. Herein he was very eminent,
and very exemplary, being always exactly careful to prefer able, godly, and
painful Ministers to them. And I doubt not, but there are thousands blessing
God in heaven for the good they have got by the Ministers put in by this Noble
Earl. The truth is, he was a great Patron and Mecaenas to the pious and
religious Ministry. We Ministers may say of him as they did of the Centurion,
he loved our Nation; we have great cause to weep over his hearse, and to bemoane
his death: For we have this day lost one of the greatest friends that the godly
and painful Ministers had in England.

7. I might add (if need were) as a further, and a most signal testimony of
his godliness, his singular care, that not only while he was living, but that
after his death also his Church Livings might be rightly disposed, but I
forbear.

8. There are three things yet behind which I must not omit.

1. He was bountiful and Prince-like in his hospitality and housekeeping.

2. He was very merciful and charitable to the poor members of Jesus Christ. I
have often and often been his Almoner to distribute considerable sums of
money to necessitous and pious Christians.

3. He was a liberal and most loving Master to his houshold-servants, and has
given competent pensions to all his old servants during life.

9. In a word: He was one who did not make use of religion for his own private
gain and interest; he had no politic design in professing godliness: his
whole aim both by sea and land, both in Parliament and in private was, to be
serviceable to Church and State, and in this particular he was a true Nathaneel
in whom there was no guile: he was a countenancer of religion in the worst
times,: he appeared for God and for his cause and servants, when it was both
dangerous and disgraceful in the eyes of the leading men of the Nation; he
received Mr. Buroughs (that eminent Minister of Christ) into his family, and
protected him for a long while, till at last he was forced to fly out of the
land. He was a very special friend unto that man of God of famous memory Dr.
Sibbs. To sum up all in a few lines, As it is said of Socrates (as I
remember) that he was so good a man that all that knew him loved him; and if
any man did not love him, it was because they did not know him. So it may be
said of the Earl of Warwick: All who knew him loved him, and if any man did
not love him, it was because he did not know him.

As for the manner of his death, it was somewhat sudden: but you must know,
that a child of God never dies suddenly, though he die never so suddenly;
though he may dye suddenly in regard of time, yet he never dies suddenly in
regard of preparation. A wicked man dies suddenly though he dies never so
lingringly, because he dies unpreparedly; but he that dies with grace in his
heart, cannot be said to die suddenly though he die never so suddenly. And yet
this sad stroke of death was not altogether unexpected. For when the funeral of
his Grandchild was delayed longer than he desired or expected, he was heard to
say, That if they tarried a little longer, they should carry him down also to
he buried with him. My hope is, That he dyed as these Noble Patriarchs in the
text, he died in the faith in which he lived. He dyed professing the true
doctrine of faith, and (I hope) having his heart adorned with the grace of
faith.

And let me assure you; that as he lived much desired, so he now dies much
lamented, especially by men professing godliness. I have heard a memorable
story of an ancient and religious Gentleman Mr. Knightly of Northamptonshire
(well known to some here) who coming to Leeze, and beholding the brave Parkes,
and goodly gardens, and other suchlike accommodations there to be enjoyed, was
heard to say to this our Earl, My Lord, you had need be very good, it is ill
going to hell from such a Paradise: it will be a doleful and dismal exchange.
Or as others relate it; My Lord, you had need make sure of heaven, or else when
you dye you will be a great loser. A rare speech worthy to be laid to heart by
all Noble persons. Now I verily persuade my self, that this our dear and
honorable Christian brother is no loser, but a great gainer by his death. He
is gone (I hope) from earth to heaven, from an earthly Paradise to a heavenly
Palace, from a house made with hands to a house made without hands eternal in
the heavens.

It is true (and it must be confessed least I should be accounted a flatterer)
he had his failings, and his many infirmities; which I trust Jesus Christ has
covered with the roabe of his righteousness. My prayer to God is, That all his
infirmities may be buried in the grave of oblivion, and that all his virtues
and graces may supervive, and live in his son and heir; that as he inherits
the estate, so he may also inherit the virtues of his Father. And that
religion, piety, and godliness may be entailed upon the Noble family of the
Riches, from one generation to another till the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ
unto judgment; That while they live they may be professors of the true faith,
and endued with the heart-purifying grace of faith: And when they come to dye,
they may make that gallant, noble, and blessed closure and conclusion of their
days which these godly Patriarchs in my text did, of whom it is said, These
all dyed in faith.

FINIS.

