The Kings Majesty's SPEECH

In the House of Lords in PARLIAMENT on Tuesday the 14. day of December. 1641.

For the raising of Forces to reduce the Irish Rebels to a Loyal subjection.

Also a Letter sent by the Lord chief Justices of Ireland to the House of
Parliament, December. 14. 1641. concerning their miserable and distressed estate
in the County of Conn^; the Rebels being within 4. miles of Dublin.

Likewise the Copy of a Letter sent from the Major of Plimmouth, discribing
the insatiable Cruelty of the Rebels done to the Protestants in all places
where they come.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

His Majesty's Speech the 14. day of December, 1641.
My Lords and Gent.
THe last time I was in this place J minded you to make what speed you could to
raise forces to reduce the Irish Rebels to a loyal subjection. The same J
shall now inculcate, for J above all things in this world prize the peace and
safety of my good Subjects, and of all rebellion J hate that of the Popish
faction, J hear daily of the woeful estate of my Protestant People in Jreland,
and do understand how my house of Commons have passed the Bill for raising of
forces for this expedition; And that the Bill sticks with you my Lords, for
which J give you no thanks; As to the Declaration I have no pleasure in that,
but that actions may be transacted in a matters of this consequence.

This is the full effect of the SPEECH.

The Report of Mr. John Pym Esquire, and one of the Burgesses in the
Parliament House, to the Committee concerning the affairs in Ireland.
STill does the Protestants echo forth lamentable and woeful complaints, and
as it were desp^yre of safety. For it was reported to the Committee for Irish
affairs that more Counties have collected their forces and join with the
Rebels.

They are marched within four miles of Dublin, pillaging of houses and driving
away Cattle, and stop the passage from whence they receive provision, to the
great grief and fear of his Majesty's poor Subjects the Protestants of
Ireland.

The Rebels made public Proclamation and maintained it with a general oath
for to be all true unto the Church of Rome; also they proclaim and confess
that King Charles is their lawful King and Governor, making a Protestation.
They took up Arms in defense of their Religion, not in any m^lice against his
Majesty, to which intent they spoke to the Lord Dillon to send Letters to the
King, but this can be no less then dissimulation, for they which love the King
will not persecute his Liege people by fire and Sword, as they have, and daily
do, and yet would they make us believe they love the King. From their power
Lord keep him for ever, and never let him be so unfortunate as to fall into
their hands, for then upon my life J am persuaded they would exile from their
hearts both duty, Love, and mercy, two Suns must not shine in one Climate,
Tyrone must have nothing to do where King Charles has authority

Although now he exalt himself as his Father did before him. Let him quickly
return to his Spanish preferment, from England, Scotland, or Ireland.

Other Letters came, that the Rebels expect Ammunition from foreign parts,
that the old Proverb may be made true, the Devil helps his servants.

Wherefore the Lord ChiefeJustices of Ireland, desired the Parliament to send
their poor Subjects and friends some relief of men and money, about which
there did arise some debate concerning sending of men out of this Kingdom, I
mean also concerning a press unless it were done by Act of Parliament, but
now it is resolved upon the question that aid shall be speedily sent unto the
poor afflicted Protestants of Ireland, the Commanders in London look every
day when their Commission should be sealed up, and then they enter into pay.

Their fingers itch until they are amongst the Rebels to quell their pride,
and release the Protestants from their bondage, in which mind that they may
always keep I pray.

There was a Letter sent from the Major of Plimenth to this effect.
THat the Rebels had seized upon diverse strong Castles and Forts, and call
themselves ambitiously the Queens Army.

Oh impudence: what an unheard of large Kingdom have thou?

Thou have usurped the Dominions of conscience, as for Piety thou have just
nothing to do^ with it.

Thou art daughter to pride, and thy Father was a bloody murderer.

Thou have joined issue with the inhumane Rebels of Ireland, else would they
not have dared to have profaned the name of our Queen in so treacherous a
design.

The Rebels want Arms, not above half of them are Armed according unto
Martial Discipline, the rest some arm themselves with skanes, others
Dung-forks, others Pick-^xes, not having any thing else to defend their bodies,
wherefore should the English and Scottish supplies make have, they might easily
be overthrown.

A Letter sent by the Lord chief Justices to the Parliament upon the 14. day
of December. 1641.
ON which day came Letters to this purpose, Relating the doleful persecution
the Protestants of Ireland by the Rebels, besides that in the County of Conne,
they cut of the Members of men, Ravish the women, put out their eyes, slit
their noses, and they are upon March, and are arrived within four miles of
Dublin.

Confound them O Lord as thou did the Host^ of the Assyrians, let them not
triumph over the tribe of Judah, turn thy face O Lord from their sins and
ours, settle peace O Lord amongst them there, and we beseech thee continue is
here, that with one voice and one heart we may praise and glorify thy Holy
name.

FINIS.

