THe Persons entrusted, by the Parliament to take the names of all such persons
within the City of London, Suburbs thereof, and Borough of Southwark, as
shall voluntarily offer themselves to be listed for Soldiers, to serve under
the Command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex, ordained by both Houses of
Parliament to be Captain General of the Army, to be raised for the defense of
Religion, His Majesty's person, the Kindom, and both Houses of Parliament) do
declare, that upon Thursday the 28. of this present July by nine a clock in the
morning, they will attend the said Service in the New Ground enclosed by the
Artillery Company near Finsbury, at which time all persons already listed or
to be listed, are to attend, and shall then receive direction from his
Excellency concerning their pay and Service.

And the said persons do give further notice, that they will likewise attend
the said Service from day to day, beginning at the hour beforementioned, as
long as shall be needful.

A ROYAL PROTESTATION Made by the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, To the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Gentlemen, now assembled at Beverley in Yorkshire.
July 2^. 1642.

And prescribed to be taken by all His Majesty's followers.

The said Protestation tending to the preservation of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws of the Kingdom.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.

Whereunto is annexed likewise the Parliaments Protestation to maintain the
said Religion, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the liberty of the Subjects.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons that this be Printed and Published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.



London, Printed by T.F. for I. Horton. July 28. 1642.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A Royal Protestation made by the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
To the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Gentlemen, now assembled at BEVERLEY
in Yorkshire.
HIs Majesty taking into his Royal consideration the great distraction of the
State, and the general dissentions in the Church about principles of Religion,
and knowing that there are many potent enemies in this Kingdom that daily
labor to ruin and confound the true Protestant Religion, and the professors
of the same, and that they may the better perfect their designs, they have out
of a habit of Love, and seemingly professing themselves Protestants, although
their hearts are quite contrary, they being subtle spies, they only watch
advantage to undermine the Rubric of the Church and Kingdom, all which His
Majesty taking notice of, and fearing that in this great confluence, there
might be some of that faction which might under pretense of taking part with
his Majesty, gain power to perfect their own purposes, he thought it
necessary to declare himself to unfold his intentions, withal adding a
Protestation taken first by himself, and afterward to be taken by all those
that have any command or employment under him.

Charles R.

We do declare, that we will not require any obedience from you, but what
shall be warranted by the known Laws of the Land.

And We do further declare, that we will defend the true Protestant Religion
established by the Law of the Land, the lawful liberties of the subjects of
England, and just Privileges of the estates of Parliament, and shall require
no further obedience from you, th^n as accordingly we shall perform the same.

And We do declare, that We will n^^ ing^ge you in any War against (...)
^^rliament except it be for our ^ defense and safety against (...) do
insol^^^ly invade, or at^^^^t against (...), or such as shall adhe^^ (...).

Likewise the Lords and (...) there assembled do declare that they will defend
the true protestant Religion, the Law of the Land, the lawful liberties of the
subjects of England, and just privileges of your Majesty, and both houses of
Parliament.

Likewise the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have thought it
necessary to declare the grounds of their proceedings, that the world
especially those that are apt to waver in their Resolutions, may be fully
satisfied, especially concerneing matters of Religon, that it is from their
purposes to let loose the Reins of golden discipline and Government in Church,
to leave private persons in particular Congregations to take up what form of
divine service they please, for they hold it requisite, that there should be
throughout the whole Realm conformity of that order which the Laws enjoyne,
according to the word of God

Likewise they do declare that all their actions and intentions, counsel and
determinations, tend to the advancement of His Majesty's Honor, the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the preservation of the Laws, and
fundamental institutions of the Laws of this Kingdom, the upholding of his
Majesty's just and Royal Preogative, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and the liberty and propriety of the Subject.

All which things being observed both by his Majesty and all those employed by
him, they doubt not but God will bless this Parliament with such good
success, as it shall be the beginning and foundation of more honor and
happiness to His Majesty, then ever yet was enjoyed by any of his Royal
Predecessors.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this be Printed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.


FINIS.

