Two solemn COVENANTS MADE Between God and Man: viz. The Covenant of Works,
And the Covenant of Grace.


Clearly laid open, distinguished, and vindicated from many dangerous opinions;
the right knowledge of whch will be very profitable to all those that have
escaped the first, and are confirmed in the second at the Sacrament.

Romans 5.18, 19. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life.

For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one, shall many be made righteous.

John 1.16. For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.

January 15. 1646.
Imprimatur.

John Downame.

London, Printed for Thomas Banks, and are to be sold in Blackfriers at the top
of Bridewell stairs and in Westminster Hall at the sign of the Seal, 1647.

Two solemn Covenants made between God and Man, viz. the Covenant of Works,
and the Covenant of Grace, clearly laid open, distinguished, and vindicated
from many dangerous and destructive opinions.
THere be several opinions about the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
grace, to the great disturbance of many Christians; some hold that there be
four Covenants, two of Works, and two of Grace; the two first, one with Adam
before the fall, and the other with Israel at their return out of Egypt, and
the Covenants of Grace the first to Abraham, and the other at the Incarnation
of Jesus Christ; this M. Sympson affirmed before a Committee of the Assembly of
Divines in my hearing. 2. Others hold that there is but three Covenants; the
first with Adam, the second with Israel at their going out of Egypt, and a
third with Jesus Christ, the two first of Works, and the last of Grace, and
this M. Burroughes delivered in his Exposition Sermon in Cornhill in my
hearing. 3. Others hold that there is but two Covenants, the one of Works, and
the other of Grace; yet the first they hold was made with Israel at Mount
Sinai, and no Covenant of works before that, and now it is vanished away, and
the other a Covenant of grace yet not made till the death of Christ the
testator, and this is affirmed by James Pope, in a Book entitled, the
unveiling of Antichrist. 4. Others hold that the Law at Mount Sinai was a
Covenant of grace, implying that there is more then one Covenant of grace, and
this is affirmed by Mr. Anthony Burgess in his Vindication of the Moral Law
the 24. Lecture, text the 4. of Deuteronomy. 5. Others with my self hold that
there is but two Covenants, the one a Covenant of Works, and the tree of life,
was a Sacrament or sign and token of it, this was made with Adam before his
fall and to all his posterity who come under it as soon as they take upon them
his nature, for he did bear an Image for himself and all his postetity, so
that if he had stood in his integrity he had conveyed his righteousness and
holiness to all his posterity, and when he by sin defiled his nature, the
whole race of mankind was polluted by him, and also he received a Covenant both
for himself and all his posterity, and in case he had been faithful to it,
all his posterity had stood with him, but he breaking that Covenant brought not
only guilt upon himself but upon all his posterity with him, so that now there
is none clean, no not one; how can he be clean that is born of a woman? Job
25.4. thus man's nature is polluted. And in regard of the Covenant, let every
mouth be stopped, for all the world is become guilty before God, Romans 3.29. for
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men for
that all have sinned, Rom 5.12. so then all men by nature lie under the
pollution and guilt of Adams sin, and liable to all the curses and penalties
due unto them for breach of that Covenant.

But then there was a Covenant of grace which God the Father made with Jesus
Christ from all eternity to save some of the posterity of Adam, and had not
this Covenant been prepared ready against the fall of Adam to take place at the
very moment of his fall, the Justice of God had immediately seized upon the
whole Creation under Heaven, and consumed them to their first nothing, but then
came Jesus Christ with the covenant in his hand saying, be gracious unto him,
and deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom, Job 33.24.
now I shall prove that the covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ from
all eternity, being a contract or plot of God the Father with God the Son
from all eternity as mediator for the salvation of the Elect.

1. If God the Father promised eternal life before the world began when as
there was no creature as yet made, this promise must needs be made to Jesus
Christ our mediator? but God promised eternal life before the world began,
Titus 1.2. Ergo, it must needs be made to Jesus Christ our mediator before the
world began.

Secondly, if Jesus Christ was set apart from all eternity for this work, then
the Covenant of grace was made with him before the world was, but says Christ,
I was set up from everlasting before the earth was, when there was no depths,
before the Mountains were fetled, when he prepared the heavens, when he
established the clouds, when he gave the Sea his decree, then was I by him as
one brought up with him, Pro. 8.23. to the 30. now this cannot be meant of
Christ as God, for then who should set him up or appoint him any work, then it
must needs follow that it was Jesus Christ as Mediator with whom the Covenant
of grace was made, for him has God the Father sealed, John 6.27.

Thirdly, If it was appointed before the world was, that Christ should come and
die for sinners, then the Covenant of grace was made with him to save a certain
number from all eternity, but says Peter, when that Kings and Rulers were
gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ, it was to do what
God had determined before to be done, Acts 4.26, 27, 28. and you are redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without spot or blemish, who
verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19,
20. therefore the Covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ before the world
began.

Fourthly, if God appointed Christ a time, and at the fullness of time he came
to redeem those that were under the Law that they might receive the adoption of
sons, then the Covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ from all
eternity, but this first is true, Gal. 4.3.4. Ergo, so is the second, and it
further appears in that when God sent his first begotten son into the world
he says, let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. and to men he
says, this is my beloved son hear him, Mat. 17.3.5.17. then the Covenant of
grace was made with him.

Fifthly, If God say of Christ, behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in
whom my soul delights, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, he
shall not be discouraged till he have set judgment in the earth, and the Isles
shall wait for his Law, and I will give thee for a Covenant to the people to
open their eyes and to bring out the prisoners from the prison; then the
Covenant of grace must needs be made with Jesus Christ, but the first is true,
Isai 42.1.4.6, 7. therefore so is the second, and that the covenant was made
with Jesus Christ, see further, thou my servant shall restore the dispersed of
Israel, and I will give thee a light to the Gentiles that thou may give
salvation unto the ends of the earth, the the Redeemer of Israel and the holy
one he shall choose thee and accept thee, and give thee for a Covenant to
establish the earth, see Isa. 49.6, 7, 8, 9. then the new covenant was made
with Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, If the Lord looked from Heaven and saw that there was no man to make
intercession and then his own arm brought salvation and his own righteousness
it sustained him, because he traveled in the greatness of his strength, and
is mighty to save, yea if God laid help upon one that is mighty, and this was
Jesus Christ, he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. then this
must needs be Jesus Christ with whom the Covenant of grace was made, but the
first is true from these Scriptures, Isa. 59.16.63. 1. Psa. 89.19. then it must
needs be Jesus Christ with whom the Covenant of grace was made,

Seventhly, If Christ became our surety, and was bruised for our iniquities,
and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed, then the new Covenant was made with him, but the first is true from
these scriptures, Heb. 7.21. Isa. 53.3.5. 1 Pet. 3.18, Ergo, so is the second.

Eighthly, If Christ be the messenger of the Covenant, and all the promises made
in him, and there is no other name given by which we shall be saved, then the
covenant was made with him, but the first is true from these scriptures, Mal.
3.1. 2 Cor. 1.20. Acts 4.12. Ergo, so is the second.

Ninthly, If God has promised to Christ that he shall see his seed, and that
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and if we be chosen in
Christ, adopted and accepted in Christ and gathered together and blessed in him
and our names written in his books of life, then the covenant was made with
Christ, but the first is true from these Scriptures, Isa 53.10. Ephe. 1.3, 4,
5, 6.10. Revel. 13.8. Ergo, then the covenant of grace was made with Jesus
Christ.

The next thing is to show how we come to be freed from the filthiness and the
guiltiness of our condition wherein we are borne and do lie under the covenant
of works. I answer, the holiness of Jesus Christ his person does sanctify our
unholinesse, he is called the holy child Jesus, Acts 4.30. that holy thing,
Luke 1.35. he was the son of God, and he was the son of Man, yet not two
sons but one son of God, or one Christ; and though he took our nature upon
him yet not by generation from man, he was conceived by the holy Ghost, Luke
1.36. therefore not conceived and borne in sin as we are, for their sakes says
Christ I sanctify my self that they also might be sanctified, John 17.19.
thus by his holiness we become holy, as by Adams filthiness we became filthy.

Secondly, For the merits of Christ's obedience to the covenant of works he has
freed his people from the guilt of their disobedience to that covenant of works
he was made under the Law to redeem them that are under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
now the obedience of Christ to the covenant of works was twofold; First, his
active obedience to that covenant who did perform it without any spot of sin,
he says of his obedience to his Father, I do always those things that please
him, John 8.29. he finished the work that his Father gave him to do, John 17.4.
and says his Father, this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Mat.
3.15. thus has the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ satisfied for all the
disobedience of his people to the covenant of works. Secondly, The other part
of Christ's obedience was passive, he suffered the penalty due unto us for our
disobedience to that covenant, though he were a son, yet learned he obedience
by the things which he suffered, and being made perfect he became the author of
salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.8, 9.2.10. it behoved Christ to
suffer and to rise from the dead the third day, Luke 24.26.46. Christ has once
suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1
Pet. 3.18. he that knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when
he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2.25. he alone trod the winepresse of his Fathers wrath,
and there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. he cried out the pains of hell gat hold
of him, and he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, now the
dignity of his person being both God and Man in one Christ, his humanity
suffering but a short time made his obedience so meritorious, to free us from
that guilt and penalty that is due unto us for our breach of that covenant.

In the next place I am to show how we come to enter into this new covenant
with Jesus Christ, I answer, by faith alone, faith is that grace on our part by
which we are grafted into the second Adam, Romans 5.2. Gal. 3.26.2.16. and so
come into this covenant as by nature we are in the first Adam and so in his
covenant, so he that believes in Christ shall not perish but have eternal
life; John 3.15 16. he that has the son has life, 1 John 5, 22. only
believe, Mark 5.36. being justified by faith we have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
for as by the offense of Adam, judgment came upon all men in his nature to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of Christ, the free gift came upon
all that are in him by faith unto justification of life, Romans 5.18. now faith
uniting us unto Christ as the head and members, 1. Cor. 12.12. makes all the
active and passive obedience of Christ to be ours by imputation, and likewise
all our sinfulness and guiltiness to be his, and he coming as a surety takes
upon him to pay all our debts, and by our matrimonial union with him all his
riches becomes ours, Heb. 7.22. by this key of faith we fetch daily new grace
out of his treasury of grace to sanctify us more and more, till at last we
have our full measure according to the gift of Christ.

Thus I have showed with whom the two covenants were made, the covenant of
works with Adam, a mere man, but the covenant of grace with Jesus Christ both
God and man, and also the time when they were made, one with Adam as soon as
created, but the other with Jesus Christ from all eternity; also I have showed
how all men enter into these two covenants, first, all men enter into Adams
covenant by nature, but the Elect only enter into Christ's covenant by grace;
also I have showed how that Adam by his breach of covenant defiled all his
posterity, and also brought guilt upon them for it, but Jesus Christ sanctifies
by the holiness of his nature all in his covenant, and acquits them and
justifies them from all their guilt by his active and passive obedience,
fulfilling the covenant of works perfectly; now if all the whole race of
mankind be contained in one of these two covenants, then it must needs follow
that God never made any other but these two touching the eternal estate of
mankind: but I have proved that all men by nature enter into Adams covenant,
save Jesus Christ that did not come into the world by the ordinary course of
nature, and so they all continue till Jesus Christ free them from that covenant
of works, and so state them in the covenant of grace; therefore God never made
any other covenant touching the eternal estate of mankind but these two.

Now some will object and say God made a covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. and
another with Israel at their return out of Egypt, Jer. 11.3, 4. Deuteronomy. 4.13.
and a third or new covenant at the death of Christ the testator, Heb. 8.8.10.
and some deny the covenant of works with Adam in the time of his creation and
the covenant of grace with Jesus Christ made from all eternity, affirming,
there was no covenant made with man before Isreal's return from Egypt, and this
they call the covenant of works, and no covenant of grace made before the death
of Christ, and this they call the covenant of grace; now when I have answered
these objections, I hope I shall give some satisfaction to those that are
troubled with so many several opinions touching the covenant of grace and the
covenant of works made with the two Adams, representing all mankind.

For answer to the first objection, if God made a covenant with Abraham, and
that also a covenant of grace, then it will follow that God made two covenants
of grace, and then we must have two redeemers, and if one of them was made to
Abraham, this is to make him who says he is but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. to be
one of those redeemers or saviors who was but a poor creature himself, but
they will say, to Abraham and Christ were the promises made, Gal. 3.16. I
answer, as one King makes a league or covenant with another by an Ambassador,
so Abraham represented Christ, for the promise of eternal life was made before
the world began, Titus 12. therefore before Abraham had his being, or it may be
answered thus: Abraham received the sign or token of this covenant, Genesis 17.10,
11. when as the covenant it self was made with Christ from all eternity, and
those elect that fall in every age of the world since Adams fall God has been
in Christ, not in Abraham, reconciling them to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and if
Abraham should stand for all the Elect to receive a covenant for them, then he
should stand for them with an Image also without sin, to answer for their lost
Image by Adam; but this he could not do because he was desiled with sin as
other men, then the covenant of grace was not made with him but with Christ,
who took upon him our nature and our infirmities and yet without sin, Heb.
4.15. so then Abraham received circumcision the token of the covenant, but
himself was saved by his faith in Christ, for says Christ, Abraham saw my day
and was glad, John 8.56. it was Christ that was given for a covenant, he is the
redeemer of Israel that holy one, Isa. 49.7, 8. it was Christ's righteousness
that was imputed unto to him and received by faith when he received the sign of
circumcision, Romans 4.11. and Abraham did but receive a further confirmation of
the covenant of grace made with Christ before the world was by the sign of
circumcision when God took in that Nation into the visible Church, so much for
answer to this objection.

Object. 2. Some object and say the Law at Mount Sinai was a covenant of grace,
and others say it was a covenant of works, but I shall prove that it was
neither, but only given to those that were in covenant as a rule of obedience,
so runs the preface, I am the Lord thy God, that is by the covenant of grace
made with Jesus Christ and confirmed to Abraham, therefore thou shall have none
other Gods but me, and in all those places where doing is required it is first
said, I am the Lord your God, therefore ye shall keep my Statutes and
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them, Deuteronomy. 18.2.4.5. Exodus
2.1. and says the Lord God in the day that I chose Israel and made my self
known to them in the land of Egypt, saying, I am the Lord your God, then it
follows, I gave them my Statutes and showed them my Judgments, which if a man
do he shall even live in them, Ezekell 20.5.11. Thus they were in covenant
before the rule of obedience was given, for the Law is not of faith, but the
man that does them shall live in them, Gal. 3.12. that is, he that obeys that
rule being in the new covenant by faith in Christ shall live, yet not for his
doing but for his believing, Rev. 5.1, 2. Gal. 3.26. it was given as a glass
to see their sin, James 1.23, 24, 25. by the Law is the knowledge of sin, see
Romans 3.20.7.7. it was given them as a schoolmaster to drive them to Christ,
Gal. 3.24. as the pursuer of blood drove the murderer to the City of refuge,
Joshua 20.3. then the Law at Sinai cannot be a covenant of grace. 2. If it was
a covenant of grace with every particular person in Israel, this were to make
them all to be their own saviors and redeemers; but this cannot be, for with
many of them God was displeased, and their carkases fell in the wilderness. 3.
The faithful amongst them were saved by their faith in Christ crucified, which
the brazen Serpent signified, and they did eat the same spiritual meat with
us, and drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the rock which
was Christ, and those that were profane are said to tempt Christ, 1. Cor.
10.4.9. 4. It is plainly said that they were in covenant with God before the
Law at Sinai was given, for God is said while they were in Egypt to remember
his covenant and to have respect unto them, Exodus 2.23, 24, 25. and the Lord
calls himself the God of the Hebrews, and the God of Israel, and bids them say
to Pharaoh, let my people go that they may serve me, and sacrifice to the Lord
their. God, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall be to me a people, which
is the very tenor of the covenant of grace, see Exodus 3.6, 7, 8, 9. and 5.3.
and 6, 7. but Mr. Anthony Burgess (whom in respect of his great worth I much
reverence, although in this particular point I dissent from him till I
beconvinced with more evidence of truth) says the Law at Sinai is a covenant
of grace, because it bears the name of covenant, Deuteronomy. 4.13. I answer, it
bears that name from the old tenure when it was given to Adam for a covenant
of works; but it will not follow that it is still a covenant no more then the
calling Rahab a harlot will conclude her still to be a harlot, after her faith
is so highly commended, Heb. 11. but he says it has the properties of a
covenant, there be the parties God and Man, and it is written with penalties
and promises.

I answer, It was a covenant to Adam, therefore those things remained to show
them their misery by his fall, and those that were not brought off by Christ
were still under that covenant and as yet never freed from it, then it had been
a vain thing to give them that old bond as a covenant unto which they were
still bound and condemned for ever, then I say it was given them for those
forenamed ends, and not as a covenant.

But he says it was a covenant of grace because God did not deal with them as
absolutely considered, but as their God, for to them belong the covenants, the
giving of the Law and the promises, Romans 9.4.

I answer, God was in covenant with them before the Law at Mount Sinai was
given, therefore the Law at Sinai did not bind them as a covenant to obey it,
or else lie under the penalty of it, and from this very text the giving of the
Law is distinguished from the promises, the first although given as a rule, yet
bearing the name of covenant; and the latter they had many promises of Christ
which is the Gospel, declaring the covenant of grace; the Gospel was preached
to them, Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.2. 1 Pet. 4.6. John 8.56. then all this will not
prove the Moral Law to be a covenant of grace.

His 2. Argument if it be considered the good things annexed to the covenant,
then this at Sinai must be a covenant of grace, for at Si nai was remission of
sins, and showing mercy to thousands, Ex. 20.5. I answer, it is true, to all
those that did obey the Law as a rule of righteousness, yet not for it, but
because they were in the covenant of grace before, for all grace and comfort
flows from the covenant made with Christ, and not from that made with Adam,
nor from the copy of it given as a rule to Israel at Mount Sinai, grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.16.

His 3. Argument, if we consider the duties commanded in the Law so generally
taken, it must needs be a covenant of grace, for what is the meaning of the
first Commandment, but to have one God in Christ to be our God by faith, I
answer, it is true to those that are in the covenant of grace before, but the
copy of Adams covenant cannot reconcile them to God in Christ, that must be
done by the covenant of grace, and being in that covenant of grace already, the
Law at Sinai may command us to walk accordingly, but says he, shall we think
that any can do the Law without any spot of sin, or without the grace of God to
pardon them? I answer no, for the Law was not given them and us for that end,
for it was given in the hand of a mediator, and now God accepts of the will
for the deed, and the preface has relation to the covenant of grace going
before; therefore although the Law be a perfect copy of the covenant of works,
yet being given to another end it cannot disanull the covenant of grace that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, nor make the promises of it of none
effect, Gal. 3.16. then this copy of the moral Law is not a covenant of grace.

His fourth Argument from the Ceremonial Law all Divines say it was reduced to
the Moral Law, so that sacrifices were commanded by virtue of the second
Commandment, and sacrifices were Evangellicall and held forth remission of
sins through the blood of Christ, I answer, those that were in the covenant of
grace before, and did by faith see Christ in those sacrifices, grant that Law
at Sinai did command them to walk accordingly as being made subservient to the
covenant of grace, and so the positive Laws of the Land are useful and
subservient to the covenant of grace, so that he who shall presume either
against man's Law or Gods Law, as now it is made useful to us, does exceedingly
aggravate his sin, to treasure up wrath to himself against the day of wrath,
although neither the Law of God nor man is the covenant of grace.

His fifth Argument he says will appear from the visible seal to ratify this
covenant which you have heard was by sacrifices and sprinkling the people,
which did signify Christ as mediator to this covenant. I answer, the covenant
of works to Adam needed no sacrifices for sin as a seal of that covenant, and
for the copy of it given at Mount Sinai to Israel, was not given as a covenant
but as a rule of life for those already in covenant: Therefore the Moral Law
at Sinai need no sacrifices which were as seals to the covenant of grace, and
not to that Law at Sinai, and those seals were long before the Law at Sinai
was given, Abels Lamb signified the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world, John 1.29. for Christ was then the true Lamb sacrificed, Revel.
13.8. now lest any should mistake, there was three sorts of Laws published in
writing at Mount Sinai which were not written before, first, that eternal
Moral Law in the 20. chap. of Exodus, now this was not only written for them
but for us also, Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11. yea for Saints and Angels eternally,
Psalm. 119.89.103.20. not one title of this Law shall fail, and the Apostles do
not seek to make void this Law, but do establish it, Romans 3.31. but then at
Mount Sinai there was the Judicial Law given in the 21, 22, 23. chapters of
Exodus, and that Law belongs no more to us then our Laws of the Land belong to
them any farther then they are grounded on the moral Law. 3. There was the
Ceremonial Law given in the 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. now this
ceremonial Law being in types and shadows of Christ to come were all ended
when Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, although the Priests
stood daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, but when
Christ had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down at the right hand
of God, Heb. 9.28.10, 11, 12. so then those sacrifices were not seals of the
moral Law, but of the ceremonial which was their Gospel in dark types and
shadows, showing them Christ with whom the covenant of grace was made from all
eternity, and that it is so, observe the moral Law was given with terrible
thundrings and earthquakes, that the people durst not come near, but cried,
let not God speak unto us lest we dye, Exodus 20.18, 19. but when the
ceremonial Law was given they saw the God of Israel, and there was under his
feet as it were a paved work of a Saphirstone, and as it were the body of
heaven in his clearness, also they saw God and did eat and drink, see Exodus,
24.3.4.10, 11. thus the Moral Law was given with darkness and terors, and
this with light and comfort, then the moral Law is not a covenant of grace.

His sixth Argument, if the Law was the same covenant and the oath which God
made to Isaac, then it must needs be a covenant of grace, but says he, God
when he gave the Law made it an Argument of his love and grace to them, saying;
if ye hearken to these judgments and do them that the Lord thy God shall keep
unto thee the covenant and mercy which he swore unto thy Fathers, Deuteronomy. 7.12. I
answer, if this Law at Sinai should be the same which God swore to Isaac, then
the Law and Gospel would be the same thing, but I need go no further then this
one text to confute it, where God says, if ye hearken to these judgments,
being the rule of their obedience, then God will keep with them the covenant
made with their fathers before the Law at Sinai was given, this at Sinai is
called judgments, that is called a covenant, this is called judgments in
opposition to the other, being an oath and promises, then the copy of the
moral Law given at Mount Sinai for a rule of obedience was not a covenant of
grace.

But then says M. Burgess, there are strong objections against these
Arguments from Romans 10. Gal. 3.18. Romans 4.14. and it seems they are too strong
for him, for I hear no more of them, only he says if it should be rigidly and
universally true, then the Doctrine of Socinians would prevail, that there was
no grace nor faith, nor nothing of Christ vouchsafed to the Jews, but what
necessity is there of this, Christ was held out to them by the brazen Serpent,
John 3.14. and Moses complains for their want of faith, saying, they are a
froward generation, a people in whom there is no faith, Deuteronomy. 32.20. and they
were punished at Meribah, because they believed not, yea they could not enter
into the promised laid because of their unbelief, Heb. 3.19. but then I say
Christ was tendered by the ceremonial Law, and faith in Christ is required from
that, and not from the moral Law, yet I will neither exclude the Law nor
Gospel, nor will I divide them in the working grace in the elect, for by the
law we see our misery, and by the Gospel our remedy, and they are enemies to
the truth (...) deny either in the work of a sinners conversion; but all this
will not prove that the Law at Sinai was a covenant of grace.

But then he says, as the law works death, so the gospel to some is the
savovr of death, and if Christ had not come then men had had no sin, and they
shall have greater judgments that despise Christ then they that despised the
Law, and this effect is accidental through our corruption, and then he says
that God does not vouchsafe grace and justification in a legal way by that Law
at Sinai but evangelically, but I say then it was by the ceremonial Law, and
not from the moral Law, or at least the moral Law did show them their misery,
and the ceremonial Law showed them Christ their only remedy, then the moral
Law is not a covenant of grace.

Thirdly, He says that the Apostle speaks these derogatory passages and they
seem to be as well the ceremonial law, yet all do acknowledge here was Christ
and grace held forth; but by his good leave, Paul was not willing to be found
in his own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is of the faith
of Jesus Christ only, Phil. 3.9. because that which comes only by the moral
law is but our inherent righteousness, when as the other by the gospel is not
in us but in Christ, and imputed to us, and by this we stand just in the sight
of God, the one we have by the first Adam, and the other we have by the second
Adam, then if these do but seemingly differ let the Reader judge, and that
other place Romans 4.13, 14. where it is said the promise to Abraham was not to
him and his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of faith, for
if it had been by the law the promise of Christ or the covenant of grace had
been void; so that here also is more then a seeming difference, and so Gal.
3.18. if the inheritance were by the law, it is no more of promise, if grace
were had at Sinai it could not be had by the covenant of grace to Abraham made
by promise, then are these but seeming derogatories? no they are such
objections that seem to be too strong for him; therefore it still holds good
that the moral Law at Sinai was no covenant of grace.

Fourthly, He says it is true that the law is a killing letter to those that
take it without Christ, and so is the gospel, but I would know how any can
take Christ from the moral law at Sinai when as he was never tendered by that
law, Christ only is tendered in his own covenant of grace made from all
eternity, and the promises in Christ are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.19. but he
says if any had said to Moses your doctrine is but a killing letter and not a
doctrine of life, he would have been judged a blasphemer against the law of
Moses, I answer, as the Law at Sinai was a rule to believers, if any man
despised this Law he dyed without mercy, because by Christ it was made a rule
for them to walk by, and such a one showed plainly that he was not a believer,
and so not in the covenant of grace confirmed before to Abraham, so then the
law at Sinai was a rule of life, but the gospel is the chief isntrumental
cause of life; and therefore he that sins against the gospel shall have the
great punishment, yet all this will not make the law at Sinai to be a covenant
of grace.

Lastly, he says we must retain that distinction of a large and a strict sense
of the law, but I say let him take the law at Sinai as strict or as large as he
will, it is not a covenant of grace, and therefore cannot state a man in grace
only, it is given both to them and us as a rule to walk by, and we ought still
to obey it so far as we are able, and yet not as a covenant of grace but as a
rule of life.

In the next place I shall prove that the law at Sinai was not a covenant of
works, if the Lord had set them upon a covenant of works this would have
disanul'd the covenant of grace given 430. years before, and if salvation came
by works it is no more of grace, Gal. 3.17.18. Romans 11.6. but says Paul, is
the law against the promises of God, God forbid, Gal. 3.21. then the law at
Sinai was not a covenant of works.

Secondly, if the law at Sinai had been a covenant of works this were to make
them their own savoiurs, but it was the happiness of Israel to be saved by the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 33.29. then the law at Sinai was not a covenant of works.

Thirdly, If all mankind lie dead in sin under the guilt and penalty of the
covenant of works already, then they are incapable of another covenant of
works, but all men are dead in sins, 1 Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 5.12.3.19. then the law
at Sinai was not given to Israel as a covenant of works, but as a rule of life
to them, being in the covenant of grace before.

Fourthly, If Israel was a peculiar special holy people to the Lord and yet
born into the world, dead in sin, incapable of working, then this must needs be
done by a covenant of grace, but they were such a people, Deuteronomy. 7.6. then not
by working but by faith in that covenant of grace confirmed to Abraham 430.
years before, they became such a people and not by the law at Sinai.

Fifthly, If Israel was married to the Lord as the spous to the husband and in
relation of children to their father, then this was done by the covenant of
grace confirmed to Abraham, but Israel was such a people, Jer. 3.14. Isa. 54.5.
Hosea 2.19, 20. Psalm. 103.13. Isa 49.15. then the law at Sinai was only a rule
of life, but not a covenant of works, whereby to make themselves such a people.

Sixthly, If the Lord had put them that were dead in sins and under the curse
and penalty of the covenant of works already to work themselves out of that
misery, by doing the works of that covenant, this had been no mercy at all to
Israel, but that law at Sinai was a great mercy to Israel, he had not dealt so
with any nation as to give them his laws and Statutes, Psalm. 147.18, 19. then
it was not given to them as to Adam a covenant of works, but as a rule of life.

Now some may ask why it is so frequent in the old Testament, do this and
live, and if ye keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar people unto me
above all people, Exodus 19.5.6. I answer, it is no more then is said in the
new Testament, he that does the will of my Father shall come to heaven, and he
that keeps my Commandments has right to the tree of life, and shall enter
into the holy City, the doers of the Law are blessed in the deed, see Mal.
7.21. Rev. 22.14. James 1.25. 2. This does not deny the doing of the law by a
surety, for it is not said that no other shall do it for thee, but do this
either thy self or by a surety and thou shall live. 3. There is an
Evangelicall doing of the Law, when with our desire and endeavor we obey the
whole Law. 4. We must understand it to be of those in the covenant of grace,
who do all in the strength of Christ, and his perfect obedience to the law is
imputed to them as if they had done it, and they obeying the law not as a
covenant of works, but as a rule of life, and God accepting it as done by
themselves and that perfectly, they that thus do the law shall live; yet this
does not make the moral Law to be a covenant of Works.

Now some it may be will say there is more then two covenants made with
mankind, for says the Lord; behold the days come that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, Jer. 31.31.
then if it be a new covenant, it is neither the covenant of Works with the
first Adam, nor the covenant of grace with the second Adam. I answer, This
promise is made to Israel and Judah at their return out of captivity, but
suppose it is meant now since the coming of Christ, yet it amounts but to the
same thing, which is a new discovery or a larger manifestation of the covenant
of grace made with Christ as mediator before the world began, which was first
declared to Adam immediately after his fall, the seed of the woman shall break
the Serpentshead, Genesis 3.15. after that in process of time, Cain and Abel
brought their offerings to the Lord, and Abels lamb did then tipifie the true
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, for he was slain from the
beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. John 1.29. and God accepted Abels offering,
Genesis 4.3, 4. and God commanded Noah to take of clean beasts and fowls into the
Ark by seavens, which was to sacrifice to the Lord, and the Lord smelled a
savor of rest and said in his heart, I will not again ourse the ground for
man's sake, Genesis 7.2, 3.8.20, 21. now all this could not be so accepted but as
they had faith in Christ the true sacrifice; see their faith Heb. 11.4.7. after
this when the ceremonial Law was written through the whole book of Leviticus,
and from the 24. of Exodus to the 32. then they saw God and did eat and drink,
they saw the God of Israel with comfort, and as it were the body of heaven in
his clearness, Exodus 24.10, 11. that is; the covenant of grace was manifested
more clearly then formerly, after this the Lord makes known unto them that a
Virgin shall bear a son, and call his name Imanuel, after this unto us a child
is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be on his shoulders,
it is so in respect of certainty, Isa 17.14.9.6. for the covenant was made
after the world began, after this a further manifestation in Ezekiels vision,
where the four estates of Christ are lively set forth, his birth mean, he had
the face of a man, 2. His life courageous, he had the face of a Lion. 3. In his
death sacrificed as an ox. 4. In his ascension like an Eagle, Ezekiel. 1.4.
compared with Rev. 4.7. now these are the badges or mottoes of the four
Evangelists, for they did lively set forth the birth, life, death,
resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ, so that that this is the last and
fullest manifestation of the covenant of grace; and if when the ceremonial law
was written they did as it were see the body of heaven in his clearness, Exodus
24.10. may not we say with Stephen when all the Church Officers are set in
their places, now I see the heavens not only clear, but opened, and Christ at
the right hand of God, Acts 6.5.7.55. so then preaching of the Gospel the
highest and fullest manifestation of Christ in the covenant of grace which was
made before the world began, Titus 1.2. and says Paul, the preaching of Jesus
Christ was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest by the
scriptures according to the command of God, to all nations for the obedience of
faith, Romans 16.25, 26.

But some will say when the new covenant is made the old shall vanish away,
Heb. 8.13. I answer, it is true, when Christ was sacrificed he put an end to
all sacrifices and ceremonies that tipified him, crucified for sins, all those
types and shadows are done away, it is called the first covenant, and the
manifesting of Christ crucified, by the History of the four Evangelists is
called the new covenant, see Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. but some will say when the new
covenant is made, God will write his laws in their hearts, Heb. 8.10.10.16. I
answer, it is not said that this shall only be done in the times after the
Incarnation of Christ, although grace shall more abound then before his death,
for as the Priestly office of Christ did show it self most before his
resurrection by sacrifices, so from thence his prophetical office is most
seen, and shall be to the end of the world; so that the knowledge of God now
shall be as the waters that cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9. and from thence his
Kingly authority shall be seen clearly and shall never end, Luke 1.13. when all
humane power is cast down, Dan. 7.9. and his own Kingdom rendered up, by which
he rules the Heathen with a rod of iron, 1 Cor. 15.24. Psalm. 2. in that day
shall all be willing to obey him, or else made to suffer his will eternally; so
then although more in number have the Law of God written in their hearts since
the coming of Christ, yet the same thing was before, for says David, I have
hid thy Law in my heart that I may not sin against thee, the Law of God is in
his heart, none of his steps shall slide, Psalm. 37.3.119.11.40.8. then the
preaching of the gospel is not a new covenant, but a clear manifestation of
the covenant of grace made with Christ before the world began.

Now let us see what James Pope has to say in his unveiling of Antichrist, of
these two that are called covenants, Heb. 8.8, 9. namely the ceremonial law,
pointing at Christ to come in all those types and shadows, and now the
glorious preaching of the Gospel declaring Christ to be already come and
finished the work of our redemption, with the differences between these
covenants, with uses and application of those differences to our selves, and
first by the way he says to maintain something still that pointed at Christ to
come when as he is already come, and has done away those things, Gal. 3.24,
25. must needs be Antichristian, but to men of understanding rather Judaisme;
for Papists do not use circumcision nor sacrifices, tipifying Christ to come,
but then by his proof he seems to mean that the moral Law was ended at the
coming of Christ, being a Schoolmasters to them before his coming; to bring
them to Christ to be justified by faith; but I have proved that this moral Law
of God is an eternal rule for Saints and Angels, Psalm. 119.89.103.20. and it
is still as a Schoolmaster to bring men out of liking with their corrupted
estate, by reason of the misery that attends them both in this world and in the
world to come.

Then he speaks of the ends why God made these covenants which is to take
people near unto himself, Exodus 9.5, 6. Heb. 8.10. 1 Pet. 2.9.10. I ans. First,
if he means the ceremonial Law and our preaching the Gospel; These I have
showed to be but manifestations of the covenant of grace, now in that covenant
God did intend his own glory in the salvation of the elect, but if he speak of
that covenant of Works to Adam, they were created near unto God in holiness
and righteousness before that covenant was made with them, which should rather
confirm then reconcile them to God, as the Angels were that never sinned; but I
pass on to his differences between these two covenants, which are as follows;

First, In regard of the time when they were made, the first of them being made
with Israel when God led them out of the land of Egypt, Heb. 8.9. Jer.
11.4.31, 32. now these things I have answered already when I showed the
covenant of grace was made with Christ before the world was, and the covenant
of works to Adam as soon as crerted, but if these covenants were not made
before Israel went out of Egypt, how comes it to pass that all before Christ
came in Adam dyed as well as we, and what is become of all those holy men
before his Incarnation, If the covenant of grace was not then made? again,
would Christ first pay the purchase before he make the covenant, and if Adam
condemned all mankind by his fall, what held off the wrath of God all that time
before the covenant of grace as he would have it was made, we know the Angels
that sinned were immediately cast down, then notwithstanding his cavilling, the
first covenant was not made at their departure out of Egypt, and if he speak
of the ceremonial law, it is as old as Abell and Caine,

But he says some will object that this covenant of works is the same that God
made with Adam, but he says our state is different from this, but I say no,
for while Adam stood we stood, and when he fell we fell with him; then he says
this covenant was to take some of the lost seed of Adam near to himself, and
the rest were strangers to the covenant of promise, Ephe. 1.12. I answer, it is
true of the covenant of grace, and this manifestation of it was a means to
bring them into that covenant.

But he says some will say, was it not made with Abraham, Genesis 17. he answers,
he had the promises of both covenants, and the types of both, Gal. 4. and
vertually he had both; but I say if he mean the moral Law as a rule then it
was not a covenant, or if he mean the covenant of works wherein he was born,
all the promises are lost by Adams fall, and only curses and threatenings remain
in it, so then he that has a right to the covenant of grace must be freed from
the covenant of works or else he cannot have it; no man can be under both the
covenants at once, which are as contrary as life and death, grace and sin, the
way to heaven and hell all at once; but then he says the types and promises go
before the thing tipifyed and promised, I grant it, for God promised eternal
life before the world began, and the Lamb of God was tipifyed by Abels Lamb;
then he says the second covenant was actually made at the death of the
testator, Heb. 9.16, 17. but I have sufficiently proved that this was made with
Christ before the world began; but if any ask what benefit those had that were
before this covenant was made, he says they had the efficacy of his death by
faith, beholding Christ in the promises before any was made, but if his faith
has no better foundation, it will not stand in the fiery trial, for what
ground is there for faith before the covenant was made, it is presumption to
believe without a promise.

His second difference, the first covenant was made with Israel after the
flesh, the second in relation to Christ, Gal. 3.29. it seems by him that
neither was made with Christ immediately, for both were made to men, although
one has relation to Christ, yet the foundation is men, and then to Christ, as
the Papists themselves will be the agents to take Christ as an instrument to
save them, but the ceremonial law and our preaching the Gospel serve both to
show forth the covenant made with Christ eternally, they had divine ordinances,
Heb. 9.1. then not fleshly.

His third difference is in regard of the conditions of the covenants, the
first says, do this and live, but this I have answered already that a surety
is not here denied, and there is an Evangelicalll doing the whole Law in their
desire and endeavor as a rule to them in the covenant of grace already, but
says he, the new covenant requires nothing by way of condition of the
creatures part, and yet he says the Lord will put his laws in their mind, and
write them in their hearts, what are those but conditions, for then the
covenant follows, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.33.

His fourth difference, the promises of the first covenant are only of
temporal things, Deuteronomy. 28.1.10.15. Jer. 11.5. but the promises of the new
covenant are all spiritual, Jer. 31.32. Heb. 8.9, 10, 11. but says the Lord,
I have established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, and
I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, Exodus 6.4.7. is
here nothing but temporal things, and says Paul Godliness has the promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and if he
mean the ceremonial law it showed them, Christ, if he speak of the moral law
it was not given them as a covenant, but as a rule of obedience.

His fifth difference is between the mediators of these covenants, the mediator
of the first he conceives to be Moses from these scriptures, Heb. 3.25. Gal.
3.19. Exodus 32.11.14. Psalm, 106.23. but the mediator of the new covenant
between God and man is Christ Jesus, Heb. 8.6. I answer, if he speak of the
moral law it was not given to them nor us as a covenant, but as a rule of
life, and so they did reverence it at the hand of Moses, representing Christ
the only mediator, for when Christ came, he took the Law in his first Sermon
and gave it with his own hand, saying; you have heard thus, but I say thus; yet
not as a covenant but as a rule of life, and if he mean the ceremonialI Law,
Moses did not at all mediate for it, we have but one mediator the man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. and Moses did no more but pray for the people as Hezekiah
did for Jerusalem, and as many other men may do.

His sixth difference is between the bloods of the covenants, the first but the
blood of Calves and Goats, Heb. 9.19, 20. and yet called the blood of the
covenant, Exodus 24.8. but the blood of the new covenant is the blood of Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.25. I answer, if he mean the moral law that requires no
blood at all, neither to Adam when it was a covenant, for he had no sin;
neither at Sinai, for then it was but as a rule to those already in covenant,
and for the ceremonial law, the blood of calves and goats was no more the
blood of that covenent, then wine is the blood of our Sacrament, for it did but
signify the blood of Christ, and when Moses bids the people behold the blood
of the covenant, Exodus 24.8. he does not mean the blood of calves and goats,
but the blood of Christ which is called the blood of the covenant, see Heb.
10.29.13.20.

His seventh difference is in writing the law of the covenants, the first was
written in tables of stone, Ex. 32.15, 16. but the law of the new covenant in
the heart, Heb. 8.10. 1 Cor. 11.25. I answer, as before the law that was
written in tables of stone was the moral law, and was not given as a covenant
but as a rule of life to Israel, and both the moral law and the Gospel are
written with paper and ink in the bible, and he that has the law of God in his
heart none of his steps shall slide, Psalm. 37.31. when men by nature do the
things of the law, they show some remainders of it in their hearts as a
covenant of works, Romans 2.15. but when it is written in the heart not as a
covenant but as a rule of life, this is sanctification.

His eighth difference is in regard of the obscurity of the one, and the
plainness of the other: I answer, it is true, the moral law was given with
blackness and darkness, Heb. 12.18. Exodus 20.21. when as the ceremonial law
in comparison of it, was as it were the body of heaven in his clearness, Exodus
24.10. and now by preaching the Gospel we do not only see a clearness of the
heavens but heaven opened, and Christ at the right hand of God, Acts 7.56. they
had but dark types and shadows of Christ, and now he has manifested himself
unto us, John 14.22. in this we do not differ, only he holds them to be two
covenants, when as it is but a more dark and a more clear manifestation of the
same covenant of grace.

His ninth difference is about the worship that did appertain to these
covenants, that which did belong to the first covenant did consist of types and
shadows of good things to come, Heb. 10.1. but the worship of the new covenant
declares them to be already come, to this let my last answer suffice.

His tenth difference is that the first covenant is done away, that the second
might be established, 2 Cor. 3.11. Heb. 8.13.10.9. this I grant, if he mean the
dark ceremonial law in types and shadows of Christ, this is done away that
the clear manifestation of Christ might remain by preaching the Gospel, but
if he mean that the moral law that was given with blackness and darkness as
he says, Heb. 12.18. this I deny, for it is a rule of Saints and Angels
eternally, Psalm. 109.80.103.20. so much in answer to his differences now let us
see what uses he makes of these differences.

In the use of his first difference he says if the first covenant was made
when Israel returned out of Egypt, then all actual sin is not against the
first covenant as some think, for then it should be made with all nations,
which he denies from that text Psalm. 147.19, 20. and to be made before it was,
and to be still in being, whereas he says it is done away. I answer, the first
covenant being that of works, was made with the whole race of mankind in Adam,
and while he stood all stood, but when he fell all the world became guilty
before God, Romans 3.19. for in Adam all dye, ver. 15.22. sin and death passed
upon all by his sin, Romans 5.12. then the first covenant was made before Isreal's
going out of Egypt, and all mankind are born under it, and all actual sin is
against it only, when it was given as a rule of life in the hand of a mediator,
it did more nearly concern them and not to other nations till they have it all
in writing, as israel had, which may answer that text, Psalm. 147.19.20. but
then he denies that all sin is done away by Christ, and yet by and by he says
all those sacrifices were not sufficient to do it, they must look beyond all
those things to Christ, and yet in his sixth difference he said the blood of
calves and goats was the blood of the covenant; then he says some hold that
unbelief is the only sin against the new covenant, and he has nothing to the
contrary; therefore I pass on to the use of his second difference, where he
says if the first covenant was made with Israel after the flesh, and the
second with Israel after the spirit, then to affirm that Infants are holy by
their parents, believing is to hold forth still a covenant in the flesh which
he understands is to deny Christ to be come in the flesh. I answer, he that
denies the doctrine of Christ's Apostles, denies Christ, but he denies the
doctrine of Paul, who says if but one of the parents be a believer, the
children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. then in all wise men's judgment James Pope
denies Christ to be come in the flesh: to this he says we are to mind the
scope of the place, which was to answer a doubt, to wit; whether a believing
husband might dwell with an unbelieving wife, his answer is they may, for else
the children were unclean as under the first covenant, but see how this man
contradicts himself, now he says the Heathens were under the first covenant,
which lie denied before from that text Psalm. 147.19, 20. then he seems to grant
it a thing out of question, that if believers children dwell with their
parents, then they are holy; but if the Anabaptists grant this, why will they
not baptize those that dwell with their believing parents, but the truth is
this, when the husband was converted to the Christian faith and not the wife,
or the wife and not the husband, and so baptized, it seems this was their great
question, shall my children be baptized? the answer is secretly employed they
may; for though thy husband or thy wife be an Infidel, yet being made one
flesh by marriage with a Christian, they are sanctified to a holy use, and so
the children being holy by this means, they are and ought to be baptized; now
this is not a real holiness, but only set a part as the Elements from a
common to a holy use, to enjoy the ordinances of the visible Church, and
Ismaels posterity being out of the Church were the seed of the flesh, Gal.
4.29. and those in the visible Church may be thus called holy, that is taken
from a common to a holy use, as members of the visible Church, although they
have not real holiness, and by virtue of this holiness their children have a
right to the visible ordinances in the public worship of the Christian Church,
then he runs into a large degression, but I do not list to follow him, then he
says to hold a nation as England, Scotland, Germany, etc. to be the Church of
God in covenant, denies Christ to be come in the flesh, and so is
Antichristian, but I say again, to deny Christ to be come in the flesh is
Judaisme, but not Antichristianisme; again, if Christ sent out his Apostles to
teach and baptize or disciple whole nations, then he that opposes this is
Antichrist, for he opposes all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. but here this
man opposes Christ in his work, to disciple and bring in nations to the
Christian Church; Ergo, he is Antichrist: the major proposition none will deny,
and the minor is proved in denying any nation as England and Scotland, who have
received the Christan faith, to be the Church of God, but he says the Jews
being under the old covenant were but one Church, and when the Christian Church
was set up, there were many Churches even in Judea, 1 These. 2.14. I answer, the
several Congregations in Israel before Christ be called Congregations, but
being put together it is called a Congregation, for both these Psalm. 74.2.4.
and so in the new testament Churches make a Church, Rev. 2.1.7. then if he
oppose, a national Church is rather Antichristian then they which plead for it
against factions.

The use of this 3. difference, if the conditions of the first covenant was do
this and live, then this shows us the reason why God dealt so sharply with
them in outward things when they sinned against him, because it was according
to the conditions of his covenant with them. I answer, those that are still
under Adams covenant are still liable to all kind of punishments, whether Jews
or Christians, yet it will not follow that all who are punished in outward
things are still under that covenant of works, although they may and are still
under the Law given at Mount Sinai, yet not as a covenant but as a rule of
life, and for sin against it may be punished in outward things in love, to
reclaim them from their sin.

Then he says the people of the new covenant live to do, and not do to live,
they do not act to be kept in Gods favor, that so they may acknowledge to the
praise of God, that all is of grace election, Romans 11.5, 6. and Christ dyed,
Heb. 2.9. and justified, Titus 3.7. to believe, Acts 18.27. and hope, 2 These.
2.16. and saved, Ephe. 2.8.9. all of grace to the praise of the glory of his
grace, Ephe. 1.6. all these I grant are of grace, but to say we may not act to
be kept in Gods favor is not at all against the grace of God says Elihu, if I
should give flattering titles to men my maker would soon take me away, Job
33.21, and says David, if I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my
prayer, Psalm. 66.18. therefore one of them durst not slatter, nor the other
hide iniquity in his heart, lest he should lose the favor of God: the spouse
in the Canticles having smarted for her negligence to Christ, when she found
him held him fast, Can. 3.4. then did she not act to be kept in his favor, and
David prayed for it, saying; O visit me with that favor thou bear unto thy
people, Psalm. 106.4. then he says; to hold forth works as the conditions of
the first covenant denies Christ to be come in the flesh: all this I grant, and
he that obeyes the Law as a covenant of works is to deny Christ, but to obey
the moral Law as a rule of righteousness does very well consist with the
covenant of grace, and as many as obey this rule, peace be on them and mercy,
Gal. 6.16. let us walk by the same rule, Phil. 3.16. the tables of the covenant
were in the Ark, which signified Christ.

The use of his 4. difference, if the promises of the new covenant are only
spiritual, then this may silence all those that walk not with them in the
public way, but I deny the promises of the new covenant to be only spiritual,
for godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and they are to blame that will not walk with them that do
obey the rule: but those are not Anabaptists who despise the rule and will not
admit any poor into their Congregations, and receive money for admittance to my
knowledge, but they have a salve for this sore, they will tell you that the
money which maintains their Minister is spiritual, then he is troubled that
they are called Sectaries, and that any should run or write to Magistrates to
have them put to death for denying their authority, writing stories of them in
Germany, as if all were such here, then he falls of praising of Anabaptists in
England, who are in the field with their lives in their hands, to maintain a
lawful Magistracy, exceedingly blaming those that discover their wicked lives,
then he returns to his own faction, calling them the people of the new
covenant, and tells them what they must suffer, then he seems to envy our
Churches happiness and outward blessings attending it, saying, their Ministers
are Gentlemen, and must have tithes of all men's charge and labor, all which
brings them under the first covenant to deny Christ to be come in the flesh,
which is Antichristian, you see his Logic, and I think you will judge it not
worth answering, then he comforts them in the new covenant against falling
away, saying, if God have writ his Law in their heart, who shall raize it out?
if God have pardoned their sins, who shall lay them to their charge? if God
will not remember them who shall call them to mind? but what of this, Israel
had this promise made to them at the return out of captivity as well as to us,
Jer. 31.34.32.40. yet if he had meant that first covenant to be made to Adam
and this to Christ, it had been the truth, for Adam brake his, but Christ who
is both God and Man cannot sin; therefore those in his covenant although before
his coming in the flesh, they could not fall away, yea the same person Adam,
although he fell from the covenant of works, yet when he believed in the
promised seed which was Christ, he could not fall away: then to be kept from
falling is not peculiar to us, but as a privilege of all believers ever since
the promised Messiah to Adam, for then by his faith he was admitted into the
covenant of grace.

The use of his sift difference, if the covenant, of which Christ and not Moses
is the mediator, be the better covenant, then to have any other mediator
besides is to deny Christ to be come in the flesh, and so is Antichristian. I
answer, this is but course logic to grant that Moses is a mediator, and to say
he that has any other then Christ denies his coming in the flesh and is
Antichristian, happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows, Romans 14.22. but I say it was not a covenant but a rule for those in
covenant which Moses received for the people, and in that also he did but
tipify Christ, who as soon as he entered into the mediatorship, at least to
manifest it, he in his first Sermon gave them the law in his own name, saying;
you have heard thus, but I say thus, Mat. 5. but then he believes so long as
Christ appears risen Christ for us, and continues his mediatorship, these in
covenant with God shall so continue, but he seems again to deny this benefit to
those before his resurrection.

The use of his sixth difference, if the blood of Christ and not the blood of
beasts is the blood of the new testament; then here is the privilege of
Saints, the blood of the first Testament did only purify the flesh, Heb. 9.13.
but the blood of Christ purges the conscience from dead works to serve the
living God, Heb. 9.14. I answer, from this very text where Christ took the cup
and said, this is my blood, Mat. 26.28. meaning the wine in the cup, but that
wine cannot purge the conscience no more then the blood of beasts, which
signified the blood of Christ to come, to their faith, as the wine in the
Sacrament signifies the blood of Christ already shed for many, then he speaks
highly of their privilege, so that now for the people of God to mourn for sin,
as under sin is sinful; but here we may see this man who would be thought to
be for Christ, does flatly oppose and contradict Jesus Christ, who would have
us mourn for sin, with this motive, they are blessed that mourn, for they shall
be comforted, Mat. 5.4. but says this man, to mourn for sin as under sin is
sinful, only he has left here a starting hole as under sin; here I grant that
they are not under the reigning power of sin, but yet many a dear child of God
has a law in his members that leads him captive to the law of sin, Rom, 7.23.
and so they are under sin as under a Tyrant, but he says this undervalues the
blood of Christ as if it did need to be affered up yearly. I answer, although
we are wholly justified, yet we are not wholly sanctified, although our sins be
pardoned, yet they are not fully taken away in this world; then he says to lie
under the guilt of sin hinders duty, I grant it, but the guilt is taken away,
though not the being of sin, and as grace grows sin dies, and he that is
mortally dead is freed from sin, Romans 6.7. 1 Pet. 4.1.

The use of his seventh difference, if the law of the first covenant was
written in tables of stone, and law of the new covenant in the fleshly table of
the heart, then we are to rekon a Nation not to be in covenant with God, and
nations assuming to themselves title and practice of Churches is Antichristian,
but this I have answered to his use of the second difference.

But then he says some will say that the invisible Church does consist of
Saints, but the visible Church now has some as bad as among the Jews, he
answers, then they will leaven them if they be not cast out, 1 Cor. 5.1.6, 7.1.
Revel. 2.20. when they are known, this I grant, and I hope there will be a
course taken with such ere long if that will please him, but I doubt it will
not, for he says those Nations that call themselves Gods Churches are the
waters that carry the whore, Rev. 17.15. but this seems to be strange doctrine,
when Christ sent his Apostles to disciple and baptize all Nations, if but one
of those Nations should come in, upon their teaching, then it would be the
waters that carry the whore, thus while he cries whore, himself is defiled
with Babilons whoredoms, and joins with them in opposing Christ.

The use of his 8. difference, if the new covenant be so plain, and full of
light, then let the people of it labor to walk as children of the light, and
show forth the praises of him that has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. I answer, as before it was the moral law that
was given with terror and thick darkness, Exodus 20.18.21. but not as a
covenant but as a rule of life to those in covenant, and when the ceremonial
Law was written they saw in comparison of the times before, as it were the body
of heaven in its clearness, Exodus 24.4.10, 11. although those types and
shadows were dark, compared with our clear manifestotion; then he says the
note that the Scripture gives to know if they be in the light is this, if they
love the brethren, meaning Anabaptists, 1 John 1.7. and those that desire to
have them imprisoned, banished, or hanged, is from the dark spirit of
Antichrist, who say, let us fill all presses and make all pulpits ring, and
possess the Parliament, City and Kingdom against the sects, etc. and when
Presbyterian Ministers cry continually to God, and the Magistrate, for fire
from heaven we may safely conclude that this is from the dark spirit of
Antichrist, for God under the old Testament appointed, that for many offenses
men should be put to death, as Numb. 15.36. but now to cut off by
excommunication except for heresy, and that under two or three witnesses, but
I say again that those under the old Testament were in the same covenant of
grace as we, though not under the same discovery of it, and the new Testament
is but the old fulfilled, and the old Testament is but the new in the promise,
and they and we have all one heart and one way to fear the Lord for ever, Jer.
32.39. but then he says that the Presbyterians will say they have more then
two or three witnesses to prove their heresy, but he says that cannot be,
unless they be infallible, for their own interest blinds their eyes, and the
whole business is in their own hands that are parties, witnesses, and judges,
then it is not likely they should acknowledge that to be truth which their
supposed adversaries hold, but will condemn it for Heresy. I ans. if their
interest be so, as that their salvation or damnation lies upon it, then it
behooves them to give right judgment, which if it did not so concern them, it
were more to be feared that they would not judge rightly of truth and Heresy,
but then he falls into a boasting what the Sectaries have done, and railing
against our Ministers for their following the Parliament with dedicatory
Epistles, Sermons, and Petitions for power to suppress them, which is not
worth the answering.

The use of his ninth difference, if the worship of the first covenant held out
Christ to come, and the new covenant declares Christ to be already come, then
it teaches us that to hold out any part of that worship now is to deny Christ
to be come in the flesh, and so is Antichristian; now here he should tell us
what be those types and shadows of Christ to come that still we observe, and
it seems they are these from his words following, their worship was tied to one
nation and to one place, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 16.5, 6. but how dare this man
affirm that we hold that God ought to be worshipped no where but in England,
nor but in one place in England, when as we hold that God is worshipped as well
in other Nations as in this, and in many hundred places in this Kingdom, as in
London; then he says their worship was carnal, from that text Heb. 9.1. where
it is said that they were ordinances of divine service, for they were all
instituted by God himself, and all was done as the Lord commanded Moses, Exodus
40. yet if he speak of those ordinances as they were used by those that had not
faith, I grant they were carnal to them, and so are our Sacraments to those
that have no faith in the thing signified by them, and to say ours are to be
performed spiritually, so was theirs to them that saw the blood of Christ,
which is the blood of the everlasting covenant, Heb. 10.29.13.20. the thing
signified by the blood of beasts, Exodus 24.8.

But then he says, the people of God question how a whole nation may be
compeld to public worship now, which was done in Israel, because they were
Gods people in covenant. I answer, this need not to be the question of Gods
people who are in covenant, for by his own confession their case is the same as
it was with Israel, then if Anabaptists be such, this need not to offend them,
but profane persons, they indeed may question what right they have, and fear
to come too without a wedding garment, but he says this will not make them
hypocrites, but I say it is not the command of God nor man that makes them
hypocrites, but it is from their own wicked hearts, that will not obey those
commands, but he is afraid to come to our assemblies lest he should deny Christ
to be come in the flesh, which they do that obey the Magistrates command in
coming to the public worship of Christ, now Shiloe is come the Magistrates
have no relation to the Church, their power is only in things appertaining to
this life, and in those things says he we are to obey for conscience sake,
when as it is required of Kings and all in authority, that those under them may
lead not only a quiet and peaceable, but a godly life, 1 Timothy 2.2. but this
has been sufficiently answered by many.

But he says that if we object that then every man may do what is right in his
own eyes, his answer is only this, if Magistrates be commanded to rule the
nations, and Christ to order the affairs of his Kingdom, then the objection
is resolved, but this he cannot prove, that Christ is confined only to rule his
Church, for when God raised him from the dead he set him at his own right hand
far above all principalities and powers, might and dominion, and every name
that is named both in this world and in the world to come, and put all things
under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to his Church,
Ephe. 1.20.21, 22. neither are Magistrates confined so to rule the State, as to
have no relation to the Church, but to be as a guard to it, and to punish the
disturbers of it, Romans 13.

The use of his last difference, if the Lord have taken away the first that he
might establish the second, Heb. 10.9. then this should teach us to take heed
that we do not go about to establish again that which God has taken away, as
all those do which go about to bring into the worship of God the rights of the
first covenant, this is indeed to give the spirit of God the lie, for in
effect, they say the first covenant is best, when as the spirit of God says
the second is best, being established upon better promises. I answer, Christ
and all his benefits were then promised, and is any thing better then Christ
and his benefits, Gal. 3.8.16. so then the things promised were not better, but
the manifestation or discovery now is better; the promises of grace were sealed
to them by the blood of beasts, the type of Christ's blood, and to us the
promises of grace are sealed by his own blood, but Christ and his benefits were
the same both to them and us.

Then he is persuaded that each godly heart longs for the utter ruin of
Antichrist, which will be completed so soon as this is generally seen, that
the upholding of the first covenant is the upholding of Antichrist, for the
Apostle admires that in as much as Christ was crucified, and so clearly held
forth among them, which did put an end to all the rights of that covenant, that
they should be so bewitched as to bring them in again; but here I would know of
him who it is that seeks to bring in circumcision or any of their ceremonies
which he seems to charge upon us without proof, because the Galathians were
bewitched with those beggarly elements which we have not the least shadow
ofthen he says circumcision was the sign of that covenant that did so deceive
them, for if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing, ye are debtors
to the whole law, Gal. 5.2, 3. I answer with M. Perkins on these words, that
circumcision must be considered according to the circumstance of time three
ways; before Christ it was a Sacrament and seal of the righteousness of
Christ apprehended by faith, Rom 4.1. after the death of Christ it was a dead
ceremony, yet some used it as a thing indifferent till the destruction of the
Temple, but afterward it was a deadly ceremony, and ceased to be a thing
indifferent, so then, although it would be to us a renouncing of Christ, yet to
the Jews it was a Sacrament or seal of the righteousness of Christ to their
faith as our Sacraments do to us; thus the Jews that believed were under the
covenant of grace as well as we, although not under the same manifestation of
it, they had the glad tidings of Christ in the promise, and we in the
performance, their promises are ceased in our performances, and their types and
shadows ceased when Christ the substance came, their ceremonies were gospel
to them to show them Christ, but these ceremonies are now worn out and are but
beggarly Elements to us, they saw as it were the body of heaven, in its
clearness, by those spectacles, but we cannot see at all with them; thus their
Gospel is ceased to us, but our preaching and declaring Christ to be already
come, is that everlasting Gospel preached by men and Angels in the midst of
heaven for ever, saying, fear God and give glory to him, and worship him that
made the Heaven and Earth, and Sea, and Fountain of waters, Rev. 14.15, 16. and
we shall then sing the song of Moses as well as the song of the Lamb, Rev.
15.3. that is, we shall be as cheerful in our duty to the moral law being a
rule of righteousness, as to extol and praise the Lord for his mercies, so
then although the ceremonial law be ceased, yet the moral law abides
eternally, Psalm. 103.20.119.89. not as a covenant of grace, nor as a covenant
of works, but as a rule of righteousness, for Moses wrote all the words of the
Lord touching the ceremonial law, Ex. 24.3, 4. and after that the Lord called
Moses up into the Mount, and there he gave him the tables of stone, and a law
and Commandments which himself had written, ver. 12. to this end, to be a rule
of righteousness, that thou may teach them their duty after they had seen
the God of Israel reconciled to them, ve. 10, 11. now the righteous being in
the covenant of grace, shall enjoy the good things of it, and that eternally,
when as the wicked being still under the covenant of works, shall suffer the
misery and lie under the penalty of it eternally.

But some will say the yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden is light, Mat.
28.11. when as the law was a yoke which neither our fathers nor we are able to
bear, Acts 15.10. therefore they were not in the covenant of grace, nor under
the yoke of Christ. I answer, it was the same covenant of grace with ours,
although not the same way administered unto them, circumcision was a seal of
the righteousness of faith to them, Romans 4.11. yet a very heavy burden to
flesh and blood, Exodus 4.25. and baptism an easy service is come in the place
of it, and so their Passover was very chargeable to sacrifice so many of their
cattle; this we are eased of, and now the Lords Table requires but little of
our estate, so also they had long and tiresome Journies to come to the
Passover at Jerusalem, Psalm. 84.6, 7. when as now God accepts of our Passover
or Sacrament near our own homes; so then Jews and Christians have the same
covenant, only their burden of administration is taken off and made easy, for
which we are exceedingly bound to praise the Lord and that for ever.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 16. line. 20. after read before, p. 32. r. is the highest, p. 20. l. 8.
reverence, r. receive, l. 15. r. leave out many, p. 21. l. 37. all, read also,
the, r. their, risen, r. arisen.

Christian Reader,
I Have lived an unworthy Minister in the same town with the Author of this
Treatise these six and twenty years, and have been a constant observer and
admirer, as of her other eminent gifts, so especially of (those which give the
highest luster to them all) her humble piety and charity. And (if I mistake
not) this Deborah does here present unto thee in these her labors Bee-like a
sting and honey conjoined. Hony-sweet instructions, counsels and exhortations
gathered out of several flowers growing in Gods Paradise, tending to all sorts
of good husbandry, and also sharp stings of reproof against all kinds of
unthriftiness, not sparing the worst of them, our Church-dividing Errors in
these times. Who knows, but that, after the lightnings of so many worthy
Barak's, and thundrings of so many powerful Boanergesses both from the Pulpit
and Press, against these Troublers of our Israel, the Lord may be pleased to
make some of these Sisera's fall by the hand and pen of a woman? First read,
then judge: and (as Barnabas did at Antioch, Acts 11.23.) when thou have seen
the grace of God, be glad and say, The Lord be magnified, who (as he may do
what he will with his own, so) has given such gifts to a woman, the fruits
whereof she here by her private pains sends forth with her earnest desire for
the glory of God, and the public good. Which is also the hearty prayer of

Thy Christian friend and well-wisher in the Lord, Robert Cade.

REader, in this Tract as in a former by her written, thou may find
verified, eminency of gifts, humility of spirit, elegancy of style, soldity of
matter, height of fancy, depth of judgment, cleernesse of apprehension,
strength of reason, all sweetly met together and truly (as well as piously)
improved for the mayntenance of the old truths of Jesus Christ, against the new
errors of these times, by the Phoenix of this age, this rare and precious
Gentlewoman, the envy and glory of her sex.

(...)


