THE KINGS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION, AND THE PARLIAMENTS Determination, concerning
the Requests of the French and Spanish Ambassadors. With the Names and Charge
of 47. of the House of Commons, appointed for the Committee, till the
Parliament sit again.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1641.

Die lovis September. 1641.
The last Day of the Parliament sitting.
MAaster Pymme, Sir Gillbert Gerrard, Sir John Francklyn. Sir John Culpepper,
Mr: Wheeler, M. Henry Mildmay, M. Bridgeman, Sir Thomas Bowyer, Sir Tho:
Barrington, Sir Edward Hales, Sir William Litton, Sir Richard Cave, M. Robert
Goodwin, Sir Samuel Luke, M. Wingate, Sir Robert Pie, Alderman Soames, Alderman
Penington; Captain V^en, M. Vassel Lord Faulkland, Captain Rainsborough Master
Bence, Sir Peter Wroth, Master Holland, M. Wynwood, M. Scowen, M. Joh. Goodwin
Sir Thomas Dacres, M. Merley, M. Martin, M, Arthur Goodwin, Sir John
Clotworthy, M. White, M. Solicitor, M. Spurstow, M. Lawr. Whitaker, M,
Sergeant Wiler, M. Strowd, Sir Henry Vane, M. Glynne, Sir Simon Dewes. Sir
William Drake, M. Beddingfield, Sir. Gilbert Pickering M. Blackstone, Master
Waller.
This Committee is to meet on Saturday next in the Exchequer Chamber, at 9. of
the clock in the forenoone. And they are to meet every Tuesday and Saturday in
every week, and at such other times as they shall think fit, till the recesse
of the Parliament, which shall be on the 20. of October next.
THey or any six of them, have power to meet with the Committee of the Lords
appointed, during their recesse at such time as they shall appoint.

Resolved upon the question.
2. That the Committee appointed by the House during their Recesse, shall have
power to receive and open such Letters; as shall come from the Committees in
Scotland, and to give answer, according to the former Instructions and Orders
of this House.

Resolved upon the question.
3. This Committee shall take care that the Orders of this House be punctually
observed, concerning the disbanding of the Army, train of Artillery, and
Garrisons, and for the issuing and sending down of monyes to the purposes
accordingly.

Resolved upon the question.
4. That this Committee shall have power to recall the Committees in Scotland,
if they shall see cause.

And it is further resolved upon the question.
5. That this Committee shall have power to go on in preparation of proceedings
against the principal of such Delinquents as are already voted, or complained
against in the House, and to report any offers, which they shall make to the
House.

5. That upon information of any Riots, or tumults, to have Power to send to
all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other Officers to stir them up to their
duty in repressing them, and to report to the House any fayler of Obedience to
that sending.

7. To examine the Entries of the Clerks books, anS to that end that the
Committee may not mistake any past Action of the House; a Clark to be left
there with his Books.

8. To take care of the Preparation of his Majesty's Revenues, and to take into
consideration any Accounts of any Accomptatants to His Majesty.

9. To go on in prosecution of the Consideration of a West India Company.

10. To take into Consideration, the fishing upon the Coasts of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

11. To take into Consideration, the resolution of the abuses, in exchanging
and transporting of money, and the regulating of the Parr betwixt this and
other Kingdoms.

12. To prepare the Irish Causes, depending, to be either at the access
transmitted to the Lords, or recommended to the Irish Parliament.

12. To consider about Saltpeter, and Gunpowder.

13. To send for any Persons, Writings and Records.

14, To prepare a discharge for the Earl of Warwick, according to those
Acquittances he has given in concerning the Northern Counties.

Ordered, that 30000 l. out of the first moneys, that shall come to the
Treasurers and Commissioners in London for the Poll-money, shall be issued
forth by the Committee, appointed to sit during the recesse, for the Payment of
the Garrisons, and that the Committees shall inquire into the state of the
monyes due to those Garrisons, and take care for the further Payment of such
monyes, as shall appear to be due unto them, over and above the said 30000 l.

It is further ordered, that the Declaration of the Commons, in Parliament made
the 9. of Septewber. 1641. When it shall be Printed, it shall be brought to
this Committee, to compare with the Record, and to take care for the dispersing
thereof.

His Majesty's Resolution concerning the Spanish Ambassadors Request, with the
Parliaments Determination therein.
WHen the King was pleased to acquaint both Houses with the desire of the
French and Spanish Ambassadors, to transport Forces out of England and Ireland,
His Majesty did withal graciously express His Resolution, not to consent to
those Desires, without the consent of His Parliament.

Both Houses have searched their Journals and find by them, that not only they
never made any expression of such a consent, (as they can make no such but by
Order) but that both Houses have by vote declared their opinion to the
contrary, and have enclosed the Copy of their Votes.

That the Parliament cannot but wonder, that any Person should presume to
inform His Majesty, that they had made any such expression, having made no
such vote, which they conceive to be destructive to their proceedings, and
contrary to the Privileges of Parliament.

And this being the state of the matter of fact, the Parliament does no less
wonder, and conceives it a high injury to them, that the Spanish Ambassadors
should offer a complaint of them to His Majesty, for doing of that which (His
Majesty having referred the consideration of the Ambassadors desires to
Parliament) they could not but do without manifest breach of their duties as
Counselors, in this His Majesty's great Council of Parliament, for the
Reasons following.

1. That the want in which foreign states stand of men, is such, that great
use may be made of them by His Majesty, and advantageous conditions had for
them in the making or strengthening of Alliances abroad as his Affairs and
reason of State may require, which will be lost, as to so many, and we fear as
to more, which under color of these may be transported if these men should be
thus parted with.

2. That the breeding of Irish Papists in a foreign war, may get danger to
that Kingdom, and trouble to this, especially serving under the King of Spain
there being already in His Dominions and in His Armies, principal Fugitives of
that Nation and that in greater Commands over a Military of the same.

3. That His Majesty having sent an extraordinary Ambassador to Ratisbone, to
demand that in this present Dyer Justice be done to the Electorall House, by
the House of Austria, and likewise published a Manifest, by advise of
Parliament, declaring that if this be not done by them (with whom how the
Interests of Spain are involved, and interwoven is evident to all men) His
Majesty will employ all such Power, wherewith God has enabled him, both by His
own Arms and the Assistance of all his Allies, to vindicate His Honor; The
Parliament conceives that before Answer be made to this, so just Demand, it is
neither safe nor Honorable; for His Majesty to furnish that Prince with
Forces, which may be a disheartning to the Protestant Party abroad, a weakening
to His Majesty, and a strength to his Enemies, in case Justice be not done to
the Electorall House, which they conceive to have the more cause to doubt by
reason of the Publication in print, of the late general manifesty to the
inclusion of the Prince Palatine.

FINIS.

