PROPOSITIONS FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY To His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: In
Two Messages from the Isle of WIGHT, Dated Novem. 26. and Novem. 27. 1647.

For the composing of all differences, and fulfilling the Desires of all
Interests in the Kingdom.

Also His Excellencies Answer, in presence of His Officers. And Sir John
Berckleys Declaration concerning the extent of the Message sent by him from His
Majesty.

November: 30: 1647:
THese Propositions from His Majesty in Two Messages to His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, were written with His Majesty's own hand, Subscribed

CHARLES REX:

Charles I's royal blazon C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENS DIEV ET MONDROIT

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

PROPOSITIONS From the KINGS MAJESTY To His Excellency SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX: In
two Messages from the Isle of Wight, dated Novem. 26. and No. 27. 1647. for the
composing of all differences, and fulfilling the desires of all Interests in
the Kingdom. The first Message.
CHARLES REX.

HAving left order at our remove from Hampton Court, that a copy should be
given you, of what we had then written to both Houses of Parliament touching
the causes of our withdrawing, and the continuance of our Resolutions to
improve every occasion of the satisfaction of all chief interests, that so a
happy peace may be settled in our Dominions: In pursuance whereof, we have
lately sent a Message to both Houses from this place, and a copy of it to you:
and being desirous in order to that blessed work, to give you our present
sense upon the condition of affairs as they now stand: We have thought fit
to appoint Sir John Barckley to repair unto you, and to communicate the same to
you: And we shall be glad by him to receive a mutual communication of your
sense also, upon this subject; not doubting, but you easily perceive by the
late disorders, into what a depth of confusion the Army and the Nation will
fall, if timely and effectual preventions be not used, and therefore we have
now again proposed (as the only expedient) a personal Treaty, for the
composing of all differences, and fulfilling the desires of all interests, to
which if you will employ your credit, as you cannot but expect the Blessings of
God upon your endeavors therein; so may you justly look for the best return
that ever our condition shall be able to make you.

Given at Carisbrooke Castle, the 26. day of Novem. 1647.
For Sir Thomas Fairfax General.
The Second Message.
Charles Rex,

THe free liberty which you willingly afforded Us to have of the use of Our
Chaplains, makes Us at this time not only to acknowledge your former
civilities, but likewise now to acquaint you that three of Our Chaplains, to
wit, Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Holdsworth, and Dr Haywood, are newly landed in this
Isle, not doubting but they shall have the same protection that formerly they
had, which still will show the continuation of Your good respect unto Us, which
we upon all fitting occasions shall not be backward to acknowledge, So We bid
You heartily farewell.

Given at Carisbrooke Castle the 27 of Nov. 1647.
For Sir Thomas Fairefax General.
His Excellencies Answer to His Majesty's Message in presence of His Officers,
And Sir John Barckleys Declaration concerning the Extent of the Message sent by
Him to His Majesty.
Sir,
I Have sent you enclosed brought yesterday to the General from His Majesty by
Sir John Barckeley, Dated at Carisbrooke Castle Novem. 26. and 27. The General
being very tender of admitting any intercourse with the King or any from him
resolved not to have any discourse in private with Him, nor any thing in
public, but what might be for His better Accommodation, or the like, but for
the matter of a Personal Treaty His Excellency could give no Answer to it the
Parliament having it under consideration: The General having thus expressed His
sense to Sir John Barckeley in the presence of His Officers, Sir John declared,
He had nothing more in command, then to desire his mediating for a Personal
Treaty, and so departed.

November. 30. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbot.


