The several COPIES OF THE Kings LETTERS, and MESSAGES, SENT TO THE
PARLIAMENT: FIRST, About a Treaty by Commissioners, and then Personally by
Himself: With the PARLIAMENTS several Answers thereunto, and some
Observations thereupon.. WITH, The COPY of a PAPER under the Lord Inchiquins
hand, concerning the Popes Nuntio now in Ireland, and his proceedings
thereabout the Bill of Bargain and Sale of that KINGDOM.

These Letters from the King to the Parliament, and their Answers to His
Majesty, With the Observations thereupon, are Printed and Published according
to Order.

London, Printed for Jane Coe, 1646.

Per maximam amicitiam, maxima fallendi copia, Salust. Jug.
IT was one of his policies, out of whose actions sprang many of the Florentine
Axioms; to give most assurance of his faith and friendship to those men, whom
he first meant to deceive, and dispoile of their Estates: those therefore, that
upon such trust, disarm themselves, and put their swords into the others hands,
and guilty (through their foolish credulity) of their own proper ruin, and all
that then can be done, is to lament, and say (when it is too late) this was
perfidiousness in them, and madness in us: and therefore wise men know, pacem
and conditones abn^ebant diserimen ac dedecus ostentan^os, and fidem in
libidine victor^^, Tacit, hist. 3. When Valentinois had no other probable way
to surprise the Dukedom of Vrbine, he comes to the Confines of Pe^ugia and
treaets with Guidobald^, the present Duke, pretending to join with him against
the common Enemy: A truce was made between them, Valen^inois enters, secures
his Artillery, and disaim^ the Duke, and forces the soldiers to assist him
against Oagly, a town of the Dutch^, takes that, and in short space after all
the rest of the State: except only the forces of St. Leo. and Majuolo, the
poor Duke with his nephew the Provost of Rome, being forced to flee the
Country, in Peasants attire.

Again, after Valentinous had effected this exployt, he sets upon Camerin^:
makes Iulio, Davarano, Lord there of believe, that he ^ill yield to some good
composition with him, (...) comes to him to treat of the accord, during the
treaty, he with his two Sons, and the whole Town is supprised; this done he
presently strangleth the Father, and the Children, and tyrannies over the
Soldiers and Inhabitants,

The Parliament desire peace as earnestly, and really, as their souls can lay
out for it, but (in actions of war especially) Cit^^^ venit pereulam cum
contemnitur. And therefore the Parliament must look before them, lest ^uey
stumble, and behind them, least they be overtaken, and on either side, which
way soever it comes we never was in greater Peril, then when by treaties we
have been flattered to ^eare it least, wherefore upon a parley, or overture we
must not be secure, but stand upon our guards (if we expect safety) as in times
of greatest defyance; least we suffer like Fabritio Colonua, who treating with
Count Gaiazz^, the (...) in Capua, upon expectation of a present accord; (...)
and slack guard upon the walls, which they without (...) opportunity of being
greedy of the spoil; gave a ^odaine ^^^^^rious assault, carried the place,
socked it, and took th^se ^^^^ners which escaped massacre.

Many plots have been invented against this City and Kingdo^^, and they never
took more then in times of treaty, and to (...) them now, the Parliament can
do no less then keep the Enemy out of our quarters, especially those who
played so foul before, least we suffer like Pazzi, the Flowrentive Commissary,
who though he had a fair Itum, that diverse principal men in the City had
secretly conspired with Vitellozza, to betray Arazzo, wh^ he then was; yet
would not believe that the hearts of so many, as should be able to affect it,
could be poisoned with so pestilent a venum of treason, he persuades himself
that the Authority of the name public, would supply his need in what he
wanted and so by suffering those Malignan^s to remain, and not wis^ly
providing to keep them down; they comply with Vitell^zza: and i^ tumult^ rise
in Arms rescue the Captives out of prison, secure Pazzi and his Officers, and
set open the gates to Vitellozza; who thereby becomes complete Conquerors of
Arezz^, to whom the soldiers become prisoners, the Inhabitants slaves, and
their estates plundered. These examples, and many more which might be alleged
may give us to understand the danger of treating with an Enemy, or suffering
them to remain in our quarters.

And whereas his Majesty offers to treat himself in person with the
Parliament, names a militia; and nominates other perticulars, and makes many
plausible expressions: they look into his actions to see if they be congruent,
as in things we have, so in those we do, each has his proper trial, to prove
the excellency thereof in his kind, ^^tima institutio experentia, gould by the
^ast, the Diamant by his hardness, Pearl by his water: so the best
discoverours of men's minds are their actions, the best director of actions is
Council, and the experience, the Parliament: therefore observe by what
Council his Majesty is led, and by lamentable experience find.

1. That thereby much innocent blood has been shed by those who have command,
and Commission from his Majesty, by which authority ye took up Arms, and
remain in an hostile way against the Parliament, many Irish Rebels have been
brought into this Kingdom? as Grady, diverse of the Butlers, Colonel O^eale,
that brake out of the Town; and many hundreds more received into his Maj.
Army; and forces, and Garrisons kept against the Parliament in several places
of the Kingdom.

2. The like also has been and still is done in Scotland, many Irish Rebels
and other frraaigne forces, and notorious Papists are in Arms against the
Parliament of Scotland, Montr^^^e Mag^^^ell and others, Margues H^n^ley a
notorious P^pist, several times Irish have been transported thither.

3. Had the Parliament had the command of Dublin; and other parts kept against
them by the Marquis of O^^^d, and others by authority from the King, and the
English sent thither not called back; nor relief sent to those that stayed been
kept from them; Ireland might have been reduced before this, but now the Lord
Harbert of Ragland that Popish insendiary is gone over thither from the King,
to receive a great command, and a nuntio from the Pope, about trading for
Ireland arrived, as you may see by this following paper, subscribed by the Lord
Inthiquins one hand; a Gentleman of Heroy^ke worth, one that deserves much
honor; for his well managing of the affairs of that Kingdom within his limits

A Copy of the Lord Inchiquin^ Paper, con^^^ning the proceedings of the Popes
(...) with the Rebels in Ireland.
SIR,
THere is lately an old Serp^^^ (a Limb of the (...) under his Holiness (...),
calls himself the (...) of the Apostolic Sea to the confederate Catholic
(and is by (...) ^^led Archbishop and Pry^^ of Jerman^^) arrived in (...)
^^^^^ed to keep life and vigor in the (...) Rebellion (...) to engage the
people of the (...) the Pope His repute for safety (which must ever (...) the
(...) his (...)) (...), that the miserable (...) people fall down and worship
(...) ways, and settle themselv^^ (...) their adoration (...) he comes within
(...) of (...) and thought, (...) are naturally blind, very (...) beg his
benediction, (...) ^ever (...) so (...) sight of him: He has brought with him
(as is said) (...) D^^kets in Gold, and Arme^ for 10000, Horse and Foot, (...)
for the relief of the Irish, and (...) of the W^^re, (...) and they agree upon
the Bill of Bargain and Sale of this Kingdom. It is (...), that his arrival
may advantage more their prejudice our ^^oceedings; for that the Irish ^re
thereby so (...) with prid^ and arrogancy, as that they stand in higher (...)
then ever with the Marquesses ^ouching a Peace, which (...) confidently hope
will never be ^ffected.

I have not any thing at present that may (...) your (...) trouble And
therefore I take leave, and remain

Your affectionate Friend, INC^^^VIN.


Now for these, and other reasons, it is not thought convenient to treat at
all, not that it cannot possibly conduce (...) ^^ce, and that for these Reasons:

I. If his Majesty should come thus to London, he should put himself into the
capacity of an Enemy, which might much amaze the minds of the people, to see
his Majesty in such a condition amongst us.

II. When the people should hear, that after those few days of his Majesty's
being here, He would return again and leave Us they would be so impatient, as
that they would be hardly quelled, but with great insurrections, and much
discontents.

III. Except there be some assurance that his Majesty will conc^^re with Them,
it is of great disadvantage to the Parliament, to admit of a Personal Treaty,
with his Majesty.

IV. To grant his Majesty (once co^^ng hither) leave to return again in an
Hostile way against the Parliament, after a few days Treaty was to make things
far worse, and the Kingdom further from a capacity of Peace, then now it is
with us.

Since the Kings last Letter, there came to our hands a Paper from a person of
quality, which is thought fit to be here inserted.

KIND SIR:
IT is thought the King had rather he at Guild Hall, then at Westminster Hall,
had rather be a (...) th^n an Englishman, a (...) he will (...) what you will,
and where (...) him (...) to pass his designs; the (...) and will not
sacrifice the public to have their debts assured, our Brethren know him too
well to trust to wh^^ she (...) and (...) of will in them to us, they helped us
at a need and will never dishonor their Nation by a misdeed, the Presbiterians
(...) so (...) to have their way Iure Divi^^ (...) of their Judgment, upon any
compliance of the Kings, I must profess my self to be a Presbiterian, but not
ridged, yet I think that Independents may fight for us, (...) principles, to
lay down their (...) Authority whatsoever they should be there unto required,
the Kingdom has found them trusty, faithful and valiant, in the performance
of that trust, they will discharge a good conscience, and therefore can the
more cheerfully bear any aspersion.

Dat. Ian. 3. 1645.

The Parliament have debated about the sending of Proposition to the King, and
have agreed upon such Propositions, as they conceive to be the only means
for the preparing a sale and wellgrounded Peace, and that for these Reasons;

I. The Kings Signing of those Bills, give satisfaction and security to both
the Kingdoms; That His Majesty's coming hither is for Peace, and the good of
His People, in giving His Royal assent to what the Parliament of England and
Scotland, for that purpose, present unto His Majesty.

II. His Majesty will hereby make the strongest Union between the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland that can be, which is already made by a Covenant with
the God of Heaven, by the Parliament and the People, and wants nothing but His
Majesty's assent.

III. Religion will hereby be settled, all Popery and Superst^^^on utterly cast
out, the Church Reformed, and pure Religion ^^blished.

IV. His Majesty may come then to His Parliament with joy, and be received of
His People with love and meekness, and have the glory, to be accounted by His
People (as is acknowledged by His Parliament) to be a principal Instrument in
so good a Work.

V. His Majesty may have a real and sincere Parliament to advise with for the
safety of His Person, State, and Kingdoms, and such as will be firm to His
Majesty, for the good of Himself and Posterity, Church, and People, and settle
the Kingdom in (...) Posture, as will keep Us under safe and well grounded
Peace.

We hope His Majesty will hearken to His Parliament.

Confu^ter ille fit tibi vir quisapit,
-- Sapient i^ en^m (...).
Here follows the Copies of the King several Messages, and Letters, and the
Parliaments Answers thereunto.

The Kings Majesty's first, ^essage, or Letter to the Parliament, sent from Sir
Thomas Glemham by a Trumpet, about a Treaty by Commissioners.

CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty being ^ill deeply sensible of the continuation of this bloody and
unnatural war, cannot think himself discharged of the (...) to God, and the
affection and regard he has to the prese^^ation of his People, without the
constant application of his ca^hest endeavors to ^^nd some expedient for the
speedy ending of these un^appy (...), if it may be, Does therefo^^ desire, that
a (...) of Richm^nd, (...) the Earl (...) (...), John (...), and (...)
Erse^ires, and their Atte^dants, with Coaches, Hors^s, and other accommodations
for their journey to Westminst^^^^ ^uring the^ stay there, and ^eturne (...)
whom His Majesty intends to (...) the (...) assembled in the Parl^ament of ^ing
^and at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland,
furnished with such Propos^^ions as His Majesty is conside^^ will be ^he
foundation of a happy and well grounded (...)

December. 5 164^ Given at the Court at Oxford. For the Speaker of the House of
(...) pro tempore.

The Parliaments Answer to the Kings first Letter, sent by a Tru^p^^er to Sir
Thomas Glemham Governor of Oxford.

SIR,
WE have rec^^ved (...) Letter of the (...). of this instant December, with His
Majesty's hand ^^closed, and have sent back your (...) by command of both
Houses, who will with all convenient speed return an Answer to his Majesty: and
rest For Sir (...)

Your loving friends, Governor of Oxford. Gray of Werk, Speaker of the House
of Peers pro tempore. William Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons.


The Kings Majesty's second Message to the Parliament, in ^^secution of the
(...).

CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty cannot but extremely wo^dee, that after so many expressions on
your part, of a deep and (...) sense of the miseries of this afflicted
Kingdom, and of the dangers incident to his (...) the (...) of this unnatuall
war, your many great and so (...) stations, that the raising of those Armies
has been only for the necessary defense of Gods true Religion, His Majesty's
honor, safety and property, the peace, (...) and security of his People, you
should (...) a safe Conduct (...) the persons mentioned in his Majesty's
Message of the (...) this instant December, which are to be sent unto you with
Propositions for a well-grounded peace, a thing so far from (...) been denied
at any time by his Majesty, (...) desired the same, that he believes has been
seldom (if ever) practiced among the most (...) and professed enemies, much
less from Subjects to their King: But his Majesty is resolved, that no
discouragment (...) ever shall make him fall of his part, in doing his (...)
put an end to these calamities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the
ruin of this unhappy Nation: and therefore (...) once again desire, that
(...) for those persons (...) in his former Message, and does therefore consure
you, as you will answer to almighty God in that day when he shall make
inquisition for all the blood that has and may be spilt in this un^aturall
War, as you tender the preservation and establishment of the true Religion,
by all the bonds of duty and allegiance to your King, or compassion to your
bleeding and unhappy Country, and of charity to your selves, that you dispose
your selves to a true sense, and employ your hearts, and all your faculties, in
a most serious endeavor, together with his Majesty, to set a speedy end to
these wasting divisions, and then he shall not doubt but that God will yet
again give a blessing of peace to this now distracted Nation.

Given at Oxford the 15. of December. 1645.

For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro (...).

The Parliaments complete Answer to both his Majesty's former Letters, which
was sent by Sir Peter Killegrew.

May it please your Majesty;
THe Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England as W^stminster,
have received your Letters of the fifth and fifteenth of this (...) December;
and having, together with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland,
taken the same into their serious consideration, d^ humbly returns this Answer.

They have in all their actions manifested to your Majesty and the world,
their sincere and earnest desires, that a safe and well-gro^inded peace might
be settled in your three Kingdoms, and for the obtaining so great a blessing,
shall ever pray to God, and use their utmost endeavors, and beseech your
Majesty to believe, that their not sending a more speedy answer, has not
proceeded from any intention to retard the ^^ane^ of putting an end to these
present calamities by a happi^ peace, but has (...) o^casioned by the
considerations and debates necessari^ in a (...) of so great importance,
wherein both Kingdoms are so much concerned.

As to your Majesty's desire of a safe (...) for the ^^^ing hither of the Duke
of Richmond, the Earl of Southampton, John Ashburnham, and (...), with (...)
happy and (...) They (...) been made (...) under the pre^ence of peace, and
(...) ^^^ved (...) cannot give way to a safe conduct, ^^^ding to your (...)
desire: But both Houses of the Parliament of England, having now under their
consideration Pro^^^tions, and (...) for the settling of a safe and well (...),
which are (...) (...) to the (...) of the King (...) of Scotl^nd, doresolve
after (...) King^^mes, to pr^sens (...) all (...).

(...) the 25 Decem^ 1655. Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peers pro
tempore. William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Comm^ons.


The Kings Majesty's third Lester being the first Messiage^^^ (...) Treaty
with the Parli^ment.

CHARLES R.

NOtwithstanding the strange and unexpected delays which can be presidented by
no former times to his Majesty's two former Messages, his Majesty will lay
aside all expostulations, (...) serving to loose (...), then to contribute
(...) remedy to the evils which (...) the present do afflick this distrected
Kingdom; therefore without ^^^ther preamble, his Majesty thinks it most
necessary to send these ^^^positions thi^ way, which he intended to do by the
persons mentioned in his former Message, though he well knows the great
disadvantage which overtures of this kind have by the want of being accompanied
by well i^structed Messengers.

His Majesty conceiving that the former Treaties have bither to proved,
ineffectuall, chiefly for want of power in those persons that ^^^^ted, as
likewise because those from whom their power (...) derived (not possibly having
the particular informations of ever^e several debate) could not give so clear
a judgment as was requisite in so important a business; it therefore His
Majesty may have the engagement of the two Houses of Parliament at
Westminster, the Commissione^s of the Parliament of Sentland, the Mayor,
Aldermen, Common Council, and Militia of London, of the chief (...) of (...)
Thomas Fairfax his Army, and also of those in the Scots Army for his Majesty's
safe and free coming and abo^d in London, or Westminster, with such of his
servants now attending him, and their followers, not exceeding in all the
number of 300 for the space of 40. days, and after the said time for his free
and safe repair to any of his Garrisons of Oxford, Worcester, or Newark, which
his Majesty shall nominate at any time before his going from London or
Westminster; His Majesty propounds, to have a personal Treaty with the two
Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parli^ment of
Scotland upon all matters which may conduce to the restoring of peace, and
happiness, to these miserable distracted Kingdoms, and to begin with the three
heads which were treated on at Vxbridge, and for the better clearing of his
Majesty's earnest and sincer^ intentions of putting an end to these unn^turall
distractions, knowing that point of security may prove the greatest obstacle to
this most blessed work. His Majesty therefore declates, that he is willing to
commit the great trust of the Militia of this Kingdom for such (...), and with
such powers (...) are expressed in the paper, delivered by his Majesty's
Commissioners at Vxbridge, the 6. of February last, to these persons
following, viz. the Lord Privy Se^^e, Duke of Richmond, Ma^quisse of Hartford,
Marquisse of Dorchester, Earl of Dorset Lord Chamber^^in, the Ear^^ of
Nor^humberland, the Earl of Essex, Earl of Southampton, Earl of Pembroke,
Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Denbigh,
Earl of Chichester, the Lord Say. Lord Seymour. Lord Lucas, Lord ^^ppington,
Mr. Denzill Holl^^, Mr. Pierpoy^^, M. Henry Bell^ssis, M. Richard Spencer, Sir
Thomas Fairfa^^, M. John Ashburnham, Sir G^rvase Cliston, Sir H. Vane jun. M.
Robert Wallo^, Mr. Thomas Chickley, Mr. Oliver Cromwell, and Mr. Philip
Skippon; supposing that these are persons against whom there can be to just
exceptions: But it this do not satisfy, then his Majesty off ^s to name the
on half, and leaves the other to the election of the two Houses of Parliament
at Westminster, with the powers of limitation before mentioned. Thus his
Majesty calls God and the world to witness of his sincere intentions and real
endeavors, for the composing and fetting of these miserable distractions,
which he doubts not (but by the blessing of God) will soon be put to an happy
conclusion, i^ this his Majesti^^ offer be accepted; otherwise he leaves all
the world to judge, who are the contrivers of this unnatural war. And
therefore he once more conjures you, by all the bonds of duty which you owe
God and your King, to have so great a compassion on the (...) mis^rable estate
of your Country, that you join your most (...) hearty endeavors with his
Majesty, to put a happy and (...) to these present miseries.

Given at the Court of Oxford December. 26. 1645. For the Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro ^empore, to be comm^^cated to the two Houses of Parliament at
Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland.




The Kings Majesty's fourth message in prosecution of the (...) personal
Treaty with the Parliament, (...) by Sir P. Killegrew.

CHARLES R.

ALthough the message sent by Sir Peter Killegraw may justly (...) (...)
answer, yet his Majesty lays that aside, (...) proper for (...) present
ende^vours, leaving all the world (...) his propasitions for a persinall
Treaty, or the flat (...) of a safe (...) for persons to begin a Treaty, be
greater signs of a real (...) peace, and shall now only ^^sist upon his
former message of the (...) of (...) December: That upon his repair to
Westoninfter, be (...) not but (...) join his ^^d^avours with his Houses of
Parliament, as to give just (...) ction, not only concerning the bufinesse of
Ireland, (...) also (...) of away for the payment of the public de^^s, as well
to the (...) the City of London, as others; and as already (...) (...) for
settling of the Militia, so he shall carefully (...) particulars, that none
shall have cause (...) for (...) whereby just jealousies may arise to hinder
the (...) (...); and certainly, this prop^sition of a persionall (...) have
entered into his Majesty's thoughts, if (...) had not (...), to (...) to all the
world, that the public good and (...) of (...) (...) is far deaner to him,
them the respect of any particular (...) wherefore none can ^ppose this motion,
without a (...) that he particularly en^ies his Majesty should be (...) Author
(...) blessed a work, be^ides the declaring himselfa a direct Opposer of (...)
pie peace of th^se Nations. To (...) will not (...) (...) and specious (...)
brought (...) public test, and those (...) real sense, and (...) the miseries
(...) their bleading Country, let them spe^dily and (...) his Majesty's
proposition for his personal (...) at West^^^ster, which (by the blessing of
God) will undoubtedly to these now distracted Kingdoms, restore the happiness
of a long ^ish^^ for and lasting (...).

Given at the Court at Oxford, the nine and twentieth day of December, 1645.
For the Speaker of the House of Pe^^es pr^^tempore, to be communicated to the
two Houses of Parli^ment at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland.




The Parliaments complete Answer to His Majesty's two laft Letters.

May it please your Majesty:
WE your humble and loyal Subjects of both Kingdoms have received your
Letters of the 26. and 29. of December last, unto which we humbly return this
Answer^ That there has been no deby on our parts, but what was necessary in
(...) business of so great (...) consequence, as is expressed in our formet
Letter to your (...) Conceming the personal Treaty desired by your Majesty,
there ^^^^ing been so much innocen^bloud of your good Subjects shed in this
(...), by your Majesty's Commands and Commissions, (...) brought over into both
Kingdoms, and inde^vours to bring over more, both of them, as also Forces from
foreign parts, your Majesty being in Arms in these parts, and the Prince in
the head of an Army in the West, diverse towns made Garrisons, and kept in
hostility by your Majesty, against the Parliament of England; there being also
forces in Scotland, against that Parliament and Kingdom, by your Majesty's
Commission, the w^rre in Ireland ^o mented and prolonged by your Majesty,
whe^eby the three Kingdoms are brought near to ^^ter ruin, and destruction.
We conceive, that until satisfaction and secutitie be first given to both your
Kingdoms, your Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, not by us
assented unto, neither can we apprehend it a means conducing to peace, that
your Majesty should come to your Parliament for a few days, with any thoughts
of leaving it, especially with intentions of returning to hostility against it;
and we do obferve, that your Majesty desires the ing^gement, not only of your
Parliaments, but of the Lord Mayor, (...) mon Counsel, and Militia, of the
City of London, the (...) ders of Sir Tho. Fair faxe's Army, and those of the
Scots Army, which is against the Privileges and Honors of the Parliaments,
(...) being joined with them, who are subject and subordinate to (...)
authority.

That which your Majesty (against the freedom of the Parliaments) inforces in
both your Letters, with many carnest expressions, (...) if in no other way,
then that propounded by your Majesty, the peace of your Kingdoms could be
established, your Majesty may please to remember, that in our last Letter we
did declare, that Propositions from both Kingdoms were speedily to be sent to
(...) Majesty, which we conceive to be the only way for the attaining a
happy and well-grounded peace, and your Majesty's assent unto those
Propositions will be an effectual means for giving satisfaction and (...)
your Kingdom, will assure a firm (...) between the two Kingdome^(...) much
desired by each for other, as for themselves) and, settle Re^gion, and secure
the peace of the Kingdom of Scotland, whereof (...) so much as mentioned in
your (...) Letter.

And ^n proceeding according to those just and, (...) for the putting an end to
the bleeding calamities of these Nations, (...) Majesty may have the glory to
be a principal instrument in so (...) (...) and we (however mis-interpreted)
shall approve (...) God and the World to be real and sincere in seeking a safe
and (...) peace.


FINIS.

