KING CHARLES HIS RESOLVTION Concerning the Government of the Church of
England, being contrary to that of Scotland. With a Speech spoken by the Lord
Car, in the Parliament in Scotland, being a little before his examination
concerning the Plot which was found out in Scotland.

Printed at LONDON, 1641.

King Charles his resolution concerning The government of the Church of
England being contrary to the Church of SCOTLAND.
THat the Scots disallow of the Hierarchy is unknown to none, their wills
stand for reason, and many in England do heartily wish, that Bishops should be
put down here also, which matter should they have granted, I fear least that
after they have procured the falls of twenty four Spiritual Lords, they would
the next Triennial Parliament strive to sweep away foure-score Temporal
Lords: not will our Book of Common Prayer relish well with some, that must be
also abolished, for why it had it is first original from the Popish Liturgye,
which I will leave to the opinion of the learned.

The Book of Common Prayer the Scots by no manner of means will allow of, I
pray that many of their learned men wrong not their own consciences by it; for
Christ has said himself, My house shall be called the house of Prayer.

It was reported in England, that our Royal Sovereign would reform the
Church of England, to that of Scotland, and quite to abolish the Hira^chie, and
the book of common prayer, but there is no such matter; for it is our Royal
Sovereign's intent to be constant to the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church
of England established by Queen Elizabeth and his Father: Nay more, his Royal
Majesty is resolved by the grace of God to dye in the maintenance of the same:
Then cease all you cursing Architophells and railing Rabshakahs, and do not
endeavor to defeat the house of God, let the sanctum sanctorum alone, neither
confine your selves to barnes and stables, for although God has said, where
two or three be gathered together in my name, there will I be, yet also did
he command a house to be built, which should be set apart for his service,
and called after his name.

FINIS.
My Lords.
Where danger hangs over head it is time to look about; certain suspicions
are conjectured concerning men of no mean quality and Traitors we are termed
all, to destroy diverse Noble men (as it is supposed) was our intents, and I
amongst the number am accounted, as one license has been given unto us to
make answer for ourselves, for my part I am but one, and let the matter fall
out as it can, I have but one life to loose. The Marquis should have been
destroyed as some do report: if he but live until I make a plot to take away
his life. I dare warrant him a double Methusalah's age. The Earl of Argile (as
it is reported) should have been destroyed, whose actions have been so just,
that he were the unjustest man breathing that should have the least imagination
to destroy him. The Lord Londen also was supposed to have had a plot contrived
to take away his life, which me thinks no Scotch-man would be so base, as to
have so wicked a meaning against him, who has been a chief upholder of our
peace with the jeopardy of his own life.

Then for General Lesly, it is very well that I was one, which always did
wish prosperity to his actions, and that victory might crown all his designs.

But my Lords, I know there be many, which a long time have been working my
destruction in a most envious Loome, the thread being spunne by nothing but
malice.

O that my life were sacrificed to do my Country good, and yet would I vvish,
that there were an alteration, concerning some chapters, let God deal by my
soul, as I wish the good of my country, not careing whether Life or Death be
my portion, a natural one I mean.

My Lords, I wonder that any of you should have such a concert concerning me,
in so much as my daily study to my thinking, has been for nothing more than
for the Common wealth. I desire nothing more, that whatsoever becomes of me,
that this may prove a most happy Parliament, Miseris succurrere didici, I have
succored others, for which many strive to reward me with poverty, to make
long Harvest of a little Corn is not proper, wherefore I now am prepared to
answer whatsoever at this time, shall or can be objected against me.

Vincenti praemia soli.

FINIS.

