His Majesty's PROPOSITIONS ( For His Majesty's coming to London) Read, and
Debated, in the House of COMMONS On Monday the 13th of November, 1648.

ALSO The Orders of the House of Commons in Answer to the same.

WITH A Copy of a Letter from his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.

And the several Propositions of the Army, at the General Council of the Army.

Published for the General satisfaction of the whole KINGDOM.

Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner 1648,

HIS Majesty's Propositions and Desires, Read and Debated in the House of
Commons, on Monday 13 Novem. 1648.
CHARLES R.

1.THat his Majesty may come to London, and be put into a condition of honor,
freedom, and safety. 2 That his Majesty may have the faith of his two Houses
of Parliament, for his safety, and his Lands and Revenues to be restored to
him. 3 That his Majesty may have allowance for such part of his Revenues, as he
shall pass away. 4 That an Act of Oblivion may be passed for a general
Indemnity, with such limitations as shall be agreed on by His Majesty and both
Houses of Parliament.
Die Lunae 13 November. 1648.
The House of Commons have referred it to a Committee to draw-up something to
present for his Majesty's coming to London, and given Instructions for the
terms. His Majesty being already in freedom, honor, and safety at the Treaty.

It is Ordered by the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, That it be
referred to a Committee, to consider of his Majesty's desires, concerning his
Revenues, and the Parliament has already Voted his Majesty 100000 l. per annum
in lieu of the Court of Wards.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That an Act of Oblivion shall
be presented to His Majesty to be passed, with such limitations as shall be
agreed on by both Houses of Parliament. And accordingly a Committee was chosen
to draw up a Bill for the said Act, to be sent to his Majesty.

A Letter from the Lord Fairfax.
SIR
HAving had a meeting of diverse Officers of the Army, I apprehend their
general sad Resentment of the many pressures now lying upon the Kingdom, in
particular, that of free Quarter, whereby they (and the Soldiers under their
Command, who have faithfully served their Generation) are even a burden to
themselves, because they are so much to the poor Country, which is the more
grievous to them, because they have generally paid their Taxes, and yet the
Army not enabled to pay their Quarters, or provide themselves necessaries
against the injury of the approaching season. I hoped ere this we should have
received some good fruit of your last being with us, the matters then agreed,
being of such public concernment, and so much requiring expedition. I desire
you to improve your utmost endeavor for a quick dispatch in providing
effectually for the premises, to prevent those ill consequences which
otherwise delay therein may produce. I request you to communicate this to the
House: so hoping to hear speedily from you, I remain

Your very assured Friend FAIRFAX.
St, Albans 9 November. 1648.
For the Honored Robert Scowen Esquire in the Chair of the Committee for the Army.
To His Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, General of all Forces raised by the
Parliament, in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers in Gol. Fleetwoods, Col.
Whalies, and Col. Barksteads Regiaments, under your Excellencies Command.
Shows,
THat through the blessing of God upon the Army, under your Excellencies
Conduct, the enemies of this Nations Peace and Freedom, have been twice subdued.

That as we engaged in Judgment and Conscience against them, to preserve this
Nation from slavery, so we hope the Parliament (by whom we were invited to
engage) would have executed Justice, upon the public and grand Enemies
thereof, and immediately have settled a just Government, under which every man's
freedom, right and propriety might have been preserved

That your Petitioners had some hope of that happy fruit of their labors,
hazard and expense of blood, when the Parliament voted no more addresses to the
King, and hereupon your Excellency and your Petitioners did testify their
approbation of those Votes, and did engage to adhere, and stand by them, in the
settlment of the Nation without, and against the King, or any other that should
partake with him, and your Excellency and your Petitioners received the thank
of both Houses for the same.

That notwithstanding a bloody War has been since raised by the Prince his
Commission, a foreign Nation invited to (which did) invade us (and as there
is ground to believe) by the Kings consent, thereby to inflave us, to his
exorbitant will and lust,

Yet when through the great mercy and favor of God, all their forces were
suppressed, instead of having our expectations answered (as to a just settlement)
we find.

That the wicked and bloody designs of the Enemies of this kingdom still
continue, As of that of Ireland by Ormond, and that at home, threatening the
lives of every well-affected person. And this we humbly conceive they are the
more imboldned unto, because of the prevalency of some in greatest Authority,
that will let no Justice be don upon the grand fomentors, contrivers and
actors, in the first and late War. So that the Innocent blood of many of our
dear friends (that has been spilt) the rapines, robberies, burning and
spoiling many welaffected towns and persons, of all livelihood, is forgotten,
just Government subverted, and such petitions tending to a settling of a just
and equal Government, (as that of the 12 of Septem. last, from the Cities of
London and Westminster) slighted, the intolerable burden of free Quarter
still continued, no redress of public grievances, by reason of which the
implacable malice of our twice conquered Enemies, seems to steal credit in the
hearts of many) whose weakness hinders them from discerning their evil ends) so
that their bloody intentions against the well-affected in this Nation, does
begin to manifest it self, both against Parliament men and the Army, as is
apparent by that most desperate and inhumain murdering of Col. Rainsborough.

That we conceive, your Excellency and the Army, next under God, are the only
Bar, that lies in their way, hindering the accomplishing of their ends: so
their main design is, how to destroy you and it. And that they endeavor by
continuing us on free quarter, yet providing Ordinances, against it, and
Instructions to enter into no man's house (except Innes, Alehouses, and
Taverns) against their wills, which was by us joyfully excepted, that thereby
the Country might be eased of that devouring Creature Free Quarter, yet when
the Army was thus quartered for the ease of the Country, we were content to
make hard shift to maintain our selves out of our pay though it was small, 2
s. per diem for horse, and 8 d. for foot, but that through the subtilty of our
Enemies, has been kept from us, we having not received any pay in six months
together. So that we must either starve and lie in the streets, or else still
oppress the Country by Free Quarter, which renders us odious to the people.
And it cannot be otherwise, seeing the Assessements of 60000 l. per mensem, if
it were all assessed and gathered (besides money for providing Arms for the
Horse and Foot, Recruit Horses, Ammunition for the Army and Garrisons, Clothes,
Stockings, Shoes for Foot Soldiers, and other incident Charges) will not
amount to the Personal Pay of the Army by 12000 lib. per mensem.

Now we being pressed in our judgments, by our Enemies hellish and Bloody
designs; and their insolent and barbarous Carriage, and also our hearts
burdened with the unsettled condition of this poor Kingdom, are bold to present
to your Excellencies consideration these things following.

1. That speedy and impartial Justice may be executed upon all fomenters,
contrivers, and actors in the first and late War. 2. That Inquisition be made
for the blood of Rainsborough. 3. That the supreme power may be declared and
determined, that the want thereof may not be the ground of future, (as it has
been of these former) Wars. 4. That a period may be set for this present
Parliment to end as soon as may be with safety, and provisions made for future
Parliaments to meet certain without writ or sumons 5. That rules may be set
down between the People and their Representatives. 6. That Laws may be made in
things civil to bind all men, so that men in no case of offense, may be freed
from the Law whereunto another is subject. 7. That all those common grievances
and desires in our Declarations of June 14. and June 23. 1647. and expressed in
the London Petition, be speedily granted and redressed. 8. That present
provision be made for constant pay of the Army. 9. That the Arrears due from
the 14. of January, may be paid off, before we be commanded to pay Quarters,
and that there may be no other abatement from Officers or Soldiers for free
quarter, then according to the rates set down in the Ordinance of Parliament,
of the 14. day of December last. 10. That the Country may be paid for our free
quarter, according to the Deduction out of our pay out of their Assesments. 11.
That in as much as the Assesments fall short to pay the Army; That therefore
there may be Additionall supplies out of the Estates of the old and new
Delinquents, that there be no more Tax or Charge to the Commonwealth. 12.
That forthwith an account be called for from all persons that have been
betrusted with any thing for the State, that the Kingdom may be satisfied
therein. 13 That the Deanes and Chapters Lands may be given to pay the
Soldiers Arrears, seeing the Parliament have given away the Delinquents
Estates that should have done it.
These things being the proper issue of our serious thoughts, we implore your
Excellency through the many blessings, deliverances, victories and successes,
the Lord has crowned you withal, The dangers you have been preserved from,
the miseries of this bleeding Nation, the blood of the innocent, the outcry of
the Widow, and Fatherless, the sad omen of future troubles, to consider the
necessity of attaining these things, that we may be no longer the scorn and
contempt of the Nation, nor object of our Enemies malice, by the want of just
peacce and settlement; but with an undaunted courage, to desire the Parliament
that these things may be forthwith established, that w^ may with safety be
released, from this troublesome and hazardous imploiment, which by reason of
the grivous oppression thereof, we profess we are weary of which things we
challenge as ours and the Kingdoms due, twice bought with our blood. In the
doing which your Excellency shall not fail of their assistance who are ready to
wade through a Sea of troubles, to have them established, though they perish in
the work.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
FINIS.

