THE SCOTS REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION; Concerning, The restoring their
Declared King to His just Rights and Privileges; with their raising an Army of
25000 men, and setting forth a great Fleet of Ships, and what their Design is.

Also, a more exact relation of the resolute deportment of the late Marquess of
Montross, and several speeches spoken by him, at the time of his Execution.

Together, with the Lord Hoptons Letter, to diverse of the Gentry in Cornwall,
and Devonshire, concerning the King of Scots, and the Parliament of England;
and their resolution to stand firm to the present Authority of the Nation.

London, Printed for G. H. and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange 1650.

The Scots Remonstrance or Declaration, for the restoring their declared King
to his just Rights and Privileges, and the raising of an Army of 25000 men.
SIR,
SInce my arrival in these parts, great has been my desire to attend your
motion, and to salute you with those Occurrences which are of greatest
concernment (being highly obliged unto you, for your former manifold favors;)
Your last of the 14th instant, seeming to challenge a return of such overtures;
which (with an impartial pen) I shall here represent, desiring they may
speedily kiss your hand, and not be concealed from public view. On the 21
instant, the late Marquess of Montross received sentence of death, and the
same day was brought to the place of execution (attended by diverse of the
Nobility and Gentry) his gallant deportment, not a little amazing the
Spectators; who after a short speech, touching his engagement for his
Sovereign, further declared, that if nothing would satisfy the Parliament of
Scotland but his blood, that it would be required again at their hands, and
that he valued not his life in the least, it being a debt that must be paid;
and that it did greatly comfort his dying spirits, to think that he did not
only act, but was to suffer for his Majesty; and said, if he had a hundred
lives, he would freely sacrifice them all for his cause, protesting, he never
took more delight in riding in a Coach to take his recreation in earthly
pleasures, then he did to ride to the place of execution in a Cart, to be
deprived of them. Which declaratory expression being ended, he pulled off his
Bever and gold hat-band, and cast it to a Gentleman standing by him, and
lifting up his hands to heaven, desired the Executioner to proceed and do his
Office, his spirit not seeming to be troubled, nor his countenance to change,
and his carriage as sweet as ever I saw a man's in all my days. And truly, it is
absolutely believed, that he has gained a better repute amongst those of his
faction (by his death) then ever he did in his life. And after three hours
hanging on the Gallows, his body was cut down, and his head severed from his
sholders, and set upon the Tole-booth of this City, his arms and legs were
likewise cut off and commanded to be set upon four principle places of the
Kingdom, which are supposed to be Aberdeen, Glascow, Sterling, and St.
Johnstons.

This being performed, many of the royall-party seemed very discontented,
threatening to be revenged, etc. but it is believed, no such thing dare be
attempted, notwithstanding the great activeness of the Presbytery in the North
of Scotland, who have set forth a declaration of their loyal integrity to
their declared King, and of the carrying on the design formerly intended by
the aforesaid Marquess of Montross, protesting; That from their souls they
abhor and detest, the delivering of the late King over to bondage,
imprisonment, and murder; and that they will endeavor to establish his
present Majesty, in all his just Rights and privileges; and in order
thereunto, the Ministers in those parts, preach very high in their pulpits, to
stir up their several Congregations to an engagement, against the Sectaries of
both Kingdoms (as they are pleased to call them.) But what the event of these
revolutions will be, few days will make manifest; It is conceived by many, that
had not the blow been given in that nick of time, some sad events would have
attended the delay, which (in all probability) will now be prevented; for if
Court splendency, great men's deluding persuasions, with designed National
advantages, do blind the eyes of the Church general, as well as thus it did
provincial, it may then be perceived, that it is not the name of Presbytery,
that will keep conscience unstained, nor crooked turnings aside unblasted, as
may be instanced by their late proceedings against those that would not
subscribe to the aforesaid engagement, imprisoning those that denied it.

Here is an Army raising, by authority from the Committee of Estates, the chief
Officers have already received Commissions, they intend to levy 20000 horse and
foot, to be added to the old model of 5000; and declare, that it is for the
defense of their Country, but it is to be suspected, their design is against
England, whether so or not, I am not able to resolve; but I can assure you, the
Scots look upon a party in England, as a perfidious and Covenant Breaking
people, and say, they are bound to maintain the solemn league and Covenant.

The Earl of Nauferling is returned from Breda, with a Copy of their young
Kings Condescensions, which seems satisfactory to many; and there are thoughts
amongst the great ones, of proclaiming him a new upon his arrival; some giving
out, that he is expected about the 10th of june, but how true I know not:
Others report, he is not to be received until he has signed all the Articles,
which it is believed, he will not now stick to do, considering the great blow
given to Montross.

We hear that he has lately received a letter from the Queen his Mother;
Wherein she seems to be somewhat displeased at his Agreement with the Scots,
and urges that he will be totally ruined thereby, for want of following her
advice, and making good provision in behalf of the Roman Catholics.

Diverse Scottish ships are already rigged, and ready to put forth to Sea, being
well manned, and accommodated with plenty of warlike provision; they pretend
(only) to be for the guard of their own Seas, and to maintain their own
interes^, but many conceive, that their design is to attend the motion of
their Land forces; who since the concluding of the Treaty at Breda, give out
high speeches; viz. That they hope that the Kingdom of Scotland will soon be
in a case of restoring their King to a flourishing condition, if he will become
a reformed Presbyter. The Marquess of Argile stands firm for the preservation
of the League and Amity between England and Scotland; and has openly declared,
that he will not be isntrumental for the fomenting of new differences, etc.
which does not a little retard the design of the new modelling Army.

Thus having in a brief and impartial manner communicated those things that
seem to be of greatest concernment; I desire to participate of your
intelligence at London, and if I may not seem to exceed the bounds of modesty
in my request, the continuance thereof will be very acceptable to him, who
remains

Your affectionate Servant, E. C.
Edenbourgh, May 20. 1650.
The Copy of a Letter out of the West.
SIR,
THis morning we received an express from Pendennis in Cornwall, intimating,
That the Lord Hopton had landed some forces in the Island of Scilly, and that
he had sent a Letter, (with a Declaration enclosed) to diverse of the Gentry in
Devonshire and Cornwall, showing the grounds and reasons of his present
engagement, and that his chief aim and ends, tend to nothing else, but the
advancement of his Majesty's cause, and restoring of the subject to his just
liberty and propriety, etc. with many other fair glosses, intermixed with
several invectives against the present government and authority; and withal,
desires them to cast off their present yoke, and to remain no longer subject to
their commands; And to the end that his advice might take the deeper impression
upon them, he dispatched several Agents to Cornwall and Devonshire, for the
dispersing of these papers amongst the inhabitants, and to withdraw and
alienate their tender affections from the present Government and Authority of
the Nation; but in the execution thereof, some of them were apprehended, and by
the great vigilance of Sir Hardress Waller, the plot was discovered; which
otherwise, in few days might have proved of dangerous consequence to the
Republique, by reason of the great forwardness of many, in underhand and
private listings: Which design not taking effect, it is said, that the
Inhabitants in those parts are now resolved to stand firm to the present power
and Authority, and to live and dye with them, in the preservation and safety of
Englands liberty, against all former opposition whatsoever.

Bridgewater, the 24th of May, 1650.
FINIS.

