THE ROYAL MISSIVE TO THE PRINCE OF WALES, BEING THE LETTER OF K. CHARLES I.

IN PART METRICALLY PARAPHRASED, FOR ESSAY UNTO THE REST.

BY RI. WATSON.

Printed AT CAEN, By CLAVDE LE BLANC. M.DC.LX.

To the Prince of Wales.
SON,
If my Papers at your hand arrive,
Wherein by Conscience Counsel I contrive;
Rallie my private thoughts, and in array
My forces ready for your march display,
Proof-armed, and by sound Experience taught
How to keep ground, retreat, how to assau't;
Advance yours by my Judgment to the field,
Where Piety must be your sword and shield;
Guide you in fight, and parlie, to redress
What now does, or hereafter may, you press.
I wing the heavy Hours, and clear the sky
From the cloud of restraint and injury;
Through my immantled soul see brighter day
Then Is usherd by the messenger of May,
In these light streaming lines, which over the hill
Show me your future triumph by my skill,
When neither Son, nor Subject, sure, will guess
The measure of the Caeuse by my success,
Convinced by yours; nor in opinion state
My Judgment, as my War, unfortunate.
So, yet more thought so for your sake, and theirs,
With my self Rivalls, you my Love's coheires;
The weights of whose afflictions press me down
Deeper in sense, and sadness, then mine own,
From a false title to my suffering,
Because I am your father, and their King.
But from most Princes have you Wisdome's prise
Won, by encountering early miseries;
And with deare-bought Experience crowned those years
Spent in beguiling pleasures by your Peers;
Practiced your arms, and patience exercised;
So that by no Chance can you be surprised,
For want of Iudgement's guard, in your escape
Secure, taught future cautele by my rape.
In this black scile, and season, do you plant
Politic Virtues, manure Moral, dant
Slow Expectation; turn Joy into Rage
At full grow'n Piety in pupillage.
So shoot up winter-scians, more straight, and clean,
Then in warm Sunshine set, or times serene.
In days of peace and plenty Princes courts
No Paradises are, but Scenes of sports,
Where Virtue take's no root, and Pleasure weave's
But Honor's counterfeit in silken leaves;
Frame's language to put off, with disrepute,
Empty formalities for real fruit,
That sterve the Public, to which Kings sons Know
Their years, by birth, and Providence, they owe.
That Royal couple, by the sacred pen
Recorded, neither Kings alike, nor men,
Give's us a prospect of the enchanting power,
Which blowe's the Gra^dsire's, blast's ye Nephew's flower.
The Paraphrast here take's the liberty of some enlargement out of sacred
History.
The son of Iesse that step't first with his sling
Toward the Court and tite of a King,
Met, though the Giant fell by the small stone,
Troops of Miss-fortunes for that happy one;
Steep mountains climbed for a concealing clowd,
And in dark caves did Innocence shroud,
Until, fledged in afflictions, and high-flow'n
He fetched from Heaven the laurel with his Crown,
Maintaind by sword and Virtue, but entailed
To one who, fraught with Wisdom, by Will sailed;
Become heir of vast wealth, and war-got leisure,
Traffiq't for newfound fancies, unknow'n pleasure;
Changed the iron Chariot for an ivory Throne;
On silver trod instead of sand and stone;
Walked under bending Cedars clasp't with gold,
While globes of Incense through his Palace rolled;
As many wives and women had, as wishes;
More tables furnished, then his father dishes.
His ships, witharmes, and horses, plough'd ye Maine,
Brought Apes too, and ye bird with starry train.
The Infant heir, in beds of softest down,
Slept out the boding sorrows of a Crown;
Chapletts of roses bound his youthful brow,
While wine and joys his bowls did overflow;
Intrancing music daily charmed his ear;
In streams of oil and whispers did he hear
All sycophantike language, not once told,
The young Prince, as young Peasant, must grow old.
In these rich softs and sweets Rehoboam bred
His honor, peace, and Crown, half forfeited
To his green Sages rashness, and those flies
That stick to glorious Princes with pressed thighs
And cripled knees, much like such summer creatures
As in ripe fruit destroy the fairest features,
Till Autumne's chasing blasts do 'em disseise,
As a miss-fortune spied give's wings to these.
I had rather (which my Heart speake's by my Hand)
That you should Charles le Bon be, then le Grand;
Yet I, hope, destined to my Royal seat,
God will both Charles the good make, and ye Great,
Called in the dawning of your Age, to try
With Nature's Champions Grace's chivalry;
And by Heaven's influence subdue the mists
That to delude your sense possess the lists;
The guerdon to which conquest of your mind,
Will be, to have it steadily inclined
To the employment of those sacred powers
Descended on you with the blooming Hours,
By their full strength and luster to maintain
Your peoples welfare, and their love to gain.
With God begin and end, whose Vassalls are,
All Kings, each scepter subject to some star,
Wherein its Fortune wind's or low, or high,
By an eccentrike regularitie,
Till, at accomplished numbers, it the same
With silent thunder strikes, or unseen flame,
Which a loud summon is, and blazing light,
For him to reach a Crown, that has no right,
Whom the Disposer Sovereign may too
Give a short turn, and then eternize you;
For all the Kings and Kingdoms of the World
Are by him calmed, or in tempests hurld;
And crowns in lines descend not, nor are given,
But by Fate wrapped up in the fold of Heaven.
The highest Monarchy you can attain
Is, to account ye World's, your Sovereign;
That you may copy right the Royal Are
By the sway of his scepter in your heart,
That scepter which by word proclaime's his will,
By spirit incline's gently to fulfill.
Princes true glory is God's to advance
In holy worship, and Church maintenance;
By civil power to oblige or release,
With justice, honor, dues to public Peace.
Auspicious Votes paid at the Altar may
Vnveile your Morning for a glorious Day;
At least keep up the cloud before her eyes
From breaking storms, dethroning Miseries;
Though with the VVretched shall I not enroll
Him that, ye field and Crown lost, save's his soul.
Unto which center of true Happiness,
I trust, the All-directour does address
These black lines of Affliction, from each arch
Of Miserie's circumference that march
Through my soul's circlet, and me captive lead
To Conquest, where, turned rays, they will deck my head.
You have already Kis't the Cup, but I
Have congies quaff't of King-calamitie,
Which though it in the hollow of each vein
A tempest beat, and sympathetike pain
Raise in my Spirits Palace, yet I call
Heaven's Panace or safe Antimoniall.
Before all, if not, as Hope suggest's, done,
Ground a firm Quadrate for Religion,
On which no slight Shaft or Pillaster set,
With the late-fancied foliage, or fret;
But such as English Architects have told
Supported the Church Aedifice of old,
When Rome on no Grotisque, or Antike, stood,
But on Heaven's Atlas, a Christ on the Cross, and the holy Martyrs that
supported the Primitive Church by their sufferings.
Colosse of blood;
Greece not in ruins, and amazement, lay,
The marble softened by her tears to clay*
Which Ancient Pile of Glory I best thought
By the Britannike Modellers new - wrought,
Wherein you have beauteous proportions seen
With others eyes, but now must judge between
Conscience and Custom, with your Reason try
What Faith can reach short of Credulity.
So shall the choice be yours, not, as before,
The practice, on mine, or the Bishops, score.
In it, thus raised, I charge you persevere,
As the divinest Oracles most near
Approaching, for pure doctrine, and the Prime
Church order drawing down to modern time,
Somewhat amended, which I often have
Expressed, and offered, but none hearing gave.
That you should fixed in Religion be,
Has no more uncontrolled necessity
For your soul's, then your Kingdoms lasting peace,
When your wars, and now - forced travailes, cease.
Since the rebellious Devil, turn Divine,
And in shape of Reforming Angels shine.
Now the old gliding Serpent goe's upright,
Pretending from dark shades to new - sprung light.
When Conscience Faction and sedition cries,
Sone with Religion stop her mouth, and Lies;
When Piety Patience pleades, and Peace, their peal
Of Fury ring's, out naught but Arms and Zeal;
So that unless the root well - earthed be,
The Wind, that seeme's to kiss, will shake, the Tree.
Nor shall you want Religion's tempting powers
To Reform, that is, Ruin you and yours:
For when the worst in treason would combine,
They find naught better blancheth the design,
Where, beside new invention, which affect's
The vulgar changing fancies, each project's
Himself a share in the Great Work, the name
Of a Reformer, to conceal his shame,
Which, self-convicted turne's to impudence
Of censure, with feigned zeal out-fa^ing sease.
What by your judgment, and the Church, is set
Religion's standard, vindicate; abet
No Partisans of faction, nor relieve
The plaintiff Schismatike, th'accus'd to grieve.
Head no disjointed Members, nor adhere
To By privilegiates are meant suich as claim privilege or exe^ption from
thepublike establissement; and would have the King's countenance against him
self.
Privilegiates, in hope, or fear;
For the complying hearts, you gain, are such
As, when you in Religion ben will crouch,
While the more upright Votaries impute,
That you their faith desprise, them persecute.
With charity, and calmnesse, recompose
Impartially divided spirits, but those
That upon interest Rebellion raise,
Out of Church-ruines to repair decaies,
Chastise by Justice, or with forces scatter,
So neither Faction need you fear, or flatter;
For if their courtesy your want, my Son,
I antedate your doom, You are undone,
If Innocence mistake her mate, in love
Bill with the Serpent, He Will devour ye Dove.
None will you find less loyal, just, humane,
Then Rebels that Religion's name profane;
All their demands, and actions, which surmount
Reaeson, or rule, they place to Gods account;
Under whose Colors, and Heaven's Canopie,
Ambition marches, with sly Policy,
Secure and confident of the applause
Common Devotion offer's to God's Cause.
Thus may you from their covenanted Bands
Heave Jacob's voice, but shall feel Esau's hands.
England less no usurping Faction feared,
Of late years, then Presbytery, which appeared
Most Saintly modest, humbly retrograde
From their forefathers boldness to invade;
Nor, when they most in Consistory sat,
Could they strike terror in my Church, or State;
But since phantastike Frowardness divides
My double - biased People into sides,
As corrupt Humors, fond some Fever's name
To get, meet in full fury to inflame:
So does each scattered discontented Passion
Here rendezvous, some in choice, some for fashion,
While this New Light, shot from the Northern star,
Religion guide's, by Parliament, to War.
At first the petty Factions were the suite
Of this great Rabbi, crouch'd and kissed his feet,
Till Time experience gave, and Warre's success
Leisure to search, discovery to guess
Each at peculiar interest, that invite's
To divide spoils, and sequestered delights;
To break Religion's stock for a new Trade
By partie-profits, or preferments, made;
This to Church ruin, and Republike, wrought;
And on Presbytery self - confusion brought;
Dashed his first hopes, when chosen General,
He meant no sharing stakes, but sweoping all.
Have nothing despicable in your eye
That threaten's the Church-peace or Piety;
Errors, and schisms, presented from a far
But as Night - cloud - foyles for Heaven's brightfac't star,
Chase from your Church-horizon, and dispell,
By early censure, each to its dark cell,
Lest what seeme's a petitionarie hand
Or'ecloud you, spread into an Armed Band.
The Temple cleansed, and ye Altars dressed,
Religion preserved, beautified, professed;
To God, his Church, your Soul, due justice done;
Truth, though betwee^ two crucified, kep't one;
Ascend your high Tribunal, judge each cause
By your inheritance, the Kingdome's laws:
For as your great Fate in that Orb does roll,
So your good Ruling-starre turne's on this pole,
Whose mixed influence may wonder bring,
That set's your Subject free, yet keepe's you King,
If you know true Prerogative's to have
A happy people Servant, no poor Slave;
Whose safety, peace, and property preserved,
Import's no pampered Body, with Head sterv'd.
Ingenuous Liberty does not restrain
The right - hand privilege to hold the reign,
Fed with the fruits of a joint care, it is meant
You guide they draw, the Chariot, by consent.
Charge not your head with such a massy Crown,
As sinke's the body and supporters down,
From which nor strength, nor honor, can you have,
Nor hope they 'll rise from ruin you to save.
Best may you Royalty from rumors quit,
When you intend not rigor, but remit;
For while by justice you oppress, not awe,
You play the Tyrant with a ruling Law.
The censure of the raving World to me
Is no reproach, so I a Martyr be,
And such I am, who suffer, to maintain
Fixed Laws, set - Worship of my Sovereign;
Naught else my Kingdom - troublers can object
But that these from their changes I protect;
That I prefer the Oracles, I found
By sun - rays writ, to dark dreams they propound;
And shall, till better Reason me persuade
Then Tumults, Armies, Prisons, which invade.
I can not yet that uncouth lesson learn,
Nor you, I hope, when at the Kingdome's stern,
That it is safe for us Kings to recant
Our Laws for Faction's violence, or taunt;
O^, for their feigned courtesy, unfold
Those sacred sheets, where VVisdome has enrolled
The Public Interest, and gratify
With new Indentures razed Community.
What, to alleviate my pressing weights,
Heaven may contrive; how to enlarge my streights;
How it will cross unnatural intents
Of Hands, becoming Heads of Jnstruments;
How into order such confusion bring;
Reduce to subject each become halfe-King;
I cannot determine, nor will take much care
How in the hands of unjust men I fare,
While in the Empire of my soul I hold
Justice by God and Conscience uncontrolled.
What Reason, Honor, Conscience, could permit
To my concession, I indulged it,
All strained atlength by offers to Reform
Regarding only safety in the storm;
Or'e-nice in no reserves, but where consent
Must needs betray all due means to prevent
Irreparable violences to
My soul, the Church, my People, Son, and you,
Who in the issues of my Grants have share,
As of my Kingdoms next undoubted heir.
vase of flowers


