HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation forbidding all the Tenants or Debtors of such who are in
actual and open Rebellion, or who adhere to, or assist the Rebels, to pay any
Rents or Debts to such Persons or any of them.

WHEREAS We have, by Our several Proclamations, bearing Date the Eight Day of
March last and the Seventh Day of April last, published Our Resolution to
grant out Our Commissions for the seizing of the Goods, and Sequestring the
Estates of all such Persons who are in Rebellion or do assist those who are, to
the intent that such their Goods, and Rents, may be safely deposited until
such Time as the Offenders can be brought to a Legal Trial, which shall
speedily proceed against them as soon as they can be apprehended, and
delivered into the hands of Justice. And We did therefore command all Persons
who were any ways indebted unto, and all the several Tenants of all such
Persons, to forbear to pay any Rents, or Debts due to the said several Person
but to detain the same in their hands toward the maintenance of the Peace of
the several Counties, and the Reparation of such men who have suffered by the
violence of the Rebels. Since which time has pleased God so far, and so
eminently to bless Our Armies, that We have again reduced several Counties to
Our Obedience, which were for the greatest part, if not totally, possessed by
the Rebels; And considering therefore that it very probable Our said
Proclamations were kept from the knowledge of Our good Subjects of those
Counties, We have once more thought fit to publish the same, and do hereby
Declare to all Our loving Subjects whatsoever, that as We have already issued
out such Our Commissions into several Counties, in which We give Authority to
the Persons trust by Us to distinguish between those who have been active and
malicious Contrivers of this Rebellion, and those who have been through
Weakness or Fear seduced by them; So We will daily issue out other
Commissions to the same Purpose. And We do straightly charge and command all Our
loving Subjects of what Condition soever, as they will answer their
Disobedience at their utmost Perils, That they pay no Rents or Debts which now
are, or hereafter shall grow due to any Persons who either are, or lately have
been in Rebellion, (and have not since submitted themselves to Us) or to any
such who adhere to, or assist those who are in Rebellion, and that they presume
not to receive any Good Money or Stock in trust for any such Persons, but that
they faithfully account, and pay the same to such Persons as either are, or
shall be entrusted by Us for that Purpose, and We shall proceed against all
such Persons who shall wilfully, and peremptorily disobey Us herein, as against
Persons notoriously disaffected to Us and Our Service. And Our Pleasure is That
this Our Proclamation be read in all Churches and Chappells throughout this Our
Kingdom.

Given at Our Cou(...) at Oxford, the Twenty fifth day of September, in the
Nineteenth year of our Reign. God save the King.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.


