C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the ease of the City of Oxford, and Suburbs, and of the
County of Oxford, of unnecessary Persons lodging or abiding there.
HIs MAJESTY being enforced to draw into these parts and places diverse
Regiments of Soldiers, who want fit places to Billet them in, by reason (as He
is informed) there are many Women and Children as well as Men, who have no
necessary employment either about His Majesty's Person, or Court, or Army, and
yet have thrust themselves into Houses and Lodgings in these places, from
whence they keep out others, which must be placed here, and are but a burden
in the consuming those provisions which are and must be made for those, whose
attendance and service is necessary, Has therefore, by the advice of the Lords
and others His Highness Commissioners, of His Princely care, thought fit to
publish and declare His Royal Pleasure and Command as follows.

1. That all such as have Houses, or parts of Houses, or other Rooms, sit for
the entertaining, lodging, or disposing of any Soldiers, or others, do truly
deliver the number of rooms they have, the number of bedds, the true number of
Persons there lodged, entertained or received, and their names, as near as
they can, and to whom they do belong, or under whose command they are.

2. That all such as are so lodged or entertained do truly deliver what their
qualities are, under whose command, or upon what attendance, either to the
Court or Army, what their names are, and do truly set down what bedds they
have to receave them, and where.

3. That if any do refuse to give such true information, or do mis-informe in
any thing, or do color any others to lodge there which ought not so to be,
that He or She shall be subject to that punishment which the offense deserves.

4. That if any Person shall not immediately, or within twenty four hours
after the publishing of this Proclamation, depart from this City and Suburbs
thereof, and County aforesaid, who cannot justify their abiding here as
aforesaid, they shall be sent away by the Officers of the Army, or Ministers of
Justice, as the case shall require, with such disgrace as they deserve for such
their fault herein.

5. That if in this County there be any Women or Children lodged or entertained
under pretense of attending the Army, or any Soldiers therein, that the
Commanders in that place shall examine and certify to the Kings Commissioners,
what they conceave to be fit, According to whose Certificate, that shall be
done which shall be just in such case.

6. That if any have houses of abiding in this County, or near thereunto, that
they remove thereunto speedily, where they shall have the Kings Protection for
their safety.

7. That if any shall in any of these things offend, they are hereby to know,
that they shall not only incur the danger of contempt to His Majesty for such
their offense, but also such other punishment as the nature of their offenses
shall deserve.

8. That if any Person come into the City or Suburbs thereof, he shall that
night, or before, discover unto St Jacob Ashley the Governor of the City, his
own name, and the names of his servants, or company, and the place from whence
he came, and the occasion of his coming. And that the Master of the House
shall, before any new commer shall lodge in any house, deliver the name of such
Person and his company to the Governor of the City, upon the like pain as
aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the Seventeenth day of January, in the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign.

