Still Bloody News from Jreland.
WIll Jrish Rebels never cease their cruelty: J am sorry for it, but yet let
them assure themselves that at length they will have the worst, but now give me
leave gentle Reader, not expiating their crimes to declare what cruelty by them
has been used from the Northeast to the Southeast of Jreland.

Their cruelty has had effect so far that they have taken Tambit, burned
Armagh, and Toyhull, taken the Newery, and beaten down Dundalke, surprised the
Castle of my Lord Blayg, affronted my Lord Moore, and flew 300 of Soldiers,
still affirming that their holy Father the Pope assisted them. Which being
effected they retired to the utmost end of Jreland.

Once they flew back to the West part, but that was but to increase their
forces, which did appear by their overrunning of the South-West County of
Tyrone, the Kingdom of Jreland from the County of Monahan, which they beat
down and put to destruction according as they did Bell Tarbit.

They overthrew Armagh, and burned Loggall, the Newery, and strengthened
themselves by taking Anney.

With two thousand men they beat down Dundalke, also they beat down almost
to the same number in the County of Warthedefloure, the men and women there in
a most cruel manner they slew, their Tangeshire were of this opinion that the
dogs should eat the flesh of Ahab wh^^ they slew righteous Naboth,
notwithstanding te^ confidence they put in their holy Father the Pope.

Their sole intents are bent to destroy the Protestant Church there, but the
good men hope by the assistance of God that they shall be prevented of their
purposes.

Their cruelty continues in the aforesaid Countries, and they the Rebellious
Papists think them safe by entertaining Treacherous hearts, but let them know
this that God is the Revenger of the cause of the innocent, mauger all the
malice of the Devils in Hell.

Their treachery also bends to the Counties of Caynith, Coming, and the County
of Carring, where they got great abundance of meat and ammunition, which in
part does maintain their Rebellious hearts, against the Protestants, and
destroy them in such cruel and bloody manner.

A True Relation
OF 4 Irish Troopers, who came to a place nere to Armagh, to a poor Cottage,
there being no body in the house but a young maid, about the age of 18. Desired
of her that they might stay there that night, but loath she was to grant them
their request, yet being loath to displease them, for fear of her life, she
granted their request, and they all went to bed together, both the 4. Rebels
and the maid, but sore against her will, and the Rebels lust began to grow so
great, that they went about to Ravish her: but she having before taken an oath
that never such a blemish, should come upon her, she resolutely told the
Rebels, that she would loose her life, before their lust should be satisfied
upon her, and having her knife near at hand, she thrust it into one of their
bowels, which the Rebels seeing, desperately drew their swords and out off,
first, her right arm, then her left, then both her legs, then they tied a rope
about her middle, and dragged it about, which having done they ripped open her
belly, and saved as much of her blood as they could, saying, that her puritan
sisters should be glad of that to drink,

Likewise the Rebels do much harm in many places in the kingdom of Jreland,
turning the reverend Minnisters out of their Pulpits, plucking one limb from
another, saying, that the dogs of Room shall eat the flesh of those
Puritan Rascals that railes against their holy father the Pope.

Also in some places of Jreland, there have many ships arrived laden with great
store of Ammunitio^ for war, thus they daily tiranize over the poor
Protestants.

There was also 3. Merchants in Gallway that had a ship came from Spain to
Gallway laden with salt, wherein there was buried great store of muskets,
Powder and shot.

The names of the Merchants
Thomas Lench. Thomas Athy. Francis Carnen.
FINIS.

