A Copy of his Highness Prince Charles HIS LETTER TO THE Commanders of His
Majesty's Forces.

WITH A Copy of His Highness Commission to Collonell POYER.

ALSO A Letter Concerning the state of the KINGDOM.

WRITTEN By Mr: Hugh Peter's, Minister of Gods Word.

LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1648.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES P.

Charles Prince of Great Britain, Duke of Cornwall and Albaine, Highest
Captain General under His Majesty, of all the Forces by Sea and Land within
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales,
To our Trusty and welbeloved Col. John Poyer, Greeting:
WE do by these presents, out of the special Trust and confidence We repose
in you, nominate, constitute, and appoint you to be Governor for His Majesty,
of the Town and Castle of Pembroke, and of the Garrison Soldiers, Forces, and
Inhabitants thereof (whom we hereby command to obey you in all things, as their
Governor. Giving you full power and authority to command as well the present
Garrison of the said Town and Castle, as any other or greater Garrison that
shall hereafter be settled there, for his Majesty's service, and to appoint and
authorize by Commission, all such Officers under you, as shall be from time to
time necessary, for the Government of the said Town and Castle, and for the
command of the Garrison and Inhabitants there, authorizing and requiring you
likewise, to keep and defend, with the assistance of the said Garrison, or of
any other Forces you can get, the said Town and Castle for His Majesty's use,
and service, against all invasions and attempts whatsoever. And for the better
defense of the same, to add such New Works, as you in your judgment and
discretion shall think meet, to the Fortification already made, as also, to do
and execute all such other things and duties as belong to the Office and
authority of Governor of the said Town and Castle, and as you in your
judgment shall think fit, for the necessary defense thereof, and in as large
and ample manner as you now hold and exercise the same. In the execution
whereof, and of this our Commission, you are to obey and pursue such Orders as
you shall from time to time receive from his Majesty, from Us, or from such
person as we shall appoint, to be General of South Wales, or Commander in
chief of the Army there, for the time being.

Given under our Hand and Seal the 13 of April, in the 24 year of the Reign
of our Royal Father the King.
To our Trusty and wel-beloved, Col: Rice Powel, Governor of Tinby Town and
Castle, and Col: John Poyer, Governor of Pembroke Town and Castle.
Charles P.

TRusty and wel-beloved, we greet you well: We have seen your Declaration, and
received your Letter, and are extremely satisfied with the many Expressions we
find in them, of your great zeal, and affection to the King, our Royal
Father, and to us: We have much reason to be assured of the Loyalty and
integrity of your intentions, when we consider the present conjunctures, and
seasonablenesse of your appearing in Arms, and declaring your Selves for his
Majesty, at this time, when the concurrence of others with you, in the same
good design, may give us more then an ordinary hope of good Success, and that
you and they may be a mutual support and assistance to each other: The Answers
we have herewith sent to your Propositions, will we hope, let you see how ready
we are to embrace all things, that may give you Encouragement to proceed
cheerfully and constantly in this cause, and the modesty you have used therein,
shall invite us to lay hold of all occasions, to obliege persons that Engage
themselves in so great an undertaking, with such reasonable demands for
themselves. And we assure you, that we shall be careful, to supply and assist
you in all things, to the uttermost of our power: And if it please God to
bless us with success, we shall endeavor by all real effects of kindness,
to let you see how truly sensible we are of your merit, and of the obligation
we acknowledge to have to you.

Given at St. Germain Lay the 23 of April. 1648.
A Letter from Mr. Peter's.
SIR,
I Have at length gotten an opportunity to write unto you, and to give you a
true account of the issue of our work, being left at Pembroke, and Tinby, for
the settling some things there. Briefly, both these Towns were very strong,
Tinby being like a Promontany into the Sea, the part without the walls stormed
by Overtons Regiament, and the Town commanded by Col. Powel yielded to mercy,
as you have heard.

Pembroke the strongest place that ever we sat down before, and the Castle
even impregnable, which after six weeks siege, constant rain, and much hardship
endured by us and them, reduced as we desired, Viz.

5 to mercy being Leaders, 16 to 2 years banishment, the rest sent home, The
Enemy consisting of men of all parts, resolute enough, keeping it even to the
last. Many were the providence in that work; for which, admire Gods goodness.
In taking Chepstow Castle and Town, and these other two, in all our long march
we have lost about 50 or 60 men, and only one Major and one Captain, The
enemies loss has been great, but none of more concernment then Col. Botlems
death, who was killed at a window, by a shot ours, at random. Their Interest was
wholly changed, and from the Parliament fell to the King, having the Princes
Commission. I being commanded in at a hostage, and to wait upon Major General
Laughorn, and Poyer, I lay in Poyers house, and in a Vault there, found his
Commission, and the Princes Letter to him and Powel, with a Letter under the
Princes own hand and seal; which shows they fought not for Arrears, besides
all the transactions betwixt the Prince and them, together with many other
Letters of theirs, manifesting the whole design of this years trouble, and the
laying every piece of them in all parts of Scotland, England, and Wales. That I
can truly say, the beating their Army at St. Fagons, and taking in this
Country, has bin the greatest services we have been in. The people are a
people merely deluded by the Name of King and Service Book, for their Religion.

This I call the third testimony God has given to the world of the integrity
of this Army, and his presence with it.

First, in the year 1645. where all the Kings power was subdued by it.
Secondly, when the tumults at London caused us to march through the city. And,
Thirdly, this years commotions: which has been queld by the Army thus
exceedingly dispersed. Oh that men would yet confess with us, his goodness,
and leave off jealousies, and wranglings, and mind their common interest! We
are marched back to England, leaving a sufficient Force here, to maintain what
we have gotten: And are yet resolved to bear our further witness as the Lord
shall direct us: We have contested with so many difficulties in this journey,
that we may not distrust God in hardships: we have wanted bread, lain in cold
fields, constant rain, our Guns sunk in the Sea and recovered, we had a
desperate Enemy, and few friends, but a mighty God; We had most of us no pay
since we came from London, many barefooted Soldiers, yet valiant and
unchangeable: We are amazed at Gods bounty, and now are safe at Hereford,
Gloucester, etc. The honest true-hearted Lieutenant General living yet above
all reproaches, of whom, I fear the poor Nation is not worthy.

Alas Sir, we now know where even all the secret Enemies of the Kingdom dwell,
yea, such as we could not have thought to have been Enemies. The use I have
made of our long being in these parts, has been the discovery of men behind
us in other parts. Good is the Lord.

Sir, it was no ridiculous work I was about, when I would have joined
Parliament, London, and the Army together; but that City did not know its day,
nor the Associated counties theirs. I wish some Government were designed,
whether by King or otherwise, I desire a blessing upon it, that so good a God
may be no further grieved by us. Farewell good Friend, and remember him who is,

Swansey 23 July, 1648. Excuse my have. Yours, and the Kingdoms. HUGH PETER'S.

FINIS.

