HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION TO ALL HIS LOVING SVBIECTS Of the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales.
CHARLES R.

WE shall not rip up the causes of unhappy differences betwixt Our Royal
Father and the Two Houses of Parliament. It shall be Our Study that they be
for ever buried, and that Our Subjects of ENGLAND may return to their
Obedience they owe Us, as their lawful king, and to the Ancient and happy
Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords, and Commons, (wherein they and
their Ancestors have lived so long, so happily) without the effusion of more
blood. With these Thoughts We are now entering into Our Kingdom of ENGLAND,
with an Army, by the blessing of God able to protect Our Loyal Subjects, who
shall join with Us, and assist Us in doing Justice upon the Murderers of Our
Royal Father, and to defend Us from the violence of such as will continue the
exclusion of Us from Our Just Rights, the Sub-version of the Lawful Government
of this Kingdom, and the Oppression of Our good Subjects, by Armies and
exorbitant Impositions: And before We enter the Kingdom, We have thought fit
by this short Declaration to let Our good-Subjects there know, That Our Desires
are not more to be restored to our Own Rights, than to maintain and procure
to them their Freedom. And as We have given full and entire Satisfaction to Our
Subjects of SCOTLAND both in what might concern Religion, their Laws and
Liberties, (which God willing we shall inviolably preserve to them) So it shall
be Our Study,(and would be Our greatest Joy) that we might Attain the same
happiness in England. And because we think our selves bound to Look more to
the Glory of God, then our Own Interest,

We do in the first place declare, That we shall faithfully endeavor in our
Station and Calling, as we are bound by Covenant, to settle Religion, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and
the Example of the best reformed Churches.

We shall also endeavor that Parliaments may be restored to their Freedom,
and privileges, by whose advise, we do declare Our Resolutions are to govern
and settle all differences and distempers, that Our people may enjoy their
Liberty, and Property, Free from Army, Quarterings, or illegal Impositions.

These being Our clear Intentions and Resolutions, We do expect and invite
all Our good Subjects of ENGLAND, and Dominion of WALES, to Concur with, and
Assist Us according to their Duty and Allegiance: and such as are in Arms
either in SCOTLAND, or in ENGLAND, under Oliver Cromwell, presently after
knowledge hereof, to lay them down, or to come in and join with Us in Our
Army, where they shall receive Protection, and full assurance of Satisfaction
in their Arreares.

And to evidence how far We are from Revenge, or continuing the unhappy
differences betwixt Us and Our Subjects, We do Declare and Engage Our Self to
give Our Consent to a full Act of oblivion and Indemnity for the security of
all Our Subjects of ENGLAND, and Dominion of WALES, in their Persons,
Freedoms, and Estates, for all things done by them relating to these Wars
these seven years past, and that they shall never be called in question by Us
for any of them.

Provided that immediately after knowledge of this our Gracious offer and
Declaration, they desist from assisting the usurped Authority of the pretended
Common wealth of England, and return to their Obedience to Us, excepting only
from this Our Gracious offer, Oliver Crumwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw,
John Cook, their pretended Solicitor, and all others who did Actually sit, and
Vote in the Murder of Our Royal Father.

And since in this Service, We have made use of the affection and assistance of
Our Loyal Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland, who cannot possibly maintain
their whole Army in England, We do require some of quality, or Authority, in
each County, where We shall March, to come to us, that Necessary provision may
be regularly brought in to the Army: And We do Declare, that the Counties from
which such shall come, shall receive no other prejudice, except such as do
oppose Us. And because it shall be Our maine endeavor, that the Subjects of
England and Wales may be safe in their Persons, free in their Goods, and as
little burdened as possible can be: This We are resolved, To permit no
Plundering, or Rapines, or taking any man's person, (who is not in actual
Opposition of Us) which We shall not with all severity punish: So if Our Army
should be forced to be more burdensome to some places and persons then to
others, It shall be Our Endeavor, that as soon as is possible they may
receive proportional satisfaction, and the Burden be made equal.

And Lastly, we do Declare that the Service being done, the Scottish Army
shall Quickly retire, that so all Armies may be Disbanded, And a lasting Peace
settled with Religion and Righteousness.

Given at Our Royal Camp at Woodhouse, near the Borders, the 5. of August,
1651.

