C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES, By the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
To our Lovits, (...) Our Lion King at Arms, his brethren Heralds (...)
Pursevants Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally specially
constitute, Greeting:
Forsameikle as James Grahame sometime Earl of Montrose, and Alaster
MacDonald, having associate to themselves some Irish Rebels, and unnatural
Countrymen, have broken out in open Rebellion against God, and his Covenant,
Us, and Our Authority, This their native Kingdom, and its Liberty and Peace,
have killed and massacred diverse of our good Subjects, spoiled their Lands,
burnt their Houses, and do yet desperately continue, acting sundry Villainies
and Outrages in all parts of the Country where they come; endeavoring thereby
(so far as in them lies) the subversion of the true Religion, and the just
Laws and Liberties of this Our ancient Kingdom. And We being confident that
all who have any love to Religion, loyalty to Us their Sovereign, or regard to
their Oath in the mutual League and Covenant, will be so far from complying
with these base Rebels, that they will heartily concur with their utmost power
to oppose and pursue them. Yet, left any, out of fear, or disloyalty of their
own hearts, should be so far wanting in their duty, as to comply, or beany
ways assisting to them, We have thought fitting, according to an Act of Our
Parliament, of the date of their presents, to give Warning to them of the danger
they may incur hereby. And for that end, Edinburgh, Dundee, Perth, Aberdene,
Stirling, Glasgow, and S. Andrews, which is declared by the Act of Our
Parliament to be a sufficient intimation to Our Lieges, and there by open
Proclamation hereof, that you Command, Charge, and Inhibit all Our Subjects,
that none of them presume, nor take upon hand to Refer, Supply, Intercommune,
nor keep Intelligence nor Correspondence with the said James Grahame, Alaster
Mac-Donald, or any of their Associates or Accomplices, nor furnish them with
Meat, Drink, House, Harberie, nor other comfortable thing, under the pain of
Treason; and certifying all such as shall failzie herein, the said pain shall
be execute upon them without favor. The which to do, we commit to you
conjunctly and severally our full power, be their Our Letters, delivering the
same be you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at S. Andrews, the (...) day of (...) and of Our Reign
the 26 year 1646. Per actum Parliamenti.

