Fox's Time and End of Time.

A GLIMPSE OF Eternity.

Very Useful To Awaken Sinners, and to Comfort Saints.

Profitable to be Read in Families, and Given at Funerals.

By ABR. CALEY.

These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into Life
Eternal, Mat. 25.46. The Third Edition, with Amendments.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside, and G. B. at the Bible under the Gate on London Bridge.
1683.

To the Reader.
BEing importuned to peruse this Book, in order to another Impression, I have
read it over with the greater Diligence; and the more I read, the more I must
needs say I am delighted with it; not only for the Excellency of the Subject,
but also for the accurate handling of it. If the Books penned by the Jesuit
Drexelius, and by Cardinal Bona, treating of Eternity, put into an English
Dress, have found much acceptance, methinks this Choice Discourse, written in
our Mother Tongue, by an Eminent Protestant Divine, should be greedily perused,
and heartily embraced by all sound Protestants: Since such will be more apt to
confide, that the Notions are Orthodox, when Communicated by an able Teacher of
their own Profession, who paints for Eternity, in a more excellent Sense than
Zeuxis did, giving Life to each Head from the Infallible Oracles of God, and
embellishing the Whole not by Engraved Pictures, but pertinent and delightful
Enlargements from both Divine and Humane Story; apt Resemblances, and acute
Sentences, still consonant to the Gravity of the Matter. Here Is a Method very
easy and natural, a Style not mean nor swelling; here are Explications clear
and full, Arguments strong and conclusive, Cautions judicious and necessary,
Lamentations and Expostulations pathetical, Exhortations lively and pertinent,
Motives powerful and suasive, Directions proper and advantageous, and all
correspondent to the Subject. It Is true, we here below are but of yesterday,
and know nothing, our days on earth being a shadow; yet considering God is from
everlasting to everlasting, we are concerned to walk in the way everlasting,
having this everlasting Consolation and good hope through Grace, that He will
save us with everlasting Salvation. His Strength is everlasting, and so is his
Mercy; which may excite us to go up the Hill, and take a Pisgah-sight of the
heavenly Canaan; which is so surpassing, that the most refined Souls here,
after all their diligent Searches and Researches, can get but a Glimpse or
Glimmering of it; which He who inhabits that pleasant Seat, is alone able to
describe. But since we breathe after it, we ought with all modest
inquisitiveness to consider the Import of those Notices we have of that
Unchangeable State, which flows from the Being of God, (who is the Eternal)
[the I AM] or most properly, Eternity it self, even as unbounded Space does
from his Omnipresence. Eternity we may get some Prospect of by the Glass of the
Scripture, as a mode of Being connoting a changeless and endless Duration, it
being like one great smooth Sea, without any curl of change. Time notes the
coming of things into Being, and so implies a change: The best Temporals are
but as the finest Picture upon Ice, which melts away with the Thawe: But all
will be fixed in the unmovable State of Eternity. Whatever in this lower State
seems firmer than other, comes nearest to resemble it, as the lasting Hills,
before which the Almighty was, and after them will be, without variableness or
shadow of turning. All Ages of Time are comprehended in Eternity, as Drops
encircled in the Ocean. It concerns therefore every created Immortal Being to
take all advantages in this alterable State, of minding that unchangeable
Misery or Felicity which abides us all, that we may not slide unawares into an
unalterable State of endless Torment, but, by getting an Interest in the
Blessed Jesus, when we are dislodged these cumbersom clayie Cottages, enter
into his Joy, even that entire duration of endless Delight. Our Author has put
one of the best Perspectives into our hands; That we may use it for the End to
which it is designed, is the heartiest Prayer of him who recommends it to the
Christian Reader.

R. A.
June 5th. 1683.
The CONTENTS.
THe Introduction.
Chap. I. Of Eternal, Invisible Things. The first Argument from God. II. Of the
Meritorious Causes, and the Nature of Happiness and Punishment, and the
Immortality of Man. III. Of Scripture-proofs of Eternal Happiness, consisting
in Sight, Love, Joy, Praise; with created Accessories: and Eternal Misery,
expressed by Wrath, Worm, Fire, Prison, Darkness, Burning, Torment. IV. Of the
Sublimeness of Eternity, as transcending all Expression, Knowledge (of it self,
or Measure) and all Imagination. V. Of the Importance of Eternity, from the
Endlesness of it. Considering God will not, nothing else can put an end to it.
VI. Of Eternity without succession, or without consumption. VII. Of Eternal
Happiness and Misery, without intermission, and without mixture, in Heaven or
Hell. VIII. Of Lamentation for those at ease, and careless of Eternity, from
three several Aggravations; with Expostulations. IX. Of Caution to prevent
Mistakes about the Adversity of the Godly, and the Prosperity of the Wicked in
this state. X. An Exhortation to Restrain from Sin, and Redeem Time. XI. An
Exhortation to look on Eternal Things, by our Meditations, Expressions,
Affections of Desire, Hope, Love, Delight, and Endeavors. XII. Of looking to
Eternal Things as our End; enforced by eight several Arguments. XIII. Of
Motives drawn from other Things, other Men, our selves, and the unspeakable
Benefits of a Prospect of Things Eternal. XIV. Of various Considerations, to
move us to make Provision for Eternity. XV. Of Directions to help us in looking
after Eternal Blessedness: With Answers to some Objections, and Cautions.
A Glimpse of Eternity.
2 Cor. 4.18. The things which are not seen, are Eternal.


The INTRODVCTION.
IN the eighth, and some following Verses, are recorded the Sufferings of Paul,
and other Apostles and Believers; they were troubled on every side, perplexed,
persecuted, cast down: And this has been the continual Lot of Gods people;
though some times have been more favorable, yet there is scarce any time in
which they have wholly been free from Sufferings. When the rage of Persecution
by the Roman Emperors was allayed, and some pleased themselves because the
Emperors were turned Christians, Augustine tells them, the Emperors indeed
were turned Christians, but the Devil was not turned Christian; and as long as
there is a Devil in Hell, and Wicked men on Earth, all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Christ the Head of the Church, whom
Bernard calls the Bridegroom of Bloods Sponsus sanguinum.
, espoused his Church to himself upon the Bed of his Cross, his Head begirt
with a Pillow of Thorns, his body drencht in a bath of his own blood; and if
the head was crowned with thorns, it is unsuitable that the feet should tread
upon Roses; if they called the Master of the house Beelzebub, much more those of
his household. Mat. 10.25.
Christ himself drank of the brook in the way, Psalm. 110.7.
and all his followers must drink of the same cup that he drank of: But though
this has been the Lot of all Believers, yet the dreggs of this cup have been
usually prepared for the Dispensers of Gods Word, Mat. 20.23.
the Standard-bearers of this bloody band; as if to Preach, were nothing else
but to stir up the rage of men. Luther.
There is no rank, or sort of men that has been exposed to so much contempt,
and suffering; If I were (says Jerome) a Basket-maker, or a Garland-weaver, or
any low Trade, that would make me sweat for the bread I eat, no man would
malign me, no man would traduce me; but now I give my self to the study and
interpretation of Scripture, now I am a Preacher, a Writer, I am blotted with
the obloquies of men.

As long as Christ was working at his Fathers Trade, and was employed, as
Justin Martyr expresses it, in making Beadsteads and Ploughs, (...).
no man opposed him; but when he was Baptized, and went out to preach the
Gospel, presently he is tempted by Satan, and persecuted by wicked men: as long
as the Apostles were mending their Nets, and following their fishing trade,
none troubled them; but when of fishers, they were made fishers of men, they
are forthwith made a spectacle to the world, and Angels, and men; and so the
Apostle expresses it, verse 11. We which live, are always delivered to death
for Jesus sake; there were but few of them left alive, but were by the rage of
Tyrants put to cruel deaths; those that survived, though they had not yet
resisted unto blood, yet daily expected when they should be offered up as a
bloody sacrifice, and were at present under great sufferings: bearing about in
their bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus, ver. 10. But did they hereupon
repent of their engaging in the work of the Lord, or sink down under
discouragement and dispondency of Spirit? Nothing less; ver. 16. for which
cause we faint not, (...).
the word signifies to shrink back; as cowards in war; to sink down as a
Porter under an overheavy burden. As one man, by the help of an Engine is able
to lift up a heavy weight, which ten or twenty men might in vain attempt by
their own strength: so the Apostles went cheerfully under that pressure of
Affliction, which would have sunk the stoutest spirits, not supported by Divine
Grace. For which cause we faint not; if you would know for what cause, what it
was that supported them: there are two causes rendered, one respecting the
Corinthians, to whom he writes, that is partly laid down, ver. 12. So then,
death works in us, but life in you: we dye, that you might live by our death;
we suffer, that you may be strengthened by our sufferings; and partly, verse 15.
All things are for your sakes, all the streights we are put to, turn to your
advantage; if we dye, it is to confirm you by our sufferings; if God shall
deliver us, and restore us again to you, it is for his glory, and your good,
that the abundant grace might by the thanksgiving of many, redound to the Glory
of God: and that is one cause why he fainted not; he counted not his life dear
to him, so as he might be helpful to their Faith. The other cause respects the
Apostles themselves; their great sufferings made both for their present
spiritual good, and for their future happiness.

1. Their present Spiritual Good: The cold Blasts of Persecution beating upon
the outward Man, by a Spiritual Antiperistasis, augmented the Heat of Grace
within, for which cause we faint not; for though our outward man perish, yet
the inward man is renewed day by day: He was three times beaten with Rods, five
times received he forty stripes save one 2 Cor. 11.24, etc.
. But as they say the Bear is made fat with blows, and the Ass battens with
pricking and beating; so it was in a spiritual sense with our Apostle, he was
once stoned, but Per tot lapides petrae conjungitur ^^i.
by those stones he was knocked nearer to Christ the cornerstone: he thrice
suffered shipwreck, but, like Noah's Ark, was lifted up nearer to Heaven, by
those floods of great waters; he was in Journeyings often, but every time his
salvation was nearer than before.

2. Their future happiness, verse 17. Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. For
Affliction, there is Glory; for light affliction, a weight, an exceeding, a far
more exceeding weight: for short affliction, that lasts but for a moment, an
eternal weight of Glory. And this it was they had chiefly in their eye: so in
this Verse, While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen. Things seen, and not seen, are, I conceive, the same with
what elsewhere he calls things present, and things to come 1 Cor. 3.22.
, and things above and things on the earth Colos. 3.1.
, and things of the life that now is, and of that which is to come 1 Timothy 4.8.
: and so the Apostle explaineth himself in the following words, the things that
are seen, are temporal; but the things that are not seen, are eternal.

The whole Verse falls under a twofold Consideration.

1. Relative, as they are a Reason why they fainted not under their present
troubles; as Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, because he had an eye to the recompense of
reward Heb. 11.25, 26.
: and our Savior Christ, for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the shame Heb. 12.2.
: so the Apostles having their eye upon things invisible, and eternal, made
light of all their present Sufferings and Persecutions.

2. Absolute, and so they show what the Apostles made their Aim and End: that
is implied in the word (...), which signifies to look, as the Archer does at
the Mark he shoots at. There were some things they made their great business,
which was the mark they shot at, the great End they propounded to themselves:
and what they were, is first specified, then more fully explained.

First, Specified, and that

1. Negatively, what they looked not at, things seen (...).
, the things of this Life, which are things visible to the eye Objecta
sensibilia.
.

2. Affirmatively, showing what were those things which they made the matter of
their choice, the great objects of their desires and endeavors, things not
seen (...).
, the things of another Life, which are objects of faith, and not of sense,
things not visible to these fleshly eyes, only apprehended by faith, which is
the evidence of things not seen Heb. 11.1.
. And that these are meant by things seen, and not seen, the Apostle, secondly,
further explaineth, in the following words, the things that are seen, are
temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal: which are not only
exegetical, explaining what is meant by things seen, and not seen; but, as the
word [for] implies, contain the reason why they aimed at one, and not the
other; the things that are seen, are temporal; all the visible things of this
life; whether prosperous, as health, liberty, riches, honor, and the like; or
adverse, as sickness, poverty, persecution, death, they are for a while, (...).
for a short season, so the word is elsewhere rendered Mat. 13.21. Heb. 11.35.
; therefore says the Apostle, we look not at them, we make them not our aim, we
trouble not our selves much about them, they are things of a higher nature we
look at, such as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard of; and these are such as
are durable; the things which are not seen, are eternal: And here there are two
things I shall speak to.

1. That the things not seen, the things of another life, are eternal: Or thus,
that the condition of man after this life, is an eternal condition.

2. That That which puts the weight upon things not seen, and rendereth them
proper Objects of a Christians aim, and choice, is because they are eternal. I
shall speak to these distinctly in the Doctrinal part, and then join them
together in the Application.

CHAP. I. Of Eternal, Invisible things, the first Argument from God.
I begin with the first:

1. THat the unseen things of another life, are Eternal; the condition of man
after this life is an eternal condition. After a few days are spent, we must
all enter upon that long day that has no evening, that infinite duration, that
has no end, that unlimited Eternity, which always has been, and is, and
shall be the same for ever and ever: when man dies he goes to his long home,
Eccles. 12.5.
the body goes to the Grave, which the Scripture calls its house, or home; the
Grave is my house, Job 17.13.
All the Kings of the Nations lie every one in his own house, Isa. 14.18
and this is a long home, being to lie there till the Heavens be no more; Job
14.12.
and Solomon says, of these days of darkness in the Grave, that they are
many. Eccles. 11.8.
But the soul goes to a longer home, the home of Eternity, as the Septuagint
reads it; believers go to their home, their Country, their Fathers house:
Wicked men go to their home, their own place, as it was said of Judas Acts 1.25
; both Saints and Sinners, when they go hence, enter upon a new, but never
ending condition: whether Death lands them upon the desired haven of rest, and
happiness, or casts them upon the black shore of misery, and torment; whether
they be received into Heaven, or doomed to Hell; whether they rise to the
resurrection of Life, or the resurrection of Condemnation, they are equally put
into an endless everlasting condition, the one rises to everlasting life, the
other to shame and everlasting contempt. Dan. 12.2.
The latter go away into everlasting punishment, the other into life eternal.
Mat. 25. last.
The truth of this I shall demonstrate from these following Arguments.

1. From God, it is true, God enjoys all happiness in himself, and can receive
no addition thereunto from the creature; all his happiness is in himself, in
the injoymeut of himself, in the contemplation of his own perfection; he was as
happy, before Heaven or Earth, Angels, or Men were made, as he is now, and
would be so, were all creatures reduced to their first nothing; as Seneca
divinely, if the world were consumed, all the Angels annihilated, and nature
cease to be, yet being left to himself, he enjoys all in himself: but though
he be in himself God over all, blessed for ever, yet it pleased God, for the
manifesting the Glory of his Attributes, to make a world of Creatures, and,
among others, Angels and Men, upon whom he imprinted some more conspicuous
Characters and Draughts of his own Perfections; and among others, made them
partakers of his own Immortality, that upon them he might manifest the Glory
either of his Mercy, or his Wrath. What if God willing to show his wrath, and
make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction? and that he might make known the glory of his mercy on
the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory Romans 9.22, 23.
? To this purpose, though he made both righteous, yet he left both to the
freedom of their own will, that if they did well, they might do it out of
choice and good will, not of necessity; if they did ill, it should be by their
own default: And though God was no ways the cause of eithers sin, nor ordained
either to punishment without reference to their sin; yet he foresaw they would
abuse their free will, by sinning against him, and by sin make themselves
obnoxious to his wrath; and accordingly ordained, that those Angels that stood,
and those of Mankind that after their Fall would accept of a Mediator, should
live eternally with himself in Glory and Happiness. On the other side, that
those of the Angels who left their first habitation, and those of the Sons of
men who rejected the help of a Mediator, should for ever feel the weight of his
displeasure. So that to deny the eternal condition of Man after this Life, is
quite repugnant to that great Design of God, whereby he appointed both Angels
and Men to be, for ever, either the perpetual Objects of his Free Grace, or the
everlasting Monuments of his justly deserved Wrath.

But to improve this Meditation a little further: We read of worlds in
Scripture, by which he made the worlds Heb. 1.2.
. By faith we understand that the worlds were made by the word of God Heb. 11.3.
.

Though some think it is spoken in the plural Number, after the Jewish mode,
who used to mention a threefold, an inferior, a middle, and a superior World,
as Camero observes: and others conceive, that by Worlds may be meant the Age
or World of the Jewish Church under the Law, and the Christian Church in the
times of the Gospel, called the World to come Heb. 2.5.
: yet I see no cause why by Worlds we may not understand the present World Tit.
2.12.
, and the future World; or, as they are distinguished Mat. 12.32.
, this world, and the world to come: this World is but of short continuance;
The fashion of this world passes away 1 Cor. 7.31.
; the World to come is a World without end: this World is like a Comet, that
blazeth for a time, and then disappeareth; the World to come is as a Fixed
Star, or rather as the Sun, that faithful Witness in Heaven, that rangeth about
the Firmament with a glittering perpetuity: this world is but a Tent or
Tabernacle, set up for a time, but e're long to be taken down, the Stakes
thereof to be removed, and the Cords broken; the world to come is a Mansion, or
place of abode: In my Fathers house are many Mansions John 14.2.
. This World was set up as a Stage for Men to act their Parts on for some few
thousands of Years, and then must become Fuel to the Fire; the world to come is
that great lasting Theater, on which God will eternally display the glory of
his several Attributes. Concerning the duration of this World, there is a great
dispute, whether there shall be only a renovation, or a total annihilation, at
the Day of Judgment: but concerning the world to come, and the Inhabitants of
it, Angels and Men, there was never any question made by any sober Orthodox
Divine, howsoever the Scripture is most clear for it, Luke 20.34, 36.
The Children of this world marry, and are given in marriage, but they that
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the Resurrection from the
dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: Neither can they dye any more,
for they are equal to the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the
Children of the Resurrection. Both these worlds God made to show the Glory of
his Attributes, God has much glory from this world; The Heavens declare the
Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork Psalm. 19.1.
, he has shown much of his Power in making; of his Providence, in sustaining;
of his Wisdom, in governing this world; but the magnifying of those two great
Attributes, his Mercy and his Justice, is chiefly reserved for the world to
come; all those temporal mercies in this life conferred upon men, are but the
blessings of the Footstool, no way comparable with the blessings of the
Throne; Riches and Honor, the two great things that are so ambitiously pursued
by the men of the world, they are but Wisdoms left handed blessings Prove. 3.6.
, not to be compared with that length of days, that eternity that is in
Wisdoms right hand, and which all the Children of Wisdom partake of in the
life to come. Some report that Joseph in that great Famine, caused a great deal
of Chafe to be cast into the River Nilus, to let the Neighboring Nations know
what plenty of Corn they had in Egypt: all the good things of this life, are
but as Chafe, which God scatters abroad in the World, to let men know what a
better, and more enduring substance he has provided for his own People: and
what is he Chafe to the Wheat, says the Lord Jer. 23.28.
? Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and these things shall
be added unto you Mat. 6.33.
. A Metaphor taken from bargainers; (...).
those that buy cloth, have usually some over-measure given in; those that buy
fruit, pay nothing for paper and pack-thread; such are these temporal things in
Gods esteem. Luther calls the whole Turkish Empire but a crust which God casts
to the Dogs under his Table; and miserable is that man, that has no other
portion but in these things; the great mercies God intends for his People are
reserved for the life to come, that in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace. Ephesians. 2.7.


On the other side, the great Executions of Gods wrath upon wicked men are
reserved for another World; therefore it is called the wrath to come Mat. 3.7.
1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
; all the punishments of this life are but as flea-bites, the Father says
Ludicra and risus.
but toys and merriments, to future torments; Nazianzen says, the Worst
temporal punishments are but (...).
the smoking of Gods wrath; and what is the smoke to the fire? We read, Exodus
9.8.
that Moses, took handfuls of Ashes out of the furnace, and sprinkled them
toward Heaven, and they became boils upon man and beast: all those plagues
inflicted in this life, are but as a handful of Ashes taken out of the furnace
of Gods wrath. The destruction of Sodom with fire and brimstone from Heaven,
was the saddest and strangest Judgment that ever was inflicted upon any, yet
our Savior says, Mat. 11.24.
It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at the day of Judgment; the Sodomites,
though then destroyed, are reserved to a more grievous destruction; those
showers of brimstone, that fell upon Sodom, are but heat drops to those storms
of wrath, which shall then, and thenceforth for ever beat upon them: It was the
invention of some of the Ancients, that there are three sorts of Thunderbolts
in Heaven; the first to warn, not to hurt; the second to hurt, but not quite to
destroy; the third to ruin, and lay all waste; the two first sorts of
Thunderbolts God often in this life discharges upon wicked Men, but the third
and worst is reserved for another life, when all the Artilleries of Heaven are
shot off, when all the Fountains of Gods Wrath are broken up, and all the Vials
of his Displeasure poured out upon the People of his Curse. By all this it
appears, that there is but little either of Gods Mercy or Justice showed in
these temporary Rewards and Punishments; the great Manifestation of these two
great Attributes is reserved for the life to come, when God will show the
Riches of his Mercy upon the vessels of mercy afore-prepared unto glory; and
the greatness of his Wrath upon the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; and
yet even then, and there, in nothing will the greatness of his Mercy and Wrath
so much appear, as in the eternity of those Rewards and Punishments then
dispensed: So that to deny the eternal State of Man after this Life, is a
brutish confining the eternal Decrees, and greatest Workings of God, to the
narrow compass of this present World, and in a manner to deny there is any
world to come, at least, such as is described in Scripture.

Having proved this from the great Design of God, in making Angels and Men; I
shall further evince it from the Attributes of God, which are eternal, like
himself; The mercy of God is an everlasting mercy Psalm. 100.5.
, it endures for ever Psalm. 136.1.
; The wrath of God is an abiding wrath John 3. last.
, therefore called everlasting burnings Isa. 33.14.
. Now these Attributes must produce suitable acts; as mercy is showed in acts
of mercy, and wrath in acts of justice: and these acts must have suitable
objects; for although the immanent acts of God, such as abide in him, of which
number are his eternal Decrees, do not necessarily require the praeexistence of
any objects, I mean in regard of a present existence In esse reali.
, but only in regard of the knowledge In esse cognito.
and foresight of God; yet his transient acts, or those that pass from him, as
rewarding, which is an act of mercy; and punishing, which is an act of justice;
these necessarily suppose some object upon which they are terminated. Now as
there are no Creatures besides Angels and Men, that are capable of merit, or
demerit, which might make them capable of rewards, or liable unto punishments;
so there is no Creature else which is immortal, and so capable of eternal
happiness, or eternal misery.

And therefore it will follow, that these, I mean Angels and Men, must for ever
remain either the perpetual objects of Gods free grace and mercy, or the
everlasting monuments of his wrath and displeasure: And therefore the Scripture
determines these upon their proper objects, Psalm. 103.17.
The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear
him: And on the other side, John 3. last.
He that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

CHAP. II. Of the Meritorious Causes, and the Nature of Happiness and
Punishment, and the Immortality of Man.
A Second Argument may be taken from the Meritorious Causes both of the
Happiness of Heaven, and the Punishments of Hell. 1. The Meritorious Cause of
the Happiness in Heaven, is the Merit and Suffering of Christ. The coming of
Christ into the world, and suffering for us, that he might thereby free us from
the wrath to come, and entitle us to eternal happiness, is that great design
which the whole Trinity have been thansacting from all eternity: so Wisdom
tells us. Prove. 8.30, 31.
That from everlasting he was as one brought up with the Father, rejoicing
always before him: Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my
delights were with the Sons of Men. And to the like purpose the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.19.
That God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself: Of all those works of
God, ad extra, such as concern the creature, this is the most sublime and
glorious, (as one says excellently) neither the Creation of all things out of
nothing, which was the beginning of the works of God, and put an end to that
long Sabbath, that had no beginning; nor the Resurrection from the dead, and
Restoration of all things, the last work that shall go before that everlasting
Sabbath, which shall have a beginning but no end; neither that first, nor this
last; though admirable works, and worthy of the Author, may be compared with
this; It is the masterpiece of Gods works, that great work in which he has
broken up all the depths of his mercy, in which he has displayed all the
banners of his Love, and exhibited the largest draughts of his power, wisdom,
love, and mercy: The whole Scripture, Jac. Arnac. Incarnation of the Son of God.
[saith Anhalt, who was both a Prince, and Preacher] is nothing else but the
swaddling bands of the Child Jesus. All the Types, Ceremonies, Washings,
Sacraments, Sacrifices, and whatsoever else we read of under the Law, were but
as leaves that promised this great fruit; as hands in the Margin pointing at
^his truth; as lines ending in this center, they all had their accomplishment
in this great Mystery, God manifested in the flesh: The Gospel is nothing else
than a Declaration of these glad tidings, which is the sum and substance of
both Testaments, briefly. If the Scripture be a ring of Gold, which God has
sent his Church as a token of his love, Christ is as the Diamond in this Ring,
that chiefly makes it so valuable: if the Scripture be as the field mentioned
in the Gospel, Christ is the one pearl of great price hid in it, which the
wiseman sells all he has to purchase: if the Scripture be a precious box,
Christ is the Ointment contained in it, filling the whole world with a precious
savor. But to apply this to the present purpose; if there be no eternal
condition of man after this life, what need was there of Christ coming and
suffering? What other end might God have in that grand design? No wise man will
undertake any great expensive business, but propound some end proportionable to
the pains he takes, and the expenses he is at; much less the only wise God:
this great work will evince at least, that there is a future condition of man
after this life, and I think also the eternity of that condition; this the
Scripture makes the end of his coming John 3.16.
God have his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life; The end of his suffering, that they which
are called might receive the Promise of an eternal inheritance; the end of that
Power which God gave him, as a reward of his suffering, Heb. 9.15.
Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to
as many as thou have given him John 17.2.
.

But if the coming and suffering of Christ considered simply in it self, will
not conclude the Eternity of our future condition, it may farther be evinced
from this following consideration; Christ being God as well as Man, his Merits
and Sufferings must needs be of infinite worth and value, and so, consequently,
meriting an infinite happiness. It would be inconsistent with the wisdom of
Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom, to pay an infinite price for a
finite purchase; nothing short of an infinite happiness can bear any suitable
proportion with the infinite price Christ paid. Now Man being but a Creature,
and so finite, is not able at once to grasp and comprehend an infinite
happiness; though the happiness purchased be objectively infinite, because God,
who is infinite, is enjoyed in Heaven, yet it is not infinite in regard of man,
whose Nature and Capacities are finite and limited; and because the happiness
enjoyed is not infinite intensively, in regard of the greatness, it must be
infinite extensively in regard of the duration and continuance; what is wanting
in the one, is made up in the other: Eternity is put into the scale to make up
the weight, otherwise there would be no proportion between the price and the
purchase; which is not to be imagined of God, who does all things in order,
weight, and measure.

2. The like is to be said of Sin, which is the meritorious Cause of the
Sufferings in Hell: Sin is objectively infinite, as being committed against an
infinite God, and consequently deserving an infinite punishment; which because
it cannot be infinite in regard of intensiveness and greatness, being inflicted
upon a finite Creature, therefore it is requisite that it should be infinite in
regard of the extensiveness or continuance; because the punishment the creature
can bear, comes short of the demerit of sin; so, as he cannot pay the whole
debt at once, he must lie in Hell till he has paid the uttermost farthing. And
as there is an infiniteness, so there is an eternity in Sin, not only an
objective eternity, as being committed against the eternal God, and
consequently demeriting an eternal punishment; but there is in a sort a further
eternity in sin: Gregory says, there is an infinite eternal malice in sin, so
as if wicked men should live eternally, they would sin eternally: and it is but
just, that they should never want punishment, who, if they had been suffered,
would never have wanted sin. That wicked men do not sin eternally, is only
because they are hindered by Death; should they live for ever, they would sin
for ever. What Luther in humility spoke of himself, I have no other name than
Sinner, Sinner is my name, Sinner is my firname, this is the name by which I
shall be always known; I have sinned, I do sin, I shall sin in infinitum, may
be more justly spoken of obdurate sinners, whose hearts are fully set in them
to do evil. Let none think, if wicked men were suffered to live longer, they
would bethink themselves, and break off their sins by repentance; the men of
the Old World lived many of them eight or nine hundred years, yet they were so
far from repentance, that, as the Father says, they made no other use of that
space given them for repentance, than to patronize their wickedness and
impiety. The like would be done by other wicked men, if they might live as
long, or a far longer time: and in evil, as well as good, God looks more at
the Will, than at the Deed. What lets us (says Seneca) to call Lucius Scilla
Tyrant, though he gave over killing, when he had no more enemies to kill? And
what lets him to be a sinner still, who leaves not sin, till sin leave him? He
that does not sin because he cannot, does sin, although he does not; that he
does not sin eternally, is only because he is prevented by death: A Postiller
sets it out by this Comparison; A company of Gamesters, who are resolvedly set
down to play, when their candle is burnt out, that they have no longer light,
are forced to give over; whereas if their light had lasted, they would have
played longer, till perhaps some had lost all their money: So it is with wicked
men in regard of sin.

Yet further, beside this potential Eternity in sin, whereby men would sin
always, if they might live always; there is a further, an Actual eternity in
men's sins; though Death puts an end to men's lives, yet not to their sins; Hell
is as full of sin, as it is of punishment; Though the Schoolmen determine,
that after this life, men are capable neither of merit nor demerit, and
therefore by their sins do not incur a greater measure of punishment, yet they
grant that they sin still; though when the creature is actually under the
sentence of Condemnation, the Law cease as to any further punishment, yet
there is an obligation to the precept of the Law still; though man be bound
only to the curse of the Law, as he is a sinner, yet he is bound to the precept
of the Law, as he is a creature: so that though the demerit of sin cease
after death, yet the nature of sin remains; though by sinning they do not
incur a higher and greater degree of punishment, yet as they continue sinning,
so it is just with God there should be a continuation of the punishment already
inflicted.

3. A third Argument may be taken from what the Scripture speaks of the
happiness in Heaven, and the torment in Hell; both which are described to be
incomparably and unconceivably great. In Heaven there is fullness of happiness,
In thy presence is fullness of joy; Psalm. 16.11.
though it be not a redundant overflowing fullness, as Christ's is, of whose
fullness we receive, as well happiness for happiness, as grace for grace; yet it
is the highest fullness the creature is capable of; being not only a fitting
congruous fullness; as we say a house, well stored, is full of household stuff;
such a fullness as the Saints partake of in this life: But an equal fullness, as
when a vessel is full of water, that nothing can be added to it; and so full it
can scarce properly be said to be, if it were fading: and therefore the
Psalmist having said, in thy presence is fullness of joy, he adds, and at thy
right hand, there are pleasures for evermore.

Again, it is described to be a perfect happiness; we read of the Spirits of
just men made perfect Heb. 12.23.
, perfect in happiness as well as holiness, which perfection excludes all
imperfection; When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall
be done away 1 Cor. 13.10.
: Though the Saints in heaven have a Negative imperfection, because there are
some perfections in God, which being incommunicable, they are not capable of,
yet they have no Privative imperfection; they want nothing which may conduce to
their happiness in their kind: whereas if their happiness were not eternal,
there were something, nay, the chief thing wanting to the perfection of it.

The Apostle in the verse before the Text, calls it, a far more exceeding
weight of glory. The Arabic Version renders it, It works for us a weight of
glory, in the most eminent and largest degree, and measure: The Siriack reads
it, An infinite glory: Haymo, A greatness of Glory, beyond all bo^nds and
measure; yet none of these reach the height of the Apostles Rhetoric, (...).
neither is any translation able to express it; now thus it could not be,
unless it were eternal: therefore that is put into the scale to make up the
weight; a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory.

Again, it is described to be a satisfying happiness. I shall be satisfied when
I awake, with thy likeness Psalm. 17.15.
. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house Psalm. 36 8.
; but satisfy it could not, unless it were eternal; there is, as in every
creature, so in man especially, a twofold desire; a desire of Perfection, and a
desi^^ of Perpetuity; a desire to advance his Being to the highest degree of
Perfection and happiness he is capable or; ^^d a desire to perpetuate this
happiness. And (...) impossible he should receive full content, till be^^ these
desires are satisfied; though in Heaven the Saints have a present freedom, from
all the ev^l that can possibly fall within the compass of their fea^s; and an
actual enjoyment of all the good, that can fall within the compass of their
hopes; yet if they had no assurance of the perpetuity of this, they must needs
be restless and unsatisfied.

Yet further, the greatness and perfection of this happiness, must necessarily
exclude all such things as are inimical to it; I shall name only two: Fear;
Perfect love casts out fear 1 John 4.18.
: and Sorrow; They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away Isa. 35.10.
, Whereas if this happiness were not eternal, there would be cause for both;
first, the Saints would be in fear of losing this happiness; and where there is
fear, there is Torment, in that forenamed Text; and this fear must needs be
productive of sorrow; were it not for the eternity of this happiness, it would
be hard to say, whether there would be the more joy or sorrow in Heaven; we may
probably think, there might be as much sorrow arising from the fear of their
future loss, as there is joy from the apprehension of their present enjoyment,
and that there should be either fear, or sorrow in Heaven, is not only
contradictory to the forenamed Text, but utterly inconsistent with the
blessedness of that estate. In sum, if we Believe what the Scripture speaks
of the greatness of this happiness, we must needs grant it to be eternal; And
this Aquinas makes Use of, as the strongest Argument to prove the eternity of
this happiness.

The like is to be said of the torments of Hell, which could not be so grievous
as they are described, if they were not eternal; were they to last a thousand
thousand years, there would be some hopes they would end at last, and this hope
will administer some kind of ease, and comfort; when some thousands of these
years were expired, it would be some comfort that there were so many already
past, and by so many the fewer yet to come; and so forward; the further
decreasing of the time would add a proportionable increase to their hope and
comfort; whereas that Cup of Wrath, the Dregs of which they shall wring out,
and drink, is without mixture, Psalm. 75.8.
without any mixture of hope, ease, comfort, or any thing which might alleviate
their misery; and that which chiefly makes it incapable of these, is the
eternity of this misery; it must be indeed confessed, that the Torments of Hell
are intensively most grievous: Bernard says that the least punishment in Hell
is more grievous, than if a Childbearing woman should continue in the most
violent pangs and throws a thousand years together, without the least ease or
intermission. An ancient writer, mentioned by Discipulus de tempore, goes much
further, affirming, that if all the men which have been from Adams time till
this day, and which shall be till the end of the world, and all the Piles of
grass in the world, were turned into so many men to ^ugment the number; and
that punishment inflicted in Hell upon any one, were to be divided amongst all
^hese, so as to every one might befall an equal part of that punishment: yet
that which would be the portion but of one man, would he far more grievous than
all ^he cruel deaths, and exquisite tortures, which have been inflicted upon
men ever since the world began: But though they be thus dreadful in themselves,
yet that which mainly, and indeed infinitely adds to the greatness of them, is,
because they are eternal; as one said: If Hell were to be endured but a
thousand years, methinks I could bear it; but for ever, that amazeth me.
Bellarmine De art been moriendi.
, out of Barocius, tells of a learned man, who after his death appeared to his
friend, complaining that he was adjudged to Hell Torments, which, (says he)
were they to last but a thousand thousand years, I should think it tolerable;
but alas, they are eternal. And as it is the eternity of these sufferings which
chiefly makes them so great: so the greatness of them proves them to be
eternal: otherwise they could not be so great as they are described.

4. A fourth Argument to prove the point, may be taken from man himself, who is
(...).
an immortal Creature Wisd. 2.23.
, God created man to be immortal, and made him an Image of his own eternity;
though he be not eternal and immortal as God is, who is therefore said only to
have immortality 1 Timothy 6.16.
, and therefore Divines distinguish between the eternity of God, and the
sempiternity of man; God is a whole eternity, both backwards and forwards, from
everlasting to everlasting; man's only a half eternity, forwards, but not
backwards: to, not from everlasting. God's is a simple eternity, he can no way
cease to be: man's only in some respect, because he may be annihilated by God's
power. God's is an uncreated, man's a created eternity; God's causal, man's
derived: God's independent, being only from himself: man's dependent and
limited: but though he be not eternal as God is, he is truly and properly an
immortal Creature. There are two essential parts of man, the soul and the body,
and in regard of both these, he is immortal: First, the soul is an immortal
substance, and that not only by the grace, and favor of God, as the body of
Adam was in the state of innocence, and as the bodies of the Saints shall be at
the Resurrection; but, by its own nature, having no internal principle of
corruption, so as it cannot by any thing from within it self cease to be:
neither can it be annihilated by any thing from without Math. 10.28.
. Fear not them which kill the body, but are rot able to kill the soul. Gregory
observes, there are three sorts of Created Spirits: the first of those whose
dwelling is not with flesh, or in fleshly bodies, they are the Angels; the
Second of those which are wholly immersed in flesh, the souls of beasts, which
rise out of the power of the flesh, and perish together with it, the third is
of those which inhabit bodies of flesh, but neither rise out of the Power of
the flesh, nor dye when the body dies: and these are the souls of men; when
the body returns to the earth, as it was, the Spirit shall return to God who
gave it Eccles. 12.7.
. From this immortality of the Soul, we may infer the eternity of man's future
condition. The soul being immortal, it must be immortally happy, or immortally
miserable. I shall not stand to enumerate those many arguments that are brought
to prove the souls immortality; but whatsoever Arguments are, or may be used to
prove this, they will all undeniably conclude the eternity of man's future
estate.

A further proof of it may be taken from the body, which though it be subject
to death, yet not to dissolution. Simo Stenius, Professor of the Greek Tongue
at Heidelberg, being visited by the Minister, lying upon his Deathbed, amongst
other Discourses, the Minister asked him, if he desired with Paul to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ? rendering the word after the vulgar
Translation; he answered with some kind of indignation, that that was not the
proper signification of the word (...).
used by the Apostle, which properly signifies to depart, to be unloosed, not
to be dissolved. Death is only a change, not an annihilation; After a Creature
is once in being, it is never wholly annihilated. Birth is a River (says)
Heraclytus) which never dries up, but is continually supplied by an accession
of fresh waters; though the Body be subject to death, and after death to a
thousand transmutations; as men cast away at Sea, may be devoured by Fishes,
those Fishes after eaten by men; possibly, some of those men devoured by wild
Beasts, those Beasts by Dogs, those Dogs eaten up by Worms, those Worms
consumed to dust, that dust scattered upon the Earth; yet after all these
revolutions, and transmutations, there is something remaining, and God is able
to make those dispersed pieces of dust, like those scattered bones, Ezekiel. 37.
to come together one to another: take twenty several sorts of seeds, and mingle
them together in the same vessel, a skilful Gardener is able to sever them one
from another: mingle the filings of Steel or Iron with so much dust, that the
filings are not perceived, yet by the help of the Lodestone you may separate
the filings from the dust, according to their first quantity: They say, some
exact Chemists are able, out of the same herb, to draw out the several elements
by themselves. That men can do this, it is because God teaches them; as the
Prophet speaks of the Husbandman Isaiah. 28.26.
, And he that teaches men knowledge, shall not he know Psalm. 94.10.
? He that first made man out of nothing, can much more repair him, out of that
something yet remaining. Augustine has a good meditation to this purpose;
Think, (says he) with thy self, how old thou art, whether twenty, or thirty
years old, before that time what wast thou? Where wast thou? In the Grave
whither thou go, there will be dust, or ashes, or something to be found
toward a man, whereas before that time, there was neither dust, nor Ashes, nor
any thing to be found toward thy Nativity. God who at first made the body out
of nothing, can and will remake it out of something pre-existent; and when it
is thus re-made, it shall be made Immortal, and incorruptible: So the Apostle,
1 Cor. 15.42.53.
It is sown in corruption, it shall be raised in incorruption; This corruptible
must put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality: We read,
Levit. 14. If the Plague of Leprosy were in a house, they must scrape the
walls, and pull out the stones, and plaster, and put other plaster in the
room; but if the Leprosy brake out again, they must pull down the house with
the stones, timber and mortar thereof. There is in every man, the fretting
Leprosy of sin: In the work of Conversion, God as it were, takes out the
Timber, and Stones, and puts others in their room, while he works a through
change in the soul; but still the Leprosy of Sin continues, till at last, God
sends Death, which pulls down the house, with the timber and stones, and
thereby takes away both the Leprosy of sin, and that mortality and corruption
which sin brings: As a Watch, being battered, or clogged with dust, is taken
in pieces; pulled joint from joint, and wheel from wheel, to the end it may go
better than before; or, as some goodly Statue of Brass, being defaced, is taken
down, pulled in pieces, put into the Fire; but all this is, that it may be put
together again, and made a more goodly work manship: Or, if we arise and go
into the Potter's-Field, and behold his workmanship; is not the Vessel made of
Clay, that was marred in the hands of the Potter? Jer. 18.4.
yet he either makes it the same Vessel, so as nothing is wanting but its
former deformity; or if he pleases, a m^re honorable vessel than before; In
like manner, the body being by Adam's sin made liable to Death, and Corruption,
God sees good to take it in pieces by death, that being put together again at
the Resurrection, it might be freed from this corruptibleness, and put into an
estate of immortality, and incorruption: To what end is the Body made thus
immortal, if not to continue in an eternal, immortal condition?

From all this we conclude, if man be an immortal Creature, both in regard of
his Soul, which is immortal in its own Nature, and in regard of his Body, which
shall be made Immortal by Gods Power; his future condition must of necessity be
immortal and eternal; whether he be admitted into Heaven, or doomed to Hell,
his condition is eternal and everlasting.

CHAP. III. Of Scripture-Proofs of Eternal Happiness, Consisting in Sight,
Love, Joy, Praise; with created Accessories: and Eternal Misery, Expressed by
Wrath, Worm, Fire, Prison, Darkness, Burning, Torment.
HAving endeavored to demonstrate the point from Arguments, I proceed to prove
it from Scripture; though it be unusual in the method of Preaching, to bring
Arguments before Scripture-proofs; yet it is frequent in Argumentation, to
reserve the strongest Proof till last. Ruffinus reports, that at the Council
of Nice, a Godly man of no great learning, was the means of Converting a
learned Philosopher, whom the Bishops with all their Arguments could not
persuade; the person brake forth into this speech: Against words I opposed
words, and what was spoken, I overthrew by the art of speaking; but when
instead of words, power came out of the mouth of the speaker, words could no
longer withstand truth, nor man oppose the power of God: Possibly what is
spoken by way of Argument, may not be so convincing to some, who will seek to
elude the strength of one Argument by another, whereas proofs from plain places
of Scripture silence all cavils and exceptions; that therefore I have reserved
for the last proof. There is a twofold Eternity, one of Happiness, the other of
Misery; the Scripture is abundant in the proof of both: I begin with the
Happiness of Heaven. The Schoolmen distinguish of a twofold happiness; one
they call the essential happiness, which they make to consist in the enjoyment
of God; the other accidental, consisting in the enjoyment of those glorious
things, which God, together with himself, gives unto his people. Others say to
the same purpose, that there is an uncreated reward, which is God himself, I am
thy exceeding great reward Genesis 15.1.
; and a created reward, consisting in those good things which God has created
to make his people happy; both these the Scripture describes to be Eternal.

1. The great Happiness in Heaven consists in the enjoyment of God: God is the
happiness of the Saints in Heaven, not only Efficiently, as he is the author of
it: nor only finally, as he is the end of it: but objectively, as being the
object of this blessedness: he is both the Giver and the Gift: the Rewarder,
and the Reward: the Crowner, and the Crown: it is God who both bestows the
happiness, and is himself the happiness of the Saints, Whom have I in Heaven
but thee Psalm. 73.25.
? God shall be all in all 1 Cor. 15.28.
: as this will hold in some other particulars, so in this; and as their great
happiness consists in this, that they have God for their Reward and Portion; so
this is said to be eternal, Thou art the strength of my heart, and my Portion
for ever Psalm. 73.26.
. But this will further appear, if we consider what ways, or in what manner God
may be said to be enjoyed by the Saints: all generally agree, that the great
happiness consists in the enjoyment of God; but there is a great dispute
amongst the Schoolmen, about the way, namely what act, or operation of the Soul
it is, by which God is more chiefly enjoyed. The Thomists contend for the
understanding, affirming that it chiefly consists in the sight, and knowledge
of God: The Scotists would have it consist in the love of God; a third sort,
place it in that delight and complacency the Soul takes in God: But after we
have scanned all the Arguments brought by each party, it will be hard to
determine, to which of these it is more chiefly to be referred; it is not to be
doubted, but it consists in all these; and though any one of these singly, much
more all jointly, make for the greatness of this happiness; yet that which is
the Crown, and Zenith of this happiness, is, because it is eternal; as
appears from Scripture, in the forenamed Particulars.

[1.] Much of Heavens happiness consists in the sight of God; which is
therefore termed the Beatifical Vision, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God Mat. 5.8.
: When he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is 1 John 3.2.
. It is disputed whether we shall see God in his essence, or only some beamings
forth of him; if in his essence, whether the Divine essence shall be
immediately represented to our sight, or whether there be a light of Glory,
strengthening and enabling the sight to behold him; if so, whether that be an
uncreated light; to wit, that infinite splendor and brightness streaming from
God himself; of which the Psalmist speaks, in thy light we shall see light
Psalm. 36.9.
, or whether it be a created light; created by God to this purpose; whether
this sight be only mental, as most determine; or whether the bodily eye shall
be so strengthened and elevated, as to see God, as may be Problematically argued
from two Texts; the one Text is, As for me, I shall behold thy face in
righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness Psalm. 17.
last.
: where the Prophet seems to speak of a further sight he should have of God,
when he awaked at the Resurrection; whereas that mental sight, he should have
before his awaking. The other Text is, Now we see through a glass, darkly, then
face to face; now we know in part, then shall we know as we are known 1 Cor.
13.12.
: Either the latter clause must be only an exegesis, an explanation of the
former, which is not so likely; or else there must be some difference between
seeing and knowing, which is the sight of the mind; but these disputes I wave,
as not so pertinent to the present purpose; whatsoever sight it be, it will be
a blessed one, the chief reward of the blessed; and that which chiefly makes it
so, is because it is for ever, what our Savior speaks of the Angels, that
they always behold the face of his Father, Mat. 18.10. (...) perpetuo Aethiop.
at all times, and throughout all times, may be as truly spoken of the Saints,
who in respect of immortality, are said, to be equal to the Angels; Luk^ 20.36.
as they shall always be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17.
so they shall always see his face, and be everlastingly satisfied with his
likeness.

[2.] From the sight of God, I come to the love o^ God, which follows upon
the other: our love o^ things, is usually proportionable to the knowledge we
have of them; things not at all known, are not at a^ loved, things but in part
known, are but in part loved; here we know God but in part; we see parts of his
ways, but how little a portion is heard of him Job 26.14.
! We do not see a thousandth part of that beauty, nor taste a thousandth part
of that sweetness that is in him; and that is one reason why our love to him is
so weak; wereas in Heaven, when we shall see God in all his beauty, when that
Sun of Righteousness shall appear in all his glory, displaying on every side
the rays of his Divine perfections, Oh what loves, what ardent and tenflamed
affections, will the sight of God produce in us? when we shall see him as he
is, we shall love him as he is; when we shall see him face to face, we shall
love him heart to heart; our love will be every way proportionable to our
sight, and knowledge; as we shall see him eternally, so we shall love him
eternally: Nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God Romans 8.39.
, it is true both of Gods love to us, and ours to him, but the latter (say our
Annotators) seems better to agree with the antecedents: Charity never
fails; Prophecies, and Tongues, and some kinds of Knowledge cease, but
Charity never 1 Cor. 13.8, 13.
: and in this respect chiefly it is preferred to Faith and Hope, when Faith is
turned into fruition, and Hope into possession; Charity is in its greatest
luster.

[3.] Others place happiness chiefly, in that joy and delight the Saints have
in the enjoyment of God; and this follows upon the former, as their love is
proportionable to their knowledge, so their joy to their love; as their
knowledge and love is full and perfect: so their joy so full, as that it cannot
enter into them, but they enter into it, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord
Mat. 25.21.
: If in this life when they see him not, yet believing, they rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory 1 Pet. 1.8.
; Oh what joys, what ecstasies, what ravishments of Spirit, must needs flow from
that full and perfect sight, and enjoyment of God, in Heaven? God will be as a
deep Sea of blessedness, says Nazianz. (...).
a Sea that has neither bank, nor bottom, the Saints as mystical fishes,
solacing themselves in those Crystal streams; yea God will be as their great
Shepherd, carrying them into his green pastures, and leading them beside the
still waters, and they like sheep, feeding among the Lillies of his Divine
Perfections: God as that great Master of the Feast, setting them at his own
Table, and himself coming forth to serve them: Luke 12.37.
they as cheerful guests, filling and satisfying themselves with the fatness of
his house: God as a great Lodestone, says Salvian, perpetually drawing by the
powerful attractives of his love and sweetness; the Saints as the Iron clinging
to him by an inseparable love and union. All these resemblances show what
unspeakable joy and delight the Saints shall have in their enjoyment of God;
but that which will make their joy most full, will be the eternity of it,
therefore these two are joined together, In thy presence is fullness of joy, and
at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16. last.
; this joy, these pleasures will hold parallel with eternity; and last as long
as God himself, Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, Isa. 35.
Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you. Joh. 16.22.


4. To these three ways of Enjoying God, I shall add a fourth thing, praising
God: which must necessarily result from all these: It being impossible, but
they who see God in his infinite beauty, sweetness, and other perfections must
needs love him, and rejoice in him, and break forth into his praises. It is a
Tradition of some of the Jewish Rabbis, that when God had finished the work of
Creating the World he demanded of the Angels (then in glory with him) what they
thought of that work? And one of them, after he had highly praised that goodly
workmanship: yet desired, that one thing might be added, to set a seal upon the
rest: Being demanded wha^ that was? Answered: To have a powerful harmonious
voice Created, which being mounted upon the Chariot of the Air, and carried
upon the wings o^ the Wind, might continually sound forth the Praises of God,
for that incomparable work: Could w^ suppose their Fantasy to be a Verity, it
had been a motion not unbeseeming an Angelical Spirit: and i^ God might be
thought so worthy of praise for the work of Creation, how much more for that
great work of Glorification? And this is indeed the great work of those
heavenly Inhabitants: In that Templ^ does every man speak of his honor, and in
thi^ consists much of their happiness: It would indeed be a blessed thing, but
to hear the Hallelujahs, and Triumphant Songs of those Heavenly inhabitants: If
a man could but a while lay his ear to Heaven, and hear that ravishing Music,
which for its loud sounding is compared to the voice of many waters, and the
voice of thunder Rev. 14.2.
; and for its sweetness and deliciousness, in the same verse, compared to the
voice of Harpers, Harping with their Harps: I may apply that, Blessed is the
People that know the joyful sound they shall walk, Oh Lord, in the light of thy
Countenance in thy name shall they rejoice all the day Psalm. 89.15, 16.
. But Oh^ how much more blessed to bear a part in those Heavenly Songs and
Benedictions: to stand continually before the Throne of God, singing Blessing
and honor, and praise, to him that sits on the Throne and to the Lamb: but
that which chiefly makes it so blessed and desirable a thing, is, because this
blessing and praising God, is not only for a time, but for ever, and ever.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will be still praising thee Psalm.
84.4,
; The Septuagint read it, they will praise thee for ever, and ever (...).
; and so both the Arabic and Aethiopick Versions.

Plato affirms, that upon every one of the Heavens, is placed a sweet singing
Siren, Carolling out a most pleasant and harmonious Song; which being eight in
number, according to their supposed number of the Heavens, do make an excellent
song, consisting of eight parts. Macrobius says that this Sirens song, is a
Psalm, composed in the praise of God; affirming that the word Siren signifies
a finger to God. Others affirm, that without any such help of Sirens, the
Heavens themselves make a most sweet harmony, by their proper motions. It was
not only the opinon of Pythagoras, and some other Philosophers, but of diverse
learned Christians, as Bede, Beetius, but especially, Anselme: Some of them
contend, that it is a thing unlikely, that such a vast Fabric should be
whirled about with so swift a motion, without noise; and if there be any noise,
it must be rather like the sound of sweet music, than harsh and confused, like
the creeking of a Cart: Might we suppose all this to be as they have conceited;
this would last no longer than the Heavens themselves, and the time is coming
when these Heavens shall be no more Job 14.12.
, but when the Heavens shall be dissolved, and this supposed Harmony cease,
there will not be an end of the praises of the Saints; they will be still
praising God, even for ever, and ever; as God deserves an eternity of praises,
so he has given them an eternity to praise him in; And from one Sabbath to
another, shall all flesh come to worship before God Isa. 66.23.
, from eternity, to eternity, they shall be sounding forth the praises of the
great Creator.

Besides, this essential happiness consisting in the enjoyment of God, there
is, (as they call it) an accidental happiness: consisting in the enjoyment of
those glorious things created by God to make his people happy: of which the
Apostle speaks: 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Now whereas this is
in Scripture set forth by several expressions and comparisons, you shall find,
they have all the Epithet, or Addition of Eternal, or everlasting; as If it be
called a Kingdom, an Mat. 5.3. Luke 12.32.
Everlasting Kingdom 2 Pet. 1.11.
, if a Crown, that Crown is said to be incorruptible, not to fade away 2 Timothy
4.8. Jam. 1.12. 1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Pet. 5.4.
, If it be called Glory, it is an eternal Glory Romans 5.2. 1 Pet. 5.10.
, an eternal weight of glory; Is it called an Inheritance? it is an eternal
Inheritance, 2 Cor. 4.17. Acts 20.32. Heb. 11.15.
an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away 1 Pet. 1.4. Romans
1.16. 2 Timothy 2.10.
, Is it called Salvation? it is an eternal Salvation Heb. 5.9.
, Is it sometimes called life? it is elsewhere said to be eternal Mat. 18.
, If joy, it is an everlasting Joy Mat. 25.23. Ja. 35.10.
, If a House, it is an House eternal in the Heavens John 14.2. 2 Cor. 5.1.
, If a Habitation, it is an everlasting Habitation. Deuteronomy. 26.15. Luke 16.9.
But not to enlarge further, these, and whatsoever other expressions the
Scripture makes Use of, to set forth the Saints happiness; have, if not in the
same, yet in some other place, the Addition of Eternal.

2. Neither is the Scripture less copious in setting forth the eternity of the
sufferings in Hell; it would be too long to insist upon those several Texts
which Eminently proclaim and ring the doleful knell of the everlasting miseries
of damned Souls, only you may observe (in the several titles and expressions,
by which they are set forth) this, that they are eternal, is still annexed.

Sometimes the punishment of Hell, is called the Wrath to come Luke 3.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
, sometimes, the Wrath of God Ephesians. 5.5. Rev. 14.10.
, This is the sad condition of those Wretched creatures, they lie under the
wrath of a justly incensed God: but that which makes their Condition most sad,
is, because this Wrath is an abiding Wrath John. 3.36.
, compared to a stream of Brimstone Isa. 30.33.
, It is a fearful thing (says the Apostle) to fall into the hands of the
living God Heb. 10.31.
, it is indeed a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a just God, who can as
well cease to be God, as to be just; whose Justice obliges him to revenge
every sin committed against him: A fearful thing to fall into the hands of an
Almighty God, who is able to revenge the wrongs which are done him by daring
mortals; but of all, it is most fearful to fall into the hands of the living
God, as it is a great happiness to Believers, that they have such an
High Priest, who ever lives to make intercession for them Heb. 7.25.
, So this is the great misery of wicked men, they fall into the hands of God,
who for ever lives to revenge himself upon them.

Sometimes it is called a Worm, which is nothing else but the stinging and
corroding of Conscience, which is one of the greatest punishments in Hell; as
every man here has the chiefest hand in his own sin, so he shall have
hereafter in his own Punishment; though the Devil has a hand in tempting men,
and one man tempts another: yet every man is his own chief Tempter: Every man
is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts and James 1.14.
enticed; though Satan tempted Ananias, yet Peter lays the blame upon Ananias
himself, Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts 5.3.
and as thus in the Temptation, so in the Punishment: though the Devil b^
commissionated by God, to torment wicked men and probably one wicked man shall
help to tormen^ another, yet every man will be his own greatest Tormentor, when
he shall consider on the one side, the punishment of loss; what a great
happiness he has for eve^ lost, when the understanding shall be enlarged, to
apprehend the greatness of his loss; when Conscienc^ shall be awakened to apply
this loss to himself; Thi^ loss is my loss, I am the man that have seen
Affliction when the thoughts that are now taken up about other things, shall be
wholly intent upon this loss; when he shall further consider, upon what fair
terms Salv^tion was offered; how much time he had to wor^ out his Salvation;
what variety of means, and help God afforded him: For what petty,
inconsiderabl^ things he lost it; when besides this punishment ^ loss, he shall
find by sad experience, what before h^ would not believe; what a dreadful place
Hell is what a fearful thing it is, to fall into the hands of t^ living God:
When he shall further Consider, ho^ often he was warned, to flee from the wrath
to come* what means and helps God afforded him, to escape the damnation of
Hell; and that nothing could prevail^ upon him: When he shall further Consider,
that he himself was the cause of his own ruin; that he lies down upon a bed
of his own making; that he is fettered in cords of his own twisting; that he
walks but in the light of his own fire, and in the sparks of his own kindling;
when he shall add this to the former, that his condemnation was through his own
choice: God set before him life, and death, and he chose his own delusions. Oh!
the rendings, and tearings of Conscience; which must needs result from these,
and the like sad reflections; which successively pressing upon the soul, like
the impetuous waves of a raging Sea, one after another; must needs afford
everlasting matter for this Worm to feed on. These considerations will be as
the Wood, Conscience as the Worm, those as Fuel; this as the Flame; the one as
Tow, the other as a Spark; they shall both burn together, and none shall quench
them: For this is that which will make this worm most unsufferable; because it
is a never dying worm Isa 66.24. Mark. 9.44.
.

Sometimes it is called fire, a Furnace of Fire, a Lake of Fire Isa. 66.24.
Mat. 13.42. Rev. 19.20.
, All which speak it terrible; but that which makes it most terrible, is,
because it is an unquenshable Fire Mat. 3.12.
, an Everlasting Fire Mat. 25.41.
, Fire here must be fed with continual supplies of Fuel, or else it goes out;
but this by the breath of God, which like a stream of Brimstone kindles it
Isa. 30.33.
, So that look how long God lives, so long this fire burns. Wicked men shall
burn in an eternity of Fire, to, and [if possible] beyond an eternity of
duration.

Sometimes it is called a Prison 1 Pet. 3.19
, and wicked men are said to be bound hand and foot Mat. 22.13.
. We read of a Prison amongst the Persians, which was deep, and wide, and dark,
and only one hole at the top; into which the Prisoners let in, could no way get
out: therefore was called by them Lethe, forgetfulness; Such, and far more
grievous, is the Prison of Hell, out of which there is no redemption: they are
lying Histories, which tell us, that Trajan was delivered out of Hell, by the
Prayers of Gregory; and Falconella, by the Prayers of Teclaes: No, he that
goes this way, never turns again; nor ever takes hold of the paths of life:
The Prisoners here are not Prisoners of hope, as we said of the Jews, in their
captivity in Babylon Zech. 9.12.
, and may be said of other Prisoners; but are Prisoners of desperation: being
once doomed to these Prisons of Fire they must continue for ever, Fettered
under Chains o^ darkness: lying there like a wild Bull in a Net: in vai^
roaring, and begging for mercy, through the grate^ of their eternal Dungeons:
Agree with thine adversar^ quickly, whiles thou art in the way: lest at any
time, the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to
the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison: Ver^ly, I say unto thee, thou shall
by no means come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing Mat.
5.25, 26.
.

But that I may contrive a large Picture, in a smal^ Ring: to use Philoes
expression, and contract the Images of great things into a little Glass:

Is it called Darkness? Do wicked men go from one darkness to another, from
inward, to outward darkness? That Darkness is said to be Eternal, For whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever Jud. 13.
: Is it called Death? The wages of sin, is death: it is a death tha^ never
dies Mors sine morte.
: Death shall feed on them, the Arabic^ reads it, shall be fed with them
Psalm. 49.14.
: Death like a hungry Vulture, shall not cease to feed on them to all Eternity.

Is it called burning? do wicked men go from Burning to Burning, from burning
in Sin to burning in Hell? from burning in Flames of lust, to burning in Flames
of Torment? these burnings are for ever, wh^ shall dwell with everlasting
burnings Isa. 33.14.
.

Lastly, It is sometimes called Torment, as it is said of the rich man, that he
was in torments, so as he cries out, I am tormented in this flame: that which
makes these torments more tormenting, is, because they are Eternal. They shall
be tormented day and night, for ever and ever: and The smoke of their torment
ascends up, for ever and ever Rev. 20.10. and 14.11.
.

Luke 16.23, 24.
CHAP. IV. Of the Sublimeness of Eternity, as Transcending all Expression,
Knowledge (of it self, or measure) and all Imagination.
HAving dispatched the first Doctrine, That things which are not seen, are
eternal: I proceed to the second.

Doct. 2. That which puts the greatest weight upon things not seen, and makes
them the proper objects of a Christians aim, and choice, is, because they are
eternal: Though if these, and things seen were weighed together, there were
many other considerables, that would give the precedence to things not seen:
yet that which Chiefly casts the scale, and makes things not Seen to
preponderate, is, because they are Eternal. This the Apostle lays down as the
Reason why they ^ooked at these, not at the other, because the other are
temporal, but these eternal; it is Eternity that main^y makes the difference,
and puts an infinite weight upon the unseen things of another life: so that I
am here to speak of the grand importance and concernment of Eternity. But I
shall say of this, as Bonaventure did upon another subject, I am not worthy,
not able so much as to unty the shooe-latchet of so great a Mystery. It ^s a
mystery of a sublime and transcendent nature, as I shall show in Three
particulars.

1 It transcendeth all expression; all that is, or can be spoken of it, falls
short of what it is in its self; what Augustine says of God, that St. John
himself does not speak of God, as God is, may not improperly be spoken of
Eternity: could I speak with the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able
rightly to express it: when we speak of it, we speak as we can, not as it is:
as children when they begin to speak, lispe and stammer, speak half words, and
broken sentences, so it is with us; when I was a Child I spoke as a Child,
says the Apostle 1 Cor. 13.11.
, It is spoken of that imperfect knowledge we here attain unto, which as it
holds good in other things, much more in this of Eternity; says Drexellius,
whatsoever is spoken of Eternity, is fa^lesse than it is; we are hardly able to
say what time is* the Philosopher defines it to be the measure of motion, o^
motion according to the former and latter parts of it but others find fault
with this, affirming, that time i^ the measure of Rest as well as Motion; the
Platonist^ say, that Time is Eternity limited: but this is to set out that
which is obscure by a greater obscurity, for we have a more clear notion of
Time, than of Eternity; they speak more properly, that say, it is a continued
flux o^ minutes, hours, days, months and years, from the beginning of the world
to the end of it; yet some think this does not fully express it. Eusebieus
says Oration in laudem Constantini.
, that part of time which is called (...), or the present time, cannot be
comprehended, much less time future, or time past, for that is not, and this is
past; then adds, the present time passes away more swiftly than either word or
thought: neither can it be taken for an instant, for either we must necessarily
expect things to come, or consider things past, and an instant flies away as
swift as thought: Augustine strugleth about it as a Bird in a string, he says
he knows it, yet confesses he knows it not, he knows enough to hold his
peace, but knows not enough to speak; and if it be so hard to say what time
is, much more to describe Eternity: and so Eusebius infers from what he had
said of Time; therefore man cannot comprehend Eternity and Everlastingness: the
highest Oratory, the loftiest strains of Rhetoric are not able to reach it;
they say, a fair face is seldom drawn but with disadvantage: the Painter going
about to draw the Picture of Helena, as not being able to express her beauty to
the life, drew her face covered with a Vail, leaving the beholder to ^onceive
what he was not able to express, the like are ^e forced to do, when we speak of
Eternity. The truth is, when we would speak of it, we can do it no ^ther way
but by improper locutions: when the Sun ^iseth red, and soon after looks
black, or pale, or ^ollow, we use to say it is a sign of rain; whereas pro^erly
the Sun is neither red, nor p^le, nor black, nor ^ubject to any vicissitude, or
change of colors, having ^o other color than its own perpetual brightness;
yet ^hus we use to speak, because it seems so to us by reason of the vapors
interposed between that and our ^ight, which make it to appear to us of those
colors. ^n like manner when we speak of Eternity, we often ^all it the times
and ages of Eternity, whereas properly ^here is no such thing in it: we say
when thousands ^f years and ages are past, Eternity is the same it was before,
whereas properly nothing can be said to be ^ast in Eternity, as shall be showed
after, but thus we ^spe and stammer when we speak of it: thus by a ^ndescention
(...).
to things that fall under our concep^ion, we would relieve our selves in
speaking of it.

2. It transcends all our knowledge and understanding; here is a Twofold
knowledge we have of things, a ^nowledge of the thing it self, and of the
measure of (...): Neither of these ways are we able to come to distinct
knowledge of Eternity.

[1.] Not of the thing it self; what the Ancients said ^f the fountains of
Nilus, that Nature made them rather to be sought after, than to be found; may
be more ^ruly said of Eternity, it is a path which no Fowl know^th, which the
Vultures eye has not seen, the Li^ns whelp has not trodden, the most piercing
eye is ^ot able to dive into it, the knowledge of it is too wonderful for us,
we cannot attain unto it: a man's eye is ^ble to look upon twenty Candles
lighted up together in a Room, but looking a while upon the Sun will dazzle the
sight; if a man falls into a River, though it be deep and broad, he may make
shift to swim out, but if he be cast away in the midst of the Sea, after he
has a while struggled for life, and wrestled with those impetuous waves, he
must unavoidably sink, and yield to the fury of the merciless waves: in like
manner, the Understanding may keep footing while it wades in the shallows of
time, though extended to an^ hundred thousand years, but soon will be swallowed
up in stupor and amazement, when it comes to lanch forth into that deep sea of
Eternity; as when we cast a stone into the water, one circle begets another,
and the latter is still bigger than the former: so in Eternity, one deep
calls upon another; it is a wheel within a wheel, there is difficulty after
difficulty, one mystery folded up in another; it is a great Maze or Labyrinth
full of infinite windings and turnings: after al^ our searchings and
indagations, we may well lose ou^ selves, but can never retreat when our
thoughts are seriously engaged in it, much less find any bound that may set
limits to our meditations* it is a Well which being both deep and dark, there
is no seeing to the bottom of it; we may say of that, as the woman did of
Jacobs well, the well is deep, and we have nothing to draw with: it is an
overflowing, and ever flowing Fountain, which is neither spent nor draw dry,
but bubleth forth into a continued stream, which is always running, and will
be running throughout all ages and generations: it is ^^boundless Sea, the
further we enter into it, the deeper we find it: the eternal happiness in
Heaven is a deep Sea, where the streams of life are ever flowing, and
re-flowing, by a continued succession. Hell is a deep sea of wrath and
vengeance* having neither bottom nor bank; no bottom for any anchor of hope to
fix on: no bank that might set any limits to the inundations of Gods
displeasure; it is a Sun that never sets, a Day that never ends, a Taper that
never burns out, an End that has no end, an infinite unlimited duration, where
millions of years are but so many Ciphers, signifying nothing; it is a thing of
the most amazing consideration, able to swallow up our thoughts in stupor and
astonishment.

[2.] There is a knowledge of the measure of them; and that is done, either by
Numeration, by which we count how many things are; or by ponderation, by which
we try how weighty things are; or by mensuration, by which we find out the
dimensions of things: but by none of these are we able to come to a clear
knowledge of eternity.

The first way of knowing is by numbering: thus we count how many years have
been since the birth of Christ, the Flood, the Creation of the world; Some
undertake to tell how many Barly-corns would reach from Earth to Heaven: but
who is able to reckon the years and ages of Eternity. Suppose, says a Lapide,
ten hundred thousand millions of millions of millions of years; add to these,
all the thoughts of Angels, and men, from the first moment of their Being to
eternity; all the motions, mutations, changes, of the several Creatures, and
things in the World; and add to them, all the numbers of Arithmetic, and fill
with them, so many numberless volumes of Paper, as would reach from Earth to
Heaven, you are not yet come to the end, not to the middle, scarce to the
beginning of Eternity: and then adds, how long shall eternity endure? For ever;
when shall it end? never; So long as Heaven is Heaven, so long as Hell is Hell;
so long as God is God; so long shall be eternity: So long shall Heaven contain
the Saints, and Hell torment the wicked; there is no number, either numbering or
numbered, which is able to set it forth: no number numbering, as when we say,
hundreds, or thousands, or millions. Boethius says well, a minute and a
thousand years, hold better proportion than a thousand years and Eternity; an
easy Arithmetician will tell you how many minutes there are in a thousand
years, but none can tell how many thousands or millions there are in Eternity;
the vastest numbers that can be reckoned, are but so many ciphers, signifying
nothing; and as no number numbering can reach it, so no number numbered: as when
we say, so many as there are stars in Heaven, or piles of grass upon the earth,
or drops of water in the Sea, any one of these would amount to a vast
unconceivable number, but none of these will hold parallel with eternity; nay
put all these together, and a thousand times more, you are not able to measure
the duration of Eternity.

[2] By Ponderation; and that is done either by the help of artificial weights,
when we put the thing we weigh into one balance, and the weight by which we
weigh it in the other: or else it is done without the help of such artificial
weights: when we poyse things in our hands, or lift them up at the Arms end, as
Porters do their burdens, to know their weight, but there is no way by which we
can find out the weight of eternity; God is said to weigh the mountains in
scales, and the bills in balances Isa. 40.12.
, but there are no scales or balances by which we can find out the weight of
an everlasting condition. When we would know the weight of things, we usually
put something as heavy in the other end of the balance, but what may be laid
in the balance to preponderate Eternity? The weightiest things that can be
brought, are to it but as the drop of a bucket, or the small dust of the
balance.

[3] By Mensuration, by which we find out the height, length, breadth and depth
of things; but neither thus can we find out the dimensions of Eternity. God is
said to measure the waters in the hollow of his fist, to mete out the Heavens
like a Span, to comprehend the dust of the earth in a measure, but who beside
God himself who inhabiteth Eternity, is able to measure the height, or span the
breadth, or fathom the depth of an infinite eternity? there is neither measure
that can reach it, nor any thing to be measured that is commensurate to it.
Astronomers find out imaginary lines, by which they measure the Heavens, and
the Earth. Mathematicians have their Jacobs staff, whereby they take the height
of the sun and stars. Mariners have their Plummet, by which they sound the
depth of the Sea, but there are no Engines or Inventions by which we may reach
the height, or sound the depth, or measure the length of an infinite unlimited
Eternity; I may say of it as Zophar does of God, Job. 11.8, 9.
It is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what can thou
know? the measure thereof is longer than the earth, or broader than the sea. By
all this it appears that Eternity transcends all our knowledge and
Understanding; the knowledge of it is too wonderful for us.

3. Yet further, Eternity transcends our conception and imagination: we are not
able to think or imagine what eternity is, whether the eternity of happiness in
Heaven, or misery in Hell. [First,] we are not able to conceive what are those
unseen eternal things in Heaven: the temporal things in this life are more in
imagination than in reality, they come abundantly short of what we imagine to
be in them; men at a distance think there is a great deal of happiness and
content in these things, that they should live most contentedly if they had so
much of Revenues coming in yearly, or such and such places of preferment, but
if at any time such men do attain to what they so ambitiously desire, they find
in the issue, that there is not that happiness in these things that they
fancied; that all these are but like the fruit of Sodom, that seem to the eye
to be beautiful apples, but being touched turn to ashes; like Oramazes his
egg, in which, the Enchanter boasted, was included all the happiness in the
world, but being broken, there was nothing in it but wind and emptiness; or
like that feast which Corn. a Lapide, reports on Isa. 55.2.
was made by a Magician in Germany, to which he invited many Noble Persons, who
while they sat at Table, received good content, and fared deliciously to their
thinking, but when they were departed, found themselves as hungry as if they
had eaten nothing at all. Suppose there were somewhere about the Country an
exceeding high Mountain, and that there went a common report as once about
Olympus, that it were the goodliest place that ever eye beheld; and that all
the Country being possessed with such an opinion, should flock thither in great
multitudes, every one contending who should get up soonest; one man being more
strong and nimble, gets up before the rest, and finding nothing there
answerable to the common report and his own expectation, looking down, and
^eeing the rest scrambling to get up, tells them, Sirs, you are all miserably
deceived, here is nothing of what ^ou expect; there is nothing here but ashes,
and smoke, and stench. Most men are strongly persuaded that ^here is a great
deal of satisfaction to be had in the ^iches and preferment of the world, else
they would ^ot hew their way to them through so many rocks of ^ifficulties, and
swim to them through so many seas ^f blood, as if they would climb up to them
upon the heaps (...) dead bodies; whereas Solomon, who stood upon a higher Rise
of ground, and saw further than a^y one of the sons of men, as having a larger
con^uence of all earthly enjoyments, and the largest ^eart to find out that
good that was in them, and ^ade this his great business; using these things not
(...) a sensual, but a critical way, that he might find ^t what good thing
there was under the Sun; yet af^^r all his experience finds himself, and
accordingly ^^oclaimeth to all the world that all is vanity, and ^nity of
vanities; the good that is in these tempo^^l things is more infancy than in
reality, they come far short of what we imagine to be in them, whereas the not
seen eternal things laid up in Heaven, are beyond what we can imagine or
conceive of them, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him 1
Cor. 2.9.
; God says, As far as Heaven is above the Earth, so far are my thoughts above
your thoughts Isa. 55.9.
. There is sca^^ce any thing, as one Preston.
observes, more vast than the thoughts of man: though the world be a vast
thing, yet thoughts are beyond it; we may imagine a thousand worlds, yet God is
there said to be as far above our thoughts, above that model we can draw of him
in our thoughts, as heaven is above the earth. When we have thought what we can
think of the goodness and mercy of God [for that is the thing there more
properly spoken to] God is as much more merciful above what we can think, as
heaven is above earth; and as this will hold in other respects, so more
especially in regard of that eternal happiness which God has in Heaven
provided for his people; when we have thought what we can of it, it is as much
above our thoughts as heaven is above earth, Now are we the Sons of God, but it
does not appear what we shall be 1 John 3.2.
, says the Syriack Version, it is not hitherto revealed: therefore it is said
to be a Life hid with Christ in God. It is said Col. 3.3.
That Christ shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all
them that believe; the glory then bestowed on them will be so far surpassing
their former apprehensions, that it will be a matter of admiration to the
Saints themselves. On the other side, the eternal punishments in Hell are
beyond all we can imagine or conceive; here many times the fear we have of
temporal sufferings is worse than the sufferings themselves: many in this
respect deal with themselves, as Parrhasius the Painter dealt with his slaves,
who pu^ them to real exquisite tortures that he might bette^ express but the
feigned tortures of Prometheus; s^ many, out of a fear and foresight of some
suppose^ evils, which possibly never may befall them, tormen^ themselves with
needless fears, and cast upon themselves the gall and bitterness of a thousand
real vexations: or if these evils do befall them, they do no^ prove so great as
they fancied; the fear of a Prison or other sufferings, is many times worse
than the thing it self. Saunders, and some other Martyr thought beforehand they
could not burn, they could never endure the fire; yet when it came, endured it
wit^ much courage and constancy: whereas the eternal punishment in Hell, and
the wrath of God there inflicted upon the Children of disobedience, is
commensurate to our greatest fears, Even according to thy fea^ so is thy wrath
Psalm 90.11.
, the wrath of God is every wa^ proportionable to the fear men have of it, and
not only so, but is beyond what we either fear, or ca^ know. In the beginning
of that verse, who knowet^ the power of thine anger, who is able to conceive
wha^ Gods wrath will be when it is poured out to the utmost; when he shall
cloth himself with vengeance when he shall stir up all his wrath, and revenge
himself for all the wrongs offered him by daring sinners God asks, Job 38.22.
Have thou entered into the treasures (...) snow, or have thou seen the
treasures of hail, which I h^v^ reserved against the time of trouble, against
the day o^ battle and war? but who has entered into those treasures of wrath,
or seen those treasures of fire, which God has reserved against the day of
wrath, and perdition of ungodly men.

CHAP. V. Of the importance of Eternity, to the endlesness of it. Considering
God will not, nothing else can, put an end to it.
HAving thus treated of the Sublimeness and transcendency of Eternity, I shall
now show of what unspeakable importance, and concernment it is; it was the
saying of Chrysostom, that if he had a mountain for his Pulpit, and the whole
world for his Auditors, he would preach upon that Text, Oh ye sons of men! how
long will you love vanity Psalm. 4.2.
? neither indeed can any Preacher improve his time and pains to better purpose,
than by seeking to take off men's love from these vain temporal things, and
stirring them up to the pursuit of things eternal. Eternity is a thing of that
infinite concernment, that never can there be enough spoken, or written of it;
it comprehends all the good that can possibly fall within the compass of our
hopes, and all the evil that may fall within the compass of our fears; as in
some Maps you may see a model of the whole world drawn into a small compass: so
the whole world to come, and whatsoever is considerable in it, is all
comprehended under this word (Eternal). As nothing is more desirable than
Heaven, nothing more formidable than Hell, so nothing in Heaven so desirable
as the eternity of its happiness; nothing in Hell so dreadful as the
everlastingnes^ of its misery; as Heaven is the treasury of all desirable good,
and Hell the storehouse of all imaginable evil; so that which is most
considerable in both, i^ the Everlastingness of them; Eternity is that which
make^ good things infinitely more good, and evil things incomparably more evil;
Eternity is the very Heaven of Heaven and the Hell of Hell; Heaven would be no
Heaven i^ comparison, and hell in a manner no hell, if it were not for this
Eternity; it would be a kind of Hell t^ the Saints in Heaven, to be in fear of
losing it, and in a manner a heaven to the damned in hell, to be in hopes of
being delivered from it: although there be many things concur to make up the
happiness o^ the Saints in Heaven, and the misery of the damne^ in Hell, yet
this of eternity weighs more than al^ the rest; Were all other things
considerable in both put into one end of the balance, and this of eternity in
the other, it would outweigh all the rest. Rev. 15.9.
Those that had gotten the Victory over the Beast, are said to sing the song of
Moses the Servant of God. Some by this Song of Moses, understand that Song
recorded Exodus 15. And that Song concludes with a declaration of Gods
eternity, ver. 18. The Lord shall reign for ever, and ever; Or, if it may be
thought to refer to the 90th. Psalm, which is a Prayer of Moses, the man of
God; the former part of that Psalm sets forth at large Gods eternity; but
whether either of these, or whatsoever else is to be understood by the Song of
Moses, I doubt not but Eternity makes up one part of that Song; nay, is the
Elah, the highest strain in that Triumphant Song. On the other side, could we
lay our ears to Hell, and hear the language of those wretched miscreants, it is
probable that the Eternity of their sufferings would still come in, as the sad
burden of their fruitless lamentations; that (...); the proper language of
Hell, is as if they should say, not ever, Lord, not ever (...).
; but all in vain: they would not here endure the thoughts of eternity; and
therefore they shall have it always written before them, in the place of their
thraldom; that, which way soever they turn their eyes, they might be terrified
with the remembrance of their miserable, most miserable immortallity. I might
be more large in showing the grand importance of Eternity: but it is an Hebrew
Proverb, that a man should not put his cattle into a place, where there is no
hedge to bound them; that therefore I may set bounds to my Meditations, I shall
show of how great concernment this Doctrine of Eternity is, from these
following considerations: in which I shall be more short, because they are so
fully handled by a more skiful builder Mr. Wells his Prospect of Eternity.
.

1. Eternity is without any end, or conclusion: that is the proper import of
the word Eternal: There is no end of the joys of Heaven. Dan. 12.3.
They who convert many to righteousness, shall shine like the stars for ever,
and ever; upon which says Drexellius, observe the argumentation of it, by the
iteration of the same word, for ever, is as much as Eternal, or without an End:
but as if that were not enough, he doubleth it: for ever and ever: and yet the
vulgar Latin expresses it more fully, to perpetual Eternities: it is not
eternity in the singular number, which yet were enough to describe it to be
endless: but eternities, in the plural; as if he should say: If you fear
Eternity may have an end, after that, there would be other Eternities to
succeed; neither does it rest here, in saying eternities, in the plural number,
or only add to these a finite term, but an infinite; to perpetual Eternities:
and if one eternity be without end, what is ten, an hundred? etc. yet if so
many Eternities could be imagined, so long shall the Saints continue in glory,
and happiness: to which nothing can put an end, and period.

First, God will not: Gods end in making man, was, that he should be the
everlasting monument either of his free Grace, or his just Displeasure: and
certainly, God will not cross, and null his own Design: he has from the
beginning written their Names in his Book of Life: and what he has written, he
has written: It is no way to be imagined, that God should make any to be
vessels of honor, and mercy; and then dash them in pieces, like the Potters
vessel; that God should receive them into his evelasting arms, and then throw
them out of his Embraces: Gods love, like himself, is unchangeable, having
loved his own, that were in the world, he loves them to the end Joh. 3.1.
; which is the same with Eternally, as the Learned observe: and so the Aethiop.
Version renders it; he loved them for ever; and as God will not put an end to
their happiness, so nothing else can.

1. Man cannot: The rage of Tyrants may cut asunder the thread of their
Temporal life, which might have been spun out longer in a Natural course; but
are not able to take away their Eternal life, I give them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand Joh.
10.28, 29.
. And yet that he may give stronger assurance, (if stronger may be given) he
adds, My Father which gave them me, is stronger than all, and no man is able
to pluck them out of my Fathers hands.

2. The Devil cannot: Though he got into earthly Paradise, and by tempting Adam
to sin, prevailed so far as to dispossess him of it; yet he can never come into
that Heavenly Paradise: he was long since thrown out, and his place no more
found in Heaven; Heaven is guarded from the intrusion of those Apostate Angels;
not only by the power of God, who cast them out of their first Habitation, and
shut them up under chains of darkness: but by its own inaccessable, and
impenetrable Nature. We often read in Scripture, of the opening of Heaven Joh.
1.51. Acts 7.55.
, from which some gather, that Heaven is impenetrable to any Creature, but by a
Miracle opened to Elect Angels and Saints: The Devils, though Spirits, and
therefore are able to pass through the hardest stone walls, are no more able to
pass through them, than to pass out of their own Nature, and Being; and this is
mentioned as a ground of joy in Heaven: The Accuser of the Brethren is cast
down Rev. 12.10.
.

3. Sin cannot: Heaven is a Holy Habitation, a Land wherein dwells
Righteousness Deuteronomy. 26.15.
, not harboring any sin, which might dispossess the Saints of the blessedness
they enjoy: There shall that be fulfilled, The iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found Jer. 50.20.
.

4. Death cannot: I am persuaded that neither death nor life shall be able to
separate us from the love of God Romans 8.38.
; Death is so far from separating from God's Love, and that Happiness, the
fruit of his Love; that next to Jesus Christ, it is the Believers greatest
friend: putting him into an everlasting possession of his desired Happiness.

On the other side, There is no end of the sufferings of the damned in Hell:
Some indeed have contended for it; Origin thought, that after a thousand years
both Devils and Men should be released out of Hell Torments: After him the
Heretics, called the Aniti L. 21. de civ. Dei.
, broached the same Doctrine: Others, that Angustine speaks of, contended;
that not all, but some should be delivered out of their sufferings; some, that
all Christians: some, all Catholics: some, those that had received the
Sacraments of the Faith: some, those only who persevere to the end in the
Catholic Faith: others, those who were addicted to works of Mercy, and
Charity: But who are these, who darken Counsel by words without knowledge?
These fond conceits are solidly refuted by Aquinas, and others, who prove by
undeniable Arguments, that these sufferings, if nothing else, yet Death puts an
end to them: in the Grave the Prisoners rest together, and those who are weary
are at rest: but Death shall not put any end to Hells punishment; it is a
death, that never dies; an end, which has no end; a defect, without any
defici^ncy. It is a death, that ever lives: an end, which never begins; a
defect, which never fails: we may well say of it, as one does, Oh killing
life! Oh immortal death! If it be life, how does it kill? if death, how does it
endure Bellarm. de art moriendi. l. 2. c. 3.
? It is neither death, nor life: for both these have something of good in them:
Oh how happy would those poor miserable creatures think themselves, if there
might be any end of their misery! they shall seek for death, and dig for it as
for hid treasures, but all in vain: They shall seek death, and shall not find
it, and desire to die, and death shall flee from them Rev. 9.6.
; They shall study plots and methods to dispatch themselves: they shall cry to
the Mountains to fall upon them, and (if possible) to crush them to nothing:
they shall desire, that the Fire that burns them would consume them to nothing:
that the Worm which feeds on them, would gnaw them to nothing; that the Devils
which torment them, would tear them to nothing: They shall cry to God, who
first made them out of nothing, to reduce them to that first nothing, from
whence they came: but he who made them, will not have mercy on them: he that
formed them, will not show them so much favor: When the Angel pleaded with God
in behalf of Jerusalem, Zech. 1.12. How long, will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, against which, thou have had indignation these threescore and ten
years? It is said, the Lord answered the Angel with good words, and comfortable
words Zech. 1.12.
: When the Souls under the Altar cried, How long, Lord, holy, and true, do
thou not avenge our blood upon them which dwell upon the Earth Rev. 6.10.
? Answer was returned how long they must stay, and in the mean time were given
them long white Robes; but when those poor Creatures in Hell shall cry out, How
long, Lord, how long will thou torment the workmanship of thy hands? how long
will it be e're thou put an end to our misery? There is no answer to be
expected, which might give them any hopes of the ending of their suffering: God
here often called to them: How long, ye sim^le ones, will ye love simplicity?
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee Prove. 1.22. Jer. 4.14.
? but they turned a deaf ear to Gods call, and therefore it will be just with
God, when they cry how long? not to hear them, but to laugh at their
destruction, and mock when their fear comes: And that these sufferings are
without any end or expiration; this, above all other things torments the
damned, and drives them to despair; were there to be any end of their mis^ry,
though after the vastest tract of time, there would be some hopes, they would
end at last. Some of the Ancients have well improved their Meditations, in
setting forth this; One thus, If they were to end after a little Bird should
have emptied the Sea, and only carry out her bill full once in a thousand
years. Another thus: If the whole world, from the lowest Earth, to the highest
Heavens, were filled with grains of Sand, and once in a thousand years an Angel
should come, and fetch away only one grain; and so continue till the whole heap
were spent. A third to this purpose: If one of the damned in Hell should weep,
after this manner; that he should only let fall one tear in a hundred years,
and these should be kept together, till such time as they should equal the
drops of water in the Sea, how many millions of ages would pass, before they
could make up one River, much more a whole Sea? and when that were done, should
he weep again after the same manner, till he had filled a second, a third, a
fourth Sea, if then there should be an end of their miseries, there would be
some hope they would end at last; but, that they shall never, never, never end,
this is that which sinks them under horror, and despair, and fetches from them
yellings and howlings, able to rend Rocks and Marbles asunder.

CHAP. VI. Of Eternity without succession, or without consumption.
ETernity is without succession, it is all together: this is one difference
betwixt Time and Eternity; Time is a continued flux of hours, days, months and
years, so that in time there is a Succession, there is time past, present and
to come: time present puts an end to that which is past, and this is soon
swallowed up in time future; but it is otherwise in Eternity: There is no
Succession, no time past, or to come: it is a duration always present, there is
no yesterday, nor to morrow: it is one perpetual to day, no beginning and
ending; it is all beginning, and always but beginning, there is no priority, or
posteriority, no First or Last, it is all together, and at once; no whence, or
whither, no term from which, or unto which ^ it is One standing flow without
any flux, one indivisibl^ point. God being Eternal, there is no difference o^
time with him, one day with him is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day 2 Pet. 3.8.
, Time to come is to him as it were past, A thousand years in his sight is but
as yesterday, and as a watch in the night Psalm. 40.4.
. Time past is to him as present, therefore Christ tells the Jews, Before
Abraham was, I am Joh. 8.58.
, He does not say, before Abraham was, I was, but I am, being the Everlasting
Father Isa. 9.6*
, so many hundred years past were as present to him, and so it is in Eternity*
Though to us who live in time, and motion, a thousand years are neither more
nor less, yet in Eternity a thousand years, and one day are all one: Some of
the Schoolmen express it by this similitude: a man that stands upon a Plain,
and sees an Army marching, sees but a little of it at a time, first one
Troop, then another, some before, others behind, some coming, some going,
others gone: whereas a man that stands upon the top of a Hill, sees all the
Army at once, though possibly one part may be many miles distant from another:
In like manner to us, who stand in the low Valley of time, there is a flux and
succession, and so a difference between time past, and to come: whereas in
Eternity there is no difference, no yesterday, or to morrow; they are the same,
they are all present; and as in Eternity all time is together, if I may so
speak, so all things else, are possessed together. Boethius says, it is an
interminable possession, perfect, and all together; all things in Eternity are
collected into one: the Eternal happiness in Heaven, is as if the quintessence
of several dishes of meat served up at a great Feast could be collected into
one morsel: as if the virtue and spirits of all the precious liquors in the
world, could be contracted, and put into one glass: there shall be as much
happiness enjoyed at once, as shall be through that infinite duration which
has no end; and yet which makes it so wonderfully wonderful, there is such a
sweetness, and pleasant variety in the happiness enjoyed, that after millions
of years it will be as fresh and desirable as at the first enjoying it. So in
the eternity of Hell-sufferings, all miseries are collected into one; it is as
if all the evils in the world could be put together, and endured at once: as if
all the malignity of the several venomous creatures in the world could be
squeezed into the same cup: so in Hell, whatsoever flaming of Gods wrath,
whatsoever scorchings of that unquenchable Fire, whatsoever gnawings of that
never dying worm, whatsoever other sufferings are to be endured throughout all
Eternity, they are all endured the same moment, and article of time; and yet
(which is as strange) when all this has been endured the vastest tract of
time, the enduring of it will be as grievous, and unsufferable as it was at
first.

3. Eternity is without any wasting or spending: while we are here, every part
of time already spent, cuts off so much of the time remaining. Isa. 20.10.
The days of our years are threesco^e and ten. When a man has lived Thirty or
Forty years, there are so many years less to come, and so it is with all things
either enjoyed, or endured in this life. A man that takes a lease for one and
twenty years, when seven or twice seven of these years are expired, there are
so many years less remaining; a man that is committed to prison for so many
months, or years; when he has endured that punishment half of that time, he
has so much the lesser time to endure it; but it is otherwise in Eternity,
after millions of ages are past (if ^ may speak so improperly) there is not one
moment, nor, (if it could admit of a division) one thousandth part of a moment
wasted, or elapsed, or a thousandth part of a moment less to come; what some
speak of a great Lake near Manubria, that it is always full, put never so much
water in it, it never runs over, take never so much out of it, it continues
full, may be said of Eternity; it is neither increased by addition, nor
diminished by substraction; add never so many thousands of years to it, it is
still the same it was before the addition, take as many from it, it is still as
much as it was before the substraction; the total sum, says Drexellius, is
neither more nor less, but what it was in its self, to wit, Eternity: as it
admits of no Succession, so neither of any Wasting or impairing: Some obscure
footsteps of this we have here, Do thou not see the Heavens, (says
Chrysostom) how fair, how spacious, how bespangled with diverse Constellations;
how long they have lasted? and yet this long duration of time has brought no
old age upon them, but they still retain the beauty and glory they had at
first. To the same purpose Alstedius, Such is the duration, and unmovable
stability of that heavenly Palace, that being created above five thousand six
hundred years since, yet it so continues to this day, that we can espy nothing
in it of change or waste, or disorder; The Sun, that faithful witness in
Heaven, is in continual travel and motion, fetches large circuits, courseth
about the world, yet there is no wasting either in its substance or qualities;
his substance is the same, his light as clear, his heat as cherishing,
influence as operative, motion as swift as ever it was; does the Psalmist
compare the sun to a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and a Giant
rejoicing to run his course? This Bridegroom is still as fair and beautiful,
this Giant as strong, and vigorous after the great labor, and constant
revolutions of above five thousand years; The like is to be observed in the
Sea; all the Rivers run into the Sea, From the place from whence they came,
thither they return again Eccles. 1.7.
: Though it continually ^endeth forth abundance of Rivers, and has done so
from the Creation, yet it continues as full as it was at first; as it sends
out some, it receives in other waters. After they have incircled the earth,
and glided along through their several channels, they at ^ast empty themselves
again into the Sea,; so that it ^s both as full and large as at first. If it
loses in one place, it gains in another: and if after so long a ^ract of
time there be no sensible decay in these great masterpieces of Nature, much
less in Eternity, where all things continue in the same state and degree.

There is no wasting in the eternal happiness of the Saints, Provide your
selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens that fails not, it
is an inher^tance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not awa^ Luke
12.33. 2 Pet. 1.4.
An incorruptible Crown; 1 Cor. 9.25.
A Crown of glor^ that fades not away, Deu^ 34.7.
It is spoken of Moses, as ^ thing extraordinary, that after an hundred and
twen^ years, his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abate^ Deuteronomy. 29.5.
and that of the Israelites in the Wilderness, wa^ as strange; that after forty
years, their clothes a^ shoes, waxed not old. But what is recorded as ^
strange unwonted thing in them, holds true in Heaven; the Saints shall ever see
God, and yet their sigh^ never wax dim; shall be clothed with the Garmen^ of
Salvation, and those Garments never wax old. ^bel has been in Heaven five
thousand years and upward, and were there so many thousands to be d^ducted from
his future happiness, it would be some dimunition to it; but this adds much to
his happiness that after so long a tract of time, he is not one wh^ nearer the
expiration of his happiness.

On the other side, there is no wasting in the eternal punishments in Hell;
Drexellius makes this observation from those words of our Savior, John. 15.6.
If a man abi^ not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, a^ they are burned; Where he
observes, the words ^ not run in the future tense, he shall be cast forth and
shall be cast into the fire, and burned: but all ^ the present tense; he is
cast forth, is withered; m^ cast them into the fire and they are burned. This
(sait^ he) is the state and condition of the damned; they are burned, that is,
they are always burning when a thousand years are past, as it was at first so
it i^ still; they are burned: after a thousand, thousan^ years more, as it was
before, so it is still; they an^ burned. If after millions of years, the
question were asked; What is now their state and condition? what do they? what
suffer they? how does it fare with them? There can be no other answer returned,
but they are burned; continually, and eternally burning. The Apostle says of
the Sodomites, that they were set forth as an example, suffering the vengeance
of eternal fire; it was many hundred years before the Apostle wrote this, that
they were doomed to those prisons of Fire; yet all that time before, they had
been burning; at this day, they are still burning: and so shall continue
burning to all eternity. All the burnings they have already endured, deduct
nothing from their future sufferings, nor in the least abate the tale of their
ensuing calamities; but they have as much to suffer, and (if I may so speak) as
long a time to suffer in, as when they went first to their own place.

CHAP. VII. Of Eternal Happiness and Misery without intermission; and without
mixture in Heaven or Hell.
4. ETernity is without any interm^ssion: There is no intermitting in time; in
the days of Joshua, when the Sun and Moon stood still; and some say, there was
the like pause in the Stars; yet time did not stand, but posted on its wonted
course: in the days of Hezekiah, when the Sun went backward ten degrees, yet
time went on; the men then living, were not the younger for that retrograde
motion: and if there be no intermissions in time, much less in eternity, and
this undeniably follows, upon what was before spoken; for if there be no
succession in eternity, but whatsoever good is enjoyed in Heaven, and
whatsoever suffering is endured in Hell, be all at once it will thence follow,
that there is no interruptions in the happiness of the one, nor any
intermissions in the punishment of the other.

1. There is no interruption in the happiness enjoyed i^ Heaven; and this adds
not a little to the greatness o^ it. The best enjoyments in this life, are
often interrupted; yea, even the spiritual enjoyments of Believers; God is
often as a stranger in the Land of their souls; and as a Wayfaring-man, who
tarrieth but for a night; his visitations are less frequent; and when they are,
many times not lasting; the best of the Saints have experience of Gods access
and recess: of his drawing near them, and his withdrawing from them. God
sometimes looks through the window, shows himself through the Lattice, shines
upon them with the light of his countenance; makes some of his glory and
goodness pass before them, so as at present they are able to say with the
Church, The Lord is my Portion, says my soul; but at other times, God hides
his face, withdraws his comforting presence, so as at present they have no
taste of his goodness nor smell of the sweet savor of his precious Ointments,
nor intimations of his love, nor illapses of the light of his Countenance: they
seek him, but cannot find him; they cry, and shout, yet he shuts out their
Prayer; they go to the Word to hear what God will speak to them; hoping that
God may create the fruit of the lips, peace; yet cannot hear one word of
comfort: they follow God from Duty to Duty, from Ordinance to Ordinance; and
yet God asnwereth them neither by Prophets, nor by Dreams neither by Prayer,
nor Word, nor Sacrament, so as they many times cry out, I have lost God, the
Comforter who should relieve my soul is far off from me; or in the language of
Sion, The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me. And as they have
these sad interruptions in their sense and feeling of Gods love, so likewise in
that joy and comfort which results from it; what they say of Apes and Monkies,
that in the full of the Moon they are pleasant and jocund, often skipping up
and down, doing their apish tricks, but in the wane are dull and sottish, not
caring to stir: in like manner Believers, while the candle of God shines upon
their head, they are filled with joy, and that sometimes beyond what they are
well able to bear: as Eph^aim, who begged of God, Lord withdraw a while thy
joys from me, the weakness of this earthly vessel is not able to hold so great
joys. And Severinus, that Indian Saint, being recovered out of a great
sickness, in which he found the glorious illapses of God upon his soul, cried
out, Oh my God, do not ^or pities sake thus over-joy me, if I must have these
con^olations, take me to Heaven, he that has tasted of thy ^weetness, must
needs after live in bitternness! Whereas ^n the other side, when God hides
himself, and with^raws his presence, there is no voice of joy heard in ^eir
tabernacles, nothing remaining of those joys ^^ey once had, but only a sad
remembrance that they ^^ce had them. Bernard on a time found himself ^uch
indisposed, yet having striven with himself, and ^en with God in prayer,
evidently found the visita^ons of God, but this lasted but a while, therefore
he ^^d of it, Oh blessed hour, but oh short stay; Oh that it ^^d lasted longer;
And Jeoffry of Peroun, being in ^ourny with Bernard, one while was so filled
with ^, that he said, he hoped he should never be sad more all ^ life; but this
joy was soon gone, so as he then fear^ he should never be cheerful more. But
these sad ^erruptions which the best Saints are subject to here, ^y shall be
wholly free from when they are made ^takers of that eternal hapiness in Heaven;
does (...) chief happiness of the Saints in heaven consist in (...) enjoyment
of God? look whatsoever way they may said to enjoy him, the Scripture
describes it to a continual, an uninterrupted enjoyment; is it by way
presence? they shall ever be with the Lord 1 These. 4.17.
. Is it ^way of Vision? what Christ says of Angels, that (...) always behold
the face of his Father Mat 18.10.
, is as true of them; Is it by way of love? Love is strong as death the coals
thereof are as coals of fire Cant. 8.6.
; some read i^ the coals of Juniper, which, they say, being raked up i^ its
own embers continues glowing a whole year together, and therefore aptly
expresses the love of the Saints, which is continually burning upon the altar
o^ their hearts; Or, is this enjoyment by way of joy an^ delight in God? In thy
name they shall rejoice all the day Psalm. 89.16.
; and this adds not a little to the happiness of the Saints, which would be
much abated, if there were any times, when they were secluded the presence o^
God: the like may be said of whatsoever happines^ there is in Heaven: which is
therefore resembled t^ a River, where there is a constant succession of waters,
Thou shall make them drink of the River of t^ pleasures Psalm. 36.89
; sometimes to a Fountain, which w^ know is continually running, With thee is
the Fountai^ of Life; and the tree of life is said to yield her frui^ every
month, to show the un-interruptedness of thos^ delights in Heaven.

2. On the other side there is no intermissions in the Eternal sufferings of
Hell, the worm is always gnaw^ing, the fire continually burning, the smoke of
the torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have ^ rest, day, nor
night. They are tormented day and nigh^ for ever and ever Rev. 14.11. and 20.10.
; the wrath of God under which they lie is Isa. 30.33.
compared to a stream of Brimstone; (...) it is likened to Brimstone to express
the fiercene^ of it, so to a stream which is continually running, (...) set
forth the continuance of it; and this much adde^ to the greatness of their
sufferings. In the evils which befall men in this life there are frequent
intermissions in the most violent Agues the paroxysm lasts but for such a time;
Fevers in a few days come to their Crisis, and end either in the death or
recovery of the Patient; Those tormenting diseases, the Gout and ^he Stone, in
a short time spend themselves, and though they are seldom wholly cured, yet
there are ^ome times of ease; and were it so in the sufferings ^f hell, were
there any resting days in hell (as Pru^entius fancied) were it one day in a
week (as some ^odern Jews conceit, affirming, that when their ^abbath begin^,
the damned are led by an Angel to a ^lace of rest, and when their Sabbath
ends, they ^re driven again to their place of torment,) or were ^ but one day
in the year, as Prudentius would have ^; that upon that day Christ rose from
the dead, ^e flames of hell are le^s not, and the damned find one mitigations
of their pain; if only thus, it were ^me abatement of their misery: but to lie
continually ^nguishing under the wrath of an incensed God, and scorching in the
flames of a tormenting Fire, without any end, ease, relaxation, or any
intermission ^f their sufferings, this makes them the more grie^ous, and
intolerable. Here when a man's mind is ^er-whelmed with grief, or is oppressed
with ^in, sleep many times gives him some mitigation; ^erefore, the Poets call
it a sweet refreshment in a ^sease morbi suave levamen.
; on the other-side, when in extremity of ^ief or pain, a man cannot sleep many
nights toge^er; when in his extremity he wishes that it were ^ening, hoping
that the night may ease him, and ^s bed give him rest; yet in this case, his
eyes are ^t waking, so as he is full of tumblings and tossings ^ the dawning of
the day; this is a great addition ^his Misery: as it was with Job, Who
therefore desi^d strangling, and death, rather than life Job 7.15.
. Ravil^c, who murdered Henry the Fourth of France, a^ong other punishments,
they would not suffer him ^ take any sleep for several days and nights
together, ^t when he began to sleep his keepers thrust burning bodkins into his
flesh, to keep him waking; and this was so grievous to him, that though many
exquisite tortures were inflicted on him, yet he told his friends, nothing so
much troubled him as want of sleep, having not had one wink of rest for six
days and nights together; but thus it is with those wretched Miscreants in
Hell, they have no rest day nor night Rev. 14.11.
they shall not be suffered to take one wink o^ sleep to all eternity.

5. Eternity is without any mixture: There is nothing but happiness in Heaven,
nothing but Misery i^ Hell; Heaven is a place of pure Mercy, Hell of pure
Justice; Joy and Triumph will be the portion o^ the Saints in Heaven; and
Misery and Howlings the everlasting portion of the damned in Hell; and tha^
without any mixture of their contraries: See it in both the Branches.

(1.) The happiness in Heaven is without any mixture: This world, as it is
between Heaven and Hell i^ place, so it is in participation; It partakes both
o^ the sweetness of Heaven and the bitterness of Hell ^ Whiles Israel was in
the wilderness the blackest nigh^ had a pillar of Fire, and the brightest day
the pilla^ of a Cloud; things here, never go so ill with me^ but they have some
comforts afforded; nor so well but they groan under some kind of trouble: Go^
has set one over against the other Eccles. 7.14.
. When Dioclesian resigned his Empire, he pretended this as the reason: As the
Planet, which has its exaltation in one sign, has likewise its counterpoise
in another; s^ if there were any thing that afforded him any content, it was
accompanied with as much vexation; our silver is mixed with dross; our wine
with water Neither is it thus only in temporal, but in the Spiritual enjoyments
of Believers; who are here, like the Nightingale, sitting upon thorns; or the
Halcyon upon the trembling waters. Does the Christian serve God? it is with
fear; does he rejoice? it is with ^rembling: does he rejoice in that Grace God
has given him? as Paul, Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ; yet he cannot
but mourn under the remainders of Corruption, with the same Apostle: O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? and when he
compares that little grace he has, with that Original purity he lost in Adam,
he cannot but mourn; as the old men did Ezra 3.
, who had ^een the former Temple in its glory; is it matter of Encouragement to
him, when his heart is enlarged in Gods service? as it was to David, when he
and the people offered willingly to the Lord 1 Chronicles. 29.
, Yet it is a matter of sorrow that he is able to do God no better service; his
greatest joy is not without some mixture; ^he women after Christ's Resurrection,
departed from ^he Sepulcher with fear and great joy Mat. 28.8.
, The Disciples, walked in the fear of God, and the comforts of ^he Holy Ghost;
Acts 9.31.
Whereas in Heaven, there are ^ll things that are desirable, and rare, and
precious, without any mixture of contraries (r): There is per^ection without
mixture of imperfectness, When that which is perfect is come, that which is
imperfect shall ^e done away: 1 Cor. 13.10.
There is perfection of holiness, without the least sinfulness; The sin of
Jacob shall be ^ought, and there shall be none Jer. 50.20.
: Perfection of happiness without any kind of misery; there is joy without
sorrow; They shall obtain everlasting joy, and gladness; and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away Isa. 35.10.
: Rest without Labor, Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord; they rest
from their Labors Rev. 14.13.
: In sum, there is life, without death attending it: Light, without darkness;
peace, without trouble; ease, without pain: a full enjoyment of all desirable
good, and freedom f^ all imaginable evil.

[2.] On the other hand; In the eternity of Hells punishment, there is all that
is evil, without the least mixture of any thing that is good, The same shall
drink ^ the wine of the wrath of God, that is poured out without mixture Rev.
14.10.
; That Cup of wrath that is said to be f^ of mixture Psalm. 75.8.
: that is, full of all the woeful ingredien^ that can be put into it; is here
said to be without mi^ture: that is, without the mixture of any thing tha^
might alleviate their Torments. I shall only instan^ in three Particulars:

[1.] Without any mixture of Mercy: Here man^ times God corrects with Judgment,
not in Wrat^ Jer. 1^ last.
or if in Wrath; yet in Wrath he remembers Me^cy Hab. 3.2.
, But there, is all wrath without any mercy; in the Sacrifice of Jealousy Number.
5.15.
, God orders, the there should be no Oil, or Frankincense put to it, because
it was an offering of Jealousy; an offering o^ memorial, to bring iniquity to
remembrance: in li^ manner, in Hell, there is no oil of mercy to lenifie the
sufferings: no Incense of prayer, to appease Go^ Wrath; he that made them, will
not have mercy ^ them; he that formed them, will show them no ^vour; the day of
Grace and Mercy is then past: t^ door of mercy is for ever shut up against
them: W^ once the Master of the house is risen, and has shut the do^ and ye
begin to knock at the door, saying: Lord, Lord open to us; He shall answer, and
say, I know you ^ whence you are Luke 13.1^
: When God has shut up the do^ of Grace, and Mercy, as he does in Hell: thoug^
they beg, and cry for mercy, they shall receive no ^ther answer than a
peremptory denial: the fooli^ Virgins deferred to get oil into their Lamps till
was too late; and when they went to buy, the Brid^groom came, and the door was
shut, and when they begged, Lord, Lord, open to us, he answered, verily I say
unto you, I know you not; Mat. 25.10,
and what will a poor ^reature say or do in this dreadful exclusion? Have you
ever seen a prisoner at the Bar, with what importunate outcries he begs mercy,
and with what de^ection and despair he goes away when he cannot ob^ain it;
think then what horror, canfusion, and Everlasting despair shall surprise the
Souls of those lost undone creatures, who find themselves drenched in a sea of
wrath and vengeance, and cannot hope to have ^o much as one chord of mercy
thrown out to them, and that is another addition to their misery; it is not
only without any mixture of Mercy at present: But

[2.] Without any hope of mixture for the future. In this life though men be
under great troubles, they are ^eldom without hope: the Prophet Daniel heard
the ^oice of an Holy One crying, Hew down the tree and ^estroy it, yet leave
the stump of the roots in the Earth, and thus it is usually with men in this
life, says Am^rose; though the tree be cut down, and the branches ^opt off,
all they have taken from them, yet some of ^he root is left, their hope is not
quite cut off; as ^ong as there is life, there is hope, to him that is ^oyned
to the living there is hope, Eccles. 9.4.
And this is some ^upport to men in their present troubles: but in hell ^oth
root and branch, and all hope are quite cut off. Bid observes, that God has
made three places, and ^n each of them has placed two things: in Heaven ^e
has placed Verity and Eternity; on Earth, Curio^ity and Repentance; in Hell,
Misery and Despair: and ^s Hell is the proper place of despair, so this despair
is without the least mixture of hope; what hope has the hy^ocrite, when God
takes away his soul? Job 27.8.
the Hypo^rite of all other wicked men is usually most confident, making no
question, and thinking much that any other should question his title to Heaven:
but when the hypocrite shall be turned into hell, with all the peop^ that
forget God, all his hopes will be quickly confuted what hope has the hypocrite
when God takes awa^ his Soul? could a man speak with such a Son of confidence
after he has been some time in hell and ask him, whether he were as confident
a^ before? Oh, what a sad and doleful answer would he return, how would he
befool himself, and cry out against his former presumption and credulity, the
greater his hopes were before, the greater now will be hi^ confusion: Hope
deferred makes the heart faint, says Solomon: much more, hope frustrated. When
Aha^suerus asked Haman, What shall be done to the man who^ the King delighteh
to honor? he presuming that himself was most likely to be the man, names the
highest honors that could fall within the compass of hi^ thoughts: but when he
saw that himself was laid aside and this honor done to Mordecai his great
enemy think what a dump this was to him; and accordingly you read, how he went
home to his house, an^ told his wife and friends what had befallen him. A man
who has a suit at Law, and is beforehand confident he shall have the day: if
when the time come he finds himself cast, this makes his grief so much
greater, by how much his confidence was greater before: and for him that was
confident of Heaven, t^ be doomed to Hell: for him that made no question of
finding mercy, now on the sudden to find himself past all hopes of mercy, this
is that which will double his damnation, and make his condition far more
miserable. It is said of the hypocrite, that his hope shall be cut off, and his
trust be as a Spiders web: Job 8.14.
the Spider spends much time, and takes much pains in the weaving of her web;
some say, every morning before she looks out for her prey, she first mend^s he^
broken web, which she industriously spins out of her own bowels, when all on
the sudden by the sweep of a beesome, or some other way, her labor is spoiled,
her web broken down, and perhaps her self killed in her own web; thus the
hypocrite takes much pains to nourish in himself a vain deluded hope; he
prays, reads, hears, fasteth, and in regard of outward performances
seems to outstrip the devoutest Christian; if the Believer with Cushi runs he
like Ahim^az will outrun him; for thus the Meteor, for the time, makes a
greater blaze than the fixed star; the Drone has a greater body, seems a
more beautiful creature than the Be, flies oftener, and with a greater noise,
and humming in and out of the Hive: the dead body is greater and longer than
the same body when alive; and thus the hypocrite in regard of outward
profession and performance of Duties, seems to go beyond the true Nathaniel: by
which means he does not only deceive others, but himself also, concluding, he
is as sure of heaven, as if he had one foot there already; but no sooner does
death cut asunder the thread of his life, but it cuts off all his hopes, leaving
him in a hopeless, helpless, and remediless condition. The eyes of the wicked
shall fail, and his hope shall be as the giveing up of the ghost Job 11.20.
: as the comparison holds in some other respects, so in this: at the giving up
the Ghost, when the soul quits this earthly tabernacle, it never returns
again to live here with it in this world; so when the hope of a wicked man
departs at death; it takes an everlasting farewell of the soul, and is
swallowed up in desperation.

[3.] Without any mixture of pity: to him that is afflicted, pity should be
shown from his friend Job 6.14.
, And usually we do pity men in their misery, even Malefactors in their justly
deserved executions: but this shall not the damned find.

1. They shall have no pity from God, he that mad^ them, will show them no
pity; nay, so far is God from pitying them, that their punishment is an ease to
him Isa. 1.24.
I will ease me of my adversaries: it is his desire to punish them; It is in my
desire that I should chastise them: Hos. 10.10.
it is a comfort to him; I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted Ezekiel. 5.13.
; it is a rejoicing to him; I will rejoice over you to destroy you, and bring
you to naught Deuteronomy. 28.63.
, Once more, it is a matter o^ laughter to him: I will laugh at their
destruction Prove. 1.26.
: what God speaks with laughing, Do thou read with trembling: Woe, and a
thousand woes to that man whose destruction is a matter of laughter to Almighty
God! What can be more sad and dreadful^ than when the God of mercy shall so far
abandon al^ pity, as to laugh at the destruction of his own creatures?

2. No pity from the Angels or Saints. Dives begged but one drop of water to
cool his tongue: Alas, what were one drop of water against a whole furnace of
fire? but this he cannot obtain, not so much as one drop of cooling water
against a whole stream of scalding Brimstone; then he begs to have one sent
from the dead to preach to his Brethren, but is denied by Abraham in that also;
he begs it again, and is denied again: and this will be a further addition to
the misery of those lost forlorn creatures. There was at Isenacus a Play Mel.
Adam in vit. Gobelini.
or Interlude acted before Frederick the Prince of that place, in which was
represented the five wise, and five foolish Virgins: the wise Virgins were
presented to be the Virgin Mary, and four other Virgins sainted by the Papists;
the foolish Virgins come, and entreat them to give them of their oil: that is,
as the Actor presented it, to intercede to God for them, that they might ^e
admitted into the Marriage-Chamber, into Heaven; ^ut the wise Virgins
peremptorily denied them, and bid them go, and buy for themselves. They beg
again, and are denied again: they knock, and weep, and importune with miserable
outcries, but all in vain; which the Prince seeing, was so astonished, that he
presently fell into a grievous sickness, crying out, To what end is Christian
Faith, if neith r Mary, n^r any other Saint, can be entreated to intercede for
them that sue to them? To what purpose are those merits, and good works so much
cried up amongst us? And this apprehension that they should beg so
importunately, and yet be denied, did so seize upon him, that he sell forthwith
into a fit of the Apoplexy, of which he dyed within four days after. If he was
thus astonished to fee this but acted in a Play: how terrible will it be when
this and much more shall be done in deed, and good earnest? if he were thus
troubled to see others denied, when it concerned not himself; how sadly will
this be resented when poor creatures shall find themselves thus dealt with?
when the Saints in Heaven shall be so far from pitying them, that they shall
rejoice in their destruction; The Lord shall destroy thee for ever: the
righteous also shall see this, and fear, and shall laugh him to scorn; The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: Psalm. 52.5. and 58.10.
here it is a matter of lamentation to good men, to see desperate sinners
running headlong upon their own damnation, and woefully embruing their hands in
the blood of their own souls. Lots righteous soul was vexed with the filthy
conversation of the Sodomites: Jeremiahs soul wept in secret for the pride of
the Jews, and wished that he had in the Wilderness a place of wayfaring men,
to leave his people, because they were all Adulterers and Adulteresses: but
when God at the last day shall clear his Justice in the just condemnation of
ungodly men, they shall not only approve of the equity of Gods proceedings:
but according to the forenamed Texts, it will be a matter o^ rejoicing to them.

3. They shall have no pity from the Devils, and their fellow-damned
Companions: but on the contrary, those who now tempt and draw them to sin, will
then insult in their torments, They shall be an abhorring to all flesh. Isa.
66.24.


4. They shall not so much as pity themselves: the Scripture Speaks, of
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: heavy cheer, (says Latimer) where
weeping and wailing is served-up for the first course, and gnashing of teeth,
comes in for the second! but thus it will be in Hell, as they shall weep, and
wail for their misery; so they shall gnash their teeth, at their own folly, and
shall be filled with such a hellish rage against themselves, that they will
never cease to vex and torment themselves.

CHAP. VIII. Of Lamentation for those at ease and careless of Eternity, from
three several Aggravations: with Expostulations.
1. THe Doctrinal* part being handled, the Application follows, which I mainly
intend. Socrates is said to bring down Philosophy from Heaven, because he first
reduced it unto practice; and certainly, that preaching is best, which comes
nearest to the end of preaching, which is to excite men to a practical
improvement of divine Truths, and I know no one truth more capable of a more
close Application, than this of Eternity: That therefore, I now come to.

1. Hence have we ground, I know not whether of reprehension, or lamentation;
or whether of lamentation, or astonishment: If this be a certain truth, that
there is an eternal condition of every man after this life: that every man,
must after a short time enter upon an eternity, either of happiness or misery:
Then behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; tremble ye men and women that
are at ease in Sion, who live as if you had no Souls to look after, as if there
were neither a Heaven to be cared for; nor a Hell to be feared, nor any being
of man after this life; yea all ye that pass by, behold, and see, and stand
astonished at the desperate sottishness of the Sons of men: when our Savior
told the Woman of the Water he gave, of which, whosoever drinks shall never
thirst; she beggs, Sir, give me this water Joh. 4.
, when he speaks of the bread that comes down from Heaven, and gives life to
the world; the Jews cried, Lord evermore give us this bread Joh. 6.
: and truly it might be expected, that when men hear of the eternity of
happiness in Heaven, they should be so affected with it, that some, as
conscious of their former carelessness, should with Ephraim, smite upon the
Thigh, and passionately bewail their neglect of so great Salvation; that
others, with those Gospel-Converts, should ask, What shall we do that we might
inherit eternal life? that others, as full of Heavenly admiration, should stand
like the Cherubins with bowed faces, as desiring to pry further into this
mystery; that others, as Naaman, when he was cured, went away resolving to
serve no other God, but the God of Israel; so they should take up peremptory
resolutions, to make it their great business to get interest in this happiness.
On the other side, one would think, that when men hear of the eternity of
Hell Torments, they should almost think, and speak, and enquire after nothing
else, but how they should flee from the Wrath to come, that they would run up
and down, from one Minister to another: and from one Christian to another,
enquiring what they should do to escape the damnation of Hell; all this might
be expected: But alas, who has believed our report? or, to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed?

Oh fools and slow of heart, to believe what the Scripture has spoken, and
what Ministers preach Isidor.
! It was the complaint of one, That eternal happiness in Heaven is every way
unspeakably great, and is freely offered to us; and yet, who spends so much as
one hour in the meditation and pursuit of it? Who is it that talks of it to
his Wife, and Children, and Family? We can riot in the praises of our Native
soil, but are ashamed to speak of our Heavenly Country, our everlasting Home;
in the things of this life, our Understandings are quick enough to conceive
them; our hearts to embrace them; our tongues to speak of them: but in the
things of Eternity, how deep is our silence? how slow our speech? How seldom
our Meditations? and as the same Author adds: we forsake the eternal
happiness in Heaven, for earthly things, which will soon forsake us; and though
this, as barely considered in it self, be so great a sottishness, as can never
be enough lamented, yet it may be further aggravated from these following
Considerations:

1. If we consider how frequently and earnestly, men are called upon, to make
provision for Eternity: It was John Baptist's pathetical expostulation, O
Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come Mat.
3.7.
; I would ask, who has not warned you? which of Gods faithful Ministers, or
what Sermon almost is it, in which they do not either directly or
consequentially, make this the great business they preach, and press upon you?
and when they Preach, they desire to do it in the most powerful and moving way
they are able: when they preach of Heaven and eternal happiness, they strive to
speak in a silken dialect, clothing their speech with the soft raiment of the
most pleasing, and winning Expressions, so as the Pulpit seems to be another
Mount Olivet, full of delight and sweetness: when they Preach the terrors of
the Lord, the damnation of Hell; they strive (if possible) not to speak Stone
only, (as he said) but Thunderbolts; desiring, that every sentence might fall
like a clap of Thunder, rending in pieces the adamantine hearts of men. The
Philosopher says, that men continually breathe fire, though it be not seen:
and when they preach of Hell, they desire (if possible) to breathe flames, that
they might thaw a frozen Generation, and scare men out of their sins, by
throwing some flashes of Hell into their Consciences: so as the Pulpit seems to
be as another Sinai, where there is nothing but fire, and lightning, and
thunder: When they go about to persuade men to flee from the Wrath to come; and
lay up treasure in Heaven; they bring Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept:
studying what Arguments, and Motives to use, making choice of such as are most
taking and prevailing with their hearts: to Arguments they add Entreaties,
beseeching men by the love of God, and love to their own Souls, and whatsoever
may be dear, and precious to men: that they would not neglect so great
Salvation: they leave no imaginable means unattempted, become all to all men,
if they may by any means save some: desiring nothing more, than to see of the
Travel of their Souls: when they see they cannot prevail, that Israel is not
gathered, they go away discouraged, crying with the Prophet, My leanness, my
leanness, woe is me; I can do no more good Isa. 24.16.
: and are sometimes ready to resolve with the Prophet Jeremy, I will Prophecy
no more in the name of the Lord, as fearing lest God has sent them, as he did
the Prophet Isaiah, to make the hearts of people fat, and their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they should hear, and see, and understand, and convert,
and be healed; for alas, whereunto may I liken the men of this Generation? they
are like unto Children, crying one to another: we have piped to you, and ye
have not danced; we have mourned, and ye have not wept: Ministers may be then
said to pipe, when they sound the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel, publishing the
glad tidings of peace, and Eternal Salvation, then to mourn, when they are
constrained to ring in men's ears, the doleful knell of their everlasting
misery; but people generally, are as little affected either with the one, or
the other, as if they were but mere fantasies: as if Heaven were but an Idea,
like Plato's Agathopolis, or Mahomet's Paradise, or Moore's Utopia; as if Hell
were but a scarecrow, set up to put an awe upon more credulous spirits.
Ministers out of their several Pulpits, cry out: Eternity, Eternity, Eternity;
and yet cannot prevail with men, to take the least care about their eternal
condition

How many be there, who have lived thirty, or forty years, under the powerful
preaching of the word, and have heard many hundred Sermons; the main drift of
which has been to exhort them to this one thing necessary; and yet it is to be
feared, the time is yet to come, with a great many, that ever they spent one
serious hour in making provision for their everlasting estate; like those, They
come, and sit, and bear the word, and seem to be affected with it, as if they
heard some pleasant song Ezekiel. 33.31.
: but they do it not; they are no more prevailed upon, as to any serious care,
and endeavor after things Eternal, than the very stones they stand on. When
Bid was old and blind, yet he would take all occasions to preach: the unhappy
boy that led him, on a time, led him amongst a Company of Stones, telling him,
there were a company of men assembled, and he preached to them; and indeed as
good preach to Stones, as to stony-hearts; there is almost as much hope to
prevail upon hard stones, as upon hard hearts; it was a strange expression
Bonaventure used upon that promise of God, I will take away the heart of stone,
and give you a heart of flesh: Lord, says he, I will none of this promise,
none of this heart of flesh, let me have my heart of stone still.

I read the Altar at Bethel clave asunder at the words of the Prophet: when
Jeroboams heart continued hard; the stones rent in pieces at the death of
Christ: when the hard-hearted Jews were not affected, let me rather have a
heart of stone than such a heart of flesh: and indeed it is true in his sense,
no stone so hard and unmalleable as the stupid heart of man, and that is the
reason of those frequent Apostrophes in Scripture, whereby God turning from a
stubborn people, applies his speech to the senseless creatures: Hear, O
Heavens, and give ear O earth; Hear O mountains the Lords controversy, and ye
strong foundations of the earth Isa. 1.12. Micah 6.2.
: implying, that as soon may the heavens, and earth hear, as soon may the
mountains, and foundations of the earth tremble, as a stupid, sottish people,
whom it most concerns. And that men that are so often, and earnestly called
upon, should be so little affected and wrought upon; this is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation: this is one aggravation of that stupidity which is
in men.

2. If we consider how soon men may enter upon their eternal condition, though
at present we be in health and strength, yet our strength is not the strength
of stones, nor our flesh of brass: we are frail mortal creatures, our
foundation is in the dust, our life is in our hand, our breath in our nostrils,
we carry about in our bodies the matter of a thousand deaths and may die (says
Calvin) a thousand several ways each several hour: as many senses, as many
members, nay, as many pores as there are in the body, so many Windows for death
to enter in at: Death needs not spend all is arrows upon us, a Worm, a Gnat, a
Fly, a Hair, a Stone of a Raisin, a Kernel of a Grape, the fall of a Horse,
the stumbling of a Foot, the prick of a Pin, the pairing of a Nail, the cutting
of a Corn: all these have been to others, and any one of them may be to us the
means of our death, within the space of a few days, nay, of a few hours; we may
be well, and sicken, and die, and forthwith enter upon our Eternal estate:
Death being the Door of Eternity, forthwith transmitting us to an eternity
either of joy, or torment: and truly one would think that this consideration
should prevail with men, to make some timely provision for their future estate.
Cato had many times moved in the Senate, that Carthage which had been so
offensive to them might be destroyed, but could not prevail, being still
opposed by Scipio; On a time he brought a Fig with him into the Senate, telling
them, that that Fig was three days before growing in Carthage, and that for
ought they knew, an Army from Carthage in as short a time might arrive at their
Gates; upon which, the Senate considering the suddenness of the danger they
might be in, gave order for the demolishing of it. Though we seem at present to
be fresh, and flourishing, like fruit growing in a fruitful ground, yet we do
not know but in a short time, perhaps within the space of three days, we may be
cropped off by death, and transmitted into another world; and therefore should be
so wise as to make provision for our future estate, both by dying to sin, which
otherwise will be the death of our Souls, and by the use of all other means
conducing thereunto: but that notwithstanding this great uncertainty, men
should live as if they were to live always, should put off the thoughts of
death, as if they should never die, should content themselves to live in that
condition in which they dare not die, or in which if they should die, they
should be eternally miserable; this argues as great a folly and stupidity, as
the nature of man is capable of.

Thou would be troubled, if thou certainly knew thou were to live but one
month longer; and art thou not affected, when perhaps thou shall not cut-live
one day Fleres, si scires unum tua tempora mensem, Rides, cum non sit forsitan
una dies?
? Eliphaz speaking of a Vision he had, says; A thing was secretly brought me,
and mine ear received a little of it Job 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21.
: He sets it out by the time when it was made known to him; in thoughts from
Visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon upon: It is further
described by the strange effects of it; fear came upon me, and trembling, which
made all my bones to shake: He goes on to show the terror this Vision brought
upon him; A Spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood up.
Hitherto is described in what manner this secret was made known to him; but,
what was this great secret which made such an impression of fear upon him? that
is partly laid down, and proved by the fall of Angels, that much more man,
whose foundation is in the dust, must consume by little and little, and must at
last in a short time, perhaps less than from morning to evening, be cut off by
the stroke of death: but wherein (as one descants upon it) lies this high
point of secrecy? for man to die, and that oftentimes suddenly, is no such rare
thing as seems here to be pointed at: surely that wherein that great mystery
chiefly consisted, lies in this: that though man must die, and many times
dies suddenly, yet all this is little laid to heart, either by others: They
are destroyed from morning to evening, they perish for ever without any
regarding it; nor yet by themselves: does no^ their excellency go away? they
dye even without wisdom: and that men's time should be so short, their life so
uncertain, as many times to be taken away in the space of one day: and that
neither others should lay it to heart, nor men themselves should learn wisdom
to make any suitable preparation; this is spoken of as a strange remarkable
thing: a thing to be justly wondered at, that there should be such prodigious
sottishness in the hearts of men.

3. If we consider how many things there are that seem to mind us of death, and
of making provision for another world. Are not our boots, shoes, gloves, made
of the skins of dead Beasts? Our hats, clothes, stockings, of the hair, or
wool of dead creatures? Is not our food chiefly upon those creatures that first
die, before they become our nourishment; and yet, behold another ensuing death;
these clothes we wear, soon wear out; these meats we eat, are soon cast into
the draught, and nature calls for a fresh supply: If from hence we look upon
things about us; the Vine feels as many deaths as winters; and notwithstanding
all our pruning and care, seldom lasts above sixty or seventy years: The like
may be said of the Trees of Pears, Apples, Plumbs, and other fruits; which
though carefully looked after, do not usually continue above fifty or sixty
years; whereas Oaks, and other Trees, which last long, commonly grow further
off from our Habitations: The sensitive creatures, that live amongst us, do not
long continue with us; the Horse seldom out-lives twenty years: it is much if
the Dog lives so long: the Ox, if not slain before, usually dies by fifteen,
or sixteen: the Sheep by nine or ten; many other Creatures in a shorter time:
And how many Creatures are there, which are but of one days continuance? the
same days Sun, which gave them life at its uprising, takes it away at its
setting: And when there are so many things to mind us of our latter end, think
what a stupidity it is, to make no preparation for it; as Seneca excellently,
Whence is it we should no more think of Death, when there are so many Deaths
about us? Or, if from other Creatures, we cast our eyes upon other Men; Job
says of the wicked man Job 21.32, 33.
, He shall be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the Tomb, and every man
shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him: Death is the end of
all flesh, the Grave the house appointed for all living; there are few weeks
pass over our heads, but we either hear the knell of Death ringing in our Ears,
or have some spectacle of Death presented to our eyes; and when others ars
snatched away by Death, the living should lay it to heart Eccl. 7.2.
, when Amasa's dead body lay in the way, the people made a stop at it; in like
manner, when we see, or hear of the death of any, we should consider what
befalls them, and must e're long befall us; Jonathan shot Arrows to admonish
David of Saul's intent to kill him; when God causes the Arrows of death to fall
on the right hand, and on the left, we should look at them, as so many Arrows
shot from Heaven to warn us. But how few be there that consider the works of
the Lord; the Psalmist says of wicked men, like sheep they are laid in the
Grave Psalm. 49.14.
; the old Translation reads it, they lie in Hell like sheep; Sheep that are put
into a fat pasture, though the Butcher comes, and takes out, first one, then a
second, after, a third, and fourth, and carries to the shambles, yet the rest
not knowing what is become of their fellows, feed securely; and with much
delight skip up and down in the green pastures, till they also are fetched
away, and carried to the slaughter. There is a bird in Ireland they call the
Cock of the Wood, they fly together in thick Woods, so as it is hard to find
them, but being once found, they are easily killed, if one or two be shot, the
rest fly no further than to the next tree; where they sit staring upon the
shooter, till the whole Covey be destroyed: in like manner, it is with the
secure, besotted sinners; the Arrows of Death light on this, and that side, now
one is snatched away, and goes to his long home, soon after, a second, a
third; some perhaps are taken away in the midst of their sins, and go to their
ow^ place, having scarce time to call upon God for mercy; yet the survivours
are little affected with these examples, but do as they used to do; Dine, and
Sup^ at their aceustomed times; go to Bed, and Rise after their wonted manner;
Sleep according to their old compass; suffer life to slip from them, and death
to steal upon them, and Judgment to overtake them, without taking any care to
make provision for their future estate: and that Gods hand should be lifted up,
and men not see; that the rod should speak, and they not hear, but continue
deaf amongst so many Alarms of Death; this is another thing, that much
aggravates the desperate sottishness of these persons.

Having thus showed the lamentable blockishness o^ the greatest part of men,
and the several aggravations which render it more lamentably lamentable; I
shall now desire from this truth we are treating on to expostulate a while, and
reason the case with these Sons of slumber, and confusion: Either this is so,
that man's condition after this life is eternal, or it is not so; If not so,
beside former arguments brought to prove it, what end was there of Christ's
coming into the world? what Use of Scripture? to what purpose all we call
Religion? What mean those workings of conscience, even for those secret sins
unknown to the world? what mean those outcries, and lamentations of men upon
their deathbeds, and that of the greatest Atheists; as Bion of Boristenes, who
all his life time had denied the Gods, despised their Temples, derided their
worship; yet when death came, he would rather have endured the greatest
torment, than to have dyed; and that not so much for fear of a natural death,
but for fear of what followed after; lest God whom he had denied, should give
him into the hand of the Devil, whom he had served; and therefore, at the time
of his death, he put forth his hand, crying; welcome Devil, welcome Laert.
; foolishly thinking to pacify the Devil by this flattering Salutation: And
Tully observes of Epicurus, that though no man seemed more to contemn both
God, and Death, yet no man feared more both the one, and the other: and whence
is all this, if there be no Being of man after death?

On the other side; if the eternity of man's condition be a certain truth; so as
it is not more certain, that the Sun shines, that the fire burns, that the
earth bears us, that the heavens cover us; than this is, that there is a
Heaven and eternal happiness, for the Saints; and a Hell and everlasting
punishment for incorrigible sinners; what ails the foolish hearts of men, to be
so stupidly careless in a thing of so infinite concernment.

Were it only a thing probable, that as much might be spoken against it, as for
it; yet a wise man would go the safest way: men do so in all other things, and
would do so here, if they would but act as men, according to the Principles of
Reason; and it is undoubtedly the safest way, to make a seasonable provision
for it: Yet further, suppose it were a thing only possible, that much more
might be spoken against it, than for it; yet a wise man would think, but what
if it proves to be so at last? though it seems otherwise to me, yet it may be
so; and if it prove so, what will become of me, if I wholly neglect to make
provision for it? but if it be a most certain, and undoubted truth, so as there
is nothing more certain, and undubitable; whence it is that men mind no more a
thing that so much, and so nearly concerns them? What are men's hearts made of?
When are those affections which use to be eagerly carried out upon meaner
objects? what is become of men^ intellectuals? Have they lost understanding, as
well as conscience? Have they sinned away Reason as well as Religion? Are they
as well without fear as without faith? as much without love to themselves as to
God? Is Israel a servant? Is he a home-born-slave? Why is he spoiled Jer. 2.18.
? Let me ask, Is a man a block, a bruit, a home-born fool? Why is he spoiled,
or rather does he spoil and undo himself? Dydd Abner as a fool dies; Thy hands
were not bound, nor thy foot put into fetters, says David 2 Samuel 3.
: but for a man to die eternal as a fool dies, when his hand is not bound, when
no thing besides his own carelessness, could either deprive him of eternal
happiness, or thrust him upon his everlasting ruin, this is the greatest folly
and madness that can befall a reasonable creature: Solomon says of a
generation of men, that madness is in their hearts while they live Eccles. 9.3.
; after that they go to the dead, if there be any one thing in which this
madness does more plainly appear, it is in this stupendous neglect of their
eternal welfare. The Philosopher said of the Milesians, He would not say they
were fools, but he was sure they did the same things fools use to do* men would
be loath to be counted fools or madmen, but if they spend all their time and
pains about other things, and neglect this one thing necessary, whatsoever they
seem to themselves, and whatsoever they are in other things, in this they do
the same things that fools and madmen do, and so they will one day judge of
themselves; but I pass to other uses.

CHAP. IX. Of Caution to prevent mistakes about the Adversity of the Godly, and
the Prosperity of the Wicked in this state.
2. THis point may serve by way of Caution, to keep us from stumbling at Gods
providential Dispensations, both in regard of the sufferings of Saints, and the
temporary prosperity of wicked men; What Solomon saw in his time, servants on
horseback, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth: Or, what the
Traveller said he observed at Rome, Asses flying, and Eagles creeping: the like
is to be frequently seen in the world: the Bramble is sometimes exalted, when
the Vine and Olive are passed by; Goats clamber up the Mountains of Preferment,
when the poor sheep of Christ feed below; the mud-wall is shined upon, while
Marble-pillars stand in the shade; Vile persons, like him in the Gospel, are
clad in Purple, when those of whom the world is not worthy, go up and down in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins: unprofitable Drones, who are a burden to the earth,
are often crowned with length of days, when many ingenious Spirits, who have
the eyes of the world fastened upon them, are taken away in the flower of their
age, and are cropped off like an ear of Corn. In a word, the proud are called
Happy, they that work wickedness are set up; many live in defiance against God,
and set their mouth against Heaven, thrive and prosper: and as it is, God
lays not folly to them Job 24.12.
, does not at present call them to an account for their Wickedness; when many
religious souls, who tremble at the least sin, and make conscience of every
Duty, are yet plagued all the day-long, and chastened every morning; and yet,
which is a greater evil, many times the wicked devoureth (...) man that is more
righteous than he; Pharaohs lean kin^ devour the fat kine; Fire comes out of
the Bramble, and devoureth the Cedars of Lebanon; and thi^ has been a great
stumbling block to more intelligen^ men; in so much as some have denied
Providence as Averroes, who hereupon affirmed, that God meddled not with things
here below; others have denied there is any God, as Diagoras; The occasion was
this, he had made a book of Verses, but before they were set out, one stole
them away, he suspecting the person, brought him before the Magistrate; the man
denied it upon oath, and so was quit, and afterward set them out in his own
name; Diagoras, because he was not for his theft and perjury struck with a
present Thunderbolt, forthwith turned Atheist concluding that there was no,
God: nay, we find this to have stumbled the best of the Saints: Job startles at
it; Jeremy and Habakkuk expostulated with God about it; David was ready to
conclude that he had cleansed his heart in vain, that there was no profit in
the service of God. Whereas if we go into Gods Sanctuary, we may understand the
end o^ both these sorts of men: wicked men, though they flourish for a time,
yet their end is sad, when the wicked spring as Grass, and all the workers of
iniquity do flourish Psalm. 92.7.
; it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever: the righteous, though they
suffer at present, yet their end is happy: Mark the just, behold the upright
man, the end of that man is peace Psalm. 37.37.
. Some express this by the familiar comparison of the Hawk and the Hen: the
Hawk is often transported from foreign Countries, bought at a great price,
carried upon the Fist, fed with choice diet, and has all things prepared for
her accommodation; but being once dead, she is thrown out of doors, cast upon
the dunghill, and no more care taken of her: the Hen on the other side, while
she is living, is little accounted of; she is forced even to lodge abroad in
the open air, exposed to the wind, and storms of the Winters night;
constrained to range abroad for her sustenance, pecking here and there a little
to satisfy her hunger; if she comes into the house, expecting some crumbs
falling from the Table, she is driven out with clamor, and little care taken
of her; but when she is dead, is cook't and dressed in the best manner; served up
in a Lordly Dish, and the greatest Persons make of her flesh part of their
Royal entertainments: These two creatures not unaptly resemble the two sorts of
men, the righteous, and the wicked: the Hawk resembles wicked men, who commonly
prosper in the world, and flourish like the Baytree; and therefore pride
compasses them about: how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids lifted up?
they carry themselves as if they had got a monopoly of happiness, as if the Sun
shined only in their Cell, as the Bernardine Monks boasted: but when death has
put a period to their lives, there is an end of all their happiness; and
eternal misery, like Pharaohs seven years of famine, devoureth the former years
of plenty, rendering their misery the more grievous, by the remembrance of the
happiness they once enjoyed. On the other side, good men, who are fitly
resembled by the Hen, usually meet but with course entertainment in the world,
are looked upon as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things:
their souls are exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that be at ease:
and with the contempt of the proud; but having once finished their course, they
are bound up amongst Gods Jewels; their bodies go down with hope to the
Chambers of Death, their souls are bound up in the bundle of Life, and put into
a present possession of eternal happiness; so that though in this life, wicked
men be the darlings of the world, when those of whom the world is not worthy,
are des^tute, afflicted, tormented; yet if we believe there is another life
after this, in which the righteous shall b^ eternally happy, and wicked men
everlastingly miserable this will abundantly clear the equity of Gods
proceedings in those tomporal dispensations; it is the end that crowns all;
all is well that ends well; Solomon says, The end of a thing is better than
the beginning of it; Eccles. 7.8.
and wise men esteem of things acco^ding to the last end.

A man that has a suit at Law upon which his estate depends, though in his
journey up to the Term, he be ill-horsed, meets with bad way, and for weather,
and homely lodging, yet if he succeed in his suit, he thinks this makes a
sufficient recompense whereas, let a man in his journey have never so man^
accommodations: as good way, fair weather, goo^ cheer, merry company; yet if he
be cast in h^ suit, and loses all he has, it will give him but little content
to reflect upon the pleasure of his journey Chrysostom, in one of his Homilies
to the people o^ Antioch, tells of himself; That he was invited t^ dinner by a
Gentleman, ^^e City, but not knowin^ the way to his house, had a guide to
conduct him the guide to gain the shortest way, carried hi^ through By-lanes
and Allies, where they met much dirt, and unsavory smells, at last they
crossed a fa^ stre^t, the goodliest street in the City, where the met with a
man accompani^d with a great number ^ people, going to his execution; coming to
the hou^ whither he was invited, and finding there goo^ Cheer, and hearty
entertainment; How much bett^ is it, (said he,) to go through dirty lanes to
good Chee^ and good Company, than to go through the fairest stree^ to the place
of Execution?

The Application is easy. Good men while they are in their journey, meet with
any difficulties and discourteous usages, but are going to a place of
happiness, and shall sit down with Ahraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven; whereas wicked men, though they go through a fair, pleasant
way; where the Devil seems to pave their way for them, that they might not so
much as dash their foot against a stone, yet they are going to execution;
having spent their days in mirth, in a moment they go down to Hell, where they
must suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire; and if so, there is little reason
why we should either think much at the present sufferings of the Saints: or
envy the temporary prosperity of worldly men.

1. There is no reason why we should think much at the Saints troubles: Austin
moves this question: whether ^t were better to eat a piece of fish, that were
made bit^er by the breaking of the gall, or to endure the tormenting pain of
the toothache, or stone, or gout, several days together, without any
mitigation, or intermission of the pain? This question says Drexelius may ^eem
a ridiculous question, for how much better were ^t (says he) to eat such a
whole fish, which could do ^ man no other hurt, but leave a bitter tang upon
the ^alate for a time, than to suffer any of these torments, ^ut the space of
one hour? all the troubles of this life, ^re but like eating such a piece of
fish, which though ^itter for the time, yet are soon over; and it is much
^etter to endure this for a short time; than to be exposed to endless and
eternal torments in Hell, therefore ^he same Father beggs: Lord, cut me, burn
me, do any thing with me here, so thou sparest me hereafter; And ^lse-where,
Let all the Devils in Hell beset me round; let ^asting macerate my body, let
sorrows oppress my mind; ^et pains consume my flesh, let watchings spend me,
and ^eat burn me, and cold freeze and contract me; let all ^hese, and
whatsoever can come more, happen to me, so as ^ may be freed from Hell, and may
enjoy my Savior in ^ternal blessedness.

And 2. There is as little reason on the other hand, why we should envy the
prosperity of ungodly men: Suppose says Chrysostom, that a man one night
should have ^ pleasant Dream, that for the time might much deligh^ him; and for
the pleasure of such a dream, should be tormented a thousand years together,
with exquisite^ torments; would any man desire to have such a dream upon such
conditions? All the contentments of this life are not so much to eternity, as a
dream is to a thousand years; and little is that man's condition to be envied
who for these short pleasures of sin must endure a^ eternity of torment In the
time of the wars in Germany, the Army being upon special service, orde^ was
given, that none should upon pain of death, g^ a forraging one soldier
notwithstanding this stric^ Command, went abroad, and amongst other thing stole
some grapes, and brought them with him; being deprehended, he was adjudged to
present death: a he went to execution, he fell to eating his Grapes: the
Commander asked, Sirrah, can you feed so heartily wh^ you are to die presently?
the poor soldier replied: S^ must I pay so dear for them, as the loss of my
life, and ^ you grudge that I should eat them? do wicked m^ purchase their
present pleasures at so dear a rate eternal torments; and do we envy their
enjoyment them so short a time? Would any envy a man going Execution, because
he saw him going up the Ladd^ in a Scarlet Coat, or a Velvet suit? What thoug^
wicked men be clothed in Scarlet, and fare delicio^^ every day, this is all
they are ever like to have: The^ is scarce a more terrible Text in the whole
Book ^ God, than that of Christ, concerning the Pharise^ Verily, I say unto
you, they have their reward Mat. 6.2. Luke 6.24.
; an^ that parallel Text, Woe to you that are rich, for you h^ received your
consolation.

Gregory, being advanced to places of great prefe^ment, professed, that there
was no Scripture went so ^ear his heart, and struck such a trembling into his
spirit, as that speech of Abraham to Dives, Son, re^ember, that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy good things; Luke 16.25.
they who have their Heaven here, are in ^reat danger to miss it hereafter: It
is not Gods usual ^ay (says Jerome) to remove from delights to delights, ^o
bestow two Heavens, one here, another afterward.

Oh how much more worthy of our pity, than envy, ^ that man's condition, who
has all his happiness con^n'd to the narrow compass of this life, but his
misery ^xtended to the uttermost bounds of an everlasting ^uration.

CHAP. X. ^ Exhortation to Restrain from Sin, and Redeem Time.
BUT that which I would chiefly insist upon, is, a Use of Exhortation; and
there are seve^l things to which we are to be exhorted from this truth. As,

[1.] This should (and being seriously considered ^ight) be a most powerful
restraint from sin; there is a ^o-fold eternity, one of happiness, the other of
misery: ^ regard of both these, the malignant, destructive ^ture of sin
appears.

First, It depriveth of eternal happiness; there is ne^r a sin thou committest,
never an oath thou swear^, never a lie thou tellest, but thou runnest a
despe^te hazard of losing God, thy soul, everlasting happi^ss, and whatsoever
may be dear, and precious; and ^ot only a desperate Hazard, but without
repentance ^ unavoidable Necessity; so as thou can have no hope of ever
seeing the Lord in the Land of the living: ever tasting how good the Lord is,
or having any p^tion in those good things, which God has provid^ for his
people; and is it not a prodigious madness lose all this, for a base lust? As
the Drunkard does ^ a pot of drink, the Covetous man, for a little thick clo^
the Swearer, for just nothing: for a sin, in whi^ there is neither profit,
pleasure, ease, nor any thi^ that might give any Satisfaction to the mind;
Perh^ some may think, If this be all, they may do well enough: Regnare nolo,
sufficit mihi salvum esse.
As some St. Austin brings in speakin^ though I miss of Heaven, I may do well
enough in a lo^ condition: wicked men now live without God ^ Christ in the
world, and think themselves well enou^ without them: and therefore may think it
no gr^ misery, not to be admitted into their presence: the care not now for the
company of Godly men, but void it all they can, and so will think it no great
mat^ to be hereafter excluded their society.

But such should do well to consider, that the ti^ is coming, when Heaven and
Hell shall divide ^ world: as there are but two sorts of men in the wor^ Goats
and Sheep, Chaff and Wheat, Righteous and Wi^ed; so there are but two places
remaining for the^ the Wheat to be gathered into Gods Garner, and ^ Chaff to be
burnt with unquenchable fire; the S^ to stand at Christ's right hand, with a
come ye bles^ etc. the Goats at his left hand, with a go ye cursed, ^ Besides
these, there is no other place, no other con^tion remaining for men after this
life; if thou lo^ Heaven, Hell must be thy portion: And this she^ further, the
devilish nature of sin; it does not o^ deprive of Heaven, but without
repentance, unavoi^ably throws the Soul into the jaws of Eternal Comdemnation:
Some say, a Man and a Crocodile seldom, ^ never meet, but it is the death of
one; It is certa^ ^n and the soul never meet, but one dies; either sin ^ust
dye now, or the soul dye eternally: if repentance that Spirit of burning, does
not burn our sins, Hell ^re will burn our Souls. If then thou make no ^reat
matter of losing Heaven, and being excluded the ^resence of God; think with thy
self, whether thou ^eest able to lie for ever under the Arrests of Gods Wrath;
and to dwell with everlasting burnings; Per^aps, thou art hardly able to bear
those temporal af^lictions now lying upon thee, and if thou have run with the
footmen, and they have wearied thee, how will thou be able to contend with
Horses? If thou ^eest wearied out in this Land of peace, how wilt ^hou do in
the swellings of Jordan, where all the waves of God shall pass over thee; where
thou shall ^e like a Beacon on a hill, or an Ensign upon the moun^ain, exposed
to all the Storms, and Tempests of Gods Wrath? When therefore, thou find thy
self ^empted to any sin, and thy heart ready to close with ^he temptation,
pause a while, and propound to thy ^elf, this unanswerable Dilemma: If I yield
to this ^emptation, and commit this sin, either I shall repent, ^r not repent
of it: If I do repent, and the best be ^ade of it, may not the short pleasure
of this one sin ^ost me many days and weeks sorrow: nay, perhaps ^ake me go
all my life, in the bitterness of my soul? ^f I do not repent, woe to me that
ever I committed it! will not this one sin increase the flames of my justly
^eserved torments? and add to those treasures of wrath ^ have been so long
heaping up? Pachomius has ^his excellent saying, Above all things, let us
every ^ay think of our last day; Let us in time think of E^ernity, and what he
pressed upon others, he practiced himself, and amongst others found this
advan^age by it; when any sinful thought, or motion a^ose in his heart, he
suppressed it with the thoughts of Eternity; if it rose and rebelled again, he
knocked ^t down with the thoughts of Eternal torments. The fool makes a mock
of sin, (says Solomon,) but wou^ the fool consider what sin will cost; would
he the kick against the pricks? would he be so fool-hard as to play with
flames? and make a sport of everlas^ing burnings? if that Saying so well known,
were ^ well considered, that is acted in a moment, which mu^ be mourned for to
Eternity: and that other of Gregory, the sin that pleases is momentary, but
the punishment it brings, is Eternal; we would rather chu^ to leap into a
Cauldron of scalding Lead, than wilingly commit any one sin. Let this then be
one Use w^ make of this point, so to set the thoughts of Eterni^ before us,
that we might not sin against God.

(2.) We should be exhorted hence to spend our time wel^ of all those talents
with which God has entrusted u^ there is none more precious, than that of
Time. Go orders, That if two men strive together, and one woun^ the other,
that he keeps his Bed, he that wounded him m^ as well pay for the loss of his
time, as for the cure of ^ wound Exodus 21.19.
; How little soever we make of the loss of tim^ God esteems it among the
greatest losses.

We read of an admirable Vision revealed to S^ John Rev. 10.1, 2, 3, 5, 6.
, He saw a mighty Angel, by which interpreters generally understand Christ the
Angel of the Cov^nant; this Angel is said to come down from Heaven, cloat^ed
with a Cloud, and a Rainbow upon his head, havin^ his Face as if it were the
Sun, and his Feet as Pillars ^ Fire. All which shows the transcendent Glory
of his appearing; Who is said to set his right Foot up^ the Sea, and his left
Foot upon the Earth: which notes his Universal Sovereignty over Sea and Land;
He is said to cry with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth; and to lift up his
Hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever; and certainly
i^ must be a matter of some great concernment, that is ushered in by so many
remarkable circumstances: men indeed sometimes raise the expectations of
people, when after a noise of the mountains bringing forth, a ridiculous mouse
creeps out: but God does not thus use to deceive the expectations of his
people: such great preparations as are here described, are always attended with
some remarkable thing suitable to such preparations; now what this great thing
was, follows: He swear by him that lives for ever; that time shall be no
longer; whether it be meant of time in general, as some contend, or of the time
of Antichrists rage, and the Churches suffering, as others think more probable,
either serves to inform us of what great worth time is, and what a great
punishment it is to be deprived of it.

Much more might be spoken of the preciousness of time, as that it is the fruit
of Christ's purchase; that doom passed upon Adam, in the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death, had been immediately upon his sin put in
execution, had not God given Christ to interpose between his wrath and man's
sin: that there was any time given him; it was not only through Gods
indulgence, but through the purchase of Christ's blood.

But to come more near the business in hand; the preciousness of time chiefly
appears, in regard of what depends upon it; all things receive their worth
and value, from what depends on them, and the Use they may be put to: A Bond,
or a man's Will, as it is a piece of written Parchment, is scarce worth one
shilling, yet an Estate of many thousands may depend upon them: therefore men
are as careful of them, as of their choicest Jewels. In like manner, time,
though, as simply considered in its self, it be not so precious, yet is it
infinitely precious in regard of what depends upon it; what more necessary than
repentance? yet that depends upon time, I gave her space to repent of her
Fornications Rev. 2.21.
; what more desirable than the favor of God? This depend upon time, and is
therefore called the acceptable time Isa. 49.8.
What more excellent than salvation? this likewise depends upon time, Now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation 2 Cor. 6.4.
, Pythagoras says, that Time is the soul of Heaven; we may rather say that it
is the way to Heaven, the Pledge and earnest of Salvation Pignus and arrha
coeli.
: But to come more near, what can there be of more weight and moment than
eternity? it is (as was before asserted) the Heaven of Heaven, and the very
Hell of Hell; without which, neither would Heaven he so desirable, nor Hell so
formidable; Now this depends upon Time. Time is the Prologue to Eternity; the
great weight of Eternity hangs upon the small wire of Time; whether ou^ time
here be longer, or shorter; upon the spending of this, depends either the
bliss or the bane of body and soul to eternity: This is our seed-time,
eternity is the harvest; whatsoever seed we sow, whether of sin, or grace, it
comes up in eternity; whatseever a man sows, the same shall he reap, this is
our market time, in which, if we be wise Merchants we may make a happy exchange
of Earth for Heaven of a Valley of tears, for a Paradise of delights: I^ is our
working time; I must work the work of him that sent me, whilst it is day, the
night comes when no man can work John 9.4.
, according as the work is we do now, such will be our wages in Eternity: It is
the time of our reprival, being all in a state of condemnation, bor^ heirs of
Hell; God is pleased to give us this time to make us our peace, and sue out our
pardon; if we improve it to this end, we may not only flee from the wrath to
come, but provide for our selves a wide and large entrance into Heaven; but if
we mis-spend this term, it is so a forbearing, that it is also an augmentation
of our punishment; the longer we live, the more wrath do we treasure up: Gods
wrath is like a great bell, that is long in raising, but being up, it gives a
dreadful sound: The Heathen Poet could say, Gods Mill is not presently going,
but when it goes, it grinds all to dust and powder (...).
: if we ravel out this time in idleness and vanity, it would have been better
for us we had never had it, better if we had been sent to Hell as soon as ever
we beheld the light of Heaven. Infinitely therefore does it concern us to
improve this time to the end it is given us, to agree with our adversary
quickly while we are in the way, lest he deliver us to the judge, and we be
cast into Prison, to lie there till we have paid the uttermost farthing; in the
ordinary passages of our lives, we do more or less esteem of time, as the
business that depends upon it, is of more or less consequence. When we are cast
into straits of time, and have some business of great concernment, which must
be done in that time, or not done at all; in this case we account every minut
precious, and had rather lose a whole day at another time, than an hour now;
thus this present time being given us to make provision for Eternity; every
parcel of time is as much worth, as Heaven is worth, and Eternity is worth;
some one hour of time in regard of the concernment of it, may be as much, and
much more than all that eternity of duration which we are to enter upon after
this life; one hour rightly improved, may procure more favor from God, and
more mercy to our souls, than we can ever hope to attain, during that infinite
duration that does await us; one sigh flowing from a broken heart, one penitent
tear falling from the eye, may through mercy prevail to discharge that great
debt of sin, which all the flames in Hell cannot expiate to all eternity. How
strongly then should that foundation be laid, that has such a building as
Eternity to be built upon it? How carefully should that anchor be cast, that is
entrusted with a vessel so richly laden, as our everlasting condition?

Bellarmine tells of an University, where those, who were to proceed Doctors,
had certain hard questions given them to resolve: and four and twenty hours
allowed them to study for their answer, and according to the resolution they
gave, they were either to receive their degree with honor and applause, or to
be sent away with shame; and those probationers, a^ he observes, would for
that time sequester themselves from company, shut up themselves in their study,
scarce allowing themselves time to eat, or sleep spending the whole time in
studying to resolve thos^ questions: The time we here spend, whether longer or
shorter, is given us by God to provide for our everlasting condition; and
seeing upon the improvemen^ of this time depends an eternity, either of bliss
o^ woe, what manner of persons ought we to be? how careful to pass the time of
our sojourning here? Suppose a man by some misdemeanour had forfeited hi^
estate and life, and that upon much intercession hi^ Prince should cause an
hourglass to be turned, an^ set him some work to do, telling him, if he spent
tha^ hour well, he should not only be freed from death but should be advanced
to some great preferment; ^ he loitered away that time, he should be put to
e^quisite tortures; it is not to be doubted, but such a^ one would improve that
hour to the uttermost of h^ power, an hour is not so little to a man's whole
life, a^ this life is to eternity; yet upon the spending of this depends our
everlasting weal, or woe; eternal life is now either gotten or for ever lost;
and if this were seriously considered, it would be a forcible motive to make us
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time; though time
it self last not, yet whatsoeve^ is everlasting depends upon it, and
therefore should be carefully improved to the best advantage.

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to look on Eternal things, by our Meditations,
Expressions, Affections of Desire, Hope, Love, Delight, and Endeavors.
3. BE Exh^rted to look to the things that are Eternal; this is that the Text
speaks to, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal; and being the duty of the Text, I shall the
more enlarge in speaking to it; it is chiefly meant of the Eternal happiness in
Heaven, as appears by the words before, our light affliction which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory: To
that therefore I shall chiefly speak, and there are two things I shall do, if
God permit: First, show what is meant by looking to things eternal, or how we
are to look to them; and then lay down some quickening motives to engage us to
it; take the first in these particulars:

[1.] We should look to them in our thoughts, and make these unseen, eternal
things, the continual subject of our meditations; it should be our morning
thoughts, our evening thoughts, our night thoughts, our solitary thoughts when
we are alone, indeed our continual thoughts, what shall become of us to
eternity? they say at the consecration of a Pope, amongst other ceremonies, a
Herald proclaims these words before him, Have in thy mind the years of
Eternity. Think of eternity, was the Motto of Meursius, a learned man
aeternitatem cogita.
, and has been of many others; some writing it in their Books, some upon the
wall of their closet, some upon some door in their house, that they might upon
all occasions be minded of it; neither is there any thing that does more
deservedly challenge our more serious meditations: we should every day set some
time aside to retire into some secret place, such as Isaac's fields, o^ David's
Closet, or Cornelius his Leads, and there to think of our eternal condition:
Thus it was with David, or whoever was the Penman of the 77 Psalm, ver. 5. I
have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times; it is in the
Original, the years of Ages, and so the vulgar Translation reads it. I had
the years of Eternity in my mind, and to the same purpose both the Syriack and
Aethiopick Versions; and it seems, he was so taken up with these thoughts, that
he could not sleep; in the verse before, Thou hold mine eyes waking, in the
Original, Thou have held the watchings of mine eyes, or as the vulgar, Mine
eyes have prevented the night watches. It is said of an eminently religeous
Minister Mr. Ward.
, that being at dinner with some company, he sat silent for a good space of
time, so as his friends wondered what he was musing on, o^ the sudden he cried
out, Oh, for ever, for ever, for ever, and so continued almost a quarter of an
hour together, and could not be taken off, but still cried out, for ever, for
ever: Eternity is a thing of that amazing nature, that it may well swallow up
our thoughts when once engaged in the meditation of it: while then others mind
earthly things, let our thoughts be taken up with this; let us impose it upon
our selves as a daily task, and suffer no day to pass us, but to set aside some
time for so profitable a study.

(1.) Let us think what Eternity is, and run over it our thoughts the several
particulars before mentioned; that it is without any end, succession, wasting,
intermission, mixture, all which set forth the unspeakable concernment of it:
then reflect upon that twofold Eternity; think what a blessed thing it is to
live in the presence of God and Christ, and the blessed Spirit, to sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest of the Saints in the Kingdom of
Heaven, to be made partakers of those joys that no eye has seen, no heart can
conceive: think on the other side, what a dreadful thing it is to be for ever
banished the presence of God, and Angels, and Saints, to be shut up eternally
under chains of darkness, where a man shall see nothing but the flames of his
own torments, hear nothing but howlings and lamentations, feel nothing but
extremity of torment; Yet further, let us not content our selves to have some
flitting transient thoughts about these things, but let us dwell upon them,
till such time as we have warmed our hearts with these considerations: there is
a twofold meditation of things, one in the light, another in the heat; one in
the understanding, the other in the heart and affections; we should not think
it enough to engage our understandings in a speculative contemplation, but
should dwell upon these thoughts till we have wrought up our hearts to a
suitable temper; as a man that in the morning takes some Physical drink, will
eat nothing two or three hours after, till it has had some kindly operation;
so having had some serious thoughts upon Eternity, we should take heed that no
intervening occasions justle these out of our minds, but suffer them to stay
till our hearts are thoroughly affected with them; that being done, proceed we
one step further.

(2.) To apply all this to our selves: to consider that we are the men who are
concerned in it, that after a short time we must certainly enter upon one of
these two conditions: and accordingly to bespeak our selves in this, or the
like manner: Oh my Soul! which of these is like to be thy condition? for
temporals I am well enough, but what are my Eternals? at present God has cast
my lot in a fair ground, I have house, lands, orchards, gardens, and other
things, not only for necessity, but delight; but hence I must; and whither
then? after I am gone hence I shall return no more to my house, my place shall
know me no more: and what dwelling shall I have when I part with this? shall I
dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and rest in his Ho^ Hill? or must I dwell with
devouring fire, and Eve^lasting burnings?

I have now Wife, Children, Friends, who are ready to accompany me when I am
solitary, to advise m^ when I am in straits, to comfort me when I am i^
heaviness, to tend me when I am sick, and perfor^ other offices of love and
kindness; but time is comin^ when I must part with them, when there will be a^
end put to these relations, so as I shall be no longer husband to the wife of
my love, nor father to the fru^ of my own loins; and when I am taken away from
them, what company shall I then have? shall I go t^ an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the first born, to the spirits of
just men man perfect? or must I take up my abode in Hell, where shall for ever
company with Devils, and damned spirits I am well provided for the things of
this life, meat drink, clothes, money, lands, and other accommodations; but
what provision have I made for my immortal Soul? what assurance have I that it
shall be we^ with me when I go hence? in these temporal things desire the best
assurance that may be had, thinking can never be sure enough, but what evidence
have for Heaven? what ground to conclude that that sha^ be the place of my
everlasting abode? If thou be no^ resolved to think well on thy condition,
whether good or bad, but would know whether thou shall live or di^ eternally,
summon thy self often to such thoughts a^ these, and deal seriously and
impartially with thy own soul; if after these enquiries thou be able to make
it out upon good ground, that thou have title to eternal blessedness, rejoice
in it, bless God for it; say as David once, Lord what am I that thou have
brought me hitherto? that thou have taken me out of the womb of nothing, and
given me a Being amongst thy creatures; that thou have not only made me a
creature, but a new creature; that thou have made me of a chil^ of wrath, a son
of thy adoption; what am I, that thou have done this for me? but as if all this
were a small thing in thy sight, thou have spoken of thy servant for a great
time to come, even to Eternity, and is this the manner of men? do men use to
deal thus? and what can thy servant say more to thee? what further happiness
can I desire of thee? Will God in very deed dwell with men? says Solomon; thou
may ask, Shall man in very deed dwell with God? shall a poor crawling worm
abide for ever with the high and lofty one, who inhabiteth Eternity? Shall this
Soul that now dwells amongst them that are enemies to peace, be one day made
the associate of Angels, and joined to the spirits of men made perfect? Shall
this vile body, this clod of earth, shine as the Sun in his greatest
brightness? Shall these eyes, these windows of vanity be admitted to see God in
all his beauty and sweetness? Shall this tongue which now so often lets fall
frothy discourses, hereafter join with that heavenly Quire, singing
Hallelu^ahs, and songs of benediction to God and the Lamb; Shall these feet
which now tread a dirty earth, afterward tread upon stars, and trace the
Streets of the New Jerusalem? When the King of Pontus in Plutarch, had married
a maid of an obscure Family, and sent to her aged father great store of all
good things: the poor man was so over-joyed, that upon all occasions he would
cry out, All this is mine: if thou be able to prove thy title to Heaven, go
round about the Heavenly Sion: tell the Towers, consider the Palaces, count
upon the several Beatitudes, the innumerable sorts of good things there
treasured up, and say to thy self, shall all this be mine? having this hope
rejoice in it, walk in the comfort of it, thou do too unworthily undervalue
thine own happiness, if thou do not live comfortably all thy days: On the
other-side, if upon enquiry thou find thou have neither lot, nor portion in
this business, bewail thy condition, sit alone, keep silence, put thy mouth in
the dust, if so be there may be an^ hope, give God and thy self no rest, till
thou ha^ ground to hope better things of thine own condition.

[2.] We should look to them in our speeches: thoug^ at some times, and some
company, men may spea^ one thing, and think another, like watermen, tha^ look
one way, and row the contrary, like those i^ the Prophet, who cry Epypt, and
look to Assyria yet there is scarce any thing, by which a man man be better
discovered, than by his constant, and usu^^ communication: The tongue is the
pulse of the Sou^ the index of the mind, as is the man, so is his
communication: Anatomists say, the heart and the tongue hang upon one string;
there is as great a proximity between the^ in a moral respect, as in their
natural posture: out (...) the abudance of the heart, the mouth speaks: Some
Physicians tell us, that in some diseases, a man's temper is as well known by
his tongue, as by his pulse or urine: it holds as true in the spiritual frame
an^ temper of the Soul. Men are usually known wha^ countrymen they are by
their language: the me^ of Gilead knew the Ephraimites by their pronunciation,
saying Sibboleth for Shibboleth: the Maid told Peter, thou art a Galilean, thy
speech bewrays thee. By this we may know whether we belong to Heaven, o^ the
World: the speech of worldly men is about worldly things, He that is of the
earth, is earthly, and speaks ^ the earth John 3.31.
; They are of the world, therefore speak the^ of the world John 4.5.
; whereas heavenly-minded Christians, who look to things eternal, make them the
great Subject of their discourses: it is a burden to the^ to be in such
company, where they hear nothing but frothy, unsavory speeches, or at best,
discourses about worldly things: whereas, discourse of Heaven, is a precious
balm to them, which does not break their head: they are glad when others say,
Let us go ^ to the house of the Lord, where they may hear some^^ing of Heaven,
and willingly embrace every occa^on to speak of it; the primitive Christians,
into ^hatsoever company they came, were still speaking ^f heaven, of a glorious
Kingdom they expected, which made the foolish Heathen tax them for ambi^ous
men, who aspired after Kingdoms; therefore ^ustin Martyr apologizeth for them:
You hearing that ^e expect a Kingdom, imagine that we lo^ok after earth^
Kingdoms: but the Kingdom we look for is not of ^his world, but is a Kingdom
above with God, and christ in heaven. While others are inquisitive about ^he
occurences of the times, or how they may grow ^ch in the world, the Believers
enquiries are about ^eavenly things: like those, Isa. 50.5. that ask the ^ay to
Sion with their faces thither-ward: Or those Gospel-Converts, who as soon as
they were wrought upon, asked, what shall we do to be saved? Or those ^oman
Ladies who would not let Jerome alone for ^sking questions; and thus it should
be with us: in ^he things that concern this life, we are ashamed that we ^re
ashamed to ask about what might be for our ad^antage, and should we not be much
more forward ^oth to enquire of others, and to discourse our selves about the
unseen eternal things in heaven? Those that fear^d the Lord, spoke often one to
another Mat. 3.16.
, The Lepers 2 King 7.
Having themselves found plenty of victuals in the Tents of the Syrians, said
one to another, this is a day of ^ood tidings: we do not well that we hold our
peace, and ^ccordingly went and told it in the City. Sampson, having ^ound
honey, did not only eat himself, but carried it ^o his father and mother. A man
that has been in a Perfumers shop, does not only partake of those sweet
^mells, but going out, they stick to his clothes, so as those that come near
him partake of those perfumes: In ^ke manner, having our selves tasted of the
heavenly gift, and smelt the sweet savor of precious ointments, we should be
ready to communicate to others what we have found, and to provoke them to taste
that the Lord is gracious; and this would be a means to engage our selves to a
more eager pursuit of heavenly things Natural bodies by motion gather heat. The
Coachman by urging forward his horses, makes his own way: in like manner, our
speaking to others, and provoking them, will set a sharper edge upon our own
affections; like the Boar that whetteth his teeth with his own foam; or the
Lion that rouseth his courage, by beating himself with his own tail.

[3.] We should look to them in our affections: we should often set our
affections on things above, not ^ things on the earth Coloss. 3.2.
, Affections are the hands of the Soul: He that has clean hands and a pure
heart Psalm. 24.4.
that is, he whose affections are clean, and heart pure; the Hands are the
keepers of the house Eccles. 12.3.
, they serve at al^ turns for all offices: therefore Epictetus says, tha^ sure
God is a great God, who has given us these hands* (...).
Amongst other Uses, they are the Instruments and Organs by which we take
things; if we take meat or drink, or any thing we want, we take it with the
hand; what the hand is to the body, that the affections are to the Soul, by
them we should lay hold upon eternal life; they are the feet of the Soul, Tak^
heed to thy feet, when thou go into the house of God* Eccles. 5.1.
It is by them the soul is carried toward things Eternal: they are the wings of
the soul; by which ^ flies to heaven as the bird to its hill. This is the great
end why God planted these affections in the soul; to place them upon such mean
objects as temporal things, is infinitely below the nobleness of the
affections. Neroes fishing for Gudgeons with a Golden hook, and digging the
earth with a Golden spade, was thought ridiculous enough by wise men; the
marriage of the Cedars with the Brambles daughter, as in Jothams parable: the
joining of a head of Gold with feet of clay, as in Nebuchadnezzars Image: the
coupling of a living man with a dead carcass, as in Mezentius his invention;
none of these so preposterous, as for the affections of an immortal soul to
prostitute themselves to so worthless objects: we should then follow Austins
counsel, to turn the water from the Bumbie into the Garden Aquam fluentem in
cloacam deducas in hortum.
; to take off our affections from things temporal, and place them upon things
eternal, which only are worthy of them, and suitable to them; but to instance
in some particular affections:

(1.) We should look to them in our desires; while others say, who will show us
any good, and have their desires eagerly carried out after worldly objects, the
desire of our souls should be after heaven, and things eternal; There is no
good Christian but goes thus far; though he may in some things come short of
what he should be, and what he should do, and be many times taken off from his
duty, yet his desire is toward God and Heaven. A Merchant may for a time
sojourn in a foreign Country to negotiate his affairs, but his desire is after
his own home; and no sooner has he dispatched his occasions, but he hastens to
his own Country; the Needle in the Compass, may be jogged another way, yet it
makes toward the North, and is in continual motion, and trepidation, till it
comes to its proper posture. A River may be turned from its course by a strong
hand, yet will be bending toward its own channel, and never leaves winding
and turning, till it works it self thither again: in like manner, a Believer
by the importunity of temptation, and the prevalency of corruption may be
unsettled for a time, and taken off from God and heaven, yet still the frame
and bent of his heart, the desire of his soul is toward God and heavenly
things; neither should we content our selves with languid desires, but strive
to screw them up to the highest pitch, so as to pant after them, as the
imbosked Heart, does after the waterbrooks: to long for them as the parched
ground gapeth after the rain.

[2.] Look to them by hope, we may say of hope, as the Apostle of faith, that
it is the evidence of things not seen: for so the same Apostle elsewhere, if we
hope for things we see not Romans 8.25.
, it is the property of hope as well as faith, to make things not seen as
visible, and things future as present to the soul. Gilead is mine, and
Mannaesseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of my head Psalm. 60.7.
, and before, I will divide Sechem, and met out the valley of Succoth: Probably
all these place were not yet in David's possession, but God had spoken in his
holiness as before, had promised them, therefore David looked upon them as
already his; in like manner heavenly things, though removed from sense, are
present to faith, and hope, and we should by the improvement of these graces,
antidate our future happiness, soar up beforehand into Heaven, solacing our
selves in those rivers of pleasure, rejoicing in the hope of the Glory of God;
and having this hope, should purify our selves, trampling under our feet the
Mo^^ of these temporal things, and live answerable to ou^ hopes and
expectations.

[3.] Look to them by love, Let no man say, (says Austin,) what Ladders or
Engines shall I climb up to Heaven by? thou ascendest by love; standing on
Earth thou art in Heaven, if thy love be placed upon God and Heaven. It is
reported of Andrew the Apostle, that being taxed by some of the Heathens, that
he did not lov^ their gods; he replied, Let me see whether your gods can make
such a Heaven, and such an Earth, and do as much for me as God has done: when
any of these temporal things begin to steal away our love, we should consider
whether they do, or can so much deserve our love, as heavenly things; if not,
we should reserve our love for the things that are most worthy of it; we should
gather up those scattered pieces of love dispersed amongst so many several
things, and place all upon Heaven and Heavenly things.

(4.) Look to them by delighting and rejoicing in them, while others have their
delight fixed upon things temporal, as the coveteous man upon the muck of the
world; as if the Curse of the Serpent were entailed upon him, to eat the dust
of the earth all the days of his life; the voluptuary upon sensual pleasures,
as if he were placed on the earth like the Leviathan in the Sea, only to take
his sport and pastime in it; the ambitious man upon Preferments, delighting to
see other men's sheaves bend to his sheaf, as it was in Joseph's dream: let our
delights be fixed upon the unseen things laid up in Heaven; let us with joy
draw water out of the wells of salvation, and with Israel, sing this song,
Spring up, oh Well, sing ye unto it Number. 21.17.
.

[4] We should look to them in our endeavors: Macedonius the Hermit retiring
into the wilderness, that he might with more freedom enjoy God, and have his
conversation in Heaven: Upon a time there came a young Gallant into the
wilderness, to hunt wild beasts, and seeing the Hermit, he rode to him,
asking him why he came into that solitary place? he desired he might have leave
to ask him the same question, why he came thither? I came hither to hunt, says
the Gentleman; and so do I, (says the Hermit) I hunt after my God. Most men
hunt after other things, the profits and preferments of the world; and many
times are with Nimrod, mighty Hunters: Hunters usually do not keep the road,
but ride over hedge and ditch, many time through Cornfieldsd, any way their
game leads them: so it is with worldly men, they care not what hedges they
break through, what gaps they make in Gods Law, and their own conscience; what
wrong they do to others, so as they may advance their own designs. Again,
Hunters stick at no pains, sometime^ ride both themselves and horses out of
breath; sometimes run till they can run no longer: with the like eagerness and
industry do worldly men pursue these things; and with the like, and far greater
eagernes^ should we hunt after God, and Heaven; we should think no pains too
much, no labor too great, so as we might attain to the end of our desires, the
salvation of our souls; this is that which is so often called for in Scripture,
Seek first the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 6.33.
; the word signifies, to seek as a man that has lost a treasure, who seeks
diligently till he find it, Strive t^ enter in at the strait gate Luke 13.29.
(...).
, i. e. Strive as wrestler^ do for mastery, or as a man striveth for life when
the pangs of death are upon him, Work out your Salvation (...), Phil. 3.12.
, it signifies, to Work accurately, and with the greatest study and care, Give
all diligence, to make your^ calling and election sure 2 Pet. 1.10. (...).
, which signifies to study and beat the brains about a thing; Labor not for
the meat that perishes, but for that meat that endures to everlasting life
Job. 6.27.
; implying, that the labor we take for these earthly things, is not worthy to
be called labor, in comparison of that we are to take for Heaven^ such labor,
and study, and striving we find the Saint to have used in the pursuit of
heavenly things. Since the days of John Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence Mat. 11.12. (...).
; they did not only use, diligence, bu^ violence, a metaphor taken from a
Castle that holds out in a siege, and is not taken but by storming; then
follows, the violent take it by force: thus Paul reach^d forth unto those
things that were before Phil. 3.14. (...)
, signifying ^he uttermost strains of the body to catch at any thing: I press
forward toward the mark for the price of the ^igh Calling; i. e. I pursue and
follow with the greatest ^agerness. He uses the same word, Acts 26.11. (...).
to express his ^age in persecuting the Saints, being exceedingly mad against
them. I persecuted them to strange Cities, the ^ame violence he showed before
in persecuting the Church, he used now in working out his Salvation; such
^arnestness and violence must we use in the pursuit of ^^ings Eternal, if ever
we would obtain them: but ^his I shall speak more to in the next Use, and
therefor shall not now anticipate.

CHAP. XII. ^f looking to Eternal things as our end, enforced by eight several
Arguments.
^ WE should look to them as our aim and end; this I conceive is chiefly meant
in the ^ext, the word signifies (...).
to look as the Archer does at ^e mark he aims at, though there may be many
things before him worth his looking on, and which ^e would look to at another
time; yet now his eye ^s upon the mark he shoots at: so it was with the
^postles; it was not temporal, but eternal things they ^oked to; They were the
mark they aimed at, the ^reat end they propounded to themselves: so, I press
^ward the mark Phil. 1.11, 14. (...).
; this he made his great work and ^usiness; whatsoever he did, he did in
tendency to his; he thought all he could do, little enough, if by any means he
might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead. And thus it should be with us,
we should loo^ upon all other things as things accessory (...).
, we should do them as if we did them not, use them as if we use^ them not;
allow them only the fragments of our time; they are things eternal that we
should mainly aim at, that should be the end we propound to our selves* there
is a twofold end, the end of the worker, that is* the Glory of God, which is
the ultimate end into which all must be resolved; and there is the end of the
work^ that is salvation: that you may receive the end of you^ faith, the
salvation of your souls. Though the glory o^ God be the great ultimate end we
should aim at, ye^ we may have respect to our own salvation, as an en^
subordinate; and things that are subordinate are not o^posed one to the other:
these two like Naomi and Rut^ go hand in hand together; whatsoever makes for
Gods Glory, conduces to our salvation; that therefore we may, nay and next to
Gods Glory ought to mak^ the end. we propound to our selves: And this being the
thing that is chiefly meant in the text; I sha^ the more enlarge my self upon
it, and the rather because it is a thing of very great import, as will appea^
from these following Considerations.

(1.) This is the great thing God looks at; there is n^thing in this world that
God so much respects (...) man; All these things have my hands made, but to the
man will I look Isa. 66.2.
, Nothing in man so much as the heart; My Son give me thy heart; that is the
M^^^ Sion which God loves above all the dwellings of Jacob; and nothing in the
heart so much as the aim a^^ end of it: it is true of God, what the Apostle
speaks of the word of God, it is a discerner of the though^ and intents of
the heart Heb. 14.12.
. Let a man's profession be never so glorious, let him be never so abundant in
the performance of duties, yet if his end be wrong, a^ his pretensions and
performances are but beautif^^ abominations in Gods esteem: Simon Magus had
been ^aptized, desired the gift of the Holy Ghost, but did not this with a
right aim and intention, but to get ^oney; therefore Peter tells him, his
heart was not ^pright in Gods sight Acts 8.21.
: On the other side, though a man's failings be many, yet if his aim and end be
^ight, if the frame and tendency of his heart be toward God, and Heaven, this
works his acceptance in Gods sight. Jehoshaphat offended greatly in his
affinity with Ahab, and the Prophet reproves him severely for it; yet withal
tells him, nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou have
prepared thy heart ^o seek God 2 Chronicles. 19.3.
. And thus Hezekiah describes the ^incerity of those that came to the
Passover, The ^ood Lord be merciful to every one whose heart is set to ^eek
the God of his Father, although his heart be not clean^d according to the
purification of the Sanctuary; 2. Chron. 30.8.
al^hough they failed in that particular, yet their heart ^eing set upon God,
that both delared their since^ity, and wrought their acceptance. Barnabas
exhorts ^he Christians at Antioch that with full purpose of heart ^hey would
cleave unto the Lord Acts 11.23.
, We read before that ^e was sent by the Church at Jerusalem to visit the
Bre^hren at Antioch; and when he came to them, we read ^f no other exhortation,
but only this; implying that ^his is the conclusion of the whole matter, the
great thing God looks at, and that should be one engagment ^o us, to look to
these things as our end.

(2.) This is the great thing in which the Devil seek^th to deceive men: though
he seeks to deceive us in ^ll the passages of our life, yet it is still in
order to ^n chief Good, or End: Mithridates the King of Pon^us, being worsted
by the Romans, and fearing he should not escape them, caused a great deal of
Gold, and Silver, and rich furniture to be scattered in the ways, which while
the Roman Soldiers gathered with great eagerness, he escaped their hands, and
got into a place of sa^ety: the Devil knowing what taking, tempting things the
profits and pleasures of the world are to men, he scatters them in their way,
that being busied about them, he might hinder them in their pursuit of Heaven,
and things Eternal; that is the great thing the Devil drives at in all his
temptations: he is willing men should go to Church, and hear, and read, and
pray, so as he can deceive them in their end, their chief Good; this is that
great deceit, under which the greatest part of the world will perish: and that
he should deceive so many in this, as it will be a matter of the insultation to
Satan, that he can thus gull many, who are otherwise knowing, understanding
men; so it will be matter of the greatest confusion to themselves, that they
should suffer the Devil to cheat them of their chief Good, that he should put
them off with so mean inconsiderable things, and lead them blindfold to Hell,
like an Ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the correction of the stocks; the
nature of man does exceedingly abhor to be cheated, there being not only loss
in it, but a disparagement, an imputation of weakness laid upon the man to
suffer himself to be outwitted; men use to say when they are cheated but in a
small thing, They had rather have given away three times as much; but to be
cheated of our souls, our eternal salvation, that is more grievous; were it
only in the matters of this life, it were not much, but to be deceived in
things of the highest concernment, in the business of eternity, that is most
sad; but that which makes it more sad, is, because it is such a gross and
palpable deceit; to take a counterfeit Pearl for a true one, there being a
great likeness, may sometimes befall an understanding man; but to take a pebble
for a Pearl, a flint for a Diamond, this is so gross, that none but a fool or
madman would be thus mistaken; and for men to take earth for heaven, things
temporal, for things eternal, to suffer Satan to cozen them of their souls and
eternal Salvation, and put them off with such mean, petty things, this is the
greatest cheat in the world, and that men should be so far deluded by Satan, as
to make things so much below themselves their ultimate end, will be to them
matter of confusion for evermore; Show your selves men, says God to the
Idolatrous Israelites, who of their silver and gold made themselves a God Isa.
46.8.
, That any should so ^^man themselves, as to make these things their God, their
chief good, their end, cannot but be in the end matter of great astonishment!
This is another Consi^eration, which shows of what grand concernment it (...),
to propound a right end to our selves.

(3.) To look to things eternal as our end, is the great ^^ing wherein the work
of Conversion does consist: Con^ersion brings a great Change, the Apostle
calls (...) a transformation Romans 12.2. (...), Ego sum Ego.
, it makes a man as it were a^^ther man, I am not I, said that young Convert:
yet (...) is, though a great Change, it is no substantial Change; ^^e man is
the same still for his nature and substance: (...) is chiefly a Change of the
heart, and that is seen ^^ainly in the aim and intent of the heart; a Bowl ^^at
runs on the left hand, if the bias be but tur^^d, it runs as much on the
right, without any change (...) the substance of the Bowl; the Painter that was
^^oken to by a Gentleman, to draw a Horse running ^^th full speed: it happened
when he brought it home ^^at he presented it to the Gentleman with the bottom
^^ard; and so it seemed to be a Horse tumbling upon his back; at which the
Gentleman being angry, the ^^nter bad him but turn the sides, and then it would
(...) according to his desire: so it is here, let but the (...) be changed, and
then the man that before lay tumbling as is were upon his back, kicking against
God and Heaven, will be running the ways of Gods Commandments: the change of
the heart is much in the change of the end, and if the heart be changed, the
man is changed; when he once comes to this resolution, time was when I made
the world my end, and that I pursued with all eagerness, such and such sins as
my end, and then it was a pleasure to me to do wickedly, whereas now by Gods
assistance I resolve to make it my business to lay up treasure in heaven;
whatsoever else I do, I will be sure to do that whatsoever I neglect, I will
not neglect this one thin^ necessary: when a man comes thus to change his end
this is the great thing wherein Conversion does consist, for, as natural
corruption consists chiefly i^ that de-ordination, whereby the heart is taken
o^ from God, as the chief good, and eternal happine^^ as the chief end, and
placed upon sin, or the world and therefore Austin makes sin to be nothing else
tha^ to use that we should enjoy, and enjoy that we should use Utendis frui,
and fruendis uti.
so Conversion is nothing else but a turning from sin to God, from the Creature
to the Creator, from things temporal to things eternal. Conversion in Scripture
is termed Vocation, or Calling; whom he ha^ predestined, them he has also
called, and converte^ men are said to be called out of the World; concei^ it
thus, a man has his face toward the world, an^ sin, and hell, while he is
marching furiously (...) these ways of his own heart. God makes him hea^ as it
were a voice behind him, saying, this is not t^ way; neither are these the
things; there is another way you must take, other things you must seek, (...)
you would be happy: when God thus calls, a^ sometimes Christ his Church, Come
with me from L^banon my Spouse, come with me from Lebanon; a^^ withal,
enclineth the heart to hear and obey the Call; this is to be called out of the
world, this is it in which the work of conversion consists: when those
Gospel-converts were effectually wrought upon, the work chiefly appeared, in
making eternal life the matter of their Enquiries: what shall we do to be
saved? What shall we do to inherit eternal life? If then we would have evidence
of our conversion, without which there is no Salvation, it must be by making
eternal things our aim, and end.

[4] The end denominates the Person, such as the end is, such is the man.
Philosophers say, Dat esse, distinguere and operari.
that the Form gives Being to the thing, distinguishes it from other things,
and is the principle of all its operations: now it is a Rule some give, what
the form is in natural things, that the end is in morals; and in all these
respects it will appear, of how great concernment it is to look to our end. As
in naturals, the form gives the Being, man being informed by a reasonable
soul, that makes him a reasonable creature; so the end does in morals, every
man is as his end is: If wordly, earthly things be a man's end, he is a man of
the world; Deliver me from the men of the world: a man of earth; That the man
of earth may no more oppress Psalm 17.14. and 10. ult.
. These earthly things transform them into their own nature; on the other side,
he that makes spiritual, heavenly things his end, he is a spiritual man; so he
is called, Ye that are spiritual, restore him a heavenly man: As is the
heavenly, such are they that are heavenly Gal. 6.1. with 1 Cor. 15.43.
. They say, tho Eagle tries her young ones by holding them against the Sun, if
they can face the Sun, she looks upon them as legitimate: if we be such as
make it our delight to acquaint our selves with God, and have our conversation
in Heaven; it is a good argument that we belong to God, that we have title to
heaven, when our knowledge and learning, will prove but weak arguments of true
Grace; when gifts of preaching, praying, di^coursing, will afford us little
comfort; when the profession of Religion, and outward performance of Duties,
will stand us in little stead; this, that we have made God our chief good, and
Salvation our chief end will be the best evidence of uprightness, and
sincer^ty; by that therefore we should make it out to ou^selves.

[5.] As the form in Naturals, so the end here gives not only Being, but
distinction, serving best t^ distinguish between one man, and another: the
great difference between the worldling and the Saint, lyet^ in this; as, in
matters of this life, does the worldlin^ take pains in his Calling, avoid
necessary expence^ manage his business to the best advantage, lay up som^thing
for his Children? All this the Saint does, the difference chiefly lies in the
end; the former gettet^ that he may get, follows the world, that he may enjoy
the world, works for more, and desires more that he may have more: whereas,
the other dot^ this for higher ends, that he may honor God with h^ substance,
that he may maintain good works, and lay up a good foundation for himself: So
in matter o^ Duty, the Hypocrite goes as far in outward performances as the
true Believer. Did David pray thre^ times a day? so did the Pharisees, yea, and
make lon^ prayers Mar. 12.40.
. Did David and Daniel fast? so they, and that twice in the week Luke 18.12.
: Did Cornelius give alms the like did they Mat. 6.2.
: Did Abraham pay tithes? they tythed their very Mint and Rue Luke 11.42.
. The great difference lies in the end, the Hypocrite does all like the
Pharisees, that he may have praise from men, or some other sinister end; at
best he prays that he may pray, and hears that he may hear, and so makes
praying the end of praying, and hearing the end of hearing: whereas the upright
Christian, though he may think it a desirable thing to be well esteemed by
those that are good, and this may be some encouragement to him; as David, I
will wait upon thy name, for it is good before thy Saints Psalm. 52.9.
: yet he does not make this his end: nay, he looks upon it as a snare to be
applauded, and cried up; as Luther said, He would not have Erasmus his honor
for the whole world: neither does he make Duty the end of Duty; the end he
aims at in all his services, is, first the advancing of Gods glory, and then
the furthering of his own salvation; if then we would have our righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and do more than others,
as Christ expects Mat. 5.47.
, we must do it chiefly by this, by doing all to the right end.

[6.] The end does not only give Being and distinction, but it gives likewise
operari, it has a powerful influence upon the actions, it is the principle of
all operations, the end and the means go together, the one draws on the other
Posito fine ponuntur media ad finem.
; he that makes riches his End, will be forward to labor, and take pains for
it: Solomon says, There is no end of his labor; he rises early, goes to bed
late, rides, runs, studies, raketh every kennel, scrapeth every dunghill,
moves every stone, leaves no means unattempted to enrich himself; no pains
seems too much to him, no difficulty can deter him; like him that gave this
impression in his Escutcheon, a hand with a Pickax, digging a way through a Rock
with this Motto, I will either find a way, or make one: In like manner, if we
look to things Eternal, making them our end, we will be diligent in the Use of
all means conducing thereunto; we will Pray, Seek, Knock, Hear, Read, Confer,
Strive, give all Diligence; Prayers, Watchings, Fastings, Humiliations,
Outcries to Heaven, and other things which carnal men cannot endure to hear
of, will be willingly entertained, if by any means we may attain the end of our
desires; he that means to go to Heaven (says Chrysostom) will stick a no
difficulties, nor question, what is rough in the way what is laborious? like
Solomon's sluggard, there is a Lion in the way; he will not say as Judas, why
is thi^ waste? or, Naaman, what needs so often washing* why so much praying,
and hearing, and laboring? bu^ will be forward to do any thing, and think no
labou^ too great, so as he may finish his course with joy.

(7) The End does not only engage to the Use of the Means, but it renders the
Means pleasant and delightful: the End gives an amiableness to all the Means
Finis dat amabilitatem omnibus mediis.
; h^ that makes riches his end, the very labor and pai^ he takes in getting
them, is delightful to him. I^ all labor there is profit Prove. 14.23.
, and this profit it brings makes it pleasant; harvest, the time of greatest
l^bour, is the time of the greatest joy, they rejoice according to the joy of
harvest Isa. 9.3.
. On the other side, h^ that makes things Eternal his End, does not only use
the Means conducing thereto, but he does al^ with delight; he rejoices to work
righteousness, he delights to do Gods Will; he is glad when they say we will go
up to the house of the Lord; he does not only pray, but delights in approaching
to God; not only hear, but the word is sweet to him; not only observ^ the
Sabbath, but calls it his delight; longs for it before it comes; like the Jew,
who, they say, put on his best apparel to welcome the approach of it and seems
to hasten its approach, wooing it wit^ this invitation, make haste my beloved;
when it comes he cheerfully addresseth himself to the duties of it like the
Primitive Christians, who, if the question were asked, Have thou kept the Lords
day? answered, I am a Christian, I cannot but keep it: in a word, whatsoever he
does in Gods service, he does it with delight and complacency: some make this
observation from that of our Savior, John 14.23, 24. (...).
If a man love me he will keep my word; He that loves me not, keeps not my
sayings: In the former clause, speaking of him that loves, he says [my word]
in the singular number, for so it is in the Original, implying that to such an
one all Gods commandments are as one, they are facile and pleasant to him; but
speaking of him that loves not, it is [my sayings] in the plural, because to
him the commandments seem many and grievous; this is the great difference
between them, he that loves not, may do the same things the other does, but he
does them not with delight; he looks upon Gods service as a weariness, and
snuffeth at it; he cries, When will the Sabbath be gone? whereas, he that has
his love set upon Christ and Heaven, looks upon his yoke as easy, counts it
his meat and drink to do his will.

(8.) What a man makes his end now, that shall be his portion; God leaves
every man to his own choice, I have set before you life and death, therefore
choose life Deuteronomy. 30.19. and 11.26.
, Every man's choice is according to his inclination, and apprehension of
things; for the Will follows the ultimute dictate of the Understanding; the
man that lives by sense, thinks these temporal things more worthy of his
choice than the other; he looks upon his money, (says Chrysostom) and
thinks he sees more beauty and luster in the gold in his purse, than in the
Sun in the firmament; these temporal things are things seen, (says the Text)
he sees them, he has them; whereas Eternal things are things not seen, for
ought he knows they are but an Idea, a fancy of more credulous spirits, who
believe every thing is told them; or if there be such things, they are things
future; and better he thinks one bird in the hand, than two in the Bush; better
a Wren in the cage, than an Eagle in the clouds, therefore he makes choice of
them, but will not choose the fear of the Lord: whereas a godly man, upon whom
God has wrought both by irradiating his Understanding to see an excellency in
heavenly things, and by enclining and determining the Will to embrace the
dictate of the Understanding thus enlightened; such an one peremptorily
concludes, that Heaven or nothing shall be the object of his choice, that if
Eternal things be not his portion, there is none worth the having; accordingly
(as there are two things we are said to will, the end, and the means; the
former they call the will, the other the choice (...).
,) he wills salvation, and Eternal^ happiness, as (next to God) his chief good,
his end; and chooses the service of God as the way and mean^ of attaining it;
Choose you whom you will serve, says Joshua, but I and my house will serve the
Lord. Le^ thine hand help me, says David, for I have chosen thy Commandments:
Mary has chosen the better part. Now God gives to both these according to
their choice Before man is life, and death, and what him likes shall be given
him Eccles. 15.17.
; the worldly man chooses tempora^^ things as his chief good, and God for the
most part gives him his desire, fills his belly with hid treasures (...) but
this is all he is ever like to have; woe to you tha^ are rich now, for you have
received your consolation Luke. 6.24.
He has not reason to look for Heaven, which he would not choose. When
wicked-men shall cry with the foolish Virgins, Lord, Lord, open to us: God will
soo^ stop their mouths, by telling them they had tha^ which themselves chose.
On the other side the godl^ man, who makes things Eternal the matter of his
choice and looks upon them as his end, this man at present is not far off
from the Kingdom of God, an^ shall certainly have at last according to his
choice that which is his end now by way of election, shall be afterward his end
by way of fruition; according to that excellent Saying of St. Austin, Eternal
blessedness is begun in election, and perfected in fruition; while Martha was
cumbred about many things, Mary chose to attend the preaching of Christ, the
means of Salvation: and what she chose, she should certainly have, Mary has
chosen that better part that shall not be taken away from her; says the same
Father: Happiness is neither given to any man against his will, but is matter
of his choice, nor is taken from any man against his will; he who chooses
salvation for his portion, and looks upon it as his chief good, shall
certainly at last obtain his choice, shall have a wide and large entrance into
the kingdom of Heaven: From all these particulars it appears, how much it
does concern us, to make eternal things our end, and aim.

CHAP. XIII. Of Motives drawn from other things, other men, our selves, and the
unspeakable benefits of a prospect of things Eternal.
HAving showed how, and in what manner we are to look to things Eternal; I
proceed to the second things propounded, to lay down some Motives to provoke us
in this manner to look to them. To this purpose I shall propound four sorts of
Motives:

(1.) From other things: Ask, says Job, the beasts, and they shall teach thee,
and the Fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and
it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee: Job
12.7.
All these may seem to teach us this Lesson; The Philosopher observes that all
Bipedes, creatures with two feet, are still looking upward; Birds and fowls
seldom stay long upon the earth; when they light there, it is to seek their
food, no sooner have they gotten that, but they mount upward toward Heaven;
though where the carcass is, the Eagles are gathered together; yet when they
have got their prey, and satis^ied their hunger, they sore aloft: as if they
mounted ^p to Heaven: Beasts, though they cannot mount ^pward, and are made so,
as they look downward, yet they are often seen to lift up their heads toward
Heaven, especially in the time of extremity. Naturalists observe of the Lion
and the Cock, that they express their joy at the rising of the Sun, as being
sensible of the motion of the heavenly bodies; the like may be said of some
fishes in the Sea; they tell us of a fish which has but one eye, which is
seated like a ^verticial point upon the top of its head, always looking toward
Heaven, therefore is called by the Grecians, the beholder of Heaven (...).
: others tell of a precious stone taken out of the head of a fish called
Synodus, that bears some resemblance of the Sun and Moon, and other heavenly
bodies: if we come lower to vegetables, Proclus observes, that plants, and
flowers, and other vegetables have all a dependence, and many of them some
representation of the Heavenly bodies, the Tulip, Marigold, and some other
flowers wait upon the Sun, as the Handmaid upon the hand of her Mistress,
opening by degrees as the Sun ascends; and again, shutting up themselves
gradually, as the Sun declineth; and this so punctually, that though the Sun
appear not, a man may more infallibly know when it is high noon by their full
spreading: than by any Clock or Watch. The Hopp in its growing winds it self
about the pole, always following the course of the Sun from East to West, and
can by no means be forced to a contrary way. Some affirm that the sap in trees
precisely follows the motion of the Sun, ascending and descending at the same
time, and by the same steps the Sun does: if we come lower to inanimate
creatures: Plato observes, that all the Elements do naturally desire to
evaporate themselves into the celestial Region (as it were) there to attain to
a higher degree of perfection; the fire, and air, those lighter elements still
aspire higher and higher, as it were, to make nearer approaches toward Heaven,
the earth and water, those heavy Elements, though they do not ascend in their
gross bodies, yet they are daily sending up some thinner part of themselves,
some vapors, as it were some breathings toward Heaven. Naturalists speak of
several stones, in which there is some representation of the heavenly bodies;
so that in the several orders of nature, there is something that might mind us
of this duty of conversing in Heaven, and looking to things Eternal: there is
scarce any thing we look on, but might some way or other put us in mind of
this; the best and choicest things the earth affords, are hid from our eyes,
shut up in darkness; so as if we look downward we see only the surface of the
earth, and there our sight is bounded; whereas upward toward Heaven, all things
are open and transparent; to note how vast our affections should be toward
Heaven: if we stand upon some high steeple, and look downward to the earth, we
cannot look long without dizziness and fear; whereas, when we look upward
toward Heaven, though a thousand times greater distance, we can continue
looking without either, as if nature would hereby mind us, that our eyes were
given us to look to Heaven, not to the earth. Having then so many Monitors, we
shall show our selves ill scholars, if we do not learn this lesson.

(2.) If from other things we look to other men, I mean the people of God, they
teach it by their example: the Apostle speaking of himself, and the rest of the
Saints, says, Our conversation is in Heaven; the word Phil. 3.20. (...),
civitas aut vita civilis.
, though it has several significations, yet chiefly these two: it signifies
our City, whereof we are Citizens, and to which we belong, Heaven: so Zanchy,
we are Citizens of Heaven, not of earth; and therefore ought to seek the things
that are in Heaven. Or it signifies carriage, or deportment, or converse Phil.
1.27. Acts. 23.1.
: so the word rendered in other places: And so most Interpreters, and our
translation render it, Our conversation is in Heaven; this is the inseparable
property of every true Believer, he converseth in Heaven: The way of life is
above to the wise Prove. 15.24.
, This world is the place of his abode, but not of his delight, his body is
here, but his soul, his better part above; his commoration is on earth, but his
conversation in Heaven; he lives here, but loves there; as Merchants who live
in this Kingdom, yet are called Spanish or Turkey Merchants, because their
trading is in those places: In like manner, the Believer he is in the world,
but not of the world; this world is but his Inn, Heaven is his home, his
Country; he is in Heaven while he is on earth, he converseth with God, while he
sojourneth in the world, his trading is for Heaven, his love, desire, delight,
is placed upon heavenly things: this is not obscurely held forth in Scripture
by those several things to which Believers are compared; sometimes to the
Palm Tree, The righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree; the Palm Tree grows
straight and upright, They are upright as the Palm Tree Psalm. 92.12. and 10.5.
, and so represents the heavenly minded Christian, whose motions toward heaven
are direct and straight, without those obliquities, and turnings aside, which
appear in the carriage of other men: the Palm Tree is small in the body, or
trunk, and biggest at the top; close and shut up in that part toward earth, but
broad and open in that part toward Heaven; and so further resembles the
Heavenly Christian, whose heart is closed toward the world, but is open and
enlarged toward Heaven: the Palm Tree has no boughs or branches upon the sides
or body, but all the boughs grow together at the top; to which perhaps that
alludes, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs thereof
(f); and so is a further emblem of a Christian, all whose branches and
outgoings are exalted above the earth; and without any straggling and
dividing; aspire toward Heaven. Again, Gregory Nyssen says of this Tree, That
it rises out of the earth with its perfect bigness and thickness at the top;
Cant. 7.8.
so that though it grows in height or bigness in the other parts of it, yet
it never grows any greater or bigger at the top: if this be true, In this
likewise it resembles the true Believer, who, though in regard of other graces
he be like the Crocodile that grows till the very time of his death, yet at
his first conversion has the frame and bent of his heart upon Heaven. Yet once
more, Philo says, that whereas all other trees have their sap in the root,
which from thence ascends, only the sap and heart of the Palm tree is at the
top, toward the top of the middlemost bough, which is surrounded by other
boughs, as a General is by his Lifeguard; if so, it has yet a further
resemblance to Believers, whose hearts are in Heaven, for there their treasure
is, and there is their heart also: In the same place the Psalmist compares the
righteous man to the Cedar: The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree,
and spread abroad like the Cedar in Lebanon: The Cedar, it is a stately Tree,
it is called the goodly Cedar Psalm. 80.10. with Ezekiel. 17.22.
, the high Cedar, it does, says Jerome, grow up fast toward. Heaven, and so
resembles those Believers who are, as he expresses it, aspiring toward Heaven.
Again, they are sometimes compared to mountains, They that trust in the Lord
shall be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed Psalm. 125.1.
. Chrysostom observes there are three things more remarkable in mountains
(...).
, their firmness and stability, their invincible strength, and their
inaccessible height; in all these respects the Saints are like Mountains, but
the last is only proper to the present purpose: of all parts of the earth, the
mountains are nearest unto Heaven: the Mythology of that Poetical fiction of
Atlas bearing up the Heavens, was to represent the high mountains, which some
of them call the pillars and supporters of Heaven; and some think they are
meant by, The pillars of Heaven tremble, and are astonished at thy rebuke Job
26.11.
: Therefore to them are Believers fitly likened: I shall name but one more,
they are compared to clouds, Being compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses; and Isa. 60.8. Who are these that fly like a cloud Heb. 12.1.
? the clouds are originally a thick exhalation rising out of the earth, but are
by the heat of the Sun rarefied and drawn up toward Heaven, therefore are
called, the clouds of Heaven Mat. 26.64.
. In like manner, though the righteous man sojourneth here upon earth, yet he
converseth in Heaven, and sits together with Christ in heavenly places Ephesians.
2.6.
. Thus we find it has been with the Saints. Scipio was not the first, says
Ambrose, that was never less alone, than when he was alone: it was so with the
Saints long before; Enoch and Noah are said to walk with God; they seemed to
live no other life, but that of God, of the knowledge of God, the love of God,
delight in God; all their thoughts, all their affections were placed upon God,
and Heaven; their whole life was nothing else but an acquainting with God, a
conversing in Heaven: Moses in all he did had an eye to the recompense of the
reward. David says, He was as a Pelican in the wilderness, and an Owl in the
desert; that he watched, and was as a Sparrow alone upon the house top Heb.
11.26.
; which though some understand of Christ, who in his birth was as an Owl in the
desert, shut out from the company of men, and born amongst brute beasts; at his
death, like the Pelican, feeding his Church with his own blood; in his
resurrection and ascension, like the Sparrow, flying to Heaven, like the
Sparrow to her hill; yet it seems more properly to refer to David, himself;
and though I apprehend it is plainly meant of a forced solitude, by reason of
Readiness persecution, yet there are who understand it of a voluntary retirement,
that David, like these solitary creatures, frequently withdrew himself from
other company, and other occasions, that he might with more freedom be taken up
with the contemplation of God, and heavenly things: but though this be not the
meaning of that place, yet it is but what is consonant to David's practice,
whose affections were taken up with Heaven, his soul fainted for Gods
salvation, his eyes failed for it, he hoped for it, he longed after it Psalm.
119.81, 123, 166, 174.
, with this he comforts himself, In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16.11.
: And, As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness Psalm. 17.15.
. Those Worthies mentioned, Heb. 11. are said to look for a City that has
foundations, v. 10. to live as Pilgrims and strangers on earth, v, 13. to
desire a better Country, that is, a heavenly, v. 16. The primitive Christians
lived like men of another world. ^^egory Nyssen says, that they stood tiptoes,
upon the earth (...).
, they hung upon the earth but by the slender thread, of natural necessity,
desiring to have as little to do here as might be: Nay, if possible, to have
nothing to do below; it was their custom in their Congregations, when they had
finished their services to raise up their feet from the earth towar^ Heaven, we
lift up our feet, says Clem. Alexa^drinus, they were so much in Heaven, that
they desired, if possible, to have their bodies there before their time, they
were, as the same Father expresset^ it, divorced, and sequestered from all
earthly interests (...).
They were like the Cart-wheel; (it is Hilaries compar^son,) that stands upon
the earth but by a little poin^ the far greater part being above the earth,
like tha^ bird, which for her beauty, and nobleness, they c^^ the Bird of
Paradise, that never comes on the earth but lives wholly in the air, upon
which she feeds when she is forced to light to un-weary her self, she lights
upon the tops of the highest trees, where she is still in the air, the place of
her delight. I might to these add Paul the Hermit, Anthony, Arsenius, an^
others, who withdrew themselves from the world devoted themselves to a solitary
life, that they might better converse in Heaven: Wherefore seeing we are
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us follow their
example; let the same mind be in us that (...) in them: let us with our Apostle
look not to things see^ but things not seen, the things seen being temporal,
but the things not seen Eternal.

(3.) A third consideration to provoke to this, may b^ taken from our selves:
the frame of our bodies minds (...) of this: whereas other creatures have their
body bowed toward earth, man is made with a body erected toward heaven; as in
the order of Creation God has placed heaven above us, and the earth under us,
so he has placed our heart, and head about to be fixed upon Heaven, our feet
below, by them to trample upon the earth: if we view the several parts of the
body, they seem to teach us this: To begi^ with the feet; Ambrose well
observes, that God has not given us four feet: as to the beasts that are
wholly conversant on earth, but only two, as the Birds which are often soaring
toward heaven. Pass we on to the knees.

The great commerce a Christian has with heaven, is the duty of Prayer; and
the knees by reason of their bowing posture, seem to be intended for this
chiefly; I bow my knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, says the
Apostle Phil. 3.14.
.

We read of the Apostle James, Thrasilla Gorgonia, and some others, whose knees
were like Camels knees, hard, and bereft of feeling, through their long, and
often kneeling in prayer. Some of the Ancients speak highly of this bowing of
the knee (...)?
, Eusebius calls it a posture proper to the Christians (...),
.

If we look from the knees to the Hands, they are not only of special service
to the body, but to the soul likewise: for which cause some have called them
the Handmaids of the soul: I will says the Apostle, that ^men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands 1 Timothy 2.8.
, Solomon in that excellent, prayer, spread forth his hands toward Heaven 1
Kings 8.22.
, Constantine had his Image engraven on his Coin, with his hands joined
together, and lift up toward Heaven: and upon several Gates of his Palace: he
was drawn in an upright posture, praying, and lifting up his hands toward
Heaven Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri jussit.
.

If we go upwards to the face; God has made the face to look upward to Heaven;
Solomon finds the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in the Head of man Eccles. 12.2.
, at least according to the Chaldee paraphrase, which refers it to the face and
eyes: Before the Beauty and glory of thy face be changed, and the light of
thine eyes be darkened, and the apples of thine eyes, the stars of thy
countenance, be extinguished; for as the whole face, so the eyes are given us
for this end. Anatomists observ^ that whereas other creatures have only four
musc^ to their eyes; whereby they look forward, and dow^ward, and on both
sides, man only has a fifth, b^ which he is able to look up to Heaven.

Look inward to the Heart, that is an inverted P^ramid, or like a Vial, that is
narrow, and contract^ in that part toward Heaven; but above all, the s^^ was
purposely given us for this end: we can no wa^ think that God has given us
these immortal souls, be only conversant about perishing things: these
spir^tual souls to be taken up with secular affairs, the souls which are
heavenly substances to be wholly e^ployed about earthly objects. How absurd is
it (...) think that God should so curiously fashion a body, i^ the lower parts
of the earth, and breathe into it a^ immortal soul, created after his own
Image, made i^ the same mould with the blessed Angels, capable (...) eternal
happiness, and then should send into the world this Epitome of the whole
Creation, only t^ eat, drink, and sleep, (or only to buy, and sell, an^
traffic in the world?) the beasts that have h^ sensitive souls can do all
this, and much more, as we^ as we: they know when they are ill what herbs t^
have recourse to for the recovery of their health; an^ some think the practice
of Physic has been much improved by observations taken from the creatures
they know how to dig their holes, and make their nests to secure themselves
against the injuries of the weather; when the place of their abode grows
incommodious, they can shift into a warmer Climate. The Stork in the Heaven
knows her appointe^ time, and the Turtle, and Crane, and Swallow, Jer. 8.7.
they know how to provide against a time of want; The An^ provideth her meat in
summer Prove. 6.8.
, they are so wise as t^ prevent a danger before them: surely, in vain is the
snare laid in the sight of any Bird Prove. 1.17.
, they have skill ^o provide a shelter against a time of danger; the wild
Beasts have their Dens, the Stags their Thicket, ^he Hares their Covert, the
Wasps their Cells, the Bees their Hives, the Doves their Windows, the Foxes
their Holes, the Birds of the air their Nests, the Conies their Burrows, the
Goats their Hills: in a word, those things that most men busy themselves
about, the crea^ures can do as well, if not better than we: some are stronger,
some swifter, some quicker sighted, some ^etter scented, in all these one
creature or other excel^eth man, and can we think, that God has given us these
intellectual immortal souls, only to do what brute creatures can do, as well,
if not in a better manner than we? Can we Imagine that these Heaven-born souls,
should be bestowed upon us for no higher end? Certainly there is nothing short
of Heaven, and things eternal, that will bear any proportion with the
excellency of these souls wherewith God has entrusted us, says Seneca; What a
contemp^ible thing is man, if he does not look higher than these ^emporal
things? Chrysostom will scarce allow such to be reasonable Creatures, whose
souls so far forget their heavenly extraction; it is infinitely below the
dignity of the soul to espouse earthly interests; A spirit has not flesh and
bones, says our Savior: neither should it debase it self to such things, as
are only suitable to bodies of flesh; What Father is there, who if his Son ask
bread, will he give him a stone? We should much less deal thus with our souls,
to put them off with a stone, with things temporal, when only the bread of
Heaven, things eternal, can satisfy them.

(4.) The fourth Motive, to look to things eternal, may be taken from the
unspeakable benefits flowing from it:

[1] It is an excellent preservative from sin; Some Schoolmen say that the
sight of God in Heaven, makes the Saints impeccable: if so, it will follow,
the more men enjoy God, and converse in Heaven while they are here, the more
free they are from sin; the times Noah lived in, were times of great defection:
when all flesh had corrupted their ways, and the whole earth was filled with
violence Genesis 6.9.
, and it is much for one spark of fire to keep alive in the midst of a Sea of
water: yet God gives this testimony of Noah, Noah was a just man, and perfect
in his Generation; if you would know what kept him upright in the midst of that
wicked and froward Generation, it follows, Noah walked with God; he that
walks with God, and has his conversation in Heaven, fears nothing but sin,
and this he fears more than Hell; they say, the Ermin is so neat a creature,
that if she sees a puddle of dirt on the one hand, and a company of dogs on
the other, she will rather expose her self to be torn in pieces by the dogs,
than to defile her self by going through the puddle: it is so with him that is
truly heavenly, he had rather endure the worst affliction, than willingly
defile himself with the least sin; nay, if he saw Hell on the one hand, and sin
on the other, he would with Chrysostom and Anselme, choose rather Hell, than
sin: he looks upon sin as the greatest evil, and therefore trembles at the
first motions of sin, dares not give himself allowance in the least sin, bate
him those sins of daily incursion, which the best cannot avoid, he comes
nearest the state of glorified Saints, who cannot sin.

[2.] It is a good security against temptations: while the Bird is soaring in
the air, she is out of peril of Gunshot, and free from those snares and
Lime-twigs which she is liable to be taken in, when she is upon the earth; he
that looks to things eternal, is not ignorant of Satan's devices: and surely
in vain is the snare laid in the sight of any Bird: as an enemy whose plots are
discovered, is more than half overcome, so it is here: whereas in the Sea,
little Fishes are de^oured of greater, and greater fishes dash themselves
against the Rocks, the fish they call the Beholder of ^eaven (...).
, that has but one eye, which they say is ^lways open and watchful, does
hereby discover and ^event the many dangers that are in the Sea: this ^^sh
according to the name given to it, is a fit Emblem ^f the heavenly-minded
Christian, who escapes those ^emptations which prevail upon other men: It was
^o strange thing that Archimedes should be knocked ^n the head, ^hile he was
drawing his Mathematick ^nes: and Thales fall into the ditch, when he was
^azing on the stars: but there is no such danger in (...) spiritual looking to
things Eternal, it is rather a pre^ervative from dangers and temptations; there
are ^wo sorts of temptations the Devil makes Use of: ^^mptations on the right
hand, when by things prospe^ous, and pleasing to us, as the honors, profits,
and ^leasures of the world, he seeks to draw us to what (...) evil: and
temptations on the left hand, when by the ^ear of suffering and persecution, he
labors to de^er us from what is good; whereas he who has things ^^ernal in
his eye, is little moved with either of these, ^^e is not so much taken with
the first, as for gain of them to lose a good conscience. When Basil was
^empted with preferment, he bad them offer such ^^ings to Children: it was not
for a Christian Bishop ^o be taken with them. Luther, when he received ^y
Tauhenheimus a hundred pieces of gold sent him, and fifty by Scartus, said, I
begin to fear, God will ^^ve me my reward here; but I have earnestly protested,
I should not be put off with these things: and this his con^empt to the world
was not unknown to his enemies: When the Pope would have taken him off by
gifts, ^he said, That German beast does not care for Gold, and ^or troubles and
sufferings, he does not so much fear them, as to commit sin to avoid suffering.
When Basil was threatened with banishments, torments, and death: he answered, I
fear not banishment, I have no home but Heaven, no native place but Paradise;
and the whole world I look upon as the common banishment of mankind: for
torments, I defy them; for what can they do to me, whose body is so worn out,
that there is nothing but bones without flesh for them to work on? and for
death I fear it not, which can but restore me sooner to my Creator; He that
has his eye upon Heaven, is neither moved with the frowns, nor flatteries of
the world, as he said, He equally contemned the favor and fury of Rome;
neither the desire of the one, nor the fear of the other, is able to remove him
from his stedfastness The like is to be said of other sorts of temptations,
which are happily resisted by conversing in Heaven* Bonaventure, when the Devil
told him that he was a Reprobate, and therefore persuaded him to enjoy a^ much
of the pleasures of the world here as he might because he was excluded from the
pleasures with God in Heaven: answered, Not so Satan, If I must not enjoy God
after this life, let me enjoy as much as I can of hi^ here: whatsoever
temptations Satan suggests, the^ are more easily overcome by him who makes it
hi^ business to converse with God, and Heaven.

[3.] It is a good help against those roving, wandering thoughts which so often
haunt us in the performance of duties, and cast so great a blemish upon our
bet^ performances. When Abraham offered sacrifice, the fowls of the air lighted
upon the sacrifice Genesis 15.11.
, These fowls resemble vain thoughts which much trouble the best of men in
their Approaches to God. Jero^ complained of himself, when he was at prayer, he
wa^ in his thoughts walking in some Gallery, or telling o^ some sum of money:
in like manner Bernard confesses that troops of unruly thoughts were wont to
flock into his heart, like people, when some spectacle is to be seen;
complaining, when my body is i^ the Church, my mind is about the world; I sing
one thing, but think another; I utter words, but regard not the sense and
matter; and concludes, woe is me, I sin then, when I should get victory against
my sins; and truly there is scarce any one thing that a Christian does so much
groan under, as the frequent a volations he is subject to in Gods service; and
it is not without just cause that he should so sadly resent them. When
Pharaoh's Baker dreamed that the birds of the air took out of his Basket the
baked meats he prepared for Pharaoh, Joseph told him, that this was a
signification of his ensuing death. When we come to present our services to
God, as he his baked meats to Pharaoh, if the birds of the air, idle thoughts
intrude into our minds; though it does not absolutely presage the death of the
soul, yet it prognosticateth the death of that service, that it is no better
than a dead service, unpleasing to him who is a living God: Now there is no
better way to suppress these thoughts than having our minds taken up with
heavenly things; the mind cannot be at the same time intent upon different
objects; as when a Dictator was created at Rome, there was a suspension for
that time of all other offices; so when the mind is taken up with the thoughts
of some remarkable thing, it gives a supersedeas to other thoughts: If thou
would forget other things (says Seneca) think upon Caesar; serious thoughts
upon our Eternal condition, would be like those Por^ers Jehojada set at the
doors of the Temple, would secure us from the intrusion of other objects.

[4.] It would work in us a holy indifferency toward ^ll temporal things; it
would moderate our esteem of them, our desire after them, our delight in them,
our grief for the want or loss of them. I shall instance in ^hese several
particulars.

[1.] It would moderate our esteem of them; wordly ^hen think all their
happiness is bound up in these crea^ure-enjoyments; they judge them the only
happy men, who have the largest confluence of these outward comforts; whereas,
he that has his eye upon eternal things, has a low Esteem of these things;
when a man stands upon the top of a high mountain, things below in the valley
seem small, and inconsiderable in his sight; they say to them that stand upon
the top of the Alps, the great Cities of Campania seem but as small Villages;
or as a man who has for a time gazed upon the Sun, when he looks downward
upon darker objects, is scarce able to see any thing: In like manner, he that
has his eye fixed upon heavenly things, counts these things as dung and dross;
he esteems all these riches in the world not worth one days conversing in
Heaven; he valueth Heaven, though but in reversion, before the world in present
possession; prefers his interest in Heaven, to the gaining of the whole world;
if God please to secure heavenly things to him, he has a holy ind^fferency
toward other things; if God casts Them in, he is thankful; if not, patient; if
he has them, he knows how to use them; if not, he has learned to be without
them; he is like the deep running River, which glideth silently by those green
Meadows, and flowery banks, those goodly things that other men admire; and
keeps within his own banks of moderation, and content, till at last he falls
into that deep Sea of divine Sweetness, to which he is hasting: Moses having an
eye to the recompense of reward, slighted the greatest honor it Egypt, he
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's Daughter Heb. 11.24.25, 26.
, He makes as little of the pleasures; He chose rather to suffer affliction
with the People of God, that to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
neither could the riches tempt him; he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches than the treasures of Egypt: such a low esteem would we have of the best
things this world affords, if we looked, as we should, to things Eternal; we
have seen them, we have tasted them, we have loathed them, says Bernard,
speaking of wordly things; the Dagon of all sublunary excellencies would fall
to the ground before the thoughts of Eternal happiness.

[2.] It would moderate our desires after these things; they are for a Season,
for a Short time (...).
; and there ^s nothing of any great importance that is but of short
^ontinuance; whether we have more or less, it is not much material; the great
thing is, What shall be our E^ernal condition? We read of some Hermites, who
were very careful of their Sepulchers, but took little care of their houses;
being demanded the Reason, they said, they should dwell but a little while in
their houses, but should lie a long time in their Sepulchers: our abode here is
but for a short time; if we have bread ^o eat, and apparel to put on, enough to
serve us to our journeys end, what should we do with more? When a man comes to
an Inn, where he is to stay ^ut a night or two, though he has not
accommoda^ions according to his mind, you would think it were (...) great
weakness, if he should send for an Vpholster ^o alter his bed, a Glasier to
mend the window, a ^arpenter and a Mason to rectify what he thinks amiss; ^f
he be but one degree above a fool, he will for so ^hort a time be content with
such things as he find^th. Mariners, who intend for a near Haven, will not
^hake so large provision as those who take a long voy^ge; and if our stay here
be so short, as Constantine told Ablavius, why so much sweat and travel? what
mean ^ur foolish hearts to be so solicitous about those things ^o which ere
long we must bid an everlasting farewell? Were our minds intent upon our
Eternal condition, ^e would for these things referr our selves to God, ^s
willing to have what God sees best for us. A ^ighteous woman being sick, was
asked by her friends, ^hether she were more willing to live or dye, she
^nswered, what God pleases; but, says one, if God should refer it to you,
which would you choose? truly says she, If God should refer it to me, I would
refer it to him again; what she did in regard of life, we would do in regard of
all the enjoyments of this life; we would leave them to be scrambled for by
those who so much admire them, and think it enough that we have Heaven for our
portion.

(3.) It would moderate our delight in them, he who breaths after things
Eternal, will be little delighted with things transitory. Some say, after
Lazarus was raised from the dead, he was never seen to smile, or to take any
content here. After Paul was wrapped up into the third Heaven, he lived like a
man of another world; the world was crucified to him, and he to the world; the
world and he lay like two dead bodies one by another; as Chrysostom descants
upon it, having little affection one to another. It is said of the Sisters of
Theodosius, that when other Ladies were at their re reations, they retired
themselves, that they might converse with God and Heaven: and Theodoret
testifies, that the thoughts of Heavenly things was the greatest pleasure and
recreation to them; delight in these will extinguish all other delights; as the
light of the Sun does the light of the fire.

(4.) It would moderate our grief both in the wa^^ and loss of them.
Ecclesiastical History makes mention of Anthony and Didimus meeting together*
Didimus was a man of excellent parts, and eminent graces, but he wanted his
sight; Anthony asked him, if he were not troubled for his want of sight; he
confessed he was; why, says the other, should you be troubled for want of that
which Dogs and Flies have, and not rather be Thankful that you have that which
the Angels count their Happiness, meaning Grace? for a Believer who has God
for his portion, and Heaven for his Inheritance, to be troubled for want of
that which a Dog, a Reprobate, a Devil may have is as if a favorite fed with
viands from the Kings own table, should be troubled he had no part of those
scraps given to the Dogs; or as if a man who were owner of a Mine of Gold,
should complain he were poor, because his money is not in pence, and twopences.
It was a poor thing in Alexander, who was Lord of the goodliest part of the
world, to be vexed because Ivy would not grow in his Garden at Babylon. It is
much more unbeseeming a Christian who has Title to Eternal blessedness, to be
afflicted for the want of these poor inconsiderable things; if we reflect our
thoughts upon those glorious things laid up in Heaven, we would conclude with
David, That our Lot is fallen to us in a fair ground, and be little troubled
for the want of other things: and as not for the want, so neither for the loss
of them. The Jews have a saying, When a Pagan or Idolater loses his Father, he
has cause to mourn, because he has no Father left; but when a Believer loses
his Father, he has cause to be comforted; because, though his earthly Father
be dead, he has a Father in Heaven: worldly men, when they lose their
Estates, cry out, they are undone; and truly you cannot blame them, it is all
they have: as Micah said, You have taken away my gods, and my Priest, and what
have I more? The loss of twenty or thirty pound is a great loss to a man that
has no more in the World; but it is nothing to him that is worth many
Thousands: Worldly men have their portion in this life; if they lose that, it
is all they have; whereas a godly man, when these things are taken from him,
has reason to comfort himself, because he has treasure laid up in Heaven,
which no injury of times, no malice of men or Devils can deprive him of. The
believing Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that in
Heaven they had a better and more enduring substance [t], Paulinus, when the
Goths invading the City of Nola, plundered his House, and took all he had from
him, cried out: Lord let not the loss of these things disquiet me, thou know
where I have laid up my treasure.

(5.) It would much Sweeten those troubles, end sufferings we here meet with:
this we have laid down in the Text. In the former verses, we read of the great
sufferings of the Apostles, and that that kept them from fainting under these
is partly laid down verse 17. These light afflictions cause for us a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory! And partly in this verse, while we look
not at things which are seen, but at things not seen, for the things which are
seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal. No
suffering seems great to him, who has his mind taken up with the greatness
of Eternity.

We read of some Martyrs, that they have endured great sufferings, without any
sensible feeling of their sufferings: as that young Child, in Josephus, who
when his flesh was pulled in pieces with Pincers, by the command of Antiochus,
said, with a smiling countenance, Tyrant, Thou losest time; where are those
smarting Pains with which thou threatnedst me? make me to shrink, and cry out
if thou can: and Bainam an English Martyr, when the fire was flaming about
him, said, You Papists talk of Miracles, behold here a miracle, I feel no more
pain than if I were in a bed of Down, it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses:
Surely their strength was not the strength of stones, nor their flesh as brass,
that they should not be sensible of so great sufferings; only they were so much
in Heaven, now they were going to Heaven, that they endured pains, as it were
without pain, and sufferings without feeling of their sufferings: Others again,
though sensible of their torments, yet endured them with unspeakable courage,
and alacrity. Laurence, when his body was roasted upon a burning Gridiron,
cried out, This side is roasted enough, turn the other: Marcus of Arethusa,
when his body was anointed with honey, and hung up aloft in a Basket to be
stung by Wasps and Bees, looked down, saying, I am advanced, despising you that
are below? And when we see weak feeble creatures, defying their torments,
conquering in the midst of suffering; when we hear them expressing the greatest
joy, in the m^dst of their greatest suff rings; singing in Prison, as Paul and
Silas did; kissing the Stake, as Henry Voes did; clapping their hands when they
were half consumed with fire, as Hawks did; blessing God that ever they were
born to see that day, as John Noyes did; calling their execution-day, Their
wedding Day, as Bishop Ridley did: We cannot but think there was something more
than ordinary, that did thus raise their Spirits: and questionless, this was it
chiefly, they had an eye to the Recompense of the reward: the consideration of
those eternal joys, they were now entering on, did so ravish their hearts, and
transport their thoughts, that all their sufferings seemed light, and easy to
them. Tertullian, says the foot feels nothing on earth, when the mind is in
Heaven; and as this sweetens sufferings, so all other troubles. Jerome thus
comforted the Hermit that was sad with his being alone in the Wilderness,
Think of Heaven, and so long thou will not think thy self in a Desert.

It is reported of Olympius, who lived Cloystered up in a Monastery near
Jordan, that his mind was so fixed on Eternity, that he had scarce any sense,
and feeling of any temporal miseries.

It happened on a time, that a certain religious man went to visit him, and
finding him cloystered up in a dark Cell, which he thought un-inhabitable by
reason of heat, and swarms of gnats and flies, and asking him, how he could
endure to live in such a place? he answered, All this is but a light matter,
that I may escape eternal Torments: I can endure the stinging of Gnats, that I
might not endure the stinging of Conscience, and the gnawing of that worm that
never dies: this heat thou think grievous, I can easily endure, when I think
of the eternal fire of Hell, these sufferings are but short, but the sufferings
of Hell are eternal. And as all present sufferings are light in comparison of
everlasting torments, so, if we think further of the eternal joys of Heaven,
this will make them seem more light; I reckon, says the Apostle, That the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed Romans 8, 18.
; He puts as it were into one balance the afflictions of this life, and in the
other the blessedness of Heaven, and having weighed both, concludes, that
there is no reckoning to be made of the one in comparison of the other.

Chrysostom writing to Stagirius, to comfort him against the troubles he met
with, bespeaketh him in this manner: If thou were elected King of some
flourishing Kingdom, and were now going to the Imperial City to be invested
with the Regal dignity, though as then were passing through the Suburbs, thou
should meet with some dirty way, or have some light affront put upon thee by
some Passenger; would thou not easily pass by this, and hasten with joy to
the Coronation? Our abode in this life is but like passing through the Suburbs;
if we hope for an immortal Crown in Heaven, we should make light of whatsoever
troubles here befall us, imitating that great Captain of our Salvation, who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame Heb.
12, 2.
. It was the Counsel an old Monk gave to a young Novice, entering into that
Order: If thou would be perfect, thou must be like the Ass of this Monastery,
which, when he is laden, repineth not; when beaten, kicketh not; when driven,
goes whither the Driver would have him: so, says he, it must be with thee;
and so it would be with us, if we had our minds seriously fixed upon
Eternity. What Chrysostom speaks of wicked men, whom he calls the Devils
Hackneys, (...).
who go through thick and thin, through fair vveather, and foul vveather,
stick at nothing the Devil puts them upon, would be verified in us; in
reference to God; we would be willing both to do and suffer what God would have
us; no trouble would appear grievous, no state and condition of life seem
amiss, in which God disposes of us.

It is reported of a Jewish Rabbin, that whatsoever befell him, he would say,
It is good, if any cross accident came, it is good; if any trouble befell him,
it is good also; if a second, a third cross, this is good also; for which cause
he was called Rabbi, (...) This also I have read of a religious man who being
in a great strait, and not knowing what to do, wrote down all the Letters-of
the Alphabet in a paper, and spread them open before God, saying, Lord, here
are Letters, and letters make words, and words signify things: do thou put
them togeth r, and make of them what thou please; it would be so with us in
some measure, if we looked as the Apostles did, at things Eternal: we would in
these temporal things refer our selves to God; we would be willing to be what
God would have us to be, and have what God would have us to have, and suffer
what God would have us to suffer.

(6.) It would have a powerful influence upon whatsoever we do: every work we
do is a step to Eternity: as every step a Traveller takes, brings him nearer
to his journies end; so every motion, and action done by us, is a step to our
eternal condition; every good action sets us nearer an eternity of
happiness, every bad action carries us nearer an eternity of misery: No sooner
is any thing acted, but it is presented to the All-seeing eye of God; and being
viewed, and censured, is forthwith transmited either to eternal reward, or
eternal punishment; many things in this life which are transient in their
nature, are yet durable as to their issue. A lease is written over in three or
four hours, yet the concernment of it may be for many years, sometimes for many
lives: in like manner it is with us; our thoughts, words, and actions, do not
dye as soon as they are past, but are as seeds which are sown in time, and come
up in Eternity; whether we pray, or sin, whether we do well, or wickedly, we
are sowing; and these several seeds sown in this world, will certainly come up
in the world to come.

We read of some Rivers, which after they have run some space, fall
underground and cannot be seen, but after many miles running under the earth,
break up again into a great stream: there are many actions we do, which are no
sooner done, but we as soon forget what we have done, they pass out of our
sight; but every one of these will rise up in eternity, and will make our
eternity either more happy, or more miserable: Cast thy seed upon the waters,
says Solomon, for after many days thou shall find it Eccles. 11.1.
. It is more properly meant of works of Charity, but will hold in all other
works; which though at present they pass out of our sight, yet after many days
will come up with a plentiful Increase; and if this were well considered by us,
what manner of persons would we be? how careful and circumspect in all our
actions? Chroniclers have said, Some Kings, though otherwise they would have
taken more liberty, yet have been more circumspect in their actions, knowing
what they did would be registered and transmitted to posterity; the like
circumspection would we have, if we did seriously consider, that all we do will
be cetainly transmitted to Eternity.

(7.) As it would have a mighty influence upon other actions, so chiefly upon
our duties; our religious performances; in which our Eternal condition is more
especially concerned. What Moses tells the Israelites, Set your hearts to all
the words which I testify this day, for it is not a vain thing for you,
because it is your life Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.
; may be said of every duty we do; it is our life, our soul, our Salvation, our
Eternity depends upon it, and how strong should that cable be that has so
great a weight hanging on it? Caesar said, being in a hot fight, At other times
I fought for my honor, now I fight for my life: In many other things we act
for our credit, for our profit, but in holy duties we act for our life, our
Eternal life is concerned; and therefore, whatsoever we do, we should do it
with all our might. It was a boasting speech of Zeuxes, that he painted for
Eternity: time has long since defaced his work, but it is certain, whatsoever
we do in Gods service, we do for Eternity; we pray for Eternity, and hear for
Eternity; and if he for that reason did whatsoever he painted with the greatest
accurateness, would not so much as draw a line but with all possible care; much
more should we do it in all the duties we perform: When formality,
indifferency, deadness, sleepiness creeps upon us, we should do well to
consider that our Eternity lies at stake; and this would be a good help against
these Distempers; we would not then put off God, and content our selves with
such dull and languid performances; this would be like Oil to the Jack, or
wings to the bird; like sails to the ship, or wind to the sails, to carry us on
with a full plerophory of affection: It is a direction some give, that we
should do every thing we do, as if it were the last time we should do it.
Seneca in an Epistle to a friend says, That he wrote then to him with that
mind and affection, as if he should be called away by death as soon as he had
written: We should do so much rather in our ^ddresses to God: we should pray
and hear, and perform every duty, as if it were the last prayer we should make,
the last Sermon we should hear, the ^ast duty we should perform; as if as soon
as we had ^one, we should be called away by death, and forthwith enter upon our
Eternal condition; and this would ^uestionless raise up our affections to the
highest ^itch of fervency and intention. When we go to ^ear a Sermon, did we
consider that it is our life, that our Eternal welfare depends upon it, we
would give ^he more earnest heed, as the Apostle exhorts Heb. 2.1.
, We would hear as the Bereans did, with all readiness and greediness of mind
(...).
; or as Christ's hearers, who are said to have their eyes fastened upon him Luke
4.20. and 19.48.
, wholly intent upon him; to hang upon him; so the word there used does
signify: as catching at every word he spoke: when we address our selves to God
in prayer, did we set Eternal happiness before us, and consider that this
depends upon our speeding, or not speeding in prayer, we would with a holy
violence wrestle with Almighty God; we would neither give our selves, nor God
any rest, but would lie at the feet of God as so many monuments of importunity,
resolving with Jacob, not to let him go, unless he bless us.

[8.] It would render us more quiet and peaceable in our carriage one toward
another: it is some wordly interest that mainly causes one man to bite and
devour, and act the part of a Devil toward another, From whence come wars and
figthings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts James 4.1, 4.
? and what lust it is chiefly, is laid down, Know ye not that the friendship of
the world is enmity with God? whereas, the wisdom that is from above is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated James 3.17.
. There is a Fish which Aelian calls the Adonis of the Sea; because it
meddleth with no living thing, but preserves a sweet peace with all the
offspring of the Sea; for which cause it is loved, and courted as the darling
of the waters: the heavenly minded Christian lives on the earth, as that Fish
does in the Sea, pursuing the things which make for peace; and as much as in
him lies, living peaceably with all men. Nazianzen, when there arose a
contention in the Synod about his Bishopric, used this speech to those that
were assembled; It is an unbeseeming thing for us who preach peace, to nourish
contention; I therefore entreat you by the sacred Trinity, that you do all
things in peace: if I be the cause of this sehism, if I be the Jonah that has
caused this storm, cast me into the Sea, that the tempest may cease, put me
from my Bishopric, banish me the City, do what you will with me, so you love
the truth and peace. Bernard, while some brethren were offended with him
tells them, I will be at peace with you, though you will not; when you
trouble me, I will be at peace with you; I will give place to wrath, lest I
give place to the Devil: thus, while such as drive on wordly interests, imagine
deceitful things against them that are quiet in the land; those that mind
heavenly Eternal things, labor all they can to promote concord, to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

[9.] It would much elevate the mind: Vision is of an assimilating nature:
Jacob's Ewes seeing the rods with white streaks, brought forth Cattle
ring-straked and speckled: the Egyptians worshipped a pied Bull; and whereas
some thought it strange, that when one dyed, they should have another of the
same color, Austin, thinks the Devil, to keep them in Idolatry, might do with
their Cows, as Jacob did with the Ewes, present to them, when they conceived,
the likeness of such a Bull. Plutarch tells of two deformed Persons, who
often looking upon beautiful Pictures, had beautiful children: this which is
sometimes true in naturals, will hold more true in morals; conversing with low
objects, makes low, and degenerate minds: What the Psalmist speaks of
Idol-makers, and Worshippers, they that make them are like unto them; so are
all they that put their trust in them; may be said here, earthly objects, make
earthly minds; whereas looking to things Eternal, which are the highest
objects, would raise our mind to a suitable height and greatness. Thoughts are
the food of the soul; the soul feeds on them, as the body upon meat: Now you
know such meat as men eat, such blood and spirits they have; and look what the
objects are about which the soul is conversant, such is the soul: low objects
debase the mind; high objects, such as things Eternal, work in men high minds,
and raise up to a greatness of spirit becoming man, so noble a creature: I
doubt not but you would look upon it as a sordid thing for men to busy
themselves about such low things as some (and they great ones) have sometimes
done: As Artaxerxes in making hafts of knives; Bias in making Lanthorns;
Demitian in stabbing Flies with a bodkin; another in stabbing Frogs; whereas,
if you make any thing your business below things Eternal, it is exceedingly
below that greatness of Spirit which should be in men who have reasonable
souls; especially Christians, who should have higher aims than other men: If
Children, (says one) play for Pins, bigger boys for Points; men for shillings,
or pounds; there is no great difference, and truly whatsoever you busy your
selves about, short of Heaven and things Eternal, it is but a more serious
trifling, and it is a shameful thing to be serious about trifles Turpe est
difficiles habere nugas.
: If like Baruch, you seek great things, seek them which are greatest and
highest, things Eternal; and this will be both an argument of a greatness of
spirit becoming Christianity, and a means to raise up your minds to a higher
pitch of greatness.

(10.) It would put the greatest honor upon us: we count those the most famous
Mountains that are highest; those the goodliest Trees that are tallest; those
the stateliest Buildings whose tops reach nearer to Heaven; accordingly they
are the choicest Christians, whose hearts are most taken up with heavenly
things. Remarkable is that which is spoken of No^h, These are the Generations
of Noah Genesis 6.9.
; but before any mention is made of his children, the Scripture first says,
Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Ge^eration; and Noah walked with God;
and then fol^oweth, Noah begat three Sons: Sem, Ham, and Japhet: Though it were
an honor to Noah to be the Father ^f those Sons, out of whose loins came all
after Generations, yet it was a greater honor to him to be a just-man, and
walk with God; and therefore (which Chrysostom calls a strange kind of
Genealogy) after the Scripture had said, These are the Generations of Noah: It
first says, He was a just man, and walked with God: and then, Noah begat three
Sons; implying, that it is a greater honor to be a good man, and converse with
God, than to be a Father of the most numerous and illustrious progeny. It is
said, That Jabez was more honorable than his Brethren: then follows, And
Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me
indeed, and enlarge my Coast, and that thine hand might be with me 1 Chronicles.
4.9, 10.
; letting us understand, that it was his piety, and conversing with God in
prayer, that made him more honorable than his Brethren. Let the blind besotted
world count it a dishonor to walk with God, and converse in Heaven; yet this
is it that will make men truly honorable in the esteem of God, and Angels, and
all good men; and will at last make them honorable in the eyes of them who now
vilify them. When Michal scorned David for dancing before the Ark: How
glorious was the King of Israel, who uncovered himself in the eyes of the
Handmaids his servants! David tells her, It was before the Lord, and if this be
to be vile, I will be more vile; and of the Handmaids thou have spoken of, of
them shall I be had in honor 2 Samuel 6.
. The like I say here, those which now despise them, even of them shall they be
had in honor; they will at last say with those in the Book of Wisdom, These
are those whom we had in derision, etc. but now are they numbered amongst the
Saints, and their portion is amongst the righteous.

(11.) It gives the greatest satisfaction to the mind: temporal things may
fill, but cannot satisfy: the belly may be filled, and that with hid
treasures, but the heart cannot de filled with these things; the soul is an
immortal substance, nothing but things eternal can content it: it first came
from heaven, nothing below heaven can give it satisfaction; as Noah's Dove
hovered over the waters, but could find no rest till she came into the Ark from
whence she was sent; as Quicksilver being poured out, creeps up and down
from place to place, and never is at rest, till it finds Gold with which it may
commix; or as little veins of Water wandered from their Fountains, though put
into vessels of Gold or Crystal, are never so well as in their proper
Fountains: so it is with the soul; The motion of immortal souls is, (says one)
like that of Celestial bodies, purely circular, they rest not, till they return
from whence they came, the bosom of Eternity; It is a Maxim, every thing has
a natural inclination to its original Omne principatum sequitur naturam
principiorum.
, Rivers come out of the Sea, and unto the place from whence they came, thither
they return again Eccles. 1.7.
, Though Fishes enjoy the vastness of the Ocean, yet they more frequently visit
the place of their first spawning, finding it more commodious; Bees will not be
forced to tarry in another Hive, unless they voluntarily leave their own in a
swarm: take them at other times when they lie out, and sweep them into another
Hive, they will at furthest the next day return into their own: Some say if a
Partridge-Egg be taken out of the Nest, and be hatched under a strange
Partridge, yet, upon first hearing the call of her own Damme, she will
presently quit the Partridge that hacht her, and render her self into her own
Covey; thus the Soul, having its original from Heaven can never be satisfied
but with heavenly things. One Bellarm. de Ascen. grad.
sets it out by this similitude: As a heavy body cannot rest in the air, be
it never so wide, nor in the water, be it never so deep, but still sinketh down
till it comes to its center; so the soul of man can never find any repose:
either in the airy and flitting honors, or in the earthly, dirty Riches, or in
the watery and softning pleasures of this life, till it comes to pitch upon
God and Heaven. Another thus: As the bubble cannot stay it self at the bottom
of the water, but ascends higher and higher, till it comes to the top, and
then striveth to ascend no higher, but breaks its thin filme, and pours forth
it self into the open air Gr. Nyss.
; so the soul cannot stay it self in any of these earthly inferior things, but
ascends up till it comes to close with its proper object, and there it
finds true repose. Satisfaction, which is in vain sought for in these
temporal enjoyments, is abundantly found in heavenly things; They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house Psalm. 36.8.
; he that has them for his portion has a goodly Heritage, may say to himself
with Deborah; Thou have marched valiantly, oh my soul, that have got such a
booty; Or David, Return unto thy rest, oh my soul, the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee!

(12.) It brings the greatest measure of joy that this life is capable of: If
one look to the land, behold darkness, and sorrow Isa. 5.30.
, But look up to Heaven, and behold light, and joy; such as converse in Heaven
are (as was before-said) compared to Mountains: high Mountains being above the
middle Region, are free from clouds and storms, there is nothing but calmness
and serenity; so Olympus is said to be all clear and beautiful (...).
; such a beauty and serenity is in the soul of the heavenly-minded Chistian: he
is like Adams Paradise, when there was no flaming sword of terror placed there:
like Solomon's Temple, where no voice of Axe and Hammer was to be heard; like
the fields of Enna in Sicily, where some say, there is a continual spring, and
flowers all the year long: whereas wicked men have mostly their heaven here,
and their hell afterward; and most Christians have their hell here, and their
heaven afterward; the heavenly minded Christian has a double heaven: one in
time, the other in Eternity* one in the way, another in hi^ Country: one in
labor, the other in rest: one is working, the other in receiving the reward of
his works as he is now in Heaven in regard of his pract^ce and converse, so in
regard of his joy, having here the first fruits of Heaven, the prelibations of
his future happiness; Larks sing sweetest, when they fly h^ghest: the^ is the
soul of the Christian most full of joy, when h^ is soaring toward Heaven in his
meditations: Oh, he^ sweet, says Chrysostom, is the contemplation of Heaven a
man would dwell in this contemplation, and no^ come out of it: A man (says
Austin) might age himself in it, and sconer grow old, than weary; that an^
cavil against the Religious Life as full of sadness, an^ Antipodes to all joy,
and cheerfulness, is, because they never experienced it, and it is most
unreasonable to censure what they never tried, it is as if (...) Judge should
condemn a man before he examine his cause, or heard him speak for himself. When
Jews went out to war, if any took a beautiful Dams^ captive, he was not
forbidden to marry her, only h^ must shave her head, and pare her nails, and
then h^ might espouse her; Joy is that beautiful Damsel tha^ all the world
court; Religion does not forbid us to marry it, only to pare off the
extravagancies of it and then we may enjoy it, (as Ambrose alluding t^ the name
Isaac, which signifies laughter or joy) t^ joy is not destroyed by Religion, it
is only laid upon the Altar, and made more sublime; thy Isaac sha^^ not dye,
but the Ram; thy joy shall not be taken away, only the extravagancy of it.

Tertullian in his Book de spectaculis, proves a large, that there is no joy
like the joy of a Christian and indeed what delight may be compared with the
delight of that Believer, whose daily fellowship is wi^^ the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ; whose convers^^ is in Heaven: who is continually drawing
water out of the wells of Salvation, and bathing his soul in those Rivers of
Everlasting pleasures? Some observe, that the Grasshopper neither feeds upon
grass as beasts do, nor upon seeds as birds do, nor upon Flowers as Bees do,
only feeds on the dew falling from Heaven, and yet is both a nimble creature,
often shipping up and down, and a cheerful creature, frequently singing; a true
Believer, as he does not much trouble himself about the world; so for the most
part he has little of it, at least in regard of what the world gives, but
conversing with things heavenly and eternal; this fills him with more joy,
than others have, when their Corn, and Wine increases.

(13.) It conduces much to the increasing of heavenly light and knowledge: the
higher men stand, the further they see; they that are in a Plain cannot see
far; they that are in a valley see but a little way; such as are in a bottom of
a well, see only that point of the Heavens that is perpendicularly over their
heads; whereas, those that stand upon the top of an high Mountain, see over all
the Country round about: questionless they who are frequently conversing in
Heaven, cannot but know more than other men. Origin upon those words of the
Apostle, Romans 11. That when the fuln ss of the Gentiles is come in, all Israel
shall be saved; has this expression, what is meant by all Israel shall be
saved; and what by the fullness of the Gentiles; only God knows, and his only
begotten Son; and perhaps some of the friends of God, of whom Christ speaks:
I call you no more Servants, but friends; for all that I have heard of the
Father, I have made known to you: such as are Gods friends, know more of his
mind than others: The se^ret of the Lord is with them that fear him Psalm. 25.14.
, The Papists say of Bonaventure, that being asked by Aquinas, out of what
Books he had those heavenly expressions that were in his writings; he pointed
to the Crucifix, saying, that is the Book which prompts to me what I write,
being prostrate at the feet of that Image, I receive more light from Heaven,
than from all the Books I read; if what they ascribe to the Crucifex, we
transfer to Christ himself, it will hold for a sound truth, They looked to him,
and were lightened Psalm. 24.5.
: We find the bodily sight is much strengthened by looking upon suitable
objects: when the eye is dimb, if it be fixed a while upon some green Meadow,
or flowery bank, it much helps the sight. Artificers, after long poring upon
some dark work, finding a dimness in their eyes, are wont to take some Emerald,
or some other green thing, by the verdure whereof their eyes may be refreshed,
and their sight strengthened: it will hold as true in spiritual sight, the
light of knowledge and understanding is much increased by looking upon the
unseen Eternal things in Heaven.

(14. It would sweeten death, and that nothing else can. It was an usual speech
among the Heathens, that only Christians were contemners of death: the
Philosophers, especially the Stoics, made it their work to furnish themselves
with arguments, and get their hearts into such a frame, that they might be
above all passions; might not fear any evil that could befall them, no not
death it self; and though in other things they went far, even to the shame of
most Christians; yet when it came to death, they fell short of what they
propounded to themselves: Socrates is thought to go as far as any other;
whatsoever evil befell him he was yet the same man; no alteration appearing in
his carriage, insomuch as another Philosopher, Antisthenes, said, If the Gods
would grant him what he desired, he would desire nothing else but to have the
spirit of Socrates; and this was so much the more remarkable, because that
equanimity he attained to, was quite contrary to his natural temper. There
came, on a time, a fellow to Athens, who pretended great skill in Palmestry,
that by the sight of men's hands he would tell what disposition they were of;
and having guessed shrewdly in many, he was at last brought to Socrates,
looking upon his hand, he affirmed him to be of a froward, peevish disposition;
the people began to hout him, having had so long experience of his meekness and
moderation; but Socrates said, do not blame the man, for the truth is, such a
one I am by nature, only I have cured the intemperance of nature, by the
practice of Philosophy; yet this man, who was so far able to master himself and
his passions in other things, was not able to master the fear of death; though
at first he seemed undaunted, yet when the cup of Poison was reached out to
him, he looked as pale as ashes, the like it was with others: Plato discoursing
highly of the contempt of death, was answered by one, he spoke beyond what he
lived. Tully was well versed in the writings of the Stoics, and thought
himself fortified against the fear of death; but when death came, complained, I
know not how it comes to pass, but so it is, the remedy is too narrow for the
disease: Though while men look upon death at a distance, they may hope by the
improvement of Philosophical arguments, to master the fear of death; yet when
death comes in good earnest, when all the senses, the ports of the soul are
beset with the ambushes of death; when death mounts up all her batteries, and
beats down one hold after another, driving the soul from one part of the body
to another, till at last the soul be forced to quit her former habitation? when
a man comes to feel what he never felt before, to do what he never did before,
nor is ever to do a second time; when he comes now to have the last cast for
an Eternity either of happiness or misery, to cease any longer to be what he
was before, and to enter upon a new, but never ending condition; when it comes
to this, they must be better and higher arguments than can be learned in
natures school, that will be able to afford support and comfort to the
departing soul. As soon may a man think to gather Gr^pes of Thorns, and Figs of
Thistles, as by the sole improvement of these, to grapple with the terrors of
death. Lypsius lying upon his deathbed, when a friend that stood by, said, It
would be in vain to suggest any arguments of consolation to him, who was so
well acquainted with the writings of the Stoics; he is said to turn himself
toward Christ, saying, Lord give me the true Christian patience; whereas, the
Believer whose mind is taken up with heavenly things, being already dead to the
world, finds it no hard matter to part with it; as that Martyr, Julius Palmar
said, to them that have their souls linked to the flesh, like a Rogues foot to
a pair of stocks, it is indeed hard to dye; but for him who is able to separate
soul and body, by the help of Gods spirit, it is no more mastery for such an
one to dye, than for me to drink this cup of Beer; having beforehand sent his
heart to Heaven, he looks upon death as a favorable wind to carry him sooner
to his desired Haven. Moses converseth with God, as a man converseth with his
friend; and when God bad him go up to the Mount, and dye there, Moses makes no
more of it; he went up into the Mount, and died according to the word of the
Lord: the Jews say that his soul was sucked out of his mouth with a kiss; he
who now converseth in Heaven, when he dies, only changes his place, but not
his company; removes to a higher form, but continues at the same school:
while he lives, he is like the Be which converseth amongst sweet flowers; or
like the Birds of the fortunate Islands, which they say, are all their
lifetime nourished with perfumes; and when he dies, he dies like the Phoenix
in the sweet odours of an heavenly conversation.

(15.) It would give us, after death, a wide and large entrance into Heaven:
They that look here to things Eternal, shall after this life have possession of
them; shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven; when others, who ^ook no higher than things temporal, shall be called
the ^east in the Kingdom of God: Heaven, like the Hal^ions nest, will hold
nothing but its own bird: the Apostle blesses God, because he had made them
meet to ^e made partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in ^ight Col. 1.12.
: Men must be meet for Heaven, before they ^ome there; they who are now
strangers to God, and Heaven, what should they do in Heaven, where the great
happiness consists in the enjoyment and service of God? whereas, they who make
it their business ^o lay up treasure in Heaven, shall have a ready admit^ance
into Heaven, a free participation of whatsover ^lessedness is there treasured
up; whatsoever happiness ^here is in the sight and enjoyment of God; whatsoever
solace in the embraces of a dear Savior; whatsoever Satisfaction in the
society of Angels and Saints; whatsoever joys and pleasures are in that place
of bliss; all this, and much more than we can ^magine, shall be the undoubted
portion of those who make Eternal things their aim and end. Jerome says, That
Saul knew beforehand he should be made King, because in a kind of a vision he
saw himself placed upon the top of a Palm Tree; the Palm Tree is an Emblem of
the heavenly minded Christian, as was before showed in several resemblances:
Now as Saul ^eeing himself advanced to the top of a Palm Tree, look^d upon this
as a Presage of his future advancement ^o the Throne, so he who has his heart
and mind in Heaven while he lives, may assure himself of Heaven when he dies;
it is his now by way of election, and shall be hereafter his by way of
fruition; now he walks with God, then he goes to God; while he is ^ere, he
converseth in Heaven; when he goes hence, ^e takes possession of it,; having
chosen that better ^art, it shall never be taken away from him. To conclude
this use, let these many advantages serve as so-many incentives to quicken us
to this duty in the Text, o^ looking to those things that are Eternal.

CHAP. XIV. Of various other considerations to move us to make provision for
Eternity.
4. BE exhorted to make timely provision for that Eternity we must ere long
enter upon. By thing Eternal spoken of in the Text, we are chiefly to
understand the unseen eternal things in Heaven; as appears by comparing this
with the foregoing verse accordingly the thing I would exhort to, is to secur^
these to our selves; this is it which is so often calle^ for in Scripture,
though under different expressions as, Seeking first the Kingdom of God Mat.
6.33.20. John 6.27. Luke 13.24. Phil. 2.12. 1 Timothy 6.12, 19. 2 Peter 1.10
, Laying o^ for our selves treasure in Heaven, Labou^ing for that me^ which
endures to everlasting l^fe, Striving to enter in a the Strait gate, Working
out our salvation, Laying hol^ upon eternal life, Laying up in stere a good
foundation against the time to come, Giving diligence to make ou^ calling and
election sure. All which, and many like expressions, tend to the same purpose,
and do all call upon us to practice that necessary duty I am now to speak to;
in speaking to which I shall first propound some Motives or Considerations to
quicken us to it; the^ by laying down some Directions, show how we may do it
more successfully: For Motives take these:

(1.) This is the one thing necessary; the great thing we have to do (...).
; if we do not this, we do nothing; those who mind only temporal things,
neglecting this, are said, to walk in a vain show, and disquiet themselves in
vain Psalm. 39.6.
, To weave the Spiders web Isa. 59.5.
, To labor for that that is not bread Isa. 55.2.
, To labor for the wind Eccles. 5.16.
, To labor in the fire, and weary themselves for very vanity Hab. 2.13.
, That this is the main thing we have to do, will appear upon this following
account.

(1. It is the end for which God sent us into the world: If a Philosopher
Anaxagoras Clazamenius.
being asked why he came into the world, could say, that I might contemplate
Heaven. Heaven is my Country, my great care is for that; much more should we
Christians think so, and accordingly answer the end of our coming hither: it is
a great deal of care we take about the things of this life: what we shall eat,
and what we shall drink, and wherewith we shall be clothed; and all this we
may do; our heavenly Father knows we have need of these things; but what is
all this to Eternity? What is all this to the great end for which we come
h^ther? Aulus Fulvius.
As he told his Son,) that he begat him not to Cataline, but to his Country: So
God did not send us into the world to eat, and drink, and buy, and sell, etc.
but that we might serve him, and save our own souls; all other things are
impertinent to that errand we came for. A devout Pilgrim traveling to
Jerusalem, in his way passed through many Cities, where, though he saw many rare
monuments, and found courteous entertainment, yet would say, This is not
Jerusalem, this is not the end of my coming. Amongst those many good things we
have, and other things we do, we should still think with our selves, this is
nothing to Eternity, this is not that we came into the world for; other things
perish with the using Col. 6.13. and Col. 2.22.
, Our most needful care as to this life, is to provide food for these bodies,
which cannot long subsist without it, all the labor of m^n is for his mouth
Eccles. 6.7.
, He that labors for himself, for his mouth craveth it of him, Prove. 16.26.
Yet the Apostle telling us, meats are for the belly, and the belly for meats,
adds withal, God shall destroy both it and them 1 Cor. 6.13.
, But when both these are destroyed, we have an Eternity to enter upon, and
that should be the great matter of our care, as being the main thing we came
into the world for. Cato for a long time never declared his opinion about any
business in the Senate, but would still close it with this passage, Methinks
Carthage should be destroyed: whatsoever else we think, or do, we should still
consider, Eternity is to be provided for: if we neglect this, all we do is
nothing, and it will be a sad reflection upon our deathbeds, when over-looking
our bypast lives, we shall find that we have all this time busied our selves
about impertinencies and neglected that great work for which we were sent into
the world.

[2.] It is for this end God gives us all the precious time we have: wise men
will not suffer their servants to spend their time about such work as will not
pay for the Candle they burn in doing it; neither would God give us so much
precious time to be spent about those petty things, those nothings that most
men are employed about; nothing less than the service of God, and working out
our own salvation, will bear proportion with that invaluble talent of Time God
has indulged to us, I gave her space to repent of her fornications Rev. 2.21.
: God does not give us so much time to be ravelled out about trifles, but to
repent; to make our peace with God, and make provision for our Eternal
condition; the time spent about other things, is but lost time: It is said of
Abraham, and some other good men, that they dyed full of days; but some
observe, it is no where so said of any wicked men; Their days are not full,
but empty; they possess months and years of vanity, empty months Job 7.3.
, as Gregory calls them; alluding to that, Some more refined Heathen thought
that not worthy to be called by the name of life, which is not spent in doing
good. Seneca says of a vicious person, who arrived to a great age, that he was
along time, but lived but a little space; and of another, alluding to Mariners,
he was tossed up and down much, but sailed little, such persons will have a sad
account to make at last, who bring their years to an end* as a tale that is
told, spending all their time about other things, and neglecting this Parson
Resolut.
: one expresses it thus, suppose a Merchant should send his Factor beyond the
Seas, to negotiate his a affairs; and after his staying there seven or eight
years, being called for home by his Master, and demanded how he spent his time,
should bring in such an account as this: so much time spent in Hawking and
Hunting, so much in going to Taverns and Alehouses; would not every man laugh
at so fond a reckening? But suppose, being asked further what he had done about
his Masters oc asions, he should answer that his time was so taken up with the
other, that he could allow no time for his Masters business; would he not be
thought worthy of a severe punishment? The time is coming when we must be
answerable to God for every hour, every minute of time we spend; and let us
think beforehand how sad it will will be, if being summoned before Gods
tribunal, we shall be able to give in no other account than this, so much time
spent in eating, drinking and sleeping, so much in the pursuit of the profits
and pleasures of the world; perhaps so much in gluttony and drunkenness, in
chamebring and wantonness, in strife and envy; in the mean time little or none
in that great work for which all our time was bestowed upon us.

(3.) It is for this end, that God gives us his word and Gospel, his Sabbaths
and Sacraments, and all the Means of grace we live under; for this end he sends
his Ministers to make offers of Eternal happiness* to this end, they bring line
upon line, precept upon precept, exhorting, admonishing, persuading, beseeching
us to look after the things of our everlasting peace; and if, notwithstanding
all these helps to Heaven, we shall neglect so great Salvation; this will make
our condition more sad, our condemnation more inexcusable; it is not here as it
is in Livings, and other Ecclesiastical promotions, which perhaps are worth an
hundred, or two hundred pound by the year, and yet not above ten or twenty
pound in the Kings Books; no, God takes exact notice what means we enjoy, how
many Sabbaths we have, how many Sermons we hear. The year, and month, when the
word of God came to the Prophets, stand upon record in Scripture Ezekiel. 1.1. and
81. etc.
. There is never a Sermon preached to us, never an exhortation pressed on us by
the Masters of the Assemblies, never a motion from Gods Spirit, but are laid up
in store with God, and sealed up amongst his treasures, and will at last day be
produced as so many swift witnesses against us, if we turn our backs upon so
many offer^ of salvation; and when we shall call to mind wha^ helps and
furtherances we have had, and what little improvement we have made of them; how
much God did for us, and how little we did for our selves; how much God did to
save us, and how little we could be persuaded to do toward our own salvation:
the thoughts of this will be as so many coals of fire, to kindle and increase
the flames of our justly deserve torments, as so many rods or scorpions with
which conscience will lash us to all Eternity; this being the^ the great thing
we have to do, what remains but that we set about it?

[2.] Consider, there is no man whatsoever, but will on time or other approve
of this course, and justify the practice of those who are most serious and
diligent in providing for their eternal condition: Wisdom is now justified of
he^ children, but will be one day justified of her greatest adversaries. Pliny
the second being written to by a friend to give some directions, how he might
better order his conversation; wrote back to him, that he would not ^^ouble him
with many directions, but would give him one which might serve in stead of all;
that we would he be same men when we are well, that we profess our selves to
be, and promise to be when we are sick. It was the saying of a mo^e refined
Heathen, but verily it is a speech deserving to be written in letters of Gold,
or rather to be engraven with the point of a Diamond in the hardest Rock, in
such legible characters, that whosoever runs may read it: Oh how happy a thing
were it, if men were always of the same mind that they are of upon their
sick-beds? It is noted by Zaleuchus in the Proem of his Laws that when men come
to dye, there ^nvades them a sorrow for what they have done amiss, and ^n
earnest desire that all their former life had been just and virtuous. And as
remarkable was that saying of Plato, Know this for certain, that when a man
comes to ^his, to see that he must dye, there comes upon him both ^ great
fear and a great care of those thing, which he before neglected in his
lifetime. It is an usual thing for ^arnal men, in the time of health, to look
upon the service of God as a weariness; to cavil against the ^trictness of
Religion; what need is there of so much ^raying, and hearing, and pains-taking?
but it is a are thing to hear men speak thus upon their death^eds. Some say,
the Mole, which continues blind ^ll her lifetime, has her eyes open toward
her ^eath: how many have we heard of, who have lived ^ll their time, as if
there were neither God, nor Heav^n ^or Hell; yet at the time of death have
their eyes o^ened, and conscience awakened? How many, who^ave passionately
befooled and blamed themselves for their former neglects; one crying out, call
time back ^gain; another, My life is done, but my work is undone; others
wishing that God would try them once more; that they might live a little longer
time; promising what lives they would lead; what care and pains they would
take: or if any be so far given over to a stupid security, that the grim face
of Death cannot awaken them; it will be certainly thus with them soon after
death. Bellarmine tells of a wordly wretch, whom he went to visit upon his
deathbed, who, when he exhorted him to make provision for another world;
answered him De ante been moriendi. l. 2. c. 11.
, Sir, I have much desired to speak with you, but it is not for my self, but in
behalf of my wife and children; for my self, I am going to Hell, neither is
there any thing that I would desire in my own behalf; and this he spoke, says
he, with such composedness of mind, as if he had spoken of going but to the
next Town or Village; vile brute! who could be so apprehensive of his going to
Hell, and be no more affected with it? could a man have spoken with this stupid
set, after he had been some time in Hell? do we think he would have made as
light of it, as he did then? Certainly if fear will not work upon men, feeling
will. It is said of Dives Luke 16.23.
, That in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and saw Abraham afar
off. He who all his life time scarce ever looked upward toward Heaven, yet
being in Hell Torments, he lift up his eyes: the most stupid conscience will
then be awakened: they who now will not see, shall then see, and be confounded;
in the latter days they shall consider it Jer. 30.24.
, Oh how happy a thing were it if men were of the same mind now, that they will
be of then, that they would be persuaded to do that now, which afterward they
will most passionately wish they had done, that they would but do that in time,
which all the world would be glad to do when it is too late! On the other side,
how sad is it that men should never consider this, till they be awakened by
everlasting burnings? Parisiensis calls such the Batts of Faith; as Batts do
not look forth till the Sun be down: so it is with such; Austin compares them
to them who awake out of a Lethargy, and fall into a Frenzy; they awake out
of a dead Lethargy of stupid carelessness, and fall into the Frenzy of honor
and everlasting despair: to conclude this particu^ar; seeing there is no man
whatsoever, but will one time or other approve of this course; it should be our
care now to set about it, to do that in time, which we will wish we had done,
when it will be too late.

[3.] Consider, that wisdom is in nothing so much seen as in this. There is,
says the Philosopher, a wisdom in some particular, as when men are wise in
their own professions, and wisdom in general (...).
, when men are wise about their chief good; by how much greater the good is we
aim at, the greater is the wisdom that is showed in the attaining it. Eternal
happiness being the chief good, wisdom is mainly seen in securing that to our
selves. There are three things in which true wisdom consists; first, to
propound to our selves the chief good, the right end, which is Eternal
blessedness: Secondly, to pitch upon the right means conducing to this end:
Thirdly, to arm our selves against those difficulties which might hinder us in
the attaining it; as we act in this, such we will appear to be at last; if we
be such as make seasonable provision for our everlasting condition, we will
appear to be wise men indeed; but if after all our cares and plottings for
other things, we shall have neglected this, we shall show our selves the
greatest fools; it was for this cause that God calls the rich man Fool (a),
he was wise enough for the world: he knew how to get it, he ordered his
business so, that his ground brought forth plentifully; when he had it, he knew
how to keep it; he resolved to pull down his barns, and, build greater; he knew
likewise how to enjoy the comfort of it; Thou have goods laid up for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry; but because all his wisdom
extended only to these things, making no provision for his future estate, God
calls him Fool, Thou Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and
then adds, so is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
God, that is careful about things temporal, but makes no provision for things
Eternal: we use to look upon them as unwise men, who have only from hand to
mouth; who look only for a present supply, but take no care for their future
subsistence; such are we, if all our care be limited to this short life,
without providing for our future estate: certainly they only are truly wise,
who are wise unto Salvation; such as are wise for other things, and regardless
of this, will at last appear to be the greatest fools; He that gets riches,
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool: Jer. 17.11.
He that makes it his great business to get riches, and so as he may get them,
cares not whether it be by right or wrong, shall not only lose them, when he
has most need of them, but shall have beside the imputation of a fool; though,
as the Psalmist says of such men, Whiles he lived, he bl^ssed his soul, and
other men praise him, thinking he does well unto himself, yet this his way is
his folly Psalm. 49.13, 18.
; and this his folly will at last appear to all men; at the end of his days he
shall be a fool; he was a fool before in the opinion of God and all good men,
but then he will appear so, both to all others, and to himself likewise; he
will then say, what a fool was I to pamper a vile body, and neglect a precious
soul; to take so much care about a short temporal life, and make no provision
for my everlasting condition?

[4.] Things Eternal are worth the securing, and worth all the pains we can
take in securing of them: The Psalmist speaks of them by way of admiration
Psalm. 31.19.
, Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
The Apostle says, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him 1
Cor. 2.9.
: What one says of Venice, that he that never saw it will not believe, and he
that has stayed there but a while, cannot know the stateliness of it; may be
more fitly spoken of Heaven; we cannot comprehend it, till we are comprehended
by it; It does not yet appear what we shall be 1 John 3.2.
; The best way to help our thoughts in conceiving of it, is to represent it to
our selves by those descriptions, and comparative expressions, by those
particular good things the Scripture sets it out by: As when a Mother (says
Anselm) gives a great Apple to a little child, though when the Apple is whole,
there be as much sweetness in it; yet because the child is not able to make
work with it, she cutteth it in several pieces, and gives the child one piece
after another: so we being not able to conceive what the Happiness of Heaven is
in it self, the best way to relieve our weakness, is to cast our eyes upon
those several ingredients which seem to constitute this happiness; as a man
that stands upon the shore where the main Sea runs, though he can neither
see the length, breadth, nor depth of it, yet by what he sees, he sees it to
be a vast thing: In like manner, though Eternal happiness be infinitely beyond
our comprehensions, yet looking thus upon it, it will appear to be a most
blessed and desirable thing, well worthy of our greatest care and industry. It
is storied of one Evagrius, a rich man, that lying upon his deathbed, being
importuned by Sinesius his godly Bishop to give something to charitable Uses;
he yielded at last to give three hundred pounds, but first took bond of the
Bishop that it should he rep^yed him in another world: before he had been one
day dead, he is said to have appeared to the Bishop, delivering in the Bond
ca^celled, as thereby acknowledging, that what was promised was made good; It
is likely the Relation is fabulous, but this is certain, one days being in
Heaven, will make a sufficient recompense for whatsoever we give, or suffer, or
do, or can do, much more the eternal enjoyment of it, and seeing there is such
a far surpassing, and eternal weight of Glory set before us, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, and godliness? Julius Caesar
coming toward Rome with his Army, and hearing that the Senate, and people fled
from it, said, They that will not fight for this City, what City will they
fight for? and truly, if we do not take pains for this happiness, what is it we
will take pains for? one would think, if we did but hear once in our lives-time
that there were such an happiness to be had, we should make it the business of
our whole lives to get an interest in it; and think no pains much, if by any
means we might obtain it, in other things, if we be convinced of the worth and
excellency of them, we need no other motive to engage us to the pursuit of
them: When the Spies had taken a view of the Land of Canaan, finding it to be a
goodly Land, abounding with all sorts of good things, they thus bespake the
people, We have seen the Land, and behold it is very good, why then are ye
still? be not slothful, but go and enter, and possess the Land. Canaan was a
type of Heaven; by that little survey we have now taken of it, we find it is
very good; why then are we still? what means the lukewarmness, and indifferency
that is found in most of us? where are those affections which use to be so
eagerly carried out upon meaner objects? certainly, did we know the gift of
God, did we know, or at least seriously consider what eternal blessedness is;
we would be willing to do any thing, would refuse no labor, stick at no
difficulty, so as we might be partakers of it: if those Roman Gladiators, to
whom the Apostle seems to allude 1 Cor. 9.24.
, fighting but for a little airy honor, were temperate in all things; and as
some report, when they entered into those Schools, vowed to suffer themselves to
be enchained, beaten, killed, to endure any thing; much more should we be
willing to do any thing; they doing it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an
incorruptibl.

[5] We have but a short time to s^cure this eternal happiness; This I say
brethren, says the Apostle and 7.29, (...).
, it is thought to allude to Sails or Curtains, which though they seem large,
when they are extended, yet being folded up, are brought into a small compass:
so Tim^, that God has spread like a Sail over all things below, has now for
some thousands of years been rouling up: the day is hastening, when time shall
be no more; and from thence the Apostle exhorts to a holy indifferency toward
temporal things: It remain^th that they that have wives, be as th^ugh they had
none, etc. it is as if he had said, Your time is short, and you have business
enough another way; there is water little enough to run in the right Channel,
let it not then run waste: you have no such spare time, that you should spend
it about unnecessaries: and if time in general, which has now lasted above
five thousand years, be short, in comparison of Eternity, much more that little
scantling of time which any of us have here to spend; we are but of yesterday,
and know not, says one, where we shall be to morrow; our soul is in our body
like the young Bird in the shell, that will soon break, and the Bird fly out;
like a Candle in a Lanthorn full of holes, which is blown out with every puff
of wind. It was the speech of Marcus Aurelius upon his deathbed, When we begin
to live, we imagine our life will endure a whole world, but when it is ended,
it seems to us to be but a puff, and blast of wind. The Scripture sometimes
expresses the term of man's life by years Psalm. 90.10.
, The days of our years are threescore years and ten: sometimes it is reduced
to months Job. 14.5.
, The number of his months are with thee; sometimes it is confined to days, So
teach us to number our days Psalm. 90.12.
: sometimes it is confined to a day Job 14.6.
, That he may accomplish as a hireling his day.

A man that has some great work that must of necessity be done, and but one
day for the doing it, had need work hard; it is so with us, only we are upon a
far greater uncertainty; the shortest day has its morning, noon, afternoon,
and evening, so that he that has work to do, knows beforehand what time he
has for doing it, but it is otherwise in the day of our life; some have a
morning, but no noon, they are born, and forthwith die, step from one grave to
another, from the grave of their mothers womb, to the grave of the earth, the
common mother of all: some have a noon, but no afternoon, their sun sets at
midday, when their bodies are full of strength, and their bones full of
marrow: some have an afternoon, but no evening; and which of these may befall
us, we know not.

There was a Jewish youth that went to a Rabbie, desiring him to instruct him
in the Law: the Rabbie asked him how old he was, he answered, eight: he told
him he was too young to understand the Law, willing him to stay till he were
eight years older, and then if he came, he would instruct him; The youth
replied, Sir, I have been often in the Churchyard, and have observed, that
there are as many graves shorter than I, as there are longer, and if I should
die before I be eight years older, what will become of my soul, if I be
ignorant of the Law? That many are snatched away by death, in the morning of
their age, we see by daily experience? what befalls them, may befall any of
us: and how sad would it be if Death should take us out of this world, before
we have made provision for another? It was a cutting speech of Caesar Borgius;
While I lived, I provided for every thing but death; now I must die, and am
unprovided to die: What provision we make for this world, whether we have more
or less, is no great matter, our abode here being for so short a time: the
great thing is, what provision we make for death and Eternity that follows it;
and seeing the time of our life, the only time of providing for it is so short,
it infinitely concerns us to improve this short time to the best advantage,
to work the work we have to do, while it is day.

[6.] When this short time is once past, there is nothing to be done in this
great work: If a man die, shall he live again Job 14.14.
? It is an affirmative interrogation, and has the force of a strong Negation;
he shall not live again as to a natural life; this life is called an earthly
house 2 Cor. 5.1.
, being once dissolved, it shall not be inhabited from generation to
generation: it is a Tabernacle, in the same place, A Shepherds Tent, Isa.
28.12.
Other Tents are taken down, and set up again, but when this is taken down, the
stakes thereof are removed, and the cords broken, it is never set up again till
the Resurrection; It is a Candle, The spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord
Prove. 20.28.
, if it be once put out, it is never lighted more; the sun of our life being
once set, it never rises again, after the evening of its setting, there is
never, till the last Resurrection Job 14.14.
, a morning of its up-rising; the Glass of Life being run out, it is never
turned again: we are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered
up again; A wind that passes away, and comes not again Psalm. 18.30
; As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the
grave shall come up no more Joh. 7.9.
; As the Flood decays and dries up, so man lies down, and rises till the
Heavens be no more Job 14.11, 12.
. It was the saying of Charles the fifth, I have spent my treasu^e, but that I
may recover again; I have lost my h^alth, but that I may have again; but I have
lost a great many brave soldiers, and them I can never have again: the like
may be said here, other things may be lost, and yet recovered again; Job lost
his whole estate, yet God blessed his latter end, more than his beginning;
Hezekiah lost his health, and fell into a grievous sickness, yet God added
fifteen years to his life, but if the time of life be once past, it is past all
recovery; to weigh the fire, to measure the wind, and to call back a day that
is past, are three things mentioned by the Angel, of the like impossibility 2
Esdras 4.5.
; While the sheep lives, though the wool be clipped off every year, it grow^th
again to the like weight, but clip it off when the sheep is dead, and there
never comes any more; while life lasts, though much of our time be wilfully
lost, and much snatched away against our will, yet by our Repentance, and future
care we may regain it, as that expression redeeming the time implies; but if
the term of life be once past, there is no redeeming of lost time; being once
entered upon our eternal condition, there is no returning back to the enjoyment
of formerly neglected opportunities: When a few years are come, I shall go the
way whence I shall not return Job 16.22.
, After death, there is no returning back to do any of these works we might
have done here Eccles. 9.10.
, Whats^ever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for the^e is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go
John 9.4.
: I must work the work of him that sent me while it is day, the night comes
when no man can work: I might show it in all those works we are to do, in
reference to securing eternal happiness; are we to secure it by praying? as,
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved Romans 10.16.
? that is not to be done after death; Because he has inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live Psalm 116.10.
: implying, when he should cease to live, he should cease to pray; Are we to
secure it by hearing? as, Hear and your soul shall live Isa. 55.3.
; neither can that be done after death. Dives desired that one might be sent to
preach to his Brethren on earth, but desired none for himself, knowing it was
then too late; Are we to do it by praising God? as, Death cannot praise thee,
the grave cannot celebrate thee Psalm. 50.23. Isa. 38.18.
; Are we to do it by Repentance? which is therefore called a Repentance to
salvation 2. Cor. 7.10.
, Repentance depends upon time; I gave her space to repent of her fornication.
When the time of life is past, though men cry like that fool Berbaldus speaks
of, Oh Repentance, Repentance where art thou? where art thou, oh Repentance?
Rev. 2.21.
they shall find no place for Repentance, though with Esau they seek it
carefully with tears: Are we to do it by believing in Christ? as, Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved Acts 16.31.
. After this life there is no future offer of Christ to be expected, The days
come, when you shall desire to see one of the days of the son of man, and shall
not see it Luke 17.22.
. Are we to do it by Hope; which is therefore called the Hope of Salvation? To
him that is joined to the living there is hope 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Eccles. 9.4.
, but after death there is no place for hopes; What hope has the Hypocrite
when God takes away his soul Job 27.8.
? The door of hope and mercy is then for ever shut up. Alexander laying siege
to a City that refused to yield upon his summons caused a Torch to be lighted,
letting them know while that torch burned, they might have conditions of peace;
but if they stood out till that was burned out, they must expect nothing but
fire and sword; the time of this life is a torch of mercy that God has
lighted, while this lasts, we have opportunities to make our peace with God,
but if we neglect it no^, it cease for ever.

Chrysostom observes, that whereas God has given many other things double;
two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, two feet
to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one might be supplied by
the other; he has given us but one soul; if that be lost, have thou, (says
he) another soul to give in recompense for it? I shall add, as he has given us
but one soul to provide for, so he has given us but one life to make provision
for it: we have not a brace of lives, that we may recover in the latter, what
we have lost in the former: They say, there is no offending in war twice: it is
certain there is no offending twice in this kind, if we mispend this life, we
have no other life to live here: if happiness be once lost, it is for ever
lost; if we once dye ill, we are damned for ever; and seeing after death there
is no doing any thing in reference to Eternal happiness, it should be our care
to do it now, as our Savior argued; I must work the work of him that sent me
while it is day, the night comes when no man can work; and not only to do it
but to do it with all possible diligence: So Solomon upon this ground
exhorts, Whatsoeve^ thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; for
there is no work in the grave whereunto thou go.

[7.] Consider, there are but few who obtain Eternal happiness; it is indeed a
Doctrine that carnal men do not love to hear; when Christ told the Jews, That
there were many Widows in Israel in the days of Elias Luke 4.25, etc.
; yet to a none of them was Elias sent, but to Sarepta, to a woman that was a
Widow; and many Lepers in the time of Elizeus, and yet none of them were
cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian, thereby implying, though many live in the
bosom of the Church, yet but a few shall be saved; the Text says, When they
heard these things, they were filled with wrath, and thrust him out of the
City; but how unwelcome soever this doctrine is to many, it is a certain truth,
that shall stand more firm than the Sun, that faithful witness in Heaven; if we
ask of the days that were before us, even since the time God created man upon
the earth, we shall find this to be most true in all the several ages of the
world; in Noah's time the world could not be very populous, having lasted so
long, and men living eight or nine hundred years, yet there were but eight
persons saved in the Ark; though it be questioned by Divines, whether all that
were temporally destroyed, were eternally damned; and we may think more
charitably of some, especially children, and such as were not capable of faith
and repentance; yet for the generality, the Scripture says, That all flesh had
corrupted their ways; and the Apostle calls them, the world of the ungodly,
2 Pet. 2.5.
Who would have thought that in those five populous Cities of the Plains, there
should not be found ten righteous persons? yet for want of so small a number,
four of those Cities were overwhelmed with a deluge of fire and brimstone. We
read of six hundred thousand Israelites that went out of Egypt, yet of all
these, two only entered the Land of Canaan; as Canaan was a type of Heaven, So
Origin makes those two that entered there, a type of those that are saved, and
the rest, of those that perish; if we come to David's time, he complains, The
Godly man cease, the faithful fail from amongst the children of men; They are
all gone astray, there is none that does good, no not one Psalm. 12. and 14.
. In Elijah's time they were so few, that he thought himself alone, and Gods
highest number did amount but to seven thousand, and what were they amongst the
many thousands of Israel and Judah? Isaiah complains, they were but a small
remnant, comparing them to the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three berries
in the upper most boughs Isa. 1. and 17.6.
: Jeremiah complains Jer. 3.14.
, they were but one of a family, two of a tribe; And Micah, Compares them to
the gleanings after Harvest, and the gatherings after Vintage Micah. 7.1.
. Indeed in Christ's time they grew up to a flock, and multiplied more in those
following times, yet this lasted not long; about three hundred and fifty years
after arose a pestilent Heresy, when the world groaned to see it self turned
Arrian; and some time after, those other Hydra^s heads, Mahom^tanism and Popery
sprung up, which to this day have overspread so great a part of the world; and
at this day, if we consider how few profess the truth, and of them, how few
live up to their profession; we must conclude, that even now there are but a
few saved; and if so, how much does it concern us to take heed to our selves?
If when Christ told his Disciples, that one of them was a Devil, and should
betray him: Though it were but one of twelve, every one began to suspect
himself; how much more should we, when we hear, it is not one of many, but many
to one, that are likely to miscary, and perish everlastingly? when one asked
Christ, Are there few that shall be saved? he answered Luke. 13.24.
, Strive to enter in at the strait gate. That is the proper use we are to make
of this Doctrine.

[8.] We can be sure of nothing else; if we make it our business to seek
temporal things, we are under a double uncertainty: First, it is very uncertain
whether we shall get what we seek: there is but one way to hit the mark, but
several ways of missing it; though the world be courted by a great many, yet
there are more suitors than speeders; there are but few that get a prize in the
worlds Lottery; these things are often like the shadow that flies from them
that follow it: they who make haste to be rich, most what make more haste than
good speed; and many times out of an eager desire of getting what they have
not, lose wh^t they have: As Balaam, who greedily seeking after honor, and
riches, not only lost them, but his life likewise, being killed in the battle
Josh. 13.22.
, Therefore the Hebrews apply that Proverb to him, the Cammel seeking horns
lost his ears: or if men do get these things, they are uncertain of keeping
them; how often do these things leave men, before they leave the world? They
flow by us says Basil, as the stream by the bank; time will moulder away the
bank it self, but the water stays not for that, but speedeth on its wonted
course: our life is as the tree, these things like the f^uit and leaves which
fall off, while the tree stands: how many be there who seemed like a nail
fastened in a sure place, which have been like Shebna, removed from their
station, and tossed up and down like a Ball in a large Country: we can have no
more assurance of these things, than if we take a model of this days clouds,
and think to compare them with them that will the next day appear. Some have
compared great men to the mountain Vesuvius near Naples, which they say is so
abundantly fertile, that it is worth thousands yearly; but when it happens to
cast forth its fery entrails, does sometimes more hurt in a day, than it
brought profit in a whole age; and how many who have been raised to the highest
pitch of wordly greatness, yet in one days miscarriage have been deprived of
all they have been so long gathering together, and lived to be objects of pity
to all that knew them: We need not take Histories for examples, daily
experience seals to the truth of this; he that in times of so great
mutability has not learned this lesson of the worlds uncertainty, deserves to
be taught it, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth and Penuel, with thorns and
brambles of the wilderness: Or if these things last till death, that is the
longest day.

I remember Rogers his Treatise of Love.
one tells of a worldly wretch, who when he saw he must dye, takes a piece
of Gold, and puts it into his m^uth, saying, Some wiser than some,
whatsoever comes of it, I will carry this with me; but could the sot think, to
carry his gold with him into another world? God tells the rich fool, This night
shall the soul be required of thee, and then whose shall these things be which
thou have provided? Whose soever they should be, they should be no longer his;
when men have been all their lives time lading themselves with thick clay: it
fares with them at death, as with the Hedge-Hogg, which having laded her self
with Apples upon the prickles of her back, and with much ado dragged home her
over-heavy burden; perhaps carries one in her mouth, but has the rest swept
off by narrowness of the hole, which she only made wide enough for her own
passage; We brought nothing into this world 1 Timothy 6.7.
, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. So that if we look after
temporals, we cannot be sure either of getting or keeping them; whereas, if we
make Eternals the matter of our choice, and labor for them in a right manner,
we may assure our selves of both. The wicked works a deceitful work, but to
him that sows rigteousness, shall be a sure reward Prove. 11.18.
. God has not said to the house of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain Isa. 45.19, 24.
. If we would take as much pains for Heaven, as others do for the world, we
might undoubtedly obtain it, and being obtained, there were no danger of losing
it, I give them Eternal life, and they shall never perish; neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand John. 10.28.
; and the consideration of this cannot but be a powerful motive and
encouragement: So it was to the Apostle, I therefore so run, not as uncertainly
1 Cor. 9.26.
; other runners, though they run with all their might, are upon great
uncertainties; Know ye not that they that run in a race, run all, and but one
receives the prize: And so it is in all other adventures about worldy things,
most have but their labor for their pains; but it is otherwise in this
spiritual race; I so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that
beats the air: And upon the same ground the Apostle encourages others; Be ye
always abundant in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as your labor is not in
vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15. last.
.

[9.] Consider what we have done in this great work; how little, and how much.

(1.) How little; the greatest part of men are scattered abroad in the world,
like the Israelites about the Land of Egypt, to gather stubble; or like Ants
about a molehill, busying themselves about impertinencies. Sir Thomas Moore
says, There is a Devil called Business Negotium.
, that carries more souls to Hell, th^n all the Devils in Hell beside: most
men have so many Irons in the fire, are cumbered about so many things, that
they wholly neglect that one thing necessary: Nay, it is to be feared, many in
the bosom of the Church, who have lived forty or fifty years under powerful
preaching, have heard many hundred Sermons to provoke them to this duty; yet
the time is yet to come, that ever they spent one hour together between God and
their consciences, in promoting that great work of their Salvation; strangers
have devoured their strength; other things, (and that for the most part
impertinencies,) have devoured the strength of their abilities, the cream of
their time: When Heaven, and eternal happiness have been neglected, as if they
were not; and if it has been thus with any of us, let the time past be enough
to have been so prodigiously regardless of that which so nearly and infinitely
concerns us: Let it be our care for the future to redeem our lost time; the
word used by the Apostle Ephesians. 5.16.
, properly signifies to buy a thing back again, a metaphor taken from men that
mortgage their Land, and redeem it again: by how much more careless we have
been, the more dilligent should we be for the future, compensating former
neglects by our after-care: a man that has some work to do, that must of
necessity be done, if he has loytered away most of the time allotted for the
doing it, had need work the harder: Such as come not into the Vineyard till the
ninth or eleventh hour, must then be more diligent, if they would be equal with
them that have born the heat and burden of the day. When the Husbandman breaks
up a piece of ground, that has been long fallow, he expects a double crop, to
satisfy for its former barrenness, the like God expects from us.

(2.) How much we have done; there are many, who like Agrippa, are almost
persuaded to be Christians, who are so far convinced, that they have taken some
pains, heard many Sermons, put up many Prayers, set a part many hours, that
they might attend the business of their Salvation; and perhaps have suffered
much for their forwardness in Religion; and think how sad a thing it would be
for such to lose all the Sermons they have heard, all the prayers they have
made, all the time they have spent, all the pains they have taken; and after
all this to go to Hell for want of not going through with this work; such may
not unfitly be compared to unhappy Mariners, who have sailed to many ports,
conflicted with the difficulties and dangers of a tedious Voyage, and with much
hazard, and pains fraught their Ship with rich Merchandise, yet after all this,
when they are well nigh arrived at their desired Haven, for want of a little
care split upon the Rocks, and leave all they have got, a prey to the merciless
waters. If then we be such as have taken some pains, and made some considerable
progress in the way to Heaven, let that we have already done, engage us to do
something more, that we might not lose all our labor, men have this wisdom in
other things; he that has already ventured much, will shoot another Arrow in
hope to make good former losses; the Husbandman that has bestowed some cost
upon a piece of ground, and sees it does not answer his expectation, will
bestow more cost, and lay on more compost, that he may receive some fruits of
his cost and labor. A man that has lent money and has no security for it,
will be willing to bedge in one debt with another, to lend a greater fumme,
that he may get security for that, and the other too, in like manner, having
done something by way of securing eternal happiness; let us go thorough with
this work, that all our former labor may not be in vain.

[10.] Consider what opinion we have of our selves, in reference to our
interest in eternal happiness; the way of man is right in his own eyes, says
Solomon; every man is naturally apt to think well of himself, and his
condition; and probably it may be so with us; we may think our selves rich and
increased with goods, and not far off from the Kingdom of God; if so, think
what a sad thing it would be to deceive our selves in a thing of such infinite
and everlasting concernment; Scipio said, it is a shameful thing in war, to
say, I had not thought it; war being of so great consequence, that a man must*
probably either conquer or die; every mistake here is dangerous; the Moabites,
seeing the water look red through the shining of the Sun upon it, concluded,
this is blood, the Kings are surely slain, and thereupon encouraged themselves;
Moab to the spoil; but going to fight upon this presumption, were themselves
conquered 2 Kings 3.
; and if it be dangerous to be mistaken in matters of war, certainly much more
in that great business of Salvation, in which if we be deceived, we are undone
eternally. This deceit has two great evils attending it:

(1.) It hinders men from laboring for it; what he said of Learning, is as
true in this, many men might have obtained it, but that they thought themselves
to have already attained it. Conviction is the first step to Salvation, there
are none further off from the Kingdom of Heaven, than they, who presume upon
the goodness of their condition.

(2.) This false persuasion will add much to our misery, the Church made this
an aggravation of her sad condition; We looked for peace, and there is no good,
and for a time of healing, and behold trouble Jer. 14.19.
, And think what an amazement it will be, when thou shall one day say, I looked
for Heaven, and behold Hell is my portion; I looked for eternal happiness, and
behold everlasting misery; if thou had never hoped, nor promised better
things to thy self, thy confusion would not have been so great; but to live and
dye with confident hop^s of Heaven, and at last to fall from so high a Pinnacle
of Hope, to that dismal pit of everlasting despair, this will wound deeply:
When Hamilcar lay before Syra^usa, he thought he heard a Voice intimating to
him, that he should the next night sup in Syracusa; and thereupon concluding he
should certainly conquer it; He commanded his Army to prepare for a fight, but
they beginning to mutiny, the Citizens took that opportunity, brake in upon
them, took Hamilcar prisoner, and that night he supped in Syracusa, but not as
a Conqueror, as he imagined, but as a Captive, which was the more grievous to
him, because he was before so confident of Victory Val. Max.
; in like manner, for those who are confident of Heaven, to be doomed to Hell;
for those who make no question of seeing, and enjoying God in the land of the
Living, to be eternally excluded his glorious presence, this will double their
damnation, and be a matter of the greatest confusion; believe it, it is a sad
thing for men to have hopes for Heaven, and yet evidences for Hell: to have
Heaven in their hopes, and Hell in their hearts: to say to themselves, Soul,
take thine ease, and God to say, Devil, take his Soul: If then we be such as
are persuaded it shall be well with us, let that engage us to all seriousness
and diligence in securing eternal happiness, that we may not be thus woefully
deceived in our expectations.

11. Eternal happiness is not to be had without our laboring for it; the
things of this world are not usually had without labor. The soul of the
sluggard desi^eth, and has nothing; Prove. 13.4. and 21.25.
The desire of the slothful kills him, for his hands refuse to labor; much
less is Heaven to be had without it. As God has propounded happiness as the
end, so he has appointed labor as the means; labor for the meat that
endures to Eternal life; work out your salvation: and what God has joined
together, let no man think to put asunder: it is in vain to expect happiness
upon any other terms, as soon may we think to pluck the Sun out of Heaven, or
remove the earth from its Center, as soon may the silly fly mount up to
Heaven, and with her narrow wings darken the Sun, and with her feeble seet stay
the motion of the Primum Mobile, as we be able to alter the Decrees of Heaven,
and invert that order that God has set: let foolish men think so much
laboring to be more than needs, and cavil against the strictness of Religion;
God has said, without holiness no man shall see him, and whose words shall
stand; God^, or theirs? who shall determine upon what conditions happiness is
to be had, but he that gives it? as our endeavors without God cannot, so God
without our endea^ours will not ordinarily save us; though God gives the earth
to the meek yet he gives Heaven only to the violent, the violent take it by
force, Mat, 5.5. and 11.12.
Jacob got the blessing by putting on the garments of his Brother Esau; Esau
signifies working; if ever we would wear that rich Garment of Salvation, we
must get it by working; our Savior indeed says of the Lillies, that they toil
not, neither do they spin, yet Solomon in all his Royalty was not arrayed like
one of them; but it is otherwise with this Garment of Salvation, we must Win it
with Labor, before we wear it with Triumph, it is an infinite mercy that
Salvation is to be had upon so fair terms: We must not think to impose upon
God, and make conditions of our own.

12. Consider, men may do much, and go far, yet miss of heaven for want of
coming up to Gods terms, many at the last day will make fair pretensions,
pleading that they had Eaten and Drunken in Christ's presence and heard him
preach in their streets, that they had prophesied, and cast out Devils in his
name, and yet be excluded: The foolish Virgins, the young man* Demas, and many
others, went far, and yet failed of the grace of God. Luther speaks of one
Arsenius, who made a great profession, and was a man of eminent parts, praying,
and discoursing to admiration, when this man lay upon his sickbed, his friends
that came to visit him, expected to hear some great thing from him, and told
him, That sure he could not but enjoy much comfort, who had been so eminent for
the profession and practice of godliness? But he answered, that he had not that
comfort they thought he had, that he found it now to be with his soul, no^
according to what man judges, but according to the judgment God passed upon
him, and God, said he, judges righteous judgment. Many the like instances
might be given, and When we hear of the ship-vvrack of so many goodly Vessels:
of the fall o^ so many bright shining Stars, had we not need vvor^ sure, and
take all possible care that we do not miscarry in like manner? Upon this
ground our Savior exhorts, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many
will seek to enter in, and shall not he able; Luke 13.24.
And the Apost. Heb. 4.1.
Let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it.

13. It is an infinite mercy that eternal hapiness is yet attainable, when by
the sin of our first parents we justly forfeited that hapiness to which we are
entitled at our first creation; God might have dealt with us as he did with the
lapsed Angels, who had no sooner sinned, but were expelled heaven, and left
without possibility of happiness. Indeed some Schoolmen and other divines give
several reasons for this different dispensation of God toward Angels and men;
some thus, that there is a time prefixed both to Angels and men, after which
there should be no possibility of altering their estate; now as death is the
time prefixed to man, so the first good or bad deliberate action to the Angels,
that those that then stood, should be confirmed in their happiness, but those
that fell, should be put out of all capacity of being happy: Some think it to
be the greatness of the Angels sin above that of man; they sought to be like
God in Omnipotency, which is not comunicable to any creature; man only in
Omniscience, ^r the general knowledge of things which they say may be imparted
to (...) creature, as it was to the humane soul of Christ: ^ome refer it to the
manner of their sinning; the Angels fell of themselves, having no others to
tempt them, but man, by the suggestion of Satan: and it is less to sin, when
overcome by temptation, than to sin voluntarily without any temptation; other
reasons they give, that tho some Angels fell, others stood, and so the whole
species did not perish; where as, in Adam all mankind fell, so as had not God
appoint^d a Redemption, none of the race of mankind could have been saved.
Again, the Angels were more glorious creatures, living in the presence of God,
whereas man was made lower than the Angels, and was placed upon the earth at a
greater distance from God, and as a Tree that falls from some high precipice,
is more battered and broken in the fall, than that which falls from a low
place. So here, by how much, says Austine, the Angels were more high in glory,
by so much was their fall more grevious and irrecoverable; and man, by how much
he was more frail by nature, by so much more capable of mercy and pardon. Again
the knowledge of Angels is intuitive, when they take a view of any thing, they
see it in the causes, the effects, and all that belongs to it; and so what
they do, they do with so full a consent of will, that they never alter, or
repent; whereas the knowledge of man is discurs^ve, he finds out one thing by
another, and one thing after another; so that upon further consideration, he
often repents of what he before did, and disliketh what he before approved. To
this purpose is that distinction amongst the Schoolmen of a threefold will*
the will of God, that can neither turn nor return: the the will of man, that
may both turn and retur^ that is, may alter both before and after Election;
between these is the will of Angels, that may turn ba^^ not return, may alter
before Election, but not after and because, as what else they do; so when the^
sinned, they sinned with that full consent of will, tha^ they cannot alter or
repent; hence they say, the sin was unpardonable, and their fall beyond all
recovery; whereas man, who sinned not with that full consent of will, might
after repent of what he did, an^ so be capable of mercy and pardon: Others
conceive it thus, that the Ange^s having so great a measure of light, d velling
in the presence of God, an^ the light of his countenance, could not sin by
error or misperswasion, but out of malice, which is the si^ against the Holy
Ghost. It is said, That the Devil (...) bode not in the truth John 3.44.
Zanchy and some other think by Truth here, is meant the Truth of the Gospel,
which the Apostate Angels refused to subcribe to; they say, it is hard to
conceive that God should irrecoverably cast off a creature, till he has
rejected the help of a Mediator; and they conceive it thus, that God should
make known to the Angels, that they should be confirmed in their happiness by
Christ, who was in time to take the nature of man, and in that nature they must
be subject to him; they through pride refuse to submit to this order; and thus,
says Zanchy, we may reconcile those different opinions amongst Divines
concerning their Sin. Some affirming, it was pride, some envy and malice, some
Rebellion, others Apostasy; whereas in this, all these meet together; in that
they took it indignly, they could not continue happy without Christ, there was
their pride; in that they envyed this happiness to the humane nature, there was
their Envy and Malice; in that they refused to submit to this order of God,
there was their Rebellion; in that they chose rather to leave there first
habitation, there was their Apostasy: So that upon this account their sin is
^hought to be the sin against the Holy Ghost in re^using the help of a
Mediator; whereas man, though ^e sinned against God his Creator, yet did not
reject ^he help of a Redeemer, but relied upon that pro^ise, The seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents ^ead; These several reasons are given, why God
should cast off the Apostate Angels, and yet put man into a possibility of
hapiness, in which, though there be much probability, yet after these rational
indagations, we can ascribe it to nothing so certainly as to the will and
pleasure of God; and may cry out in the Apostles words, Oh the bounty and
severity of God, to^ards them severity, toward us men bounty: That ^od should
pass by so many once glorious Creatures and extend his mercy to poor lost man,
this is that which may justly swallow up our thoughts in admiration, and he
proper improvement we are to make of this singular distinguishing mercy, is to
labor after an interest in that happiness, which is tendered to us, but denied
unto them: otherwise if we shall neglect this great salvation, we shall
hereby make our sin more grievous, and our condemnation in this respect more
inexcusable than that of the devils. Suppose two Rebels to have taken up Arms
against their Prince, the Prince leaving one out of all hopes of mercy, should
send a pardon to the other, if this man to whom the pardon is granted, should
refuse the pardon and slight his Princes favor, would not every man judge him
Worthy of a more severe punishment? thus it is between us and the Devils:
Anselme has a good meditation to this purpose, in which he aggravateth his own
sin above the Devils; the Devil sinned when he had not seen any before punished
for sin; I, notwithstanding I saw his punishment; he persists in his malice
against God rejecting him, I against God inviting me, he is hardened against
God punishing, I against God showing mercy, he against God who reprobated him,
I against God dying for me, and so concludes, behold the Devil whose Image I
abhor, yet in many things I find my self more to be abhorred. And remarkable is
that of Eusebius Emissenus, though the Devil should be damned for many sins,
and I but for one, yet mine would exceed the Devils impiety; they never sinned
against a God that became an Angel for them; they never sinned against a
Mediator that was Crucified for them, but miserable and wretched I (and it is
wonderful that my heart does not melt when I think on it) have sinned against a
God, became man for me, against a God who has left me an example of love and
holiness, I am more unworthy than the Devils: If then w^ would not make our
condemnation in this respect more grievous and inexcusable than that of the
Devils; let us take heed of neglecting this Salvation provided for us, seeing
there is happiness for us, when there is none for them; let this engage us to
give all diligence to make this happiness fure to our selves.

14. Consider what a sad thing it will be to lose Eternal happiness for want of
laboring for it: What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? Suppose a man could heap up silver as the dust, and gold as
the streams of the brook, that he could gain as much as the Devil promised
Christ, all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them; or as our Savior
here supposes, could gain the whole World, and in the gaining of that should
lose his Soul, should lose Eternal happiness, which is the same in effect, he
should make but Glaucus and Diomedes's exchange of Gold for Copper; like the
Cock in the Fable, that parted with a Pearl for a Barley-corn. Chrysostom
compares such to workers in Mines, who for a little wages do always hazard, and
sometimes lose their lives. Menot a French Preacher compares them to a
Huntsman, that spoileth a Horse worth many pounds, in pursuit of a Hare not
worth so many pence; Pareus to a man that with much ado wins Venice and as
soon as it is won, is hanged up at the gates of the City: When such an one
shall at last compute what he has gained, and what he has lost, he will
certainly conclude, that he has made a woeful Bargain. A man that has lost a
rich Jewel, and took it to be but a common Peble, or has lost the Evidences of
his whole Estate, and thought them to be but waste paper, is at present but
little troubled at his loss, but if he comes to understand what he has lost,
he is ready to tear himself in pieces: Men now cannot be brought to understand
the worth and excellency of eternal happiness, nor what a sad thing it is to
lose it. Honorius the Emperor had a little white Hen, which he extremely doted
on, calling her Rome after the name of his Imperial City. When Rome was taken
by Alaricus, and news was brought to him, being then at Ravenna, that Rome was
destroyed, he thinking they meant his Hen, called by that name, brake out into
a passion; but when he was told, it was the City of Rome he seemed to be less
troubled: being more affected for the loss of a paltry Hen, than for the prime
City of the World. Many men are more troubled, I will not say for a Wife or a
Child, but for the loss of a Horse, or a Cow, than to hear they are in apparent
hazard of losing eternal happiness; but when after death they shall find
themselves for ever deprived of it, and shall have their understandings
cleared, and enlarged to know the worth of what they have lost, then they will
conclude that their is no loss like this loss; and would think themselves
happy, if upon any conditions they might be but some little time within the
possibilites of happiness: They would be willing to give any thing, thousands
of Rams, ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, or whatsoever men count precious: they
would be willing to do any thing, if prayers, tears, humiliations, watchings,
fastings would prevail to regain lost time, how gladly would all this, and much
more be undertaken? If it were to be regained by hewing their way through Rocks
of stone, by swimming through Seas of blood, by encountering the greatest
difficulties and dangers, how willingly would they undertake any thing that is
possible to be done? they would be willing to suffer any thing, if enduring the
pain of a thousand deaths, if lying a thousand years in Hell, would satisfy
Gods Justice for their former neglects, and prevail for some longer time to be
indulged them, how tolerable would this seem? How gladly would they accept of
the Conditions? But alas it will then be to late, the door of hope and mercy
will be then for ever shut up against them; they will have nothing then to do,
but to lament their doleful loss, and that they will do with howlings and
lamenations, able to rend Rocks and Marbles in pieces.

CHAP. XV. Of Directions to help us in looking after Eternal Blessedness; with
Answers to some Objections and Cautions.
HAving finished the Motives, I proceed to some Directions: The Apostle James
speaks of those as uncharitable men, who give good words to the poor: saying,
Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled, notwithstanding, give them not
those things which are needful to the Body, and censureth their
uncharitableness with Jam. 2.16. (...).
What does it profit? Probably I might incur the like Censure, should I only
exhort men to labor for eternal Blessedness, and not withal give some
Directions how it might be attained, therefore shall lay down these ensuing.

1. We should engage our selves by taking up fixed peremptory resolutions;
things fully resolved on are more than half done: when a man out of a practical
conviction comes to be sensible both of his want of happine^s, that without
it, it had been good for him that he had never been born, and of the worth and
excellency of it, and thereupon takes up a set resolution, that he must have
it whatsoever it cost him; that whatsoever he neglects, he will not neglect
this one thing necessary, this man is not far off from the Kingdom of God;
Resolution when it is fixed like a principle in the Soul, when it is both
deliberate, proceeding out of a settled Judgment; not rash, sudden and
precipitant: and determinate with the full bent and tendency of the heart, not
a velleity, a weak fluctuating inclination, such a Resolution has a twofold
advantage: (1.) It has a powerful influence upon the whole man; he that fully
resolves upon a thing, will put to the utmost of his power about it; and when
a man takes up a steadfast resolution to make Heaven his business, this will
engage all the powers, Faculties, Abilities of the Soul: all the wisdom, study,
care, thoughts, affections, endeavors in the pursui^ of it, such an one will
stick at no pains, but be willing to do any thing that he might obtain it: (2.)
It will break through all Oppositions. Nazianzen walking by the Seaside, and
observing how the waves beating upon the shore, brought with them many
Cockleshels, stalks of Herbs, and the like trash, and returning with other
waves, swept them away again, when in the mean time the Rocks about him stood
firm, being not a whit moved by the flux and re-flux of the raging waters,
deduced from thence this profitable Meditation, That weak irresolved minds are
soon overcome by contrary persuasions: whereas a steadfast peremptory resolution
will easily dash all temptations, and keep a man, that no contrary
solicitations can remove him from his stedfastness: As therefore they say, Bees
when they fly in a great wind, ballast themselves with little stones, that they
might not be carried away with the wind; so it should be our care to Fortify
our selves with strong and settled Resolutions: only we must take heed of
resolving in our own strength. Luther in his Comment upon the Galatians, tells
of Staupitius, that he had often heard him complaining to this purpose; I have
many times resolved, and covenanted for the Service of God, but I cannot
perform according to my resolutions; hereafter I will take up no such Resolves;
for I well see, if God be not merciful to me in Christ, for all my vows and
resolutions, I shall never be able to appear before him; and Luther commends it
for a holy kind of despair, what we think to build by our own strength, we will
soon pull down by our own weakness: therefore when we thus resolve, we should
go forth in the strength of the Lord, and make mention of his Righteousness
only.

2. We should improve that Power we have: though a man in his natural estate is
not able to believe and repent, and do such things as more immediately
accompany Salvation, yet he may do something in tendency to it: as

1. He may abstain from those sins that are Destructive of Salvation, though he
cannot abstain from sin collectively; yet he may divisively; though not from
all sin, because it is natural to sin, yet from this and that particular sin:
though he cannot refrain from the inward lustings of the heart, which
continually sends forth sin, as the Fountain sends forth water, yet he may
from many outward acts of sin, every one of which strengthen the habit, and
more strongly incline to sin; the Drunkard can continue sober while he is in
sober company; the Swearer if he be in the presence of a Justice of Peace, will
scarce swear an oath for some hours together, and what they do at one time, and
in one company, they might do in another; though they cannot abstain from sin
out of love to God, or hatred of sin yet they may out of love to themselves,
and fear of Hell^; if the Laws of the land should ordain, that he that
swears, or is drunk, should be punished with death, it would no doubt keep
man^ from those sins, and what they do out of fear of a temporal, they might do
much more out of fear of eternal death.

2. A man may hear, read, pray, confer, meditate, and use other outward means
appointed by God; if he does something this way, he might do more, allow himself
more time for these duties, and when he sets about them, might d^sengage
himself from other things, that he might intend them in a more serious manner,
this, and much more a man may do. If any Object, that he cannot do this without
Gods help, and assistance? I answer, It is true, but withal consider, what kind
of assistan e is hereunto required, and I shall explain it thus: It is most
true, that a man can move neither hand, nor foot, without the concourse of Gods
Providence; but it is such a general concourse, as God seldom denies to any,
whereas if a man would do any thing above his strength, as when Sampson would
pull down the House upon the Philistines: this requires an addition of more
strength; in like manner, though to believe and repent requires a special
grace and assistance of God, yet to the use of these means before hinted, is
required no more than that common grace, and general assistance, which God
seldom denies to any man.

If any object further, that they cannot perform these Duties in a spiritual
manner; they cannot pray, and hear in faith; I answer, while they are in their
natural condition, that is not their means: Means says one Fenners wilful
Murder.
is that which comes between a man's Can, and his Cannot: their means is to do
what they can, to pray, that they may pray in faith; to hear, that they may
hear in faith; to perform Duties, that they may perform them in a spiritual
manner.

If it be objected thirdly, that without faith it is impossible to please God;
it is the prayer of faith that pleases God, and so likewise in other Duties:
and to what end should they do these things when the doing them is not pleasing
to God? I answer, Though without faith these Duties are not spiritually and
formally good, yet they are morally and materially, and so far as they are
good, they are pleasing to God; If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
Genesis 4.7.
A Cain, a wicked man, so far as he does well, he is accepted: though these
Duties being done without faith, are not adequately proportionable to Gods
will, and so truly pleasing to him, yet they are materially good, in regard of
the matter, accepted of him; though doing these Duties be not a degree in the
thing, ye it is a degree to it, though in the state they were it is not
available to Salvation: yet b this a man renders himself more c pable of
Salvation, and presents himself as a subject more fit for God to work on;
though I cannot say with the Romanists, that he who improves his natural
abilit^es, does out of congruity merit justifying, and saving Grace; or that
God has absolutely bound himself upon the exerting, and putting forth of these
natural abilities, to bestow supernatural Graces; because that of our Savior,
To him that has, shall be given: is to be understood, in the same kind; yet
certainly, God is never wanting to those, who are not wanting to themselves;
the Apostle says that God will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.3.
As a King really wills, and desires the welfare of all his loyal Subjects:
though not with that degree of willingness that he does the welfare of some
special Favorite, whom he raises to great preferment; in like manner, though
God does not will the Salvation of all with that degree of willingness that he
does the Elect, yet he wills it with a true and real will, though not with an
absolute efficacious will and resolution; as a thing which he absolutely
resolves shall come to pass, as he does the Salvation of his Elect, yet he
does it with a conditional will, if they will come up to the terms of the
Gospel: though he does not deal with all men in a Covenant of Grace, yet he
deals with all in a Covenant of righteousness, if I may so term it; if they
do well, they shall be accepted; if they believe and repent, they shall be
saved; and he bestows upon them many means and helps to this end; no man
shall have any cause to plead at the last day, I knew thou were a hard Master,
reaping where thou have no^ sown; I was not wanting in using the Mean, but thou
were wanting in giving a Blessing: I did what I could on my part, but thou
failedst on thy part* no, God will silence any such plea, as he did with that
unprofitable servant, Why did thou not put out my money to the Exchangers?
Why did thou not improve that power I gave thee? God will then make it
appear, that every man's destruction is of himself; that God would have healed
Babylon, but she would not be healed; that he would have gathered men as the
Hen does her Chickens, but they would not: Seeing then Gods bowels are not
straightened to us, let not us be straightened in our own bowels; let us carefuly use
the means God has appointed, improve those talents, put forth that power he
has given us; it is in vain to expect God should help us, unless we help our
selves as we can do nothing without Gods assistance, so God ordinarily will do
nothing without our cooperation.

3. We should carefully observe and improve those seasons and opportunities
which God puts into our hands, though the whole time of life be given us to
make provision for Eternity, yet there are some particular seasons, when this
may best be done; some certain articles of time when God makes more immediate
offers of Eternal happiness: As,

1. When we find some more than ordinary impulse to seek God, in some duty of
his own appointment; sometimes when our thoughts are taken up with other
things, we find a motion darted into our minds to seek God by prayer, or some
other duty; and many times one motion after another; and when God thus provokes
us to seek him, it is a sign that is a time when God is willing to be found of
us: When God bad Moses come up into the Mount to him, it was an argument he
would meet him when he came there. When Christ told his Disciples, Behold I go
before you into Galilee, there shall you see me, the Disciples going, found as
he had said: In like manner, when God prompts us into his presence, it is a
good argument we may then prevail with him.

2. When God prepares the heart and puts it into a frame and temper in some
measure suitable to the duty; as when there is wrought in us an aweful
apprehension of the Majesty and holiness of that God before whom we come,
alively sense of our own unworthiness to come into his presence, a serious
consideration of the solemnity of the duty we are about, an earnest desire to
meet God in the way of his own appointments, when God is pleased to work up our
hearts into such a frame; these preparations are not in vain, Thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, Psalm. 10.17.

3. When God is pleased to enlarge the heart, and vouchsafe a special
assistance in the duty; when a man stirs up himself to take hold of God, and
continues wrestling with God by a holy importunity, He shall approach to me,
for who is this that engages his heart to approach unto me? Jer. 30.21.
and let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me, Isa.
27.5,
and he shall make peace with me.

4. When the hearts of Gods Ministers are enlarged, when those goads, nails
given from one Shepherd, are powerfully fastened upon the the conscience by the
Masters of the Assemblies. When Christ was teaching, it is said, The power of
God was present to heal: It holds true in regard of spiritual healing, Luke
5.17.
when the Word is powerfully preached, God, whose way is in the Sanctuary;
whose Walk is in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, is then more specially
present to make his word effectual, We then as workers together with him,
beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain; then follows,
Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6.1.


5. When there is wrought in the heart some remorse for sin: When John Baptist
preached in the Wilderness of Judea, the people went out to him, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins; and then he tells them, Now
also is the Axe laid to the root of the tree. Mat. 3.10.


6. When there are stirred up in the soul, some desires after grace and
Salvation, Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; then Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found, call upon while he is near Isa. 55.1.


(7.) When God by threatening or inflicting some great judgment does awaken and
terrify the Conscience: Thus the Prophet having threatened a sore judgment, he
adds, Therefore now also says the Lord, turn to me with all your heart, etc.
Joel 2.12.


(8.) The time of sickness, when a man comes to apprehend he must die, and
forthwith enter upon his eternal condition. Tully observes, when men draw near
to death, then they begin to think of Virtue, and to repent deeply of those
Sins and offenses they before committed. Beza says, That God laid the
foundation of his spiritual health in a violent sickness that befell him at
Paris,

(9.) After some great Mercy conferred, or some great deliverance vouchsafed,
which is apt to put the heart into a melting frame; when the Angel minded the
people of Gods mercies to them, and how ill they had requited him, they wept
abundantly; Eccl. 8.6.
These, and the like, are the particular times when God works more close with
man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living; but here is the great misery, men that are careful to take the
proper seasons in all other things, yet in this which most concerns them, are
more inobservant than the Stork and Crane, and other brutish creatures; and
this is the great cause of the mi^carriage of many thousands of souls, because
to every purpose there is a time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is
great upon him: Judge. 2.
It holds true in the miseries that befall men in this life, because there is a
nick of opportunity when every thing may best be done, and with most advantage;
and sometimes when it must be done, or not done at a I; and men many times want
judgment to discern this time; this is the great cause of those evils that
befall the sons of men: Esau lost the blessing for want of coming a little
sooner: Saul lost his Kingdom for want of staying a little longer; and as in
the things of this life, men's not timing things aright, is the cause why they
miscarry in their undertakings; so it is more especially in spirituals, because
there are some particular seasons and articles of time, when God draws more
near to men, and makes more immediate offers of mercy and salvation; and men
will not know the time of their visitation: hence it comes to pass that the
misery of men is great upon them; this is that that sets open the floodgates
of damnation, that makes Hell to enlarge it self, and swallow innumerable
Souls: there is no one sin, I think I may say, not all sins put together, that
is the cause of the damnation of so many under Gospel Light, as this one sin;
there are few who live under Gospel-dispensations, but are convinced of the
necessity of making provision for their eternal condition; and have many
purposes and resolutions to do it, only they will not take Gods time; they put
it off, and think it will be time enough afterward; and this is that fatal
Rock, where millions of Souls dash themselves in pieces; that great
stumbling block, at which innumerable men stumble and fall, and perish
everlastingly. Could we lay our ears to Hell, and hear the cries and complaints
of those poor tormented creatures, I doubt not but we might hear them crying
out against this Sin, as the chief cause of their perishing: if therefore our
Souls, our Salvation, our everlasting welfare be precious to us, take heed of
neglecting those seasons and opportunities, which being once past, can never be
recalled again; but let us in this our day know the things that belong to our
peace.

Yet further, though at these, and the like times, God works with men, yet we
may probably conceive, that there may be sometimes one particular time, when
God, above others draws more near in this kind; To every thing there is a
season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven: There is a particular season,
when every thing may be best done, and sometimes must be done then, or not at
all. When Elisha desired that a double portion of Elijah's spirit might be
given him, Elijah answered, Thou have a^ked a hard thing, nevertheless, if thou
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee, but if not, it
shall not be so; Elisha being with him, and seeing him when he was caught up,
had accordingly a double portion of his spirit; whereas had he missed that
time, he had likewise missed of what he desired. Some have observed, that there
are few me^, but some one time or other in their life, have an opportunity put
into their hand for advantaging themselves in regard of their outward condition
in the world; some one opportunity more conducing thereunto, than they have all
their lives beside, and if this be neglected, many times they never meet with
the like again.

Samuel appointed Saul to tarry seven days, he tarried six and part of the
seventh, and Samuel not coming, he forced himself, and offered a
Burnt-offering; the Text says, As soon as he had made an end of offering,
Samuel came, and tells him, he had done foolishly, for now would God have
established his Kingdom upon Israel; but now he tells him, his Kingdom should
not continue, 1 Samuel 13.
When the people met to crown Rehoboam, had he then spoke good words to them,
as his old Counselors advised, they would have served him for ever but
speaking harshly, ten Tribes revolted from him, and he could never after regain
that opportunity, he then had of settling himself: It is probable it may be
thus with some, in regard of their spiritual condition, Christ tells the
young man, that he was not far off from the Kingdom of God: but he being
unwilling to comply with Christ's terms, went away, and we do not read that he
ever came to Christ after; When Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and
judgment to come, Felix trembled, but put him off at present, go thy way for
this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee, but we do not
find that ever that season came; So Agrippa tells Paul, Almost thou perswadest
me to be a Christian; within a little; (...).
but having thus spoken, he rose up, and it is likely was never after in so
good a frame; some upon the hearing of a powerful convincing Sermon: others in
the time of some great sickness, much bewail their former neglects, and take up
strong resolutions for the future, so as at present, they seem not far off from
the Kingdom of Heaven; yet afterward, repent of their very repentance; and
neglecting to improve this opportunity, it may be feared of some, that they
never have the like again.

Some say, the Panther never brings forth but once, and the reason is because
when the young ones gather strength, they struggle to get more liberty, and
with their nails tear the film, or bag, in which they are enclosed, which
putting the Dam to pain, she casts them out, while they are yet blind and
deformed, and the bag being torn, she is incapable of bearing after; Thus many,
when they are under the pangs of the new birth, which might if well managed, be
a happy preparative for forming Christ in their Souls: yet growing impatient of
these workings, and stirrings of Conscience, and not willing to stay long
enough in the place of breaking forth of Children, they either silence
Conscience by running to worldly diversions, or snatch at comfort before
Humiliation has had its perfect work, and by this default all comes to
nothing; with Ephraim they flee like a Bird from the birth, and from the womb,
and from the conception, and possibly, never recover the like advantage.
Infinitely therefore does it concern us, when we have so fair a gale for
Heaven, to improve this opportunity to the best advantage, which cannot be
neglected without great hazard of losing Eternal happiness.

(4.) We should be careful to cherish the good motions of Gods Spirit, exciting
us to this work: As the best way to overcome sin, is to resist the first
motions of it (upon that in Genesis 3. The Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpents head; Austin says, What is the Serpents head, but the beginning of
Sin? Resist that, and thou breakest the Serpents head;) so the best way of
working out our Salvation, is to cherish those good motions the holy Spirit
breaths into the Soul; if thou blowest a spark, says the Wise man, thou shall
have fire, if thou spit upon it, it will go out, and both out of one and the
same mouth. The Spirit of God is compared to Fire in Scripture; as that phrase
of quenching the Spirit, implies; there is no man, but sometimes has a spark
of this fire warming his heart; if we be careful to blow this spark, we may
have fire to light our feet into the ways of peace; if we quench, or neglect to
cherish it, we make our selves fitter Fuel for everlasting burnings: The
Spirits working is compared to the blowing of the Wind, Cant. 4.16. John 3.8.
Mariners, when they have a fair wind, use to put forth; but if they neglect
that opportunity, may stay some time before they have another wind, and perhaps
may lose their intended Voyage: when the North and South wind of Gods Spirit
blows upon the Garden of our Souls, then is our time to set out for heaven;
if we neglect these sweet gales, we must know, the Spirit blows where and
when it lifts; we cannot expect it should blow at our pleasure: It is said of
the Ostrich, That she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and warmeth them in the
dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, or the wild beast break them
Job 39.
. Some Naturalists say, when she thus leaves her Eggs, she does it with an
intent to return to them again, and for that purpose usually takes her mark by
the seven stars, but having staid some time in seeking her food, and the seven
Stars being removed from the place where they were, she in vain looks for her
Eggs, and so they are either broken* or miscarry for want of brooding. Many men
have good motions put into their hearts, many purposes to set about that great
work of their Salvation; but at present they lay them aside, thinking they may
re assume them when they please; but neglecting at present to prosecute those
good motions, the Spirit being grieved, withdraws it self, and when the Spirit
withdraws its assistance, it will be in vain to think to effect this work by
their own strength; when therefore the blessed Spirit of God warmeth our hearts
with good motions, it should be our care to follow good motions, with good
purposes, and purposes with promises, and promises with endeavors, and
endeavors with performance, and performance with perseverance; whereas if we
quench these motions, and stifle these births of the Holy Ghost in our Souls,
it will be just with God to withdraw his Spirit; so God threatens, Be
instructed, oh Jerusalem, lest my Soul departs from thee, and woe to them when
I shall depart from them, says God Jer. 6.8. Hos. 9.12.
.

But to press this further, Behold, says Christ, I stand at the door, and
knock: Rev. 3.20.
this knocking is chiefly by the motions of his Spirit: Knocking, is first, a
vehement motion: men knock hard when they desire to come in; so does the
blessed Spirit. Secondly, It is an iterated motion: men knock, and if they be
not heard, knock again; so the Spirit. Thirdly, It is a gradual motion: men
knock first more gently, then with a louder noise; so likewise it is with the
Spirit. But then fourthly, Knocking is a finite motion: men will not always
continue knocking; we have a saying, if a man knock three times, and none
answers, it is manners to be gone; and when the Spirit of God knocks time
after time, if we shut up the doors of our hearts, it is but just that he
should give over, and never knock more.

Again, He is not only said to knock, but Call; behold, I stand at the door and
knock, if any man hear my voice: though he does not speak by an audible voice,
yet he does by words spoken inwardly to the mind, by a secret inspiration; as
Austin says, he felt something within him, but what it was he could not tell;
for it was neither a voice to be heard by the Ear, nor any color to be
discerned by the Eye, nor any scent to be perceived by the smell; it was
neither hard, nor soft, that it might be felt, yet there was something God did,
which he easily felt, but was not able to express! As when the Lightning, says
Cyprian, breaks through the Cloud, the sudden splendor of it does not so
much enlighten, as dazzel the Eyes; so thou sometimes feel thy self touched,
but do not see him that touches thee; thou hear words spoken inwardly to
thy Soul, but do not perceive him that speaks to thee; by such a Voice God
often speaks to men, a Voice sweetly acquanting us with Gods will; such a
voice as is spoken of, Thine ears, shall hear a word behind thee, saying, this
is the way walk in it; Isa. 30.21.
and if when God thus speaks we be ready to hear, if when he says, seek my
face, our hearts echo, thy face Lord will we seek; when he says, let him that
has an ear to hear, our hearts answer, speak Lord, for thy Servants hear; when
he says, Return ye backsliding Children, our hearts answer, Behold we come
unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God; Jer. 3.22.
If when he cries, List up your heads, Oh! ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may come in, we forthwith hear his
voice, and open the door, he is most ready to come in, and sup with us, and to
give us to sup with him. But here is the great misery, God speaks once, yea
twice, yet man perceives it not, Job. 33.14.
and when we turn a deaf ear to Gods Call, we hereby provoke him to take up
that peremptory resolution, Because I called, and ye refused, I will also laugh
at your Calamity; then shall they call upon me, and I will not answer, they
shall seek me early, but shall not find me. Sometimes he is said to strive with
men: and this he does in such manner that it is no easy thing to outstrive
these wrestlings and contendings of Gods Spirit; he does so follow men with the
Exhortations, Admonitions, Counsels of his Word, so hedge them in with Mercies
on the one hand, and Corrections on the other; so besiege them by inward
Enlightnings, Convictions, Persuasions, Impulses, that men shall confess
another day, that they were forced to strive, and strive hard to elude these
workings of Gods Spirit, but this he will not do always, My Spirit shall not
always strive with man: Genesis 6.3.
Oh then take heed of withstanding these strivings of the Spirit, Woe be to him
that striveth with his Maker; Isa. 45.9.
If all striving with God be woeful, certainly this is most desperate, when he
shall strive to do us good; and we shall strive to suppress and put off these
contendings of the Spirit, when he shall strive to save us, and we shall strive
for our own Damnation: woe to him that thus striveth with his Maker, if we have
hitherto thus striven against God, take we heed of striving any longer, lest
God resolve, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he is flesh.

Sometimes the Spirit is said to draw, Cant. 1.4. Hos. 11.4.
There are in Nature four ways by which one thing may be said to draw another;
by Sympathy, so they say the Herb Aproxis, through a natural correspondence
with the fire, though at a distance from it, draws the flame, and begins to
burn: by heat, so the Sun draws up the Vapors: by motion, so the Horse
draws the Coach: and by secret attraction, so Amber draws the Straw, and
the Loadstone the Iron: the blessed Spirit makes use of all these four ways of
attraction; he draws by Sympathy, when he works in the heart any kind of
willingness to yield to his call; by heat, when he warmeth the heart by good
motions; by motion, when he seeks to work upon men by the pious examples of
other Christians; and lastly, by secret attraction, when in a Dream, a Vision
of the night, or any other secret way, he opens the ears of men, and seals
their instruction, that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide Pride
from man Job 33.16, 17, 29.
. And as Elihu adds, Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man: These
several ways he seeks to draw him to himself, and when the Spirit does thus,
we should resolve with the Church, Draw me, we will run after thee Cant. 1.4.
: whereas, if when the Spirit draws on, we draw off; when he draws forward
toward heaven, we dravv backward toward perdition: Let us remember that
dreadful commination, If any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in
him Heh. 9.38.
. By all this it appears of what grand import it is to observe the motions,
and comply with the workings of the Spirit: We read, when the Cloud, the
testimony of Gods presence, abode upon the Tabernacle, whether it were two days
or a month, or a year, the Children of Israel abode in their Tents, and
journied not; but when the Cloud was taken up, whether it was by day or by
night, they journied Numb. 9, 17.
. When the Spirit of God is present with us, and offers its assistance, now
is our time to set out for heaven; whereas, to neglect this season, and to
think to do it afterward, is as if the Mariner should lie still when the Wind
is favorable, the Ship rigged, the Sails spread, and all accommodations
provided, and should put forth when he were deprived of all these Advantages:
Or as if the Smith should lay aside the Iron when it is hot and malleable, and
begin to strike when it is grown cold. When David enquired of God whether he
should go out against the Philistines, he had this Answer from God, When thou
hear the sound of a Going in the tops of the Mulberry-trees, then thou shall
bestir thy self, for then shall the Lord go out before thee. 2 Cor. 5.24.
When we hear as it were a voice within us exciting us to this work, we should
then set upon it, that being the time when the holy Spirit goes before us.

5. We should conscionably perform those Duties which God has appointed as
means and helps to obtain Eternal happiness: As,

1. We should be much in Prayer: David says, For my love they are mine
Adversaries, but I give my self to Prayer; Ps. 190.4.
it is in the Original, but I prayer; the words give my self unto as in our
Translation, are added for explanation, as the different Character shows:
David speaks as if he were composed and made up of Prayer, and therefore no
wonder that David assures himself of Heaven; As for me I will behold thy face
in Righteousness; it being impossible that a Son of so many prayers should
perish. He that calls upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved, is in three
several places Recorded in Scripture,

2. We should be swift to hear. Hear and your soul shall live. Isa. 55.3.
It was by the Ear, by our first Parents listening to Satan, that we lost that
hapiness we were entitled to by our first Creation: and in Nature, the same
thing that gives the wound, does sometime; afford the Cure: So God has
ordered, that by the Ear, by hearing the Word, we may obtain happiness.
Excellent is that passage of Chrysostom, If you step into Courts of
Judicature, what pleading and wrangling shall you hear? If into the
Marketplace, there is little to be seen but buying and selling, and lying and
cheating; if into Private Families, nothing but working and toiling for the
World; if into Princes Courts, Isa. 55.3.
all the Discourse is about Honors and worldly greatness, but nothing that is
Spiritual, (...).
scarce a word of God and Heaven. But go now into the House of God, and there
you shall be sure to hear something of Heaven and Heavenly things, of the
blessedness of separate Soul, of such things as neither the eye has seen, nor
the ear heard (...), etc.
; we should therefore diligently wait at Wisdoms doors, and attend at the posts
of her Gates.

3. We should be much in thanksgiving; God promises, I will give thee the
opening of the mouth in the midst of them; Ezekiel 29.21.
he would give them deliverance in such manner, that Ezekiel, and the rest of
the Faithful, might with freedom and open mouth praise the Lord in the
Assemblies. This opening of the mouth in praise, which justly belongs to God,
for whom praise waits in Sion, and is imperfectly done by Believers on Earth,
is perfectly and abundantly practiced by the Saints in Heaven: the high praises
of God are in their mouths; it is the great work of those Heavenly Inhabitants:
as therefore wicked men accustom themselves to swearing and cursing; as
practicing that on Earth they are like to do in Hell: So the Saints inure
themselves here to blessing and praising God, as learning that Duty on Earth,
which they are to practice in Heaven: As Young Gentlemen, who intend to Travel
into Foreign Countries will beforehand season themselves with some general
observations of the Situation, Manners, and Customs of those Countries; and
learn something of the Language, that they might not be wholly to seek when
they come there: In like manner, if we intend for Heaven, we should now
accustom our selves to praising God, which is the proper Language of Heaven,
and will make us more meet for it. The 145 Psalm is entitled, David's Psalm of
Praise: Psalm. 50.23.
Some Rabbis had so high an esteem of this Psalm, that they affirmed, that he
who would three times every day repeat over this Psalm, might assure himself of
Heaven; because some might think too high, Rabbi Kimchi thus moderateth; that
it is to be understood of those that not only speak it with their mouth, but
with their heart also; when the Sacrifice of Praise is offered to God, not only
upon the high places of the tongue, but upon the Altar of the Heart, and from*
thence flameth forth in the Life, such praise has a promise of Salvation made
to it, Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; and to him that orders his
Conversation aright will I show the Salvation of God. (x) The praises the
Saints now give to God, are like the Musician's tuning his strings before he
plays they are but the es^ayes of those everlasting Allelujahs they shall
sing in Heaven.

(4.) Another help is Christian Conference, and conversing with Heavenly minded
Persons: It is a good Observaation Chysostome has, that naturally a man has
but one Head to advise him, one Tongue to speak for him, two Eyes to foresee
dangers, two Hands to work with, two Feet to walk with; whereas, says he, had
a man that skill, that he could make that Head* a thousand heads to advise him;
that Tongue a thousand tongues to speak for him, those Eyes a thousand eyes to
foresee dangers, etc. he would hardly be circumvented by any Policy; but this
benefit we may have by the Communion of Saints; their Examples, Prayers,
Directions, Exhortations, Encouragements, would be great helps to us in the way
to Heaven: They who ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, are in a
hopeful way of arriving there. When the Spouse enquired of the Watchmen, it
was but a little that she passed from them, but she found him whom her soul
loved.

To these I might add the Duties of Reading, Meditation, Self-examination, and
some others, which must be all done in their proper seasons: The Husbandman
must dung his Ground, Plow, Sow, Harrow, and perform other parts of necessary
culture; if he neglects any one of these, he cannot expect a good Crop; so it
must be in our Spiritual Husbandry, we must use all the means appointed by God,
without the neglect of any; it would be a weakness in a man that has a heavy
Load, and dirty ways to pass through, to take but any one Horse out of his Team;
our work is great, our strength small, our Enemies Potent, our hindrances
many, therefore had need use all the helps God affords, without omitting any
one: Only I shall subjoyn two Cautions to be observed by us in the Use of these
means, and performance of these Duties.

1. We must not be as the Grasshopper, that takes some skips toward Heaven, and
then squats down upon the Earth again: or as some say of the Leopard, that if
he does not get his prey at two or three jumps, is impatient of any further
pains: we must not think it enough to perform these Duties for a time, and then
give over if we do not find that success as we expect, but must continue and
persevere in the practice of them: In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the
Evening withold not thy hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper,
either this or that Eccles. 11.6
. Elijah sends his Servant to look toward the Sea, he looked, but saw nothing*
he went and looked a second a third, nay six times, yet sees nothing; he went
the seventh time, and then he saw a little Cloud like a man's hand, and
presently the Heaven was black with Clouds, and there was a great Rain: It may
be thou have made thy Addresses to God in the ways of his apointment, and that
not once, but often; thou have followed God from one Ordinance to another, and
yet God answers thee neither by Prophets, nor by Dreams; yet be not
discouraged, but wait still upon God in the use of the means; possibly at last
thou may see some little Cloud arising, some little relenting for sin, some
weak desires after Grace and Salvation; if but so, do not despise this day of
small things, or if at present there be not so much as a little Cloud
appearing, yet resolve still to wait upon God, and possibly, as in that Miracle
wrought by Jehoram, of which the Prophet says, Make this Valley full of
Ditches; for thus says the Lord, ye shall neither see Wind nor Rain, yet the
Valley shall be filled with Water; 2 Kings 3.16, 17.
So, though at present there be neither Wind nor Rain to be seen; not one sigh
coming from the heart, not one tear dropping from the eye, yet God being
remembered in his ways, may in due time shower down righteousness and Salvation
upon thy Sou^; Be not weary, says the Apostle, of well doing, for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not Gal. 6.9.
We should not then be as the common draught-horse, who if he does not find the
Load coming, gives over after a pull or two; but like the Horse of a right
breed, which, though tied to a Tree that stirs not, yet strains, and pulls, and
will sooner fall down dead with straining, then give over. I charge you, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem; that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love till he please,
Cant. 2.7.
She was willing to wait his leisure. When Moses went up to receive Gods
Commands, he stays six days in the Mount, Exodus 24.16.
and the seventh God called to him; though we wait long, yet if at last God
speak Peace, this will be a sufficient recompense for all our waiting.

2. A second Caution is this, We should take heed of any high thoughts of any
thing we do, but let the golden thread of Self-denial run through all our Duties;
and that in these two particulars:

1. We should not be like Antipheron, a Creature Aristotle speaks of, who by
reason of the weakness of his Eyes, had a reflection of himself in the Air, as
others have in a Looking-glass, so as all the day long he saw himself; but
rather should be like that Mirror fixed upon the wall of the Arcadian Temple,
in which, men looking to see themselves, they saw instead of their own faces, a
representation of the Deity they adored: when we have done all we can, instead
of seeing our selves, we should see God in all our Duties, and look upon all we
do as Gods work in us: The Ciens does not bring forth fruit by any virtue of
its own but by virtue of the stock into which it is ingrafted. Without me,
says Christ, ye can do nothing. if Austin, in the Agonies of his first
Conversion, heard, as he thought, a voice speaking to him, Do you stand in your
self, and do you not stand? ^n te fras and non stas?
It was to let him know, in his own strength. If Catharine of Sienna, laboring
under temptations, and begging Christ's help, had as is reported, this Answer
returned, I am what I am, thou art what thou art not, It was to make her
sensible that she was nothing in her self; what she was, she was in and by
Christ: the promise of the Kingdom of Heaven is made to the poor in Spirit,
Mat. 5.
Such as know they are nothing, have nothing, deserve nothing can do nothing of
themselves; we must be emptied of our selves, if we would receive of Christ's
fullness; we must be nothing in our selves, if we would have have Christ to be
all in all to us; when we have done all we can, we must deny our selves, and
ascribe all to free grace. When Joab had overcome Rabbah, he sent to David to
come and take it, lest if he took it, it were called after his Name. 2 Samuel
12.28
When we have performed Duties in the best manner, we should be willing that
God have the glory of all. When David and the People offered liberally and
willingly toward the Building of the Temple, David ascribes all to God, Who am
I and what i^ my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly after
this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
Paul, whom Austine for this cause calls the best Child of Grace, the
faithfullest Servant of his Lord, whatsoever he was, or had, or did, he
ascribes all to free grace; he was in nothing behind the chiefest of the
Apostles, yet confesses he is nothing. 2 Cor. 12.11.
He was what he was, eminent* for grace, yet what he was, he was by grace; By
the grace of God I am what I am: 1 Cor. 15.10.
he lived, yet not he but Christ lived in him. Gal. 2.20.
he labored abundantly, yet not he, but the grace of God which was with him.
He was able to do all things, but through Christ's strengthening him. Gal. 2.20.
When we do no evil, we do our own, as Christ says of the Devil* Phil. 4.13.
John 8.
we walk as men's they like men have transgressed the Covenant. Hos 6.7.
But if we do any thing that is good, it is from God, who works all our w^rks
in us; as therefore of him, and through him, so to him are all things.

2. We must take heed of relying upon them: Luther says, We must take heed not
only of our sins but of our good Works. (n) Duties can never have too much
diligence used about them, nor too little confidence placed in them; they are
good helps, but bad Saviors; it is necessary we ^o them, but it is dangerous
to rely upon them, John Knox lying upon his Deathbed, passed over the last
night of his Life with many sighs and groans; being asked, What was the cause
of his trouble? He answered, that he had in his lifetime gone through many
Combats, endured many buffettings of Satan, but now theroaring Lion set more
strongly upon him; before the Devil had set his sins before him, and tempted
him to despair, and sought to work upon him by worldly allurements; but now he
went another way, seeking to persuade him, that Eternal Life was but a due
Reward for the great pains and labors he had taken in the Church of God: and
this he looked upon as the most dangerous temptation; if the Devil cannot
diswade us from performing Duties, he will persuade us all he can to rely upon
them; and this will as much gratify Satan, and as certainly ruin our Souls,
as if we wholly neglected them: when we have done all we are able, we must say,
We are unprofitable Servants. Rollocke, when some minded him upon his Deathbed
of his great Service he had done in the Church; He replied, I abhor my
Rectorship of the University, my Reader-ship of Divinity, my Pastor-ship of
Edenborough; and all I have done, that I might be found in Christ, not having
on mine own Righteousness: And at another time: There is nothing of mine, which
I do not account as dung, that I might win Christ* And again, I have nothing to
glory in, but the merits of Christ, all other things I count loss.

6. We should labor for those Graces which entitle to eternal happiness; I
shall name only some as,

1 Knowledge, This is eternal to life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. John 17.3.
Though the Valentinian Heretics had knowledge in too high estimation, when
they ascribed all to it, affirming, that as ignorance made us subject to all
misery, so the restoration of the inward-man must needs belong to knowledge
only; yet what some Philosophers said of Light; that all the influences of the
Sun and Stars, are by light transmitted to this inferior world; so the light
of Knowledge is that Conduit-pipe, by which the several Graces God works, are
conveyed into the Soul; as in the first-Creation light was the first thing God
made, so in the new Creation Josephus says, that Judas Maccabeus; going about
to repair the Temple, and purge out the relics of Idolatry; began with the
Lights* placed a Light upon the golden Candlestick, and ordained a Feast* which
they called Lights: John 17.3.
Thus when God purifieth the heart, (...).
and makes it a Temple for himself He first sets up the light of knowledge in
the Soul without this we can never hope to be made partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light; When Hamans face was covered, death followed: when men
live in a land of Light, and yet have the things of their peace hid from their
eyes, it is a sad Prognostic of their everlasting miscarriage; If our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3.


2. Godly sorrow, which works repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of.
2 Cor. 7.10.
If any thinks he has no sin, I would say to him as Constantine of Acesius the
Novatean, Let him make new Ladders to climb up to Heaven by: but if we have
sinned, there is no other way than by godly sorrow; sin must be purged either
by water or by fire, says Guericus; if the water of Repentance does not here
wash away our sins, Hellfire will afterward burn our souls.

3 Faith, which the Apostle calls the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen Heb. 11.1.
though we must distinguish between faith of Adherence, and Faith of Evidence,
between the first Act of Faith whereby we believe, and the second Act, or as
some call it, an act flowing from faith; Actus a fide emanans.
between the work of Faith, which is Believing, and the fruit of Faith, which
is Assurance; A Christian may have faith in the Seed and not in the Harvest;
the fire of Faith may warm his heart, yet not flame forth in Assurance; he may
have the direct act of Faith, both a Negative exclusive act, whereby he
renounceth all other ways and means of Salvation, and a Positive exclusive act,
whereby he rests wholly upon Christ for Eternal life; yet not have the Reflex
act, whereby he knows that he believes, and that Salvation belongs to him;
yet where Faith is called a Believing to Salvation Heb, 10.39.
and Salvation is said to be the end of Faith. 1 Pet. 1.9.


4. Love, The joys of Heaven are said to be prepared God, for those that love
him. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Ambrose in his Funeral Oration for Theodosius, describing his religious death,
brings in the Angels and Archangels hovering about his departing Soul, to
carry it to Heaven: And asking him, what Grace it was he here practiced on
earth, that gave him so ready an admittance into Heaven? He replied, I have
loved, I have loved; Love is as strong as Death, the coals thereof are coals of
fire, which has a most vehement Flame. (z) In the flames of this fire it is
that the devout Soul ascends to Heaven, as the Angel once in the flame of
Manaoh's sacrifice.

5. Humility, As the Philosopher being asked; What is the first thing required
in an Orator? answered, Pronunciation; what was the second? what the third?
answered still Pronunciation, Pronunciation? So says Austin, I^. I where
asked, what is the readiest way to attain Truth, and so Happiness? I would
answer, The first, the second, and the third thing, is Humility, Humility. as
often as I were asked, I would say Humility; Humility does not only entitle to
Happiness, but to the the highest degree of Happiness, Whosoever shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Cant. 8.6.


6. Heavenly-mindedness. There is no one thing so much hinders the attaining
eternal life as Earthly-mindedness; there are some Fowls they call Polysurchoi,
which though they have wings like other Fowls to fly with, yet they have such
heavy ponderous bodies, that they seldom fly higher than the stub of some
Tree, but live most-what like beasts upon the earth; worldly-minded men like,
these Fowls, who though they have intelectual, immortal fouls, by which, they
should have converse in Heaven, yet they are so eaten up with the world, that
they have no time; and less mind to look after Heaven Chrysostom observes,
that other beasts, thoug^ they are made so as they look down to the earth, ye^
sometimes, especially in their extremity, they lift up their heads toward
Heaven; only the Camel is so depressed with the bunch of flesh upon his back,
that he is always poring upon the earth, and is never observed to look up
toward Heaven; To other beasts he compares other sorts of sinners: who though
great strangers to Heaven, yet sometimes have some thoughts of God, and Heaven,
only the covetous worldling, like the Camel, is bowed down to the earth, that
he lives, as if there were neither a God to be served, not a Heaven to be
looked after: this sin therefore we must in a special manner take heed of, it
is not more impossible for the same eye, at the same instant, to look downward
toward the Earth, and upward toward Heaven, than to have the hearts both upon
the World and Heaven: if we desire, and hope for Heaven we must be Crucified to
the world, must set our affections on things above, not on things on the Earth;
we must never expect Heaven when we die, if we be strangers to Heaven while we
live: In Physical transmutations the form is introduced in an instant; but
there are some antecedent qualities, some previous dispositions that preparethe
body for that change; though the soul in the instant of death quits Earth, and
mounts up to Heaven, yet it must be prepared for Heaven by conversing there
beforehand; such as now live strangers to Heaven, shall never intermeddle
with those joys. (b)

7. To these we must add the grace of perseverance; some have seemed to begin
well, yet ended miserably; others have begun ill, but ended happily;
perseverance is all in all, other graces run the race, but only perseverance
receives the Crown. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown
of life: Rev. 2.10.
Solomon says, better is the end of a thing, than the beginning thereof
Eccles. 7, 8.
. The grace of the Comedy lies chiefly in the last Scene; it is the evening
that Crovvneth the day: Seneca says, the last day judges all the precedent;
happy are they, whose last days are the (...) days; whose works are more at
last, than at fi^ vvheras, when men seem to begin well, and aft^^vvard turn
from the holy Commandment, it had (...) better for them never to have known the
way of Righte^^^ss. 2 Pet. 2.21.
Among other Prodigies which were (...) bout the time Julian came unto the
Empire, t^ was one: after a plentiful Vintage, there were w^ grapes appeared
upon their Vines with which man Wise men were much affected, looking upon it
(...) ominous. When men seem to abound in the fruits (...) Righteousness, and
afterward bring forth the w^ grapes of sin and disobedience, it is a sad
Prognosti^^^^ of their eternal ruin; as the falling of the lea^ is the
forerunner of vvinter, so the falling away men in this life, presageth that
winter of (...) wrath; when the storms, and tempests of Div^ vengence shall
for ever beat upon them: havi^ then put our hand to the Plow, we must ta^ heed
of looking back again; the promise of eter^^^ happiness is made to such as
persevere: He the endures to the end shall be saved. Matthew. 10.22.


FINIS.

