A Call from Heaven to the Unconverted.

A SERMON Preached at the F^^ERAL OF Mr. JOHN GASPINE.

(...)

IF these weighty Considerations are not worth your R^ading, keep it clean, and
return it when called for.

LONDON: Printed by John Williams.

REV. ii. v. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.


IN these Words there is a severe threatening; I will come unto thee quickly,
and I will remove thy candlestick out of his place.

A Candlestick signifies the Church of God, or a Company, or a Society of
People met together to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. As if he should say,
I will smite thy Shephe^ds and scatter thy Flocks; I will take away thy Lights,
and I will leave ^hee in Egyptian darkness; I will cut off my Ordinances, which
are my golden Pipes to convey the Water of Life unto you.

But you will say, Why is the Lord so angry with Ephesus?

It is, because of the Churches sins; it is, because thou have not loved me as
once thou did. Want of love to Christ is a Sin that deserves to be
unchurched; that deserves that God should take away your Ministers For, what
is our preaching for, but to gain your Lo^^ (...) Christ, and to hate the Devil*

Secondly, In the second Place, the Works o^ ^^is Church of Ephesus were; they
had been very labourious in the external Principles of Religion, in promoting
the Salvation of Souls; but yet notwithstanding they had gone so far, yet they
had not done what they did out of a right Principle, that is, out of pure Love
to Christ; this makes the Lord so angry, tha^ he threatened to unchurch them.

Well, but is there no remedy to prevent this heavy Judgment? He that holds
forth the Rod tells you a Remedy. As if he should say, Oh you Ephesians, if you
will love me better, and if you will be more painfu^ in the great Work of your
Salvation, if you will but repent of your sins, I will not bring those heavy
Judgments upon you, which I threatened to bring upon you.

When the Gospel goes God goes; and when God goes, Christ goes; and when Christ
goes, the ministering Angels of the Covenant go; the Candlestick goes, and the
Lights they go along with it.

What then follows, when God goes? Then the Devil he comes, yea legions of
Devils come; and then there follow the Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and
all other manner of evils. God does not go alone, neither does God remove his
Candlestick alone. I do not tell you that God threatens you to pull down all
your Lights* I would not terrify you by telling you that God is a departing
from you, when he puts out some of your Lights: But yet I must needs tell you,
that when God does deprive you of so many hundreds, of as Pious, and as
Laborious, and as Learned (some of them) as any are in the Vineyard, I say,
when God deals thus by you, I cannot think that it is in mercy to you, but in
Judgment.

The Church of England is a great People, and there are many poor Souls in it
that are as Firebrarnds in the Fire, that have great need to be plucked out; and
as there are, blessed be God, many eminent Ministers at this Day in England, to
snatch such poor Souls, as Firebrarnds out of the Fire; yet, I say, that where
there is one, we have need of ten.

But though our disease is dangerous, yet it is not desperate; there is one way
for us to prevent those he^vy Judgments that the Lord does threaten to inflict
upon us; and that is by repentance, by a serious repenting of the Sins past of
our lives, and to amend what has been amiss in us.

I shall now come to make some Application.

Use 1. In the first Place, is this a Truth, that Repentance is the only Way
and Means to prevent the Judgments of God that are th^eatned against a People
by God for sin. Then first of all, (...) would have you to observe the cursed
nature of this cursed thing, called sin: Sin must be repented of or it will
destroy us, it will destroy our Bodies, it will destroy our Souls, it will
destroy our Kingdom; this is the cursed nature of this thing called sin.

My beloved, I think it is one of the hardest that is, to understand the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, to understand that deadly Poison that is in it; it
is for want of the true Knowledge of it, that causes that deadness of Heart
that you so much groan under. Thus you see that sin (that thing we so much
slight) what a terrible thing it is. Alas, what think many of us of a vain Word
or an idle thought, or swearing an Oath: what a trifling thing it is to neglect
Prayer.

But let me ask, you that think sin to be so slight a matter, what is the
reason that God is so angry that he made Man? what is the reason that many a
sinful Church has made God repent that ever he made a Church? I say therefore,
consider the exceeding Venom that there is in sin: Oh! take heed of sin, it is
a Child, that although it be conceived in joy, yet it shall bring forth sorrow
in the End. Cursed be the Day that ever sin was born into the World. Sin, it is
so vile a thing, that it makes God for to cry out at it, and Jesus Christ for
to cry out at it, and makes them to say, they will be gone: If you continue in
your sins, I will take away my Ministers, and leave you in darkness.

Tush, say you, what is sin? I say it is the Venom and Poison of our Natures,
it is that which is, as the Hand to unsheath the Sword, and to thrust it into
our own Bowels, Sin, it is as a Millstone that is tied about our Necks, that
will pull us both Soul and Body into the bottom of that Sea of the wrath of God
from whence there will be no recovery; sin is a Plague that will follow our
Posterity after we are gone out of this World; sin it is a worm upon the Tree
of Life that eats up the fruit of it; sin it is which makes the Lord to take
away the Gospel from amongst us; sin it is a Devilish Charm within us, that
drives away God, and Christ, and the Gospel from amongst us: This is the Evil
of that cursed thing called sin. Oh! do not you make a little matter of it: Do
not you say, when you have been drunk, what harm is there that I have drunk a
Cup too much? do not say, when harm is there in my telling a lie, or swearing,
an Oath? Oh my beloved, what a sad thing is this sin, that it should cause God
for to throw Angels out of Heaven into Hell! Pride cast Angels into Hell, take
heed it does not so by you. Sin made God to destroy all the Old World; sin made
God to repent that he had made the World; sin made God for to burn Sodom and
Gomorrah; sin made God for to threaten Ephesus, to remove his Candlestick from
among them.

Therefore I say, do not think sin to be a small matter, make Conscience of the
least of sins; believe God that it is a vile thing; consider with thy self what
a vain labor this labor of sin is, it is a vain troublesome work; when you
commit it, you must resolve for to die the Death, or to undo it again. Sin it
may well be called the labor in vain. When thou art a doing any thing that is
Evil, thou must repent of it, or else it will undo thee. Sin is a long thread
of the sinners spinning, that when he has spun it out he must sit down in
sorrow, and labor to undo his work again.

While thou art a sinning, I can compare it to nothing better, than to the
journey that Joseph and Mary made to Jerusalem, and left Jesus Christ behind
them.

My beloved, it is a sad journeying without Christ in your Company: when you go
on in your sin, you must return again, or else you will lose your Souls. This I
say is the labor in vain of sinners, they are doing a work that they undo
again; they are running a race that they must run back again, or else it will
undo them. You are gathering up of sticks that will help to burn you; you are
whetting a knife that must cut your own throats, you are spinning a thread that
must hang you.

Oh my beloved, little do you think that you are doing this, when you are
sinning! Do not you say therefore; that sin is a little matter, for God will
damn the Soul and Body for it: He that will damn thee for lying, he that will
damn thee for neglect of praying, he does think that these sins are great
matters: Will you lay these things to heart.

I say take heed of sin, and do not you go away with light thoughts of it.

Use 2. Is repentance the only way and means for to prevent the Judgments of
God, which are threatened by God for sin? Then from hence you may learn the
excellency and the usefulness of that grace of Repentance.

Oh what an Omnipotent grace is this! it is a grace that can do any thing with
God: Why, what can this grace do? what can it not do! This grace of Redemption
it can redeem your mortgaged Blessings, it can repossess you of those Blessings
that you have foolishly played away. Repentance can make God to stay here in
our Kingdom when he is a departing. Repentance it is a heartbreaking for sin,
and it breaks the heart of God likewise; when thy heart yearns for sin, his
heart yearns toward thee; as thou may see in the yearnings of God's Bowels
toward Ephraim, Jer. xxxi. 18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the
Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned I repented; and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because
I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is ^phraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant
child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still:
therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord.

Ephraim, that was a Tribe, one of the Tribes of Israel, you here have the
Voice of a p^nitent Sinner; he smites upon his thigh, which is a Sign of great
anguish of Spirit; here you have the ^enitent, here you have the weeping
shame-fac'd Sinner: But in the Verse following, you have God standing and
looking on: says God, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him.

If thy Heart breaks, thou see that God's Heart will turn toward thee. Oh
the excellency of Repentance, that does so much prevail with the God of Heaven!
It is these Dews and heavenly Showers that must revive your almost dying
withering Blessings. Repentance, it is that holy Oil that must recover our
Lamps that are going out: Oh the excellency of Repentance!

From hence you may gather, what an excellent privilege a penitent Heart has
with God: It is the mourning lamenting Sinner that is like to do England good;
these hard-hearred Sinners they cannot recover an almost lost Gospel, they
cannot fetch God again; but a penitent Heart can. My beloved, how can you live
without such a Grace? Your Souls want it, your Families want it, three Kingdoms
want it; the great want in England is broken-heartedness.

Use 3. Is Repentance the only Way to prevent the Judgments of God? Then you
may from hence gather, That when God either has his Plagues upon a people, or
continues in threatening his Judgment upon a people, it is a sign that those
people are ^ery guilty of impenitency, and that this people have not yet
repented of their sins.

If God threaten^ you, O England, Scotland, and Ireland: If God threatens ^ou
to give you up to hardness of Heart and blindness of Mind, (does God do it at
this Day?) then I say, O England, Scotland and Ireland, you are impenitent
People at this Day: If you see a Kin dom groaning under the Judgments of God,
it is a Sign that they have not made use of those Remedies that would have
cured them.

This is a Charge against England, we have been a stiff-necked People.

Oh England, England, how long shall God wait on you before you repent? how
often has God threatened to remove the Gospel from among you? How often has
God visited you with great and grievous Sicknesses? How many thousands have
been killed by the Sword? How many Widows and fatherless Children have there
been left desolate? God has visited you with Mercy, and yet you repent not. Oh
my beloved, is not this sad? If God come to punish you after you have received
so many mercies from him, take heed that God does not rid his Hands of you.

Why sit you as if you had no Hand in these Things, you careless Masters, that
never Pray in your Families, nor never Teach your Families to Pray? It is for
your Sins that God does threaten to remove the Gospel and to take away his
Ministers. Will you repent of your Sins? If you do not, sad will be your Ends;
God may cut you off from the Face of the Earth, and raise up unto himself a
Generation out of your Loins, that may serve him better than ever you have yet
done, and God may cause you to die in a Wilderness.

Oh the hard-heartedness of the People of England! Oh the Swearing, the
Wickedness, the Superstition and Profaneness that is grown up amongst us! that
I may say, as the World was once drowned by Water, so it is now almost filled
with Wickedness. Oh you sinful wicked Generation, is this your requital unto
God for all his mercies? Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? is not he thy father that has bought thee? has he not made
thee, and established thee?

May I apply this to you; is this the Thanks you return to God, that has been
as a Father to you, that has bought you, and made you? When your Sins grow so
high, do you not think but that the wrath of God will grow high too.

Ay, But you say, Why de you speak to us of these sins? speak to them that
commit such sins.

Answer. My beloved, have you repented of your Sins? Are you grown hard-hearted
with the rest of this Generation? Let me ask you, have you repented of those
Sins that you are guilty of? Yes, say you, we hope we have. Let me try you a
little with these few Things.

First of all, Have you thought upon the Wickedness of your Ways? Have you set
your Sins in order before you? Have you called to mind the Manner of your Lives
and Conversations? Sin is never left until it be soundly laid to Heart.

A repenting Man is one that the World says, is a moping Man or a Woman; he is
one that will look himself in the Face of the Gospel an hour to find out his
Spots; and when he has found them, he falls a Weep^ng.

Secondly, If you have repented as you say you have; what has been your
mourning for Sin? You came crying into the World, your Mother said. Since the
first Tears that you shed, how many Tears have you shed for your Sins? When
were you alone in your Chambers? When have you done as Ephraim did? How often
have your Cheeks been wet with your Tears? How many Handkerchiefs have you wet
with your Tea s for your Sins? Oh my beloved, do you think that God will not
humble you for your Sins? God will humble you before he exalt you, God will
bring you to the brink of Hell before he brings you to Heaven.

Thirdly, If you have repented of your Sins, as you say you have; then, what
Reformation is there in your Lives? What Sin have you left? What Sins are they
that you have forsaken?

Have you observed that you are more humble than you were heretofore? Do you
observe that your Hearts are more in Heaven than they were before? Do you
observe that you Pray more, and delight in Prayer more than you have done? It
may be you are ready to cry out, that you are Well; Well, but have you
repented? Alas, you talk you have repented of your Sins, when it may be you
know not of one Sin that you have left. Did thou once swear by the Holy Name
of God? and art thou afraid for to take his Name into thy Mouth, but with great
reverence and adoration.

Fourthly, Have you repented of your Sins as you say you have done? Then, what
Reformation have you taken up for your obedience? It is your resolution for to
seek God more in Prayer than ever you have yet done? Will you watch your Hearts
in Prayer more than you have done? Will you take more care of your Family? Will
you give them an example of a holy heavenly Life,

Fifthly, Have you repented of your Sins, as you say you have? Then, how much
are you troubled for the Sins of others? Do your Hearts mourn in secret, for
the Wickedness and the Abominations of the Places where you live?

And now, I beseech you, do not you flatter yourselves in your wicked sinful
Courses; if you do, then I say, take heed that God does not send his Judgments
upon you: And if you repent not, doubtless God will bring some Plague upon
England ere it be long.

Consider this O England, and do not provoke God to depart from you; for, if
you repent of your Sins, yon may expect to live quietly in the Land of your
Nativity, and go to your deathbeds in Peace and Rest: but if you will not
repent of your Sins, then, I say, expect nothing but Cursings instead of
Blessings from God: If you will repent, do it to Day; God knows how long it may
be before you you have such another Day.

The welfare of your Souls depends upon it; the welfare of the Church depends
upon it; the welfare of three Kingdoms depends upon it.

My beloved, it is no trifling now, Will you repent, I ask you? It may be
hereafter God will give you up to hardness of Heart, and blindness of Mind; and
if you go on in your wickedness, Hell will follow after.

Well, I say, Will you repent? I ask you the Question, and I ask you no other
Question then I have asked my own self, before I came into this Place. I ask
you again, Will you repent, every Man and Woman among you? For Jesus Christ is
angry with you, and he takes away many of your Lights from among you.

That God is angry with you, it is plain, for God would never else have taken
away his Ministers from among you.

I doubt not but God has made use of some of those that are to speak no more
in the Name of Jesus, to the snatching of you as firebrarnds out of the Fire;
and in bringing you from the Kingdom of Satan, unto the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Well, will you repent? If you will not, your Sins lie at your own Doors; do
not think its a hard Question, when I ask you, if you will repent? There are
two Places where there is no Repentance; the one is in Hell: it were a vain
Thing for me to go to the Gates of Hell, and cry to them, Repent, for their Day
of Grace is past, and their doom is passed upon them; I do verily think that
there is more sorrowing in Hell for Sin, than there is here upon Earth: But
their sorrow is not a sanctified sorrow. If the damned in Hell were delivered
out of Hell, they would Sin again: If they lived eternally, they would Sin
eternally. But I am not speaking to Men in Hell nor to Women in Hell, but I
speak to you that are here upon the Earth.

Now my beloved, I beseech you in the Name and fear of God, that you will
repent. The dying Words of dying Men and Women, do usually prevail with those
that here. The dying Words of Fathers and Mothers, do use to prevail with their
Children: My beloved, if you have any love to God, if you have any love to your
Souls, I say, repent of your Sins. It may be God has made me instrumental, to
the plucking of some of you as Firebrarnds out of the Fire, and in building of
some of you up in the most holy Faith.

Object. But may some of you say, You bid me repent, how can I do it? I can no
more repent than the dead Man can arise.

Answ. It is true, O Sinner, that thou say: But though thou can not repent
when thou will, yet if thou will but endeavor to set thy self about the Work,
it is probably that God may give thee a repenting Heart; therefore I say, take
heed of shutting thy self out from Mercy.

Object. But say you, Why do you then press us to such a work, when we cannot
do it of our selves?

Answ. Mark here, when I say unto you, will you repent? That is, will you make
use of the Means that God has appointed for your Repentance? Will you reckon
up all the Sins you have committed against God? Will you reckon up all the
Times that you have been Drunk, or that you have sworn an Oath? Will you reckon
up all the Sins that you stand guilty of between God and your own Souls? And
will you go to God and beg of him, that he would be pleased to pardon them?

But say you, What if we do not? If you do not, then you are still in your
Sins, and there is no Peace to you; there is no inward Peace to your Souls,
there is no true Peace to your Kingdom.

But that I may prevail with you, I shall give you some Grounds or Motives to
press this Argument more home upon your Consciences.

First of all, Repent; because Jesus Christ has commanded you under great
Penalties if you do not.

My beloved, consider a little with your selves, who it is that speaks unto you
here in my Text.

It is not I, but it is Jesus Christ; and doubtless Christ would never have
persuaded you to this work of repentance, if it were not necessary.

This Book is the Counsel of the Physician of your Souls, and the Physician of
your Church, and the Physician of your Kingdom. He that says unto you, repent,
says, if you do not, your sins shall not be blotted out. He that says unto
you, repent, says, if you do not, eternal Death shall follow.

Repent, I say, or if thou do not, woe be unto thee; woe unto that Man that
ever he was born; woe unto thee, ^t had been better thou had never seen the
Light: Thy Parents that bore thee, they may repent that ever thou were born. Oh
my beloved, it is a terrible Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God! Oh
my beloved, if your Parents should see any of you carried in a Cart to the
Gallows to be hanged, it would make them to repent that ever they brought you
forth into the World! how much more then do you think it would trouble them for
to see you thrown Body and Soul into Hell, there to be tormented with the Devil
and all his Angels for ever. I say, repent, or else God will take away the
Gospel from among you; repent, or God will take away his Ministers from among
you.

Secondly, Repent, for Christ has encouraged you with many precious promises,
if you will repent.

Object. But say you, This is a hard work: What! shall we ever go with tears in
our eyes? What will God give us for our reward?

Answ. My beloved, your reward is great; would you know what you shall have?
For your Sorrow, you shall have Crowns of Glory, you shall have Joy
unspeakable; if you will but repent of your Sins, God will blot them out.
Methinks it should make thy Heart for to ache, to think how God will deal with
thee at the Day of Judgment; how God will say, before all the* holy Angels, and
before thousands of righteous Persons, Look what a hypocrite stands there. God
will then make known the most secret Sins, before Men and Angels, that thou
would not have men to know now.

Oh repent therefore, that your Sins may be blotted out, and you shall never
hear more of your Sins; repent, and you shall be saved; repent, and you shall
escape Hell.

Thirdly, Repent, because God has waited a long while upon you; how long has
God stayed at your Doors, asking you if you would repent? How long, O thou
proud Man or Woman, has God waited upon thee? How often has God come, and
stood knocking at the Doors of your hard Hearts, you that are given to Taverns
and Alehouses, and Rioting? How long will it be before I shall see you leave
these Taverns and Alehouses? and let me see you upon your Knees in your
Closets.

Oh thou grey-headed Sinner, God has waited long upon thee, it may be ever
since thou were fifteen or sixteen Years old; as I have known many eminent
Christians at those Years, which has made me much admire at it. Oh thou
Sinner, God has waited upon thee all this while, when will thou repent, Romans
ii. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-sufferings; not knowing that the goodness of God leadest thee to
repentance?

There is not a Blessing thou have from God, but it has this written upon it,
repent of thy Sins. Will thou think of what I say unto thee? When God puts thy
Bread into thy Hands, he says unto thee, Sinner, take this bread, eat it, and
repent: When God puts the Cup of Beer into thy Hand, he says unto thee,
Sinner, take this beer, drink it, and repent: When thou arisest in the Morning,
he says unto thee, Sinner, take this suit of clothes, and put it on, and
repent: Every Mercy that thou receivest from thy God, calls thee to come along
with me. Come, will thou leave thy Sins and go along with me? Will thou leave
Hell, and go along with me? My beloved, I will desire you to bear a little with
me, because I am so urgent in pressing this great Work of Repentance.

Fourthly, Consider, if you will return and repent, God will return to you; if
you will leave your Sins, God will not be angry with you; if you will have the
Means of Grace, God will give you the Means of Grace. My beloved, God never
goes from you, until you go away from him; God has entreated you to return,
and God has promised to return to you.

My beloved you have heard the Parable of the prodigal Son, how he ran away
from his Father, but at last when he was ready to perish with Hunger he ^^^^rns
to his Father's House again.

So, my beloved, God is your Father, but you are Prodigals; all the Sins that
you have committed against God is Prodigality. But yet, let me tell you, if you
are willing to come to God's Feet, he will take you about the Neck; if you are
willing to forsake your Sins, God is willing and ready to pardon your Sins; if
you have been a wicked, sinful, rebellious People, yet if you will turn to the
Lord, he will turn to you.

FINIS

