TWO DECLARATIONS THE FIRST, From the Kings most Excellent Majesty; to all His
loyal Subjects, Wherein He declares His gracious will and pleasure concerning
His two Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster.

Signed, CHARLES REX.

THE SECOND, Concerning His Majesty's coming to Oatlands, and the proceedings
of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning his speedy coming to London;
as also the ^e.

C R
depiction of King Charles II

Aug: 17 LONDON Printed for R. Rishton, Anne, 1647.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S LAST Declaration and Protestation to all His loving
Subjects, concerning his two Houses of Parliament.
Sent in a Letter from his Majesty's Court at Oatlands, for the speedy of it in
and about the city of London.
Worthy Sir,
Upon Friday last, the Kings Majesty removed from Steek-Abby, to Oatlands,
together with all his Majesty's Sumpture horses, and other provisions belonging
to the Court Court, we do expect our next motion for London, where his Majesty
has a great desire to come, and to recide with his two Houses of Parliament;
as for the late rumors divulged that his Majesty intends a new war against
the henourable Houses of Parliament, much might be said concerning this, but I
will refer you to his Majesty's own Declaclaration, signed charles Rex, which I
shall here recite verbatim.

CHARLES REX.

THere having been many Rumors spread, and informations given, which may have
induced many to believe, that We intend to make war against Our Parliament;
We profess before God, and declare to all the world, that we always have,
and do abborre all such Designs, and desire all our Nobility and Commoners who
are here upon the place to declare whether they have not been witnesses of Our
frequent and earnest Declarations and Professious to this purpose; Whithe^ they
see any color of preparations or councels that might beget a belief of any
such design. And whither they be not fully persuaded, that we have no such
intention, But that all Our endeavors (according to Our many Professions)
(...) to the (...) and constant settlement of the true Prosteant Religion, the
just Privileges of Parliaments, the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace,
and Prosperity of this Kingdom.

Given at His Majesty's Royal Court, and signed, Charles R.

His Majesty is in perfect health of body, and much satisfied in mind, and
far more pleasanter since his coming to Oatlands then formerly.

He hopes to see White Hall ere long, there to consult with his two houses of
parliament for the settling of a firm peace within this Kingdom.

His Majesty approves much of the Generals present proceedings, in that he in
seth his utmost endeavors for the speedy settling of his Dread Sovereign in his
just Rights and Authority; as also for the confirming of a lasting peace within
this Kingdom. For other particulars, I refer you to this ensuing Declaration.

C R
decorative header with English lion and Scottish unicorn flanking a royal
diadem
Another Declaration or Message concerning the Kings Majesty's speedy coming
to his Royal Palace at White Hall.
WHereas the voice of the people has lately been heard, and many rumors
noyled abroad, concernig his Majesty's not coming to London with his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, which for many weighty reasons could not so well
be accomplished as now in the future, by reason of the then present
distractions, and the great differences uncomposed; which for the present
composure of all, His Excellency Sir Thomas Farfax has left no ways unassayed
for the speedy settling both of Prince and people, as is plainly evident by all
his endeavors and undertaking, especially since his advance to or near the
City of London; for since his Excellencies advance to Kingston, he has called
another council of War, where was several things propounded, in order to
the speedy settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, and in particular,
concerning the bringing of the Kings Majesty to London, for the speedy settling
of his Majesty in his Royal Throne, and confirming his just Rights and
Authority upon Him and his Posterity; of which, the Kingdom will (no doubt)
receive a good account suddenly; for it is further declared, that all things
goes on in such a gallant posture, conducing much to the honor and safety of
his Majesty, and the peace and welsate of all His loyal Subjects, that it is
verily believed, that 8 days time will bring gallant things to pass, in which
time, we hope to see his Majesty tryumphantly seated in his Royal palace at
Westminster.

The face of things now look gallantly toward a settled peace; and it is hoped
all old grudges will be forgotten, and reparations made to Kings servants,
according to the late motion of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, expressed in
his own Letter to both Houses of Parliament, wherein bet desires that the Kings
servants who have a long time been^ destitute and outed of their places.

The Kings Majesty is very cheerful and merry, and it is supposed he will be
conducted either to White Hall or S. James very speedily, the happy
accomplishment of which, is the carnest prayers, of

Your devoted servant, R. Rishton.
Oatlands 15 of August. 1647.
FINIS.

