The Kings Majesty's SPEECH TO The Commissioners at Nottingham, on Saturday the
13. of February, In the praise of Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning the Trust
which was reposed in him by the Parliament. And his fidelity to His Majesty.

With diverse Questions propounded by His Majesty to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

And Sir Thomas Fairfax his Answer to His Majesty again concerning them.

Charles I's royal blazon C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

London, Printed for E. H. February 19. 1647.

The Kings Majesty's SPEECH TO The Commissioners at Nottingham in the praise of
his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX, in diverse reasons which he showed to them.
ON Saturday February 13. his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX having his head
quarters in Nottingham, to which His Majesty was to come, attended by the
Parliaments Commissioners from Mansfield, and not by Newark, as was first
intended, was in a strait, how he should deport himself toward his Majesty,
being General for the Parliament, and was like to undergo the censures of
diverse spirits, whether way soever he moved, but at last, concluded it were
better for him to suffer for civilities, then the contrary: he commanded that
certain of his Officers should prepare themselves to attend him, to meet his
Majesty and wait upon him, which was accordingly: few that were inferior to
Captains went: these marched near two miles, met his Majesty; His Majesty
after some space, perceived who it was, and casting his eye upon the General,
the General alighted and kissed his Majesty's hand, aid after mounting,
conducted him into the Town, and to his lodging.

His Majesty as it is said, asked the General, what Fo ces were gone for
Ireland, and of my Lord Lisle; to which the General gave answer, purporting
the Parliaments care, and strong intentions for a speedy reducing that Kingdom.

His Majesty has moved every day save the Sabbath, notwithstanding the
badnesse of the weather, being snowy and stormy; when his Majesty past from
Leeds the people more then 5000. appeared, crying, a King, a King.

His Majesty still refuses to hear the Commissioners Ministers Preach or pray,
resolving, first to have satisfaction to his objections, and give his consent
to the establishment of Presbytery a King, before he acts in it.

Upon the 13. of February being Saturday, The Kings Majesty about seven of the
clock in the morning went out of Nottingham, attended by the General with his
Officers, and after leave taken departed.

His Majesty after the General was gone, said to some of the Commissioners as
follows, which is in praise of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

His Speech is this,
THat the General was a person of Honor, Faithful to his trust, and one,
that ever kept his word with him, that is, in keeping promises and Articles of
War, and in using prisoners, with such respect, as was fit for men in that
condition, and as he would expect in such a condition.

A Letter sent from Nottingham, to his loving friend in London.
Noble Sir,
I Thank you for your last, you need not conjecture that there is any
excommunication between our pens, yesterday his Majesty came from Mansfield,
the Generals Excellency had notice of his Majesty's coming hither that day,
and therefore went to meet him.

His Excellency with the chief Officers (none under Captains) went from hence
toward Bescot Park, and about 2. miles of, met the King near Bescot, who was
then coming hither with the Commissioners and Gentlemen.

The King made a stop, when the General came to him, and his Excellency
alighting, his Majesty gave him his hand to kiss. But his Majesty spoke not
one word to the General, neither did the General speak any thing to his
Majesty.

His Majesty looking very earnestly on all our Officers, but said nothing to
them, only rid cheerfully along till they came hither.

The General waited on the King to his lodging; and went with his Majesty to
the Privy-Chamber-doore, but went not in with the King, nor afterward to his
Majesty that night.

The next morning the General waited on his Majesty again, and then the King
had much more discourse with the General, then he had the day before. Wherein
his Majesty propounded diverse questions to the General, concerning the
affairs of Ireland, and diverse other reasons, and was discreetly and wisely
answered again by his Excellency the General.

His Majesty again enquired much after the Lord Lisle, and concerning the
business of Ireland and the Forces desired for that service, and many other
things in relation to preparations, and prosecutions of that War.

The General likewise gave his Majesty exceeding wise and discreet Answers:
As becomes a Person of honor, and yet so reserved, that his Majesty had
little from his Excellency that could add to his Majesty by way of
information, the gallant and discreet Answers which he made to his Majesty
was admitted, the noble and faithfulness of this valiant General has been
so spread abroad, that all the Christian World will love him, for the favor
and mercy which he has showed to his Enemies, and so he has gotten the love
of his King, Parliament, and Country even to his dying day.

His Majesty with the Commissioners intended to lie that night at Leicester,
and stay there the Lords day, and that night, and then to go for Holmby on
Monday, to be there Monday night, Sir this is all at this time from

Nottingham this 13. of February, 1646. Your humble servant W. Smith.


The Earl of Stamford. Mr. Ashurst, and M. Goodwin, went from hence yesterday
to Morpith, farther North.

His Excellency General Leven came into the town of Barwick with a small
retinue of his Officers and Gentlemen, and lodged there all night.

The next morning his Excellency with his attendants went from hence into
Scotland, and so to go on toward Edinburgh, having left instructions with his
Officers what to do in the managing of the Scots soldiers through their
Town, out of England into Scotland.

It is reported by some that came out of Scotland, that have been at
Edinburgh, who say that Kolkittoth with his Forces, is within thirty miles of
Edinburgh: the truth thereof, I do not certainly know, but it seems that
either he or some of his party have given them an alarm above Edinburgh, but
ere long I make no question, but you will hear of some passages between them
and the Scots Forces when they are come into Scotland, and begin to draw a
little nearer to them.

The Parliament of Scotland have had their several debates of late, about
their joining with the Parliament of England, in sending Commissioners to his
Majesty, to press him to take the Covenant, and sign the Propositions. They
have received Letters from the General Assembly of the Kirk about it.

The fair correspondence with the Parliament of England and Scotland does much
encourage the hearts of all true-hearted Subjects in both Kingdoms, and the
gallant usage of his Majesty at Holmby, that there is no fear or Jealousies any
more in both Kingdoms, and I make no doubt, but that God will ere long, so
work it in his Majesty's heart, that he will be willing to take the Covenant
and sign the Propositions, to the joy of all his loving Subjects, and the good
of himself and his posterity hereafter.

FINIS.

