The Copy of a Letter from His Highness Prince CHARLES, To the Speaker of the
House of Peers.
Expressing his contentment concerning the Votes of the House of Peers, for a
Personal Treaty with His Royal Father. With His desires concerning the same.
Charles P.

RIght trusty and right well beloved Cousin, we greet you well.
Understanding with great contentment that the two Houses of Parliament have
resolved upon a Personal Treaty with His Majesty, (one of the particulars
pressed by us in our Declaration of the 29. of July last, as most conducing to
the settlement of a blessed Peace) We have thought fit to acquaint you with our
sense and desires concerning the same, to the end that they may be communicated
by you to the House of Peers from us. First, we propose, That the Treaty be
appointed to be in such place, and in such manner, as may best consist with the
Honor, Freedom, and Safety of His Majesty, whereby the agreement to be made,
may not be blemished with any face of restraint. Secondly, That the Treaty may
be betwixt His Majesty and His two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, so as the
matters in difference may equally fall under the consideration of all persons
concerned therein. Thirdly, that during the said Treaty, there be a general
Cessation of Arms, to the end that the affections of the people, though
engaged in several parties, may thereby be prepared to meet in amity and
brotherly kindness, and that no intervening accidents or successes may disturb
the proceedings in this Treaty. Lastly, That an orderly moderate subsistence
during the Treaty may be agreed upon for all Armies and Forces now on foot, and
particularly for the Scottish Army, in such manner as may be with the least
pressure on the Northern Counties. And if the two Houses shall think fit to
consent unto the effect of what we now propound, as proper to render this
Treaty effectual, we shall with great joy and alacrity interpose our mediation
to the King our Father for the obtaining of all such Concessions and Acts of
Grace, as by the blessing of God may most conduce to a firm and lasting Peace,
and the happiness of His Majesty and all His People. We farther desire you to
propound to the House of Peers, That some equal course may be speedily settled
for the support of Us and the Navy with us, whereby we may be enabled to
protect the Trade of the Kingdom, and may forthwith discharge all Ships and
Merchandises now staid by Us.

Given under our Hand and Seal from aboard the Fleet in the Downs, the 5. day
of August, in the 24. year of the Reign of the King our Royal Father.
To our Right Trustly, and Right well-beloved Cousin, the Speaker of the House
of Peers for the time being.
THE END.

