HIS MAJESTY'S TWO MESSAGES to both Houses of Parliament, concerning His
Chaplains.
Holdenby, 17. Feb. 1646.
SInce I have never dissembled, nor hid my Conscience, and that I am not yet
satisfied with the alteration of Religion, to which you desire my consent, I
will not yet lose time in giving reasons, which are too obvious to every body,
why it is fit for me to be attended by some of my Chaplains, whose opinions,
as Clergy men, I esteem and reverence; not only for the exercise of my
Conscience, but also for clearing of my judgment concerning the present
differences in Religion; as I have at full declared to Master Marshall and his
Fellow-Minister: having showed them, that it is the best and likeliest means
of giving me satisfaction, which without it I cannot have in these times:
Whereby the distractions of this Church may be the better settled. Wherefore I
desire that, at least, two of these Reverend Divines, whose names I have here
set down, may have free liberty to wait upon me, for the discharge of their
duty unto me, according to their function.

Charles R.
B. London. B. Salisbury. B. Peterborough. D. Shelden, Clerk of my Closet. D.
March, Deane of York. D. Sanderson. D. Baily. D. Heywood. D. Beale. D. Fuller.
D. Hammond. D. Tailer.





Holdenby, 6. March, 1646.
IT being now seventeene days since I wrote to you from hence, and not yet
receiving any answer to what I then desired, I cannot but now again renew the
same unto you. And indeed concerning any thing but the necessary duty of a
Christian, I would not thus at this time trouble you with any of my desires.
But my being attended with some of my Chaplains, whom I esteem and reverence,
is so necessary for me, even considering my present condition, whether it be in
relation to my conscience, or a happy settlement of the present distractions in
Religion, that I will slight diverse kinds of censures, rather then not to
obtain what I demand; nor shall I do you the wrong, as, in this, to doubt the
obtaining of my wish, it being totally grounded upon reason. For desiring you
to consider (not thinking it needful to mention) the diverse reasons, which no
Christian can be ignorant of, for point of conscience, I must assure you that I
cannot, as I ought, take in consideration those alterations in Religion, which
have and will be offered unto me, without such help as I desire; because I can
never judge rightly of, or be altered in, any thing of my opinion, so long as
any ordinary way of finding our the truth is denied me; but when this is
granted me, I promise you faithfully not to strive for victory in Argument, but
to seek and submit to Truth (according to that judgment which God has given
me) always holding it my best and greatest conquest to give contentment to my
Two Houses of Parliament in all things, which, I conceive, not to be against my
conscience, or honor; not doubting likewise but that you will be ready to
satisfy me in reasonable things, as I hope to find in this particular,
concerning the attendance of my Chaplains upon me.

Charles R.


FINIS.

