HIS MAJESTY'S TWO PROCLAMATIONS To the Counties of SOUTHAMPTON and DORSET:
Declaring His Grace, Favor, and Pardon to the Inhabitants of the said Counties.

Given at His Court at Reading, the 28 of November, in the 18 Year of His
Reign. 1642.

God save the King.

December: 8OXFORD: Printed, Anno 1642.

By the King.
A Proclamation of His Majesty's Grace, Favor, and Pardon to the Inhabitants
of His County of Southampton.
WHereas We have taken notice, that by the Malice, Imndustry and opportunity of
several ill-affected and seditious persons in Our County of Soutpamdton, very
many of Our weak and seduced Subjects of that Our County have not only been
drawn to exercise the Militia, under color of a pretended ordinance, without
and against Our Consent (a Crime of a very high nature, if we should strictly
enquire rhereinto) but have made many Contributions of Plate, Money, and Horses
toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against Us; We do hereby
publish and Declare; That we are graciously pleased to attribute the Crimes and
Offenses of Our said Subjects of that County to the power and Faction of their
seducers, Who, we believe, by threats, Menaces, and false Informations
compelled and led them into these actions of undutifullnesse and disloyalty
toward Us; And We do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious Pardon to
all the Inhabitants of our said County of Southampton, for all offenses
concerning the premises committed against Us before the publishing of this Our
Proclamation, except Sir Thomas Larvise, Sir William Waller Knights, and
Richard Norton Esquire, against all which We shall proceed according to the
Rules of the Law, as against Traitors and stirrers of sedition against Us, And
whom We do hereby require all Our Officers and Ministers of justice, and all
Our loving Subjects whatsoever, to apprehend and cause to be kept in safe
custody till Our pleasure be further known. Provided that this our grace shall
not extend to any person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation shall
presume by Loan or contribution to assist the said Army of Rebels, to assemble
and muster themselves in arms without authority derived from Us under Our
hands, to enter into any oath of Association for opposing of Us and Our Army,
or to succor or entertain any of the persons excepted in this Our
Proclamation, or in Our Declaration of the 12. of August. But We must and do
declare, That whosoever shall hence forward be guilty of the premises, or of
either of them, shall be esteemed by Us as an enemy to the public peace, a
person disaffected to Us, and to the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, and
shall accordingly receive condign punishment, of which We give them timely
notice, that they may proceed accordingly at their perils. And We do hereby
will and require our high Sheriff, Justices of the peace, and all other Our
officers, and loving Subjects, to resist, oppose, and apprehend all such
persons as shall presume to make any Leavies in that Our County, under what
pretense soever without authority derived from Us under our hand. And We
likewise will and require them and every of them to be assistant to all such as
shall either command the Train Bands of that Our County, or make any Leavies in
the same by virtue of Commission under Our great Seal or Sign Manual.

Given at Our Court at Reading, this 28 of November in the eighteenth year of
Our Reign.
By the King.
A Proclamation of His Majesty's Grace Favor, and Pardon, to the Inhabitants
of His County of Dorsett.
WHereas We have taken notice, that by the Malice, Industry and importunity of
several ill-affected and seditious persons in Our County of Dorset, very many
of Our weak and seduced Subjects of that Our County have not only been drawn to
evercise the Militia, under color of a pretended Ordinance, without and
against Our Consent (a Crime of a very high nature, if We should strictly
enquire thereinto) but have made Contributions of Plate, Money and Horses
toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against Us; We do hereby
publish and declare, That We are graciously pleased to attribute the crimes and
offenses of Our said Subjects of that County to the power and Faction of their
seducers, Who, We believe, by Threats, Menaces, and false informations
compelled and led them into these actions of undutifullnesse and disloyalty
toward Us; And We do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious Pardon to
all the Inhabitants of Our said County of Dorset, for all offenses concerning
the premises committed against Us before the publishing of this Our
Ptoclamation, except Denzill Hollis Esquire, and Sir Walter Earl Knight,
against whom We shall proceed according to the Rules of the Law, as against
Traitors and stirrers of sedition against Us, And whom We do hereby require
all Our Officers and Ministers of justice, and all Our loving Subjects
whatsoever, to apprehend, and cause to be kept in safe custody till Our
pleasure be further known. Provided that this Our Grace shall not extend to any
person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation shall presume by Loan
or contribution to asist the said Army of Rebels, to assemble and muster
themselves in Arms without authority derived from Us under Our hand; to enter
into any oath of association for opposing Us and our Army, or to succor or
entertain any of the persons excepted in this Our Proclamation, or in Our
Declaration of the 12 of August. But we must and do declare, That whosoever
shall hence forward be guilty of the premises, or of either of them; shall be
esteemed by Us as an enemy to the public peace, a person disaffected to Us,
and to the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom; and shall accordingly receive
condign punishment, of which We give them timely notice, that they may proceed
accordingly at their perils. And We do hereby will and require our high
Sheriff; Commissioners of Array, Justices of the peace, and all other Our
officers, and loving Subjects to resist, oppose, and apprehend all such Persons
as shall presume to make any leavies in that Our County, under what pretense
soever without authority derived from Us under Our hand. And We likewise will
and require them and every of them to be assistant to all such as shall either
command the Trained-bands of that Our County, or make any Leavies in the same
by virtue of Commission under Our great Seal or sign Manual.

Given ar Our Court at Oatlands, this sixteenth day of November, in the
eighteenth year of Our Reign.
FINIS.

