A Mess of POTTAGE, Very well Seasoned and Crumbd. With BREAD of LIFE, and
easy to be digested. Against the contumelious slanderers of the Divine
Service, terming it Porrage.

Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things. 4. Philippians, 8. Set forth by Gyles Calfine.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642. Being a Year of disciding.

A Mess of Porrage very well seasoned and Crumb'd, with Bread of Life, and
easy to be digested.
I Need not make an Appology to the ensuing Discourse; It Is well known to all
honest and discreet Protestants, how basely our Service Book is termed (by the
name of Porrage, a name very frequent in uncivil mouths) and trampled under
foot by unreasonable men, that have neither Faith nor Charity; and although
they be now well fed to the full, and may go from one Church to another to
please their pallat, and taste of what pleases them best; yet there may a time
come, (which I pray God there do not) that they may be glad of the crumbs which
fall from theit Masters Table: but let them alone awhile, the thing that I say
is this, That our Common Prayer is so abhorred, depraved, detested, and
despised of by many, as if it were the most vilest thing in the World; nay, if
the Devil himself had composed it, it could not be more villified then it is:
It Is a shame to speak, and I blush to hear it, that Men that think themselves
such rare Divines, that people that think they have such knowledge and zeal, to
term such a good thing and such holy matter as there is, to be Porrage: oh
fie! where is your judgment? where is your moderation; what, quite lost? is
this your zeal turned to hate? you are surely of a hot and fiery Spirit,
contrary to the nature of warm and wholesome Porrage; if you knew but the
right virtue of Pottage, you would not have termed the Common Prayer so, but
your own Prayers: For do ye not know, That they were godly men that made them;
they were not made ex tempore, but with deliberation, not hand over head, as
many do in these days, but seriously considered of, and premeditated and do
you not know, That these good men laid down their lives for this and the
Truth? and do ye not know, That they were established and maintained by Acts
of Parliament? in the Reign of three Kings and one Queen, and is it now made a
laughing stock; surely you should have more manners then so.

Indeed, is Parliament time, and men speak and do what they list now, and so do
ye; for ye speak evil of Kings, of authority and dignity, and despise
government, contrary to the Apostles rule. Oh the great malice that is one
against another! against Peer and Peasant, against Priest and People oh envy,
thou limb of the Devil! how rulest thou in the hearts of people, especially
against Bishops; oh how odious is that name to many! but I counsel you to
speak moderately, and judge charitably; if they be stained, let them be
pained: they have faults as well as we; yet they are Gods Ambassador, his
Stewards, his Angels, disposers of Gods secrets, disbursers of his treasuries;
then revile them not, For it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler
of the People.

But as for that which you call Porrage, who hatched the name I know not,
neither is it worth the enquiring after, nor the worse for that name, nor none
the worse that uses it, for I hold Porrage good food; it is better to a sick
man then meat; for a sick man will sooner eat Porrage then meat: Pottage will
digest with him, when meat will not: Pottage will nourish the blood, filles the
veins, runs into every part of a man, and makes him warmer, so will these
prayers do, and work more effectually; set the body and soul in a heat; warm
our devotion, works fervency in us, lifts up our souls to God. And many things
more it works in us, if we had but appetite to them, and it is well stored with
herbs out of Gods Garden, here a little, and there a little, as appears in
the beginning of the Common Prayer, and so forward to the end of it. For there
is the herbs of Gods own planting (in our Pottage, as you call it) the ten
Commandments, dainty herbs to season any Pottage in the world then there is
our Saviors form of prayer, and that is a most sweet pot-hearbe, cannot be
denied, then there is also David's herb, his Prayers and Psalms, help, to make
our Pottage relish well; then, S. Paul's precepts; also the Creed, a very
faithful pot-hearbe; and the Song of the blessed Virgin, a good pot-hearb, so
that this porrage has abundance of choice herbs to season it and those that
will eat no such porrage as these so well dressed it is pity but they should
fast, and as the proverb is, those that will eat no porrage must eat no meat.
Though they be as (some term them) Cockcrowed porrage, yet they are as sweet,
as good, as dainty and as fresh, as they were at the first: The Sun has not
made them sour with its heat: neither has the cold winter taken away their
vigor, and strength, but they are as wholesome and as well rellished as at the
first, and unless you be sick for novelties, you cannot eat better then
these. Compare them with the Scriptures, and see if they be not as well
seasoned and crumbd: if you find any thing in them, that is either too salt or
too fresh, too bitter, or too sour, too little or too great; that herb shall
be taken out, and a better put in if it can be got or none at all: And as in
Kitchen porrage there is many good herbs in it so there is likewise in this
Church porrage, (as you call it) For first in Kitchen porrage, is good water to
make them so, on the contrary, in the other porrage, is the water of life. 2.
There is salt to season them. In the other is a prayer for grace, to season our
hearts. 3. There is Oatmeal, to nourish the body: in the other is the words of
him, that is the bread of life, which nourishes our souls and bodies to
eternal Life. 4. There is Thyme in them to relish them, and it is very
wholesome: in the other is a wholesome exhortation, not to harden our hearts,
whilst it is called to day; this rellisheth well. 5. There is a small Onion to
give a taste. In the other is a good herb, called, Lord have mercy upon us,
which gives a sweet taste to the soul. 6. There is Rosemary to comfort and
refresh the body, In the other is comfortable words of Christ: Come unto me all
ye that are heavy laden, and I will refresh your souls. 7. There is Marygold
leaves, to revive the spirits. And so in the other, there is the souls
magnifying the Lord, and the spirits rejoicing in God our Savior. These and
many wholesome herbs are contained in it, and all these boiling in the heart of
man's will, make as good porrage as the world can afford, especially if you use
these herbs following for digestion. viz. The herb repentance, the herb grace,
the herb faith, the herb hope, the herb love, the herb good works, the herb
piety, the herb zeal the herb fervency. the herb ardency, the herb vigilance,
and the herb constancy; with many more of this nature, which are most excellent
for digestion. And those that despise this porrage of ours, have no appetite to
the Lords prayer, the ten commandments, the Psalms of David, and other good
matter that is in them, this being contained in the common prayer, must be
despised also but me thinks I hear some say, they despise not those What is it
then I pray that you dislike in this porrage? Oh Sir, I know your meaning by
your gaping, this slicks in your teeth and spoils your stomach. 1. There is,
(you say) too much of the surplice which smells of the garment of the Whore.
2 There is too much crossing in Baptism, and that smells (you say) of the mark
of the Beast, (but of what beast, I wot not). 3. There is too much bowing, and
that tastes of Idolatry. 4. There is too much ring in Matrimony, and this
smells of Superstition. 5. Too much kneeling at the Sacrament, this tastes of
Antechrist. 6. Too much standing up, this smells of vain glory. 7. Too much
glory be to the Father, and this is superfluous. 8. There is too much Lord
have mercy on us, and this is needless. 9. Too much Lords Prayer and this is
odious in every ones mouth. 10. There be too many prayers and they savor not
of the spirit. And what of all these, do they savor so strong in your nose,
that you dare not peep into the Church. Then I may say, you savor of an ill
smell, and are very absurd, and you have got a great cold in your feet, and it
is sumed up into your head, and so stuffes your brain, that you cannot smell at
all, and carrion is as good to your sent, as good and wholesome porrage is. That
which you hold to be the worst, (as namely) trossing, bowing, surplice,
kneeling, etc. is not worth the speaking, and he is a mad man that believes
there is salvation in them and so of necessity we must use them: no, they may
be left at any time, when authority shall command: they are ordered but for
decency sake, and as near to the Primitive times as could be gathered, and if
we have no order in our Churches, we shall be a reproach to all people. If we
should be of that mind, as the fashion is or many people are, we then must have
a new form of prayer every year, so you would have something, but you know
not what: so that you are never content full nor fasting, neither with porrage
nor without.

If Pottage had not been good food, Jacob would have made none neither would
the Angel of the Lord, have carried Abbacuc by the hair of the head, to Daniel
in the Lions Den, that he might eat the Pottage which Abbacuc had prepared for
the reapers. I Will warrant you Daniel was glad of them, he went not behind the
door to eat them, as many in our days do stay at the Church door till the
service is done, and then come and eat the bread out of others mouths: but
believe it, there is no death in this Pottage, in this Common Prayer: though many
have preached and said there is, and that it is mere Popery. If this be the
opinion of Roundheads, then it is no marvel we are so subject to change; for
mark it always, that that which is round is soonest moved and never constant,
neither in manner, fashion, or place; their wit is like quicksilver in a
football, always running, so nothing will stay their humor. Therefore I
counsel you to do as Esou; Jacobs brother did, who sold his Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage; so would I have you to do, to sell your self opinions for
this Porrage; I do not mean that you should sell your chiefest Birthright, The
Word of God, that unto which you are born, and must die for; not to sell this
for Ceremonies, not to sell the substance for a shadow, but despise the bare
conceits of it; and I dare warrant you, that the using of this which you call
Porrage, will never prove your bane neither shall you commit any sin in the
least degree, provided, that you use them to no other end, then they were
ordered unto, and that is as S. Paul speaks concerning the World, to use it, as
not abusing it; for the fashion of the World passes away, to such end we may
use them, and not abuse them, knowing that it is in the power of the King and
Parliament, to alter and change them when they please, if in case they be
corrupted.

You that unto the Flesh are so inclined,
And love all meats but Porrage (that is your mind)
Hark in thine ear, what I say, look well to it,
For too much Flesh, perchance, will make thee rue it.
Set not thy mind upon the Flesh too much,
Least that it prove too hot for thee to touch;
This kind of diet meat and Porrage fills,
But too much Flesh alone, the body spilleth.
Postscript.
Fear God, Honor the King.

Let every Soul he subject to the Higher Powers.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake, for God is a
God of Order, and not of Confusion.

FINIS.

