C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
To Our trusty and welbeloved high shieriffe of Our County of York.
TRusty and Well beloved, We greet you well:
Whereas we understand, That Sir John Hotham takes upon him (without any legal
Authority or Power) to issue warrants to Constables, and other Our Officers, to
raise diverse of our Trained bands of this Our County, and requires them to
ma^ch with their Arms, and to come into Our Town of Hull, where he has
disarmed diverse of them, keeps their Arms, and discharges the men: And
whereas We are credibly informed, that diverse persons, Who were lately
Colonels, Livetenant-Colonels, Captains and Officers of the trained Bands of
this Our County, intend shortly to summon, and endeavor to muster the forces
of this Our County: For as much as by the Law of the Land, none of Our trained
Bands are to be raised or mustered, upon any pretense or authority whatsoever,
but by special warrant under Our own hand, or by a legal Writ directed to the
Sheriff of the County, or by warrant from the Lord Lieutenant, or
Deputy-Lievtenants of the County, appointed and authorized by Commission under
Our Great Seal. And whereas at present there is no Lord Lieutenant or Deputy
Lieutenant legally authorized to command the Forces and trained Bands of this
Our County of York, and the Commissions, to Command, and Power of all
Colonells, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains and Officers of Our trained Bands,
(which were derived from the Commission and Power of the Lord Lieutenant
only) are now actually void, and of no force and Authority. Our will and
Command therefore is, that you forthwith issue Warrants under your Hand, to all
the late Colonels, Lievetenant-Colonels, Captains and Officers, who (whiles
the Lord Lievtenants Commission was in force) had the command of the trained
Bands of this Our County: And also to all High and Petty Constables, and other
our Officers, in this Our County, whom it may concern, charging and commanding
them, and every of them, in Our Name, and upon their Allegiance, and as they
tender the Peace of this Our Kingdom, not to Muster, Leavie, or Raise, or to
Summon, or Warn (upon any pretense or Directions whatsoever) any of Our
trained Bands to Rise, Muster, or March, without express Warrant Under Our
Hand, or Warrant from you Our Sheriff grounded upon a particular writ to that
purpose, Which we also command you, not to put in Execution without Our Privity
and Allowance, whiles we shall reside in this Our County.

And in case any of Our trained Bands shall rise, or gather together, contrary
to this Our Command, Then We will and command you to charge and require them,
to dissolve, and retire to their dwellings. And if upon due Summons from you,
they shall not lay down their Arms, and depart to their dwellings, We will and
command you upon your Allegiance, and as you tender the peace and quiet of his
Our Kingdom, to raise the power of the County, and suppress them by force, as
the Law has directed and given you Power to do. And too the end that this Our
express Command may be notified to all Our good Subjects in this Our County,
so as none may pretend hereafter to have been misled through ignorance; We
require you to cause these Our Letters to be forthwith read, and published
openly in all Churches and Parishes in this Our County. Herein you may not
fail, as you tender the safety and honor of our Person, the good and peace of
this Our Kingdom, and will answer the contrary at your peril. For which this
shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at YORK the fifth day of May, in the eighteenth year of
Our Reign, etc.
Imprinted at York by Robert Barker, And now reprinted at London and are to be
sold by G.B. at his shop near Cliffords Inn. 1642.


