Monday 29th, January, 1648.
A True Relation of the KINGS Speech to the Lady ELIZABETH, and the Duke of
GLOUCESTER, the day before his Death.
HIs Children being come to meet Him, He first gave His Blessing to the Lady
ELIZABETH; And bad her remember to tell her Brother JAMES when ever she should
see him, That it was his Fathers last desire that he should no more look upon
CHARLES as his Eldest Brother only, but be Obedient unto him, as his
Sovereign; And that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers
Enemies: Then said the KING to her, Sweet heart, you will forget this; No, (said
she) J shall never forget it while J live; and pouring forth abundance of
Tears, promised Him to write down the particulars.

Then the KING taking the Duke of Gloucester upon His Knee, said, Sweet heart,
now they will cut off thy Fathers head; (Upon which words the Child looked very
steadfastly on Him.) Mark Child what J say, they will cut off my head, and
perhaps make thee a King; But mark what J say, you must not be a King, so long
as your Brother CHARLES and JAMES do live; For they will cut off your Brothers
heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at the last. And
therefore, I charge you, do not be made a King by them: At which the Child,
sighing, said, J will be torn in pieces first: Which falling so unexpectedly,
from one so young, it made the KING rejoice exceedingly.

Another Relation from the Lady ELIZABETH'S own hand.
WHat the KING said to Me the 29 of January, 1648. being the last time I had
the happiness to see Him: He told me he was glad J was come, and although he
had not time to say much yet somewhat he had to say to Me, which he had not to
another, or leave in writing. Because he feared their Cruelty was such, as that
they would not have permitted him to write to me. He wished me not to greeve
and torment my self for him; for that would be a glorious death that he should
dye; it being for the Laws, and Liberties of this Land, and for Maintaining the
true Protestant Religion. He bid me read Bishop Andrew's Sermons, Hookers
Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bishop Lauds Book against Fisher, which would
ground me against Popery. He told me he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped
God would forgive them also; And commanded us, and all the rest of my Brothers
and Sisters to forgive them: he bid me tell my Mother, That his thoughts had
never straied fr(...)m her, and that his Love should be the same to the last.
Withal he commanded me and my brother to be obedient to Her. And bid me send
his Blessing to the rest of my brothers and sisters, with commendation to all
his Friends: So after he had given me his blessing, J took my leave.

Further, he commanded us all to Forgive those People, but never to Trust them;
for they had been most false to Him, and to those that gave them power, and he
feared also to their own souls; And desired me not to greeve for him, for he
should dye a Martyr, And that he doubted not but the Lord would settle his
Throne upon his Son, and that we should be all happier, then we could have
expected to have been, if he had lived; with many other things, which at
present J cannot remember.

Elizabeth.

The KING said to the Duke of Gloucester that he would say nothing to him but
what was for the good of his soul; he told him that he heard that the Army
intended to make him King; but it was a thing not for him to take upon him, if
he regarded the welfare of his Soul; for he had two brothers before him; and
therefore commanded Him upon his blessing; never to accept of it; unless it
redounded lawfully upon him. And commanded him to fear the Lord, and he would
provide for him.

Copia vera.
March 24 Printed in the Year, 1648.


