HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH TO The Inhabitants of Denbigh and Flint-shire. 27.
September. 1642.

LONDON, Printed for R.L. 1642.

His Majesty's Speech to the Inhabitants of Denbigh and Flint-shire,
27. September. 1642.
GENTLEMEN
I Am willing to take all occasions to visit all my good Subjects, in which
number I have cause to reckon you of these two Counties, and having lately had
a good expression of your loyalty and affections to me by those Levies which at
your charge have been sent me from your parts (which forwardness of yours, I
shall always remember to your advantage) and to let you know how I have been
dealt with by a powerful malignant party in this Kingdom, whose Designs are
no less then to destroy my person and Crown, the Laws of the Land, and the
present government both of Church and State, The Leaders of these men by their
subtilty and cunning practices have so prevailed upon the meaner sort of people
about London, that they have called them up into frequent and dangerous
tumults, and thereby have chased from thence my self, and the Greatest part of
the Members of both Houses of Parliament; Their power and secret plots have had
such influence upon the small remaining part of both Houses, that under color
of orders and Ordinances made without the Royal assent (a thing never heard of
before this Parliament) I am robbed and spoiled of my Towns, Forts, Castles,
and Goods, my Navy forceably taken from me, and employed against me, all my
Revenue is stopped and seized upon, and at this time a powerful Army is marching
against me. I wish this were all; They have yet further I boured to alienate
the affections of my good People, they have most injuriously vented many false
reproaches against my person and Government, they have dispersed in Print many
notorious false scandals upon my actions and intentions, and in particular have
labored to cast upon me some aspersions concerning the horrid bloody, and
impious rebellion in Ireland. They tell the people that I have recalled two
ships appointed for the Guard of these Seas, it is true: but they conceal that
at the same time I sent my Warrants to the Downs commanding four as good ships
to attend that service in stead of those should be recalled, which Warrant by
their means could not find obedience. They forget that they then employed 40
ships (many of them my own, and all of them, set forth at the public charge of
this and that Kingdom) to rob and pillage me of my goods, to chase my good
subjects and maintain my own Town of Hull against me. And that by the absence
of those ships from the Irish Seas, the Rebels have had opportunity to bring
store of Arms, Ammunition, and supplies to their succors (to which we may
justly impute the calamities, which have overwhelmed my poor Protestant
subjects there) They cry out upon a few suits of clothes appointed (as they
say) for Ireland, which some of my Forces took, but conceal that they were
taken as entering into Conventry (then in open rebellion against me) where I had
reason to believe they would have been disposed of amongst their Soldiers who
t^en bore arms against me: they talk of a few horses which I have made use of
for my carriages (concealing that they were certified to the useless for the
service of Ireland) when they themselves have seized 100000 pounds particularly
appointed by act of Parliament for the relief of Ireland (where my army is
ready to perish for want of it) and employed it (together with such part of the
400000 pounds subsidy as they have received) to maintain an unnatural civil
war at home. Neither have they used their fellow Subjects better then they
have done me their King. By their power the law of the land (your birth right)
is trampled upon and in stead thereof they govern my people by votes, and
arbitrary orders. Such as will not submit to their unjust unlimited power are
imprisoned, plundered, and destroyed, such as will not pay such exactions as
they require toward this rebellion are threatened to be put out of Protection
(as they call it) of the Parliament, such as conscienciously remember their
duty and loyalty to me their Sovereign are reviled, persecuted, and declared
traitors, such as do desire to maintain the true Protestant Religion, as it is
established by the Laws of the Land are traduced and called Popish, and
superstitious; And on the contrary such as are known Brownists, Anabaptists,
and public depravers of the Book of Common Prayer, or countenanced and
encouraged. They exact, and receive Tunnage, and poundage, and other great
duties upon merchandises, not only without law, but in the face of an Act of
Parliament to the contrary, past this present Parliament, which puts all men
into the condition of a Praemunire that shall presume so to oppress the
People. If you desire to know who are the contrivers of these wicked designs
you shall find some of their names in particular and their actions at large in
my declaration of the twelfth of August (to which I shall referr you) I wish
their craft and power were not such, that few of those copies can come to the
view of my good people; since that time these men so thirst after the
destruction of this kingdom, that they have prevailed to make all my offers of
Treaty (which might bring peace to this kingdom, and begett a good
understanding between me and my Parliament) fruitless. In this distress into
which these men have brought me, and this kingdom, my Confidence is in the
Protection of Almighty God, and the affections of my good People, and that you
may clearly see what my resolution lately taken to be read to you, And I
desire that the Sheriffs of these two Counties will dispose Copies of that and
what I now deliver unto you, having noe other way to make it public; these
men having restrained the use of my presses at London and the universities.

FINIS.

