AN ANSWER, In Defense of A MESS OF POTTAGE, Well Seasoned and Crumb'd.

Against M. T. S. T. R. A. I. S. P. H.

Anagram, Strap Smith.

Who falsely says, the COMMON PRAYERS are unlawful, and no better than the
Popes Porrage.

11. Job 2.3. Should not the multitude of Words be answered, and should a Man
full of Talk be justified.

Should thy lies make men hold their peace, and when thou mockest shall no Man
make thee ashamed.

23. Exodus 1. Thou shall not raise a false Report.

In which Tract is answered his unanswerable Reasons: By the same Gyles Calfine.

London, Printed Anno Domini, 1642.

An Answer in Defense of a Mess of Pottage, well Seasoned and Crumb'd.
THat it is a very great part of indignity to call the Book of Common Prayer,
the Popes Porrage, is proved by three Reasons. First, In regard of the Matter
in it. Secondly, In regard of the manner of it; And thirdly, In regard of the
Laws that have been Acted for the maintaining of it. As for the Matter of it,
if you look well upon it, you shall find grounded, first upon the Scriptures;
yea, Scripture it self, in many places, and not upon any Popish Mass. 2. For
the Manner of it, wherein is first, Reading and Meditating; Secondly, Heavenly
Ejaculation, containing short pitthy Prayers, and they be of three sort; first
to be delivered from sin. Secondly, Petitions for Grace, and Thanksgivings for
Gods blessings toward Us: The third Reason, That it is an indignity to call it
Porrage, because they have been est^blished by Acts of Parliament; viz. in the
days of King Edward the sixth Queen Elizabeth, King James, and now maintained
by our gracious Sovereign King Charles; and therefore fourth Reason might be
added, That it is an indignity to the State, to cast an aspersion upon them, as
if they should maintain Laws against Gods Word: for which cause there is
pen^lties against those that did either deprave them, or use any other in stead
of them: and to thi^ purpose the Scripture says well, 13. Romans 5. and 13. Heb.
17. and therefore it is not the Popes Porrage, nor composed out of the Mass
and if you will look back a little, you shall find, That Liturgies and Forms
of Prayers have been long before the days of Edward the sixth, if not before
there was any Pope in the World; Austea, Basil, Clement, Chrysostom, and
diverse other, before their times who had forms of Prayers, and did answer
after the Minister sometime, Lord have mercy one us, etc. and at other ^imes,
We lift up our hearts to thee, O Lord, and sometimes, Amen: By all which it
appears, That it is an indignity to call it so, and that it is not composed by
the fat Cooks (as you te^rme them) of the Popes Kitchen, but by Learned
Divines, and therefore not to be abolished.

But grant it were Composed out of the Masse-Boo^ (which I will never do, but
defy it) is it therefore so corrupted that it must needs be abolished, and not
rather corrected, amended: purcase you had a joint of meat (which I know you
love well) and that it were in a place of two tainted, or as we usually say,
Fly-blown, will you because of this, cast your meat quite away, and never eat a
bit of it no, I suppose you would not, but rather cut out that which is
tainted; a d throw that away, as not fit to be eaten, and preserve the rest for
your own eating. And yet the Common Prayers is not taken out of the Popish
Mass, neither is it tainted, nor an Idol-worship, and can be no abomination to
offer them to God; and to this purpose, your proofs are but slender, that you
prove that our prayers are abomination; indeed if they were directed to any
Idols, Saints, or Angels, and not to the True and Ever living God, they then
were Idolatrous Prayers: But being directed, intended, and Gods Glory only
aimed at it is a foul abuse, and deserves the lie, to say they are profane, and
full of Popery: therefore raise no more Rabshakah like; but lay thy hand at thy
mouth and be silent, for this kind of zeal is like a fire that will burn up
all Godly discipline, and brings souls even to despair, if Gods mercy did not
exceed his Works. As for Baptism, Matrimony, Visitation of the sick,
Consecration of the Lords Supper, Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, you say they
are taken out of the Masse-Book, which is false, and that they are unlawful
and inventions of men; then, I pr^y, show a better way or form, that they may
be performed according to the Scripture. God did institute Marriage, but we
never read how the manner of performing it was: we read of diverse that were
buried, but how it is not specified? so for the rest: therefore God has left
it to the Church to prescribe a form how to do them, provided, that they do
them according to his Word as near as they can. Indeed in these days of
divisions; there be many that Baptize, Bury, and Marry, etc. after another
manner then the Common Prayer injoynes; but what is their manner? my thinks
they come short of performing them so well as the Prayer Book Commands: for in
Baptism ther^s scarce any Prayer made for the receiving of the Child into the
Congr^g^tion, and for its growth in Grace; and to perform these duties, a
Stable, B^rne, or Chamber, is more fit then a Church, and I think I should not
lie, if I did say, a River: as for Marriage, th^r's little said wherefore it
was ordained, for as soon as they come into the Church, they are Married, with
a short Prayer of the Ministers, and so flightly shuffled up and away. So
likewise at Burials, some there be that allow of no Prayers at the Grave, for
(say they) it is Popery to read to the Dead, (all that is true) but they do
allow of Sermons to be Preached over the Dead, and why that? they say it
benefits the hearers, as if the Prayers of the Grave did not, and were only
for the Dead: but if as much gai^e were to be had at the Reading of the
Prayers, as there is at the Sermons, I question if any would stick to say
them: Now let any indifferent Man Judge; whether the Old way, as the Church
uses, or the New way that Seperates and such like use be the best. I for my
part will leave it to the wise consideration of the King and Parliament to
order things, as They seem best, and that I will follow. But why is the
Epistles and Gospels termed patches and shreds? It Is but a gross Phrase: are
you kin to any Botcher that uses patches and shreds to make up a Garment?
And what foolish and vain repetitions are there (as you say;) Is Lord have
mercy upon us, etc. The Lords Prayer, and other short Ejaculations,
battologies, tautologies, and foppish things? what kind of absurd speech is
this: it seems you want none of Gods mercy, and your Prayers are better then
our Saviors, and that may be is the reason, that many will not conclude their
Prayers with the Lords Prayer. Christ before his Passion, prayed to his Father
one thing three times, Mat. 26.44. saying the same words: is it therefore
unlawful for us to do the like? I suppose not: neither to read any small
portion of Scripture by it self upon any occasion, by taking out here a little
and there a little, as the Prophet has it; so now it is neither frivolous nor
ridiculous, but may be used in Gods worship. Moreover, if a Woman make a
courtesy to the Minister in the Church, at her coming in, or going out. What
of that? (if you be a Minister) did you never put off your Hat to any in the
Church (or were you always uncovered) nor did none to you; but being it is
done, it is neither felony nor treason; it is no Popish Ceremony, nor any duty:
common reason will tell you, that we owe reverence one to another, especially
to our superiors; perhaps you have done worse in a Church then that is, and we
may lawfully reverence one another either in Church or field: but indeed
nothing is ill spoken, but where it is ill taken, so says the Proverb; but
what reverence will you allow to God in the Church, if Man must have none:
surely all reverence to him must be excluded, if not God himself God, it seems
by this Argument, made the body for no use at all in the Church (or any where
else) but to come and squat down and never to stir, unless they sit uneasily,
or to look upon another, fine clothes: David thought it not sin to kneel to
God, neither did Daniel; Christ is an example for us in this point, who fell
upon his knees to his Father; He humbled himself, that we might learn of him;
and therefore it is no Popish Porrage, or any unseemly thing. The Letany also (as
you say) is ridiculous, full of Magic spells, and worse if worse can be, even
Conjuring it self: What unreasonable madness and absurdity is this? perhaps
your belief is not as an others is to believe you are saved by Christ
Sufferings, but by your own Merits; and to believe thus, is indeed ridiculous.

Concerning our Orders in the Church, no man need admire at it; for what is a
Church without Order; S. Paul commands it, Let all things be done in Order,
says he; but it is a disorder when Ministers shall kneel, and other men shall
sit, when one shall stand; and another in a manner lie all along. I confess,
the Church at this time is out of Order, for in some places I have seen
unmannerly Boys turn Clearks, and begin a Psalm, because they would have no
Service read yea, they have held on in Singing, till the Minister came that
should reach, in which time was Sung, the first four parts of the 119 Psalm,
and part of the fifth part: I am sure these have been unlawful Orders,
neither has the Prayers been so tedious and wearisome, as you say, nor driven
out at length, to hinder Pre^ching; no, all those Prayers put together, have
not been so long as I have heard: some to my knowledge have been an hour and
a quarter long: wherein I have heard one and the same thing reiterated (I speak
within my bounds) a dozen times; neither could I find them so profitable as
those in the Common Prayer: Besides all this, if there has been Sermons
wanting in many places, it was not long of tedious Service (as you call it) but
the fault was rather in negligent Ministers: never were Sermons debard for the
Service sake, but they have been as plentiful as ever; and if any have not
read those Prayers with that devotion as they ought, the fault lies still in
them, that prayed without a sense and feeling of their own wants, and not in
the Prayers, for they are found, and not to be termed Porrage or Popish dregs.
I could wish, that the Pope in all his Dominions had no worse Porrage then
these Prayers, for then we might be assured he would at length turn
Protestant. And what quarter is there about Holidays, days of Feasting, as if
they were kept in honor of Saints. Though God said, six days shall thou
labor, and keep the seventh day holy, does it argue, that we may not go to
Church on a Holyday: the performing of this Service on that day, is to give God
thanks that he has given us such good Examples, as they were for us to
imitate, and that we may praise God in the remembrance of them, that they
lived a godly life, and dyed in the Faith of Jesus Christ. If you had (...)
Child or Friend, that did live a Christian life, and dyed in the state of
Grace, would not you (though many years after) thank God that you had such a
Child or Friend, that was Gods servant, and pray further, that you may follow
his steps: would you be thus uncharitable to your self, I suppose not: for
proof, The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; but the memory of
the wicked shall rot, as the Scripture speaks, the keeping of Holy days is
therefore, that we may spend some time in the Church in praises and prayers:
and to exercise our selves in some lawful recreation: and that therefore
cannot be Popery: there is yet another thing that is much stumbled at, and that
is kneeling at the Sacrament, now to say this is Idolatry, you must first prove
that we kneel to the Creatures, Bread and Wine; to the Minister or to the
railes; but to neither of these did ever any Christian Protestant kneel, or
ever had that thought; which is the fittest, to kneel, stand, or sit? we read
of neither of these, but that many will conj^cture that Christ and the
Disciples sat: which is not altogether so apparent: If the Church has power
to charge the time of receiving the Sacraments from night to noone, surely it
has some power to order a wholesome and seemly gesture, being there is none
prescribed. Many are sore crossed at the Cross in Baptism, and say it is the Mark
of the Beast, Revel. 13.16.17. but it is not there understood, a material
Cross, but the open profession and Religion that the beast uses, and all
those that profess his Religion, they are said to be marked with the Beasts
mark; that is, the receiving of the m^rk in the forehead or hand one signifies
the profession, and the other signifies the action, both which argue no Cross,
but I desire no more crosses; but cross fellows take them if they will, and
then one cross may lie upon another. If the Surplesse be a Rag, it is sooner put
off then on, there is no holiness in it, it is but a signification of purity,
either in the Minister, or the worship. So that in sum of all that has been
said, there is no reasonable Man (I believe) will censure the Common Prayer to be
so vile, so unlawful, and so full of Popish shreds and patches (as you say
it is) and therefore to be abolished; but rather if any thing be in it that is
unsound, to be corrected and amended: for it was not Composed of fat Cooks of
the Popes Kitchen (as you term them) but of godly Divines, of which function
you are, I suppose, if not, would you were as good, for I scarce like you,
especially when men steal their works out of other Authors, or some other of
their own, and are ashamed of their names, and in stead write unknown Letters,
as M.T.S.T.R.A.I.S.P.H. which being Annagramd is STRAP SMITH; and that I may
give you one strap more, and play the Smiths part, in striking the iron whilst
it is hot, I will leave you in the midst of the River, swimming after a Duck, but
caught a Goose (the meat I should say) with your Doublet off, and your Breeches
on, which is an unproper swimming (for a muffled Cat can never catch Mice) no
more can you attain to the flesh you so desire, being so trussed; and if I
have not made a good exposition of your Doublet, then take it another way; One
there was, being hungry, went to an Ordinary, and calls for a three penny
Ordinary, and presently was brought him a great boule of Pottage, with a little
meat in the midst; the hungry party at the sight of it, straight pulls off his
Doublet; the party which brought it, asked the reason why he did so? answer was
made, that he seeing so much Pottage, which he did not love, and so little
meat, which he loved best, there was a necessity that he must put off his
Doublet to swim to it: of which opinion you are, if not that party, who hold
Pottage is only for Children, and meat for Men but my opinion is, that Pottage
and Meat, Prayers and Preaching, is food convenient for Children and Men, and
such are the Common Prayers, term them as you list. Now, if I have done well,
I am not sorry; but if ill, I wish it were better, it is as well as a lame Man
could do; notwithstanding, it is far better to be Lame, then Lecherous. And no
more of this.

FINIS.

