His Highness the PRINCE OF WALES HIS ANSWER To the Earl of Warwicks Summons:
Sent by Major HUMPHRY BOSVVELL, the 22. of September 1648. stilo novo: with the
Earl of Warwicks desire to meet the Lord Willoughby.

Another Paper of the Earl of Warwicks, in Answer to the PRINCES.

A Letter of DORIZLAUS'S intercepted, going to the Earl of Warwick, concerning
the arresting of the Constant Warwick, and the Captain, being prevented by the
same Letter.

Also the Princes coming to his Navy, with 10000. l. for the Seamen; and the
Hollanders joining with the PRINCE.

Printed in the Year 1648.

WE have seen a paper dat. 19. of September, signed by the Earl of Warwick,
and sent aboard our Fleet, now riding at Anchor of Helford Sluice, and under our
own immediate Command; By which, with strange insolence, and in a manner very
disagreeable to a person of honor (whose own condition so absolutely depends
upon the preservation of the regal power) he requires our Officers to take
down the Standard, and to render themselves and the Ships under their command,
to him (who he says, is constituted by authority of Parliament, Lord high
Admiral of England) for the use of King and Parliament. To all which
extravagant expressions and demands, he will receive the most proper answer,
from the disdain and courage of those faithful Officers, and Mariners whom
he would corrupt, who have with such eminent affection and Loyalty (which we
shall always remember) brought that our Royal Fathers Fleet to be employed
under our command for his service, and who (we are confident, by Gods
blessing,) will preserve and desend the same against any such demands or
attempts whatsoever. They very well know, that it is in the Kings sole power to
make a Lord high Admiral of England, and that though this our Fleet be now
required to be given up for the use of the King and Parliament, the King in
truth is still in prison, with such circumstances of restraint, as to say no
more, are not usual in the case of the most private person, and whose delivery
and freedom all his Subjects are obliged to endeavor, by the Laws of God and
man, with the utmost hazard; and in that pious work, and whatsoever shall
contribute thereunto, we have full assurance, all the Officers and Mariners of
our Fleet will vigorously perform their part, and in so doing publish to the
world how much they abhor those that would seduce them.

And for the encouragement of all those who have any impressions in their
consciences of honesty and duty to God and the King; and who (we believe by
fears and threats) are led into this desperate and wicked Combination; We do
by the authority granted Us by our Royal Father, and in his name, who has the
sole power to grant pardons, and without whose consent no Act of indemnity can
secure any guilty person, offer a gracious pardon to all those Officers and
Mariners who are now aboard any of the Ships under the command of the Earl of
Warwick, if they shall quit that service, and betake themselves to our
protection, where they will be received into pay, and into a better condition
of subsistence, then they can be in the employment they now have; And if they
shall bring with them any of the Ships in which they now are, or other Ships,
they shall continue in the same commands they now have, and receive such
further encouragement and reward as (besides the satisfaction of their
Consciences) shall be very advantageous to them: And if that unhappy Earl
himself, who has contributed so much to the destruction of Government, which
himself or his posterity can never reasonably hope to survive, shall now (upon
the observation of the temper and disposition of those, whose commands he now
executes, and from whom we believe in his first engagement, he did not expect
or apprehend such Commands) out of conscience and prudence desire to join with
us in the rescue of our Royal Father from his unworthy imprisonment, and the
restoring the almost ruined Kingdom to peace and happiness, and the English
Nation to their old Glory and renown, we shall with all princely sincerity and
affection take him into our Arms, and concur with him to those great and good
ends, which can only make the Nation happy.

Septem. 22. Old style. 1648. CHARLES P.


After the delivering of this to my Lord of Warwick, he seemed to be somewhat
discontented against the Army, and used Major Boswell very civilly; and at his
departure engaged himself to give a meeting to my Lord Willoughby, and used
many civil expressions toward his Highness the Prince of Wales.

May it please your Highness,
WE have had the honor to be acquainted with your Highness Paper of the 22.
of September, expressing your displeasure against that Summons, sent by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick (duly constituted, Lord high Admiral of
England) to the Admiral, or chief Commander of the Fleet of English ships
riding off Helvord Sluice; which as it was advised and approved by us (amongst
others) at his Lordships Council of War, so upon second thoughts we cannot
find to contain either insolency or extravagancie, it tending to no other
end, but the returning of those Ships to the service of the King and Kingdom,
whose they are, from which they have been perfidiously diverted and betrayed;
and for their reduction whereunto, We shall not count the utmost improvement of
our courage, (which (blessed be God) will not be blunted with any treacherous
reflections) nor the hazard of our lives too dear a Sacrifice, and which to
endeavor, his Lordship is (by the obligations of honor and duty) so much
engaged.

We have considered your Highness invitement of the Officers and Mariners of
this Fleet, to quit and exchange this service, which our and their hearts do
with the greatest indignation disdain and abhor, as that which would be a
sin against God, an injury to His Majesty, a further disturbance of our
native Countries peace, and a violation of those impressions of honesty and
duty, which we owe to our consciences and trust; and so would render us truly
unhappy, by really contributing to the destruction of the Parliament, in whose
preservation and honor, your Highness interest, as well as the Kingdoms, is
so much concerned; and to the further effusion of precious blood, whose vast
expense, with the true originalls thereof, we beseech your Highness to lay
sadly to your Princely heart, and to make your serious application to those
ways which may most directly conduce to a safe and well-grounded peace betwixt
his Majesty and the Parliament. In order to which, a Treaty is now depending,
and His Majesty in a condition of Freedom, honor, and safety: And in such
ways none shall with more faithful, cheerful, sincere and humble affections,
serve your Highness, then

Your Highness humble Servants, Warwick. John Coppic. John Pear. Tho. Pety.
Jo. Lambert. Jo. Bowen. R. Moulton. Robert Nixon. Owen Cox. R. Huddock. Tho.
Harrison. John Mildmay. William Branckley. Rob. Bardwith. Richard Ingle. R.
Fearmes. Fr. Penroe. George Ayscu^e Jo. Bowen. R. Willoughby. Andrew Ball. Ja.
Peacock. Richard Pitock.

Aboard the S. George at Anchor of Gore, 15. Septem. 1648.

My Lord,
I Will give your Excellency an account of our proceedings here about the
Arrest of the Constant Warwick, and Capt. Dear. I undertook to set it a foot
before I had received your Excellencies procuration; but because I must needs
substitute one to follow the business, I could not effect it; for no body here
would undertake to be my Substitute, until I could show him procuration under
your Excellencies hand and seal, that I got upon Saturday morning last past;
Mark Bernarte for a Knave.
then forthwith I substituted one Mr. Barnarte, a good trusty man, and
forthwith advised with an able Lawyer, who is the only man here affectionate
to the Parliament among all those of that coat, named Isebrand Craft; I desired
to know of him, out of which Court we should (for the best expedition) take out
our Process; he told me, that since it was an action of damage, and account of
meum and tuum in a civil Plea, it must be taken out of the Court of Holland,
the Court Provincial, by reason the Court of Admiralty cannot take connisance
of these things here: then he asked me, whether I had here ready, either the
Original, or a Copy of the Charter Party, or Commission of the said Captain
Dear: I told him, no: but that I could have it by the next Post; his answer
was that for want of it we should find the Court very unwilling to grant out a
Process, it being required by the Instructions of that Court to grant out none
until some summary proof appear, that the Plaintiff is grounded in his suit
against the Defendant: However, Ibid the Advocate to try and draw up a Petition
to the Court, for without foregoing Petition signed by the Advocates hand, no
Warrant is issued forth for the arrest of a Ship and Captain; he did so, and
gave in the Petition upon Monday: the Court demurred upon it all that day: and
upon Tuesday sent the Petition into the Assembly of the States of Holland, as a
business of that Moment, which they durst not take upon themselves: the States
forthwith made a resolution, that the Petition should be referred back to the
Court Provincial; And that the Court should do Justice according as was
desired: upon Wednesday this resolution of the States was got to be signed, See
how he abuses one of the State.
and was (together with the Petition) brought into the Court Provincial; Then
the Court passed the Warrant, which on Thursday was sent to the President of
that Court, called Wyngarden, for to seal it: This servile fellow (instead of
sealing it instantly, as his duty is to do) kept us off until yester night
ten of the Clock; Mr. Barnat my Substitute gave him no respite all that while,
but pursued him wheresoever he went; at length he said he would not seal it
until he had acquainted his Highness with it as Admiral of the Seas, and
went with the Petition and Warrant up to the Prince of Orange his lodgings last
night. This morning he sent it home sealed; when he had got a Notarius ready to
protest against him, of all losses and damages which were like to happen to us
by this delay of Justice: but this morning a new difficulty arose, which the
Mandatory (the Exploycher or Huissier) as they call them here, who would not
go about the executing of his Office until I would promise him 80. guilders
8. l. sterling, at all adventures, performing his Office, or not performing it,
I could by no means agree to such a Proposition, for so a knave might sit and
drink four days, take money besides of the adverse party for betraying his
trust, and laugh at us in the end: I offered him the sum demanded after the
work done, and the bringing of Dear up to the Hague, this he refused, and
flung away; so that hitherto I cannot find any other to do the work upon such
terms as we may in reason trust upon: I have had my health but ill since my
journey into North Holland, but (by the grace of God) I mend apace: while I
have life in me, I am

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble and faithful Servant, Dorislaus.
I have now met with an Explausiter that has undertook the work, at 8.
Guilders per diem, his Wagon and Boat-hire besides, and 25. Guilders over and
above, if he bring Capt. Dear up to the Hague.




This Letter being intercepted on the Haven at Helford Sluice, by my Lord
Willoughby, prevented both the arresting of the Ship, and the Captain, which
otherwise had been done within half an hour after; and is now riding with the
rest of the Ships at Helford Sluice, being safe out of the Harbor: Dorislaus
looked basely the day after, missing of his purpose.

32. Sail of Hollanders are come in, and ride with the Prince his Fleet, and
struck sail to his Highness, which they refused to do to my Lord of Warwick,
and saluted his highness his Standard, each Ship with seven pieces of
Ordinance; and after the Prince his giving them thanks, they shot off each of
them one piece more.

The Prince is now come to the Fleet, and has brought with him the 10000. l.
for their 6. months pay, the Seamen being all unanimous, and resolve to live
and die with his Highness.

FINIS.

