The Right Honorable. Edward Lord Montague. Baron of Kimbolton. Vis-count
Mandeuile. Earl of Manchester. And Mayor General of the Parliaments Forces in
the associated Countyes, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex


The true portraiture of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague Baron of
Kimbolton Viscount Mandevile Earl of Manchester and Major General of the
Parliaments Forees in the Associated Counties norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex
(...)


ENGLANDS SAD POSTURE; OR, A true Description of the present Estate of poor
distressed England, and of the lamentable Condition of these distracted times,
since the beginning of this Civil, and unnatural War.

Presented to the Right Honorable, Pious, and Valiant, EDWARD, Earl of
MANCHESTER.

You that have Eyelids, that can tears distill, View Englands Posture, and
then weep your fill.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold by Richard Harper, in
Smithfield, at the Sign of the Bible. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Pious, Valiant, and vigilant, EDWARD Earl of
MANCHESTER, and Noble General, over all Military forces in our Eastern,
associated Counties.
RIGHT Honorable, and therefore Honorable, because truly Right, not only a
lover, and practiser, but a faithful defendar of right. But that which makes
your fame singugular, is that this virtue in you is so general, that where as
all men are by nature, inclined to seek their own right, your Honor has
engaged, both your Life and Estate, to mainetaine the right of others, yea the
right of our King and Country, nay which is most transcendent, the right and
safety of Gods cause; which is now, by unhappie occasion, in danger to suffer
violence. And in this your uprightness of heart, in defense of the right of
your case, you have hitherto done so rightly and Nobly, that it cannot appear
in the least part, that the fairest professers of reward, nor the fowlest
threatenings of revenge, could either draw or drive you to so much as slack your
Impartial hand in these your pious proceedings, much less to betray your
trust: nor has envy it self, the least moate to cast into you dish, which
(Noble Earl) is now more rare then over; Europ being now in travill, to cast
some poison into every dish, that is presented on the table of our distempered
State, and n^ doubt has often abusd your Honorable presence in presenting
great and gross Malignants, in disguised habits. And as this to the eye of the
world, and to your Eternal praise, does render you truly Honorable; so it
does happily declare, the happiness we enjoy by enjoying so happy, so
vigilant, and so successful a governor, as your Honorable self is, under
whom, through the blessing of God, we in these associated Counties, may more
truly say, then Turtellius did to Felix we enjoy much quietness: And seeing by
your Honor, worthy deeds are done for your Country we except it with all
thankfulness, and alacrity of spirit; being bound to bless God, for such a
blessing upon us, and not to cease praying that you may ride on and prosper.
Now right Honorable, amongst other these your deep engaged servants, I the
most unworthy of the least of your favors, have notwithstanding, presuming on
your Clemency, dared to shelter these my deformed shaddows, under the wings of
your protecting substance, yet (Noble Earl) no farther then they may be
capaple of favor, but if in any thing I have erred, I am there at your
pleasure, to be corrected. Now in this misshapen picture, I have labored to
offer to your view, and so to the eye of the world, the most deformed form of
our nations, now most miserably miserable estate; out of which it is possible,
that your piercing cie may pick somewhat, that may be useful; but if not, I
beseech your Honor to resolve, that my intents herein are honest, and the
contents (if we make no other use of them) may at the least tend to our
humiliation; they being no other then a glass, wherein we may see our sins,
reflecting upon our selves: and in our present miseries, read our foregoing
offenses: but not any way presuming to instruct, nor too far to trouble your
Honor with trifles, I cease in this kind, to be any farther tedious, humbly
begging pardon for this my intrusion, and I shall for ever hold it my
happiness to hear of your prosperity; which in spite of all your enemies,
the God of all good success, crown your Honor with, as he has begun. So
prays

Your humble perioner EDWARD CALVER.

THE PREFACE.
THE Title of this Book, does succinctly, and briefly, comply with the sad
condition of the present times; describing the turbulent state of this land,
and the many miseries, under which the genius of this Kingdom, does now grown.
War has never seemed sweet to any, but to the unexperienced, who blinded with
its flourish, and its glory, observe not the Tragical events, that do attend
it. Of all the War the Civil is most grevous, where all the obligations of
friendship, and Nature, lie canceld in one another blood; while Brothers, and
Kindred, destroy one another, by the devouring sword: Religion being traduced
to palliat these bloody acts, and trampled down by Malignants and Papists, for
the defense whereof our Liberties, and Laws, we are bound unto the Parliament,
to whom we owe our safety and subsistence. This Kingdom does now stand in a
most sad posture; first occasioned by sin, and now punished by the justice of
God, with an unnatural war, making it swim in a deluge of its own blood.
Every day brings in many sad Demonstrations, corcerning this subject, the
burning of houses, the pillaging of of goods, the violating of all Laws, both
Divine and Human, have bin Arguments written in blood, by too many swords.
That which is here related in the following several particulers, and Epigrams
adjoined thereunto, may be fitly called Englands sad Postures, or her Glass
wherein she may behold her sadd distracted face, her sufferings at this
present, being a compendious mixture of all distresses, endured even from the
beginning of this Civil War, which being here presented unto your view; I
doubt not but that it will find deserved compassion in the Reader, and move
him to send up his prayers to heaven, that this bleeding Kingdom, may be once
again established in Peace and Truth, as all good men do most earnestly
desire. This Book being but a sadd Picture of the miserable calamities of this
Kingdom, drawn out by the hand of the Author.

E. CALVER.

THE CONTENTS.
OUR Sins provoking. Gods Anger smoking.
The Sword proceeding. The Kingdom bleeding.
Our King turmoyling. The Parliament toyling,
Religion shaking. Our Laws now quaking.
Delinquents Plotting. The Papists doting,
Malignants Raving. True Christians Craving.
Good people praying. This Author devising
On these sad times or Epigramatizing.
Our Sins provoking.
SIN, I the most prodigious sight indeed,
The Devils offspring, most Infernal seed;
The root of Ruin, death, and Hell, and care,
Heavens, how endured you, when I acted there?
You spotless powers, and I the most defiling,
Could not agree, which caused my thence exiling,
But powers Celestial, could your care in this
Be so precise then, and now so remiss?
My Father did but once offend at first,
And was for ever, sentenced accursed:
But cockerd mankind disoebyes you still,
And yet is favored, sufferd in his ill.
Look down on England, on that divine Eden,
See, how it surfets, on the fruit forbidden,
Nay, with my Father, it aspires the Crown,
Whereon he dored, oh! then cast it down.
The Epigram.
Sin, thou have surely drawn thy picture well,
And justly claim'st thy pedigree from Hell.
Thou and the Devil are so near allyd,
That where thou actest, he does cheifely guide:
Satan that serpent, is indeed thy sire,
And thou his viper art, his chief desire,
Although thy hatching (most unhappie birth)
Lost him the comforts, both of heaven and earth.
Sin, thou indeed may silly man accuse,
That with thy nature, thou should his abuse:
Man, who by nature, in Gods Image shind,
Should in thy Image, now the Devil find.
But sin, thou Serpent, though thou have the Art,
To cosen mankind, and accuse him for it;
Accuse not God though, whose proceeding must,
By thy false Father, be acknowledge just.
Gods Anger smoking.
Oh! England England, foolish England, nay
Thou know it, and do yet reject thy day;
My goodness to thee, is so long expressed,
Thou furferst with is, thou do love the taste.
Nay yet more sor did, more perverse by much,
Because thou findst my long forbearance such:
Thou fondly think me like thy self no doubt,
Or else do judge my eye of justice out.
Thy sins, they are ascended, and declare
Thee so rebellious, that I blush to hear;
Can so much mercy, be so much withstood?
Ah, it repents me, I have done thee good.
Cease then my mercy, thou in vain art shown,
And stir my justice, be to England known.
Those mercies wherein it could find no taste,
Now make them longd for, or else lay it wast.
The Epigram.
Lord, Lord, it is true, we must though to our shame,
Confess unto the glory of thy Name,
That England has been infinitely blessed,
In taking from thee, though returning least.
England has been like Eden, therein growing
All fruits delicious, streams of pleasures flowing.
But oh fond England, thus well streamd and fruited,
Has took a surfer, and those streams polluted.
England, must therefore guilty, guilty cry,
Though England therefore sentenced be to dye.
But its accuser is its foe, nay thine,
Then see his malice, let thy mercy shine.
But Lord thy justice, must have course it is true,
But with thy justice, do thy mercy show.
Sin to thy judgment, England has subjected,
Let sin be slain for it, England but corrected.
The Sword proceeding.
Come, I must rouse now, must no longer rest,
In gross oblivion, I from heaven am pressed.
But is this certain? yes it is decreed,
My Captain calls me, I must then proceed.
The Lord of Hoasts, now utters his command,
And send commssion down into my hand,
That I to judgment, must proceed in have,
By taking vengeance, and in laying wast;
Especially in England where I slept
So many late long years, in durance kept,
That I through length of time, neglect and dust,
Was quite forgotten, and consumd with rust.
But now I have commission, a decree,
Of Englands follyes, to revenged be.
Of Englands blood, now must I drink my fill,
And scour the rust off, with the dropps Ispill.
The Epigram.
Infatuate weapon, oh Remorselesse foe,
Thou without pittre, do thou rigor show.
But senseless England, that thou thus should urge
A God so gentle, to use such a scourge.
England, England, how will thou have ease?
This wrath thou can not in the sword appease;
That raves and rages, as if wars did choose
To make this Realm, his place of Randevouze.
But sword thou sparst not, car'st not who complain.
To invocate thee, then is endless, vain.
Alas for England Lord! it is thus undone;
But thou have mercy, though the sword has none.
Lord check the sword then, thou alone have power;
And sword, though thou have license to devour,
And eat up England, must thou drink the blood
Of Gods own servants, is not that too good?
The Kingdom bleeding.
Bleeding indeed, alas my wounds are wide,
The sword makes issues, streams on every side;
Yea bleed so fully, I to faint begin,
My heart is wounded, and I bleed within:
Nay bleed not only blood, but it is my grief,
That I in bleeding can have no relief.
No means, no Surgeon can be found, has are,
To stanch my issue, stay my bleeding heart.
Oh sad condition, no salve to apply,
Can stop this current, must I bleeding die?
Most wretched I, then have I such a vent,
So deep a wound, when all my balm is spent.
But fooolish England, that I took no heed,
In time of plenty, for a time of need.
I in my health built Castles in the air,
But now in sickness, lo, I now despair.
The Epigram.
England, dear England, I must hold thee so,
Dear in my thoughts, though now in deadly woe.
Thy blood must doubtless soon be spent indeed,
When in thee almost every vain does bleed.
Thy streams run swiftly, not by dropping shed,
But streams are flowing, as if fountains bled;
Fountains indeed, as well as Conduits small,
Th'impartiall sword, makes no respect at all.
But oh thou God of England, and of war,
And eke of peace, where people humbled are.
The sword it self is most remorselesse steel,
But yet thy hand that strikes therewith, can feel.
England, then England, seek unto that hand,
That awful, power full, that gave the sword command,
That Lord of all, that God of Hoasts indeed;
He orders Battles, only helps at need.
Our King turmoiling.
You higher powers, can you so knit your brow,
Upon the owner of a Crown below?
That Charles, whom his dominions should obey,
Should only bear the Scepter, not the sway?
Supremest powers, this may indeed be due,
As my correction, if your hand I view;
But if I view them, whom your just command,
Has made my subjects, may they Charles withstand?
Unhappie Charles then, but you higher Chaires,
Who have the rule of all Terrene affairs.
Though you, and justly, overrule my Crown,
Yet give me leave, to keep my subjects down.
Let from your fountaynes, so much fullness spring,
If I command not, I am then no King.
Suits it with Royal dignity, that we?
Should subject, to a subjects party be.
The Epigram.
Great King of Kings, who have the chief command,
Within whose hand, our Sove^aigns heart is spand:
Teach him to pray, for what befits him best,
And then in mercy, answer his request.
Lord, give him wisdom, to discern his foes,
And then a weapon, to prevail on those.
And let thy greatness, to his grace make dear,
Not men insinuating, but sincere.
And gracious Sovereign, if poor ashes may,
As for your highness, to your highness pray.
Esteem not men for acts, in State most fit,
Who in Religion, never acted yet.
It Is feared, that the preferments, the promotion,
Attends on many, takes up their devotion;
And men aspiring, are the least to trust,
Religion, only binds men to be just,
Our Parliament toyling.
Sure heavy sequel, very heard success,
The Kingdom panting, almost pa^^ redress;
And lo we labor, to redress the same,
Yea in much perrill, and yet paid with blame.
Labor indeed, both night and day we spend,
In tedious studdy, England to defend:
We neither pains, nor life nor living spare,
Besides the burden of contempt we bare.
Well may we groan then under such a weight,
And we besides, dismembered by decert.
Nay more, infeebled underneath this lead,
Not only members, but we want our head;
We want our hopes, our hearts desire our King,
Whose presence, had been precious in this thing.
Unhappie project, that did thus betray,
Both King and Kingdom, stealing him away.
The Epigram.
We read that learned Astrologers approve,
Of certain houses, in the spheres above;
Wherein the Planets, as they do relate,
Are sure most active, most predominate.
So you our lesser Plannets, here below,
Now in your houses, do your brighttnsse show,
You in your motions, always gave a light,
But now right centered, you appear most bright.
Our Sun and Moon, are so declined west,
That you our Stars are needful in the East.
Shine then, oh shine then, till your greater light,
Gets from beneath, this Canopy of night.
But lesser Plannets of the greater borrow,
Our Sunns declining, therefore breeds your sorrow:
But God the fountain, whence all light begun,
Makes stars to shine, in absence of the Sun.
Religion Shaking.
Great God, great guide, and fountain of all good,
From whence it issues streams into a flood:
Think, think upon me, oh thou fountains head,
I am a drop, which from thy bucket slid.
I am thy offspring, why art thou estranged?
Do thou not know me? Lord am I so changed?
But thou know all things, then the fault must be,
Not in thy knowledge, but alas in me.
I am indeed polluted, and defiled,
And have so lost the Image of thy child;
That though thou know me, thou may view me rather,
As a disdaineing, then indulgent Father.
But, Lord thou can not, without sorrow sure,
Thy child's destruction, though defiled endure.
Cleanse then, oh cleanse me, rather then reject,
Lord do not ruin, though thou dest correct.
The Epigram.
Great God and gracious, from whose height indeed,
Does all the goodness here below proceed;
Amongst the rest, Religion as the chief,
Which calling to thee, cannot want relief.
Though now it stammers, thou can understand,
Though now it faints, thou have help at hand:
And though thou hear'st it, we are bound to call,
For if that suffers, we must suffer all.
And dear Religion, thou that have the keys,
To give us entrance, where all comfort lies.
Oh fear not, fear not, thou shall sure have aid,
Thy suits are granted, though they seem delayed.
Thou have indeed abused thy keys in store,
By fondly trying, a forbidden door.
But now thou see, thou were deceivd therein,
And seekst reforming, thou shall favor win.
Our Laws now quaking.
Shaking, and quaking, it is so indeed,
Alaffe we shiver, and quiver, like a reed;
Our old injunctions are recalld again,
Our new prescriptions, held by some as vain.
We which were wonted to be Englands guide,
Are now so pesterd, pent on every side.
We who should have the sway of all the land,
Condemning others, now condemned stand.
Distracted England, how will thou have ease?
Where England will thou prove out thy first pleas;
What preservation, can thou look to have,
What Justice, when we suffer, that should save?
Needs must thou England be indeed confusd,
If rules of order may be thus abused.
If we, which in thee should set all things right,
Be now condemned, or disordered quite.
The Epigram.
England it is certain, thou haft long been such,
With false proceeding, been abusd too much.
Thy Laws which should have seen thy life corrected,
Have either been corrupted, or neglected.
And therefore England thou must bear the blame,
If now thy Laws be questioned for the same:
Where justice cannot see true sentence past,
It will take vengeance, on that Judge at last.
And you our Laws, our former Laws at least,
Which could be both, in earnest, and in jest.
Is it not justice, you should for it pay,
That could be wrested, almost any way?
But Laws have patience, suffer this a while,
Until that justice, scowres away the soil:
And it is hoped (rising from the slain)
That you new formed, shall keep Court again.
Delinquents plotting.
Come come Complisses, shall we now obey,
Who were destind, and were borne to sway?
Shall We be checked, now challengd in our course,
Whose wills so lately were like laws in force?
See we not how a giddie headed crew
Got with their betters into public view;
Now take upon them as if chief of note,
To chardge, examine, judge, condemn, and vote.
Preposterous people that were thus mistook,
What heart ingenious, can such upstarts brook?
If by our letters we were apprehended,
We might be silent had we so offended:
But as these upstarts are but late of standing,
So they we trust shall not be long commanding;
We have we fear not water to suffice,
To quench such sparks as from mere ashes rise.
The Epigram.
It has been noted evil will betide,
When Stars that are held eminent do glide,
But then most evil, or portending wars,
When those thus gliding are Malignant stars;
Some stars are fallen now, we may fatal call
Stars too, from higher magnitudes let fall:
And if predictions ever did appear
In true productions, it is doubtless here.
But you oh you that have been Lights above
Or should have been, so, that declined prove,
Could you be, think you, from your stations thrown,
By a more feeble motion then your own:
Can judgment in you be through will so clouded,
Or reason under boiling rancour shrouded?
Oh show your wisdoms, and confess, as fit,
A power Almighty in it, and submit.
The Papist doting.
True Mother, and yet virgin pure abod,
Virgin of man, but mother of a God:
A God indeed, of Jesus Christ thy Son,
We give thee glory for these hopes begun.
We here in England amongst people blind,
Have lived a long time to our grief confined;
But through thy intercession now we hope
To find a door of more enlargement open.
It Is true we long time have invoked thy name,
And thou we doubt not have still heard the same,
And have our suits presented, but alas
Our hour of penance must run out the glass.
But oh! blessed virgin, Queen of heaven, and dear
To God the Father, cease not to appear
For our enlargment, we some comforts view;
But yet uncertayne, let us find them true,
The Epigram.
Deluded Papists, that which you report
Upon our blindness, may we not retort
Into your bosoms, and you justly paid,
Who thus are praying to the dead for aid?
What help by scripture from such can you find?
But in the scriptures you may well be blind,
When as the scriptures are conceald, it is sure,
From most, that so your blindness might endure:
You are possessed with a senseless Story,
Which without scripture shows a Purgatory,
Wherein the souls of very Saints must be,
Till by the suits of living men set free.
If thus the living for the dead must pray,
What can you for the suits of dead men say?
Fond man, have you no better helps to claim,
Your hopes are weak then, and amiss do aim.
Malignants Raving.
Oh mserable world what times are here?
What ever praying, yet no ease appearc?
Our states consumd, our selves consumd and lost.
Besides a sea of guiltless blood, 't has cost.
And all forsooth to satisfy some few,
Some, most precise, or most prodigious crew;
Or to speak truly, might we speak so far,
To help to mayntaine a Rebellious war.
Accursed be those occasioned our betraying,
Into this thraldom, what no end of praying?
And these perfidious Roundheads who so far
Do strive to further such unnatural war.
Is this Religion, you that seem so pure,
That kill in public could be so demure?
Find you occasion now to vent that spleen,
Which in your bosoms boyld so long unseen?
The Epigram.
Perverse Malignants, if I had the skill,
Had Art, as I have Ink within my quill,
I would so paint you, that you in this book,
Should find, and should confess your are mistook;
Mistook indeed, could you else so mistile,
Yea so miscensure, malice, and revile
Those men whose lives, it is manifestly known,
Have been by odds, more virtuous then your own?
More virtuous, true, it is that you do envy,
Because your vices are condemned thereby.
Earth blinded moles, but will you blame the day,
Because it does your deeds of night bewray.
Earth blinded, sure this Epithet befits;
It Is only earth does thus distract the wits.
In earthly things did you no damage find,
You would remain as silent men, as blind.
Good Christians craving.
Sure Lord thy Justice and thy Mercies strive;
Thy mercy would have England kept alive.
Thy Justice on the other side does cry
England is guilty, guilty, let it dye.
Lord can thou be thus, as it were distressed,
Because that England will not seek for rest.
And can thou England not lament thy fate,
When God himself seems so Compassionate.
Oh England England let our suits make speed,
That mercy may with Justice beagreed;
For it is certain till there be this peace
Above, our wars will not below surcease.
But gracious God whose mercy do appear,
Then when thy Justice seems to domincere;
Since England is not of thee yet forgot,
Though thou do scourge it, yet consume it not.
The Epigram.
Heavens help you Christians, you are well imployd
Help you to pray, for prayers will provide:
You are the soldiers in this time of need
That are most faithful, and most like to speed;
You are both voluntary, yea and pressed,
Oh ply your place, your Amunitions best.
You have Rams horns, whose shrill Echoes shall
Make Rome to totter, Ierico to fall.
Then though your weapons be condemn das slight
Yet be not daunted, but maintain your fight.
The noble Captain in whose cause you stand,
Can where, and when, and how he list command;
Then though you dare not in your own strength trust
Yet call your Captain, and your conquer must.
Fight then with comfort, do not fail therein;
Pray without ceasing, I shall say Ames.
Our Sins provoking.
Lord thou with England well may be in ire,
Yea be to England a consuming fire.
Its sins are grievous, very Sodom like;
Sure the are full Lord, it is time to strike.
Fullness of bread, much idleness and pride,
Were Sodoms sins, but therefore Sodom died.
England in all these has polluted been,
Shall England live then? Lord repay its sin.
Thou did indeed great Ninivy forbear,
But it repented Jonah being there.
Thou have to England many Ionahs sent,
But drowsy England does not yet repent.
Nay England has thy messengers abused,
Contemnd thy Message, thy commands refused;
Profayn'd thy Sabboths; nay it is come to pass,
That England once more falls in love with Mass.
The Epigram.
Thy accusations sin, are sure too just,
And what with sorrow we acknowledge must,
That we have nothing to thy charge to lay,
But only this that thou did us betray.
Thou did allure us till the bait we took,
But now do wound us kill us with the hook:
Most subtle fisher, but most simple we,
Who in thy baits, could not our baine feresee.
But England England let us be more wise,
See here the cause from whence our cares arise.
This is indeed that deadly darling foe,
Which both betrays us and consumes us so;
This is that viper in our bowels bleeding,
Which whiles we suffer, on our soul lies feeding:
To kill this bratt then, only can do good,
To stop this vent, can only staunch our blood.
Gods Anger smoking.
Ah foolish England, had thou but confessed
Thy faults in time, thou might have been at rest:
But as thou long time have been lukewarm cold,
Thou have of late been desperately bold.
But though thou would not, yet did J lament thee,
And in my mercy many warnings sent thee;
Besides examples of my wrath for sin,
Which pointing at thee, from all parts have been.
I put my spirit of foretelling harms
Upon thy teachers, who have sought by charms,
Both by entreaties, and by threats to win,
Or to awake thee from thy sleep in sin:
But thou have counted their reports untrue,
False teachers therefore justly are thy due:
That through delusions, as it is ensuing,
Thou might be sealed up to thy utter ruin.
The Epigram.
Great God of Europe, God of England then,
Though we have set up other Gods therein;
Thou do most justly charge us, nay it is much
That thy forbearance, has so long been such.
Been such indeed, we long have sinnd, but still
Thou seemdst to winck, although we knew thy will.
We had thy word, still sounding in our ears,
Which though we loathed still, still thou did forbear's.
Nothing could urge thee, till we took in hand
To set up Dagon where thy Arc should stand;
To set up Idols in thy name and place,
And bowd before them to thy very face.
But this has urgd thee once more to a flood,
At least in England, and that too of blood;
But when this deludge, shall have washed this land,
Lord rest thy Arc here, let not Dagon stand.
The Sword proceeding.
Proceed? it is certain, how can I be still?
When God himself has given me charge to kill;
Can I, suppose you, in my Scabbard rest,
And am by such an awful Captain pressed?
But I have further summons in this thing;
England, I have a warrant from thy King,
From awful, powerful, angry Charles besides,
Within whose keeping much command abides;
He is offended at the very heart,
And has commanded I should take his part.
Then England do not blame me as unkind,
Though I consume thee, being thus enjoined:
No no, but England, would thou have release,
Thou must with God then, and thy King make peace;
For till they stay me by a new command
I must not, will not, cannot, stay my hand.
The Epigram.
Thou sword of England, thou have truly said,
Thou can not spare us till thy hand be stayed,
That to accuse thee were but to increase
Thy fury rather then our fears release;
But sword of England though thou have a charge,
To drink in England, is the same so large,
And so unbounded, that it has no tie,
But thou must drink here till thou drink us dry?
If it be so, then England is accursed;
But if some part sword, may aswage thy thirst:
Then show this Kingdom, since thou must have blood
Drink the corrupted, so thou may do good.
But oh thou God of England, who have sent
This bloody weapon, for our punishment:
Alas it often, too often does mistake,
Then guide, or sheath it, for thy mercies sake.
The Kingdom bleeding.
My dlssolation must be doubtless near,
All tokens of my fatal change appear;
Bleeding and fainting, gasping yea and dying,
If that some hand be not some help applying.
My late chief comfort in distress my God,
In my distress, now whipps me with his rod.
My Forts, my Holds, my Castles tumbling down,
Nay more my King, endangering a Crown.
My face looks pale, where beauty late sat glowing,
My breast are emtie whence late streams were flowing,
My young men flaine, my virgins drowned in tears,
My songs of pleasure turned to sights and cares;
Where Music sounded, Bells did sing before,
Now Drums are beating hideous Cannons roar;
My friends and lovers do amazed wring
There helpless hands, my foes rejoice and sing.
The Epigram.
Sad posture sure, a spectacle wherein
We may behold the image of our sin
Lust has conceaved, brought forth sin, and lo
Sin in conclusion brings forth death and woe.
But bleeding England could we, it is true,
Have bled in tears for these our sins, as due,
The streams of blood which do increase so high,
Had been by tears distll'd, in time put by.
Our Sins and want of sorrow for the same,
Were then the cause from whence this deluge came.
Unhappie men that we could not desery
Our want of bleeding, when our eyes were dry.
But England, England, is it yet too late?
Cannot our tears yet this same flood abate?
Oh! let us try it, tears have still done good,
In deepest dangers, why not then stanch blood?
Our King turmoyling.
Oh heavy, heavy what a weight I bear?
Are Royal Septers swaid with so much care?
Are these the Glories and delights that wait
Upon a Septer, prized at such a height.
I am by sacred providence a head,
But here lies that now which does press like lead
Those tender members which from me take life,
Are with themselves now, and with me at strife.
My subjects who are so my members dear.
They some seduce me, others domineere;
And almost all my members go about
To let each others dearest blood run out.
Think you a head then can be free from aching,
Whose members, heart, veins, are thus bleeding, breaking.
The Epigram.
Deeare and dread Sovereign, and our Sun below,
As from your highness beams of brightness flow;
So beams of life to us that lie beneath,
And we without you very faintly breath.
If such a sun may under shadows rest,
Well may your subjects be in sackcloath dressed.
Unhappie strait, then whereto you are brought;
Oh that we could lament it as we ought.
The silly subjects for a conquest strain,
But still you loose, which side soever gain;
And yet your Highness does not seet redrest,
Because uncertain who advise you best.
Indeed dread Sovereign men of deepest wit,
Most near, most dear, most far, may fail, but yet
It were a wonder, England never knew,
If Parliaments should not to Kings be true.
Our Parliament toyling.
Most gracious Sovereign, under whose command,
Next under great Iehovahs charge, we stand.
Your grace has put us, with a charge in trust,
We then were Traitors, should we not be just.
When we enjoyd your Royal presence here,
And you indeed were in your proper sphere:
You then condemnd such lesser lights as had
Abusd there stations, running retrograde.
But now thy presence is from us withdrawn,
Those satall stars upon your highness fawn,
And would persuade it too by wars:
We are but commets, they your fixed stars;
But your conjunction with them does declare,
By the effects produced what they are.
Your Kingdoms all to blood, and death subjected,
Which could not be so, were you well affected.
The Epigram.
Great counsel you may well recount your cares,
And stead of ink, may sum them up in tears;
That such a Court should in such danger stand,
As has been such a Pillar to the land:
Yet be not daunted, since the cause is good,
Virtue shines cleerest, when it is most withstood.
You were elected by a public call.
What private aims, can then your acts forestall?
Had you been guilty in some heinous matter,
You might like others, have been forced to flatter;
But Being guiltless, fear not falsehood sown,
By such as thereby, would excuse their own.
Although our Sovereign, may a while be held,
By false suggestions, Lies at length will yield;
And then the truth, shall be our Sovereigns guide,
To prove them dross, but you the gold that is tried.
Religion Shaking.
Well may J totter, as if fever taken,
When thus my pillars are removed, and shaken;
Needs must I tremble, as most like to slide,
When my upholders, are so much envied,
The world indeed is with me at defiance,
Because I with her must not have compliance,
Because I may not with her greatness doat.
Ten thousand swords are drawn to cut my throat,
Besides the many stabbs and wounds I take,
By such as on me a mere cloak do make:
Whiles others turn me to as many terrors,
By rending mein pieces into errors.
Poor, true Religion how am I distressed,
The world grows troubled, if I seem to rest.
Am I become a burden to the same,
Heaven call me home then thither, whence I came.
The Epigram.
Most dear Religion, and of Heaven by birth,
Can thou be persecuted thus on earth.
Has the old serpent not forgot his spleen,
Which in thy tender infancy was seen?
No, no, that serpent Satan prince of Hell
Is now become a Dragon, and most fell;
And steed of spleen, persues thee with a flood,
To overwhelme thee, and that too of blood.
But dear Religion here lies thy repose,
The Earth shall drink this Ocean up, thy foes
And thou shall find, in times of most distress,
A hideing place, though in the wilderness.
Then dear Religion, if that England may,
Not once again be happy in thy stay:
Oh yet despair not, God will sure prepare
A biding for thee, though some other where.
Our Laws now quaking.
It Is then no marvel, sure you need not wonder
To see the Kingdom thus lie sighing under
So much distemper, and distress when we
That should conform all, thus confounded be.
Needs must the building of a state decay,
When thus you take its principalls away.
While such as gloried in our happy state,
Are now bewayling there unhappie fate.
Late active servants we lament to see
How slow you move now, and how sadd you be;
Your heavy looks do cipher your distress,
Our sorrows for you can be sure no less.
But if our Courts and cases now adjourned,
Shall into course be once again returned;
We shall we doubt not prove our actions true,
And find in fine, both cost and damage due.
The Epigram.
You upright laws of either Church or state,
If there be any thus passionate?
You have no reason to complain I trust,
It is not you are blamed, but the unjust:
The course it may be, may awhile be staid,
But upon mere necessity delaid;
And if once opportunity befor't,
You shall have freedom and again keep Court.
But if some upstart evil Courts enjoined,
Be unto a perpetual sleep confined.
It is but Justice, nor were you to grutch,
If many of your servants sleep as much;
It was indeed your officers that long
Have made you thought corrupted, done you wrong,
Nor is it law but lawyers, that are meant,
When men deluded bitter language vent.
Delinquents Plotting.
Fear not Accomplices we shall have success,
All happle tokens promise us no lest.
Our sunn is risen in our parts, which way
Can we then fear but we shall have the day?
Nay more our Sun does in has strength appear,
And is attractive both from far and near,
Our Moon besides is at her full you see;
What sadd then, or what suddayne change can be?
Let us not then be idle, our designs
Can only prosper while our Sun thus shines;
If any objects seek to interpose,
Let us persuade our Sun they are his foes;
This is the project let it be maintained,
We have already so much vantage gaind
By this invention, as indeed imparts,
That we besides this, need no other Arts.
The Epigram.
Delinquents? No you do defy the name,
Indeed it may be you deny the same:
But since our states discover you uncleere;
How dare you then before our Sun appear?
But this does show your want of wisdom most
That you can upon mere confusion boast,
And promise to your selves a world of bliss,
From signs that do decypher all is amiss.
Our sun is risen in your parts we say,
And therefore doubtless you must have the day:
Because our Sun is risen in the west,
Which is a wonder; are you thus possessed
Most fond Delinquents? this does either threat,
That Englands darkness shall indeed be great
For still the East has shown our day begun;
And if that fails us sure our day is done.
The Papist doting.
Sure this befits us, here we comfort find,
If these delinquents may but have their mind?
So we assist them now, to work it out,
They will consent as far to us no doubt.
Lets not be sparing then in this design,
But lets endeavor willingly to join,
And freely venture what we have in store;
And if that fail us, let us send for more.
Our holy Father, from our Mother Rome,
Can send Commission, that relief shall come;
Yea from all parts, upon the earth, that lies
Within his confines, which will sure suffice.
We from experience here have comfort growing
By aid already, from all quarters flowing;
Especially our brethren from the west,
Which still com swimming, in bright armor dressed.
The Epigram.
Presumptuous Papist, can you boast heerin,
Indeed you always have deluded been,
And are so strongly Catholic in will,
You think Religion, to remain so still.
Could you a building else suppose to rear,
Upon such grownd-works as Delinquents are.
To see Romes Scepter in our Realm bear sway,
From hopes of such uncertain helps as they.
Indeed your ghostly Father in his seat,
Has guld a long time, by delusions great;
And in this Kingdom has ere now appeared
A God, though like a tyrant domineered;
But his deceits, and Tyranny I trust,
Have here been proved so cruel and unjust,
That Charles, who justly does enjoy our Crown,
Will never let the Miter sway it down.
Malignants Raving.
Prodigious miseryes! is this the day,
For which we longd so long, and did so pray;
Are thus our burdens, where we were oppressed,
Our wrongs, and woes by Parliament redrest.
Unhappie Parliament, it must be so,
When you release not, but increase our woe.
You talk of ease, but we feel greater pains,
You promise freedom, but we find them chains.
You cannot be contented with our treasure,
And threatens too with prisons at your pleasure,
But you will have our lives too in your hand,
To sell away like bondslaves at command.
You force us to a fight, wherein each brother,
Must upon pain of hanging, kill each other,
And ruinate the land, yet through pretense,
So to procure our Kings, and lands defense.
The Epigram.
Monstrous productions, in our days indeed;
And you Malignants, that abortive seed,
Could you else thus like vipers kill, or worse;
Your faithful, painful, tender hearted nurse?
No, Kings and Queens, are nurses you will say,
And so do I, but this has been there way,
A Parliament has still, determined how:
And so our Sovereign has given order now.
But low our sins have sold us for a spoil,
And now our King is taken in the wile.
Will you then count our Parliament unjust,
Because they stand out to maintain their trust?
Deluded and Malignant spirits right,
Both against virtue, and your selves to fight.
You say this Court is causer of your ruin,
When it is your sins, that are you thus persuing.
Good Christians craving.
Great God who did good Hezekiah hear,
When Rabshekah was railing without fear:
Though some against thy just corrections spurn,
Yet hear their sighs whose bowels truly yerne:
Lord thou may justly make our judgments worse
When, though some pray, yet many more do curse,
And call for vengeance with a voice more high,
Then thy poor servants can for mercy cry.
This Lord, we fear, yea find it so indeed,
Or else thy sword sure should not thus proceed,
Were thou not more and more incensed by some.
Thy servants suits could not still empty come.
But Lord, thou can both ease thy servants groans,
And can restrain the wickeds rage at once,
Lord do thy mercy, and thy strength make clear,
Rebuke the wicked, show thy Saints are dear.
The Epigram.
God speed you Brother, prosper your design,
And hold your hands up, they may not decline.
You act the posture, which got once the field
When Israel made Amalick to yield.
Some boast how keys given Peter can prevail,
But you have keys, set Peter out of Gaile.
Oh turn those keys then, make the bolts to fly,
Where Paul's, and Peter's, now in durance lie.
You have the balsom, let it out be poured,
By which King Hezekiah was restored.
You have the only success in your hand,
Oh! offer it up then, it may heal the land:
Nay you have valiant Joshua's command,
Where at the sun did both return, and stand,
Our Sun's declined but promises no morning,
Oh! that you could entreat us his returning.
Our Sins provoking.
Unhappie England, that too late begins,
To see thy follies, and to blame thy sins.
Can thou accuse us now thou feelst it smart?
Who have until now, hugged us at the heart.
Lord judge between us, we are but the seed,
This land has long sown, and still sowes indeed,
Shall we be blamed then, as in all the fault;
Lord, this shows plainly, England still does hault.
Nay Lord, this Kingdom deals with the as ill;
Thou long have tild it, but it is barren still,
Or rather more unnatural and gross;
Thou sowst good seed, but it does bring forth dross
Can thou then, can thou be indulgent yet,
To such a land, too, as does all forget?
Under thy mercies fruitless, and ungrate,
Under thy judgments, but equivocate.
The Epigram.
Sin wounded England, let us see our shame;
Wounded, deep wounded, but who did the same,
Who were the bloody authors of this deed?
Here, here, we quarrel, here we cannot read.
Surely not any can this blame refuse,
But yet we one another do accuse;
Some few, indeed confess it was our sin,
But few, or none, will see our selves therein.
Oh foolish England, can we we feel it smart,
And can confess too, it is our due desert?
Yea beg for ease, would feign have healing wrought,
Yet will will not lay the plaster where it ought.
We would have ease and peace, but will not see
Our hearts within us, out of order be;
And they are the wounds, which must be searched, before
We can expect, the healing of our fore.
Gods Anger smoking.
England thou have held such tidings vain,
As told thy sins did at my thrown complain;
But now thou see they have assumed that place,
Yea dare accuse thee to thy very face.
Could not my mercies melt thee into tears?
Nor yet my threatening, sink into thy ears?
Nor ought awake the, till thou heardst the drum,
Which beats thy executioner is come.
Nay, yet thou do not, as thou should do, quake,
Thou do but slumber, art not yet awake;
But under such a letergie do lie,
That it is justice, thou should sleeping die.
Art still unfruitful underneath my word?
Art still unhumbled, nuderneath my sword?
Art still revolting? England, then I must
Be still in judgments, or I were unjust.
The Epigram.
Just God, and powerful, gracious too with all,
Or else weak mankinds comfort, were but small.
Were not thy justice, and thy strength at one
With thy compassions, Mankind were undone.
But, Lord, thou gracious simpothy sing have,
Thy justice, of thy mercies, has a taste,
And justice, doubtless, never is prevailing,
But mercy stands by, at the least, bewailing.
Then drowsy, drowsy England, are we sleeping,
When mercy for us stands by justice weeping?
Can we be careless, tearelesse here below?
When heavens do thus bewail our overthrow?
But gracious Father, whiles thy wrath is burning,
Since thus thy mercies, over us are yerning;
Mercy and justice, does in thee combine,
Oh! let thy mercies, in thy justice shine.
The Sword proceeding.
England, as I have license from thy God.
And as thy King commands me as his tod,
So I have likewise, a commission sent,
For my assistance, from your Parliament;
They writ unto me they are sore distressed,
And that thou England, are so much oprest,
That if I be not speedily persuing
To thy assistance, all will come to ruin;
Your goods, your lands, your liberries, your King,
Nay, your Religion, a most precious thing,
Are all in danger, ready to be lost,
Or into gulfes, of deep confusion tossed.
England, thou will not blame me then, I hope,
When I am drawn forth, by this threefold rope;
Can thou account that ill done at my hands,
Which God, and King, and Parliament commands?
The Epigram.
Sword, thy Commission it is large indeed,
Needs must thou wound, and needs must England
Our God, our King our Parliament commanding;
Alas poor England, what can be withstanding?
England, our sins have forced our God to wrath,
Our God, he drawn his sword of vengeance has,
His sword is falln into our Sovereigns hand,
Yea meets moreover, with a third command.
England, then let us, let us see our thrall,
Our sins are the Original of all,
Our sins have made our God to wrath inclined,
And God has all our miseries enjoined.
Let us no longer then such shifts invent,
To charge our King, or blame our Parliament:
But let us wisely, lay the blame on those
Our deadly sins, the cause of all our woes.
Our Kingdom bleeding.
Alas, I bleed, but bleeding does no good,
Because I do not bleed in tears, but blood;
Yet I must bleed, the wounds are made so deep,
And tears denyd me, J in blood must weep.
Well may I bleed, although I bleed in vain,
To see so many valiant soldiers slain;
To see my laws and freedoms, at this strait;
To see and feel my dangers, at this height:
Nay more, my King distressed, by betraying;
His subjects fore distracted in obeying;
Yea those his subjects, which I find most loyal,
Proclaimed Rebels, under the name Royal:
Besides Religion, that does lie at stake;
Must I not bleed, to see Religion shake?
Dear, true Religion, without which no doubt,
My dearest blood, had long ere now run out.
The Epigram.
The tender grape, which without pressing flows,
Is like the child, obeying without blows.
But England, this thy bleeding for thy sin,
Cannot commend thee, having forced bin.
Commend thee? no, but yet, it mend the might,
Could thou at length, yet make use of it right.
The blood of children, which the rod does draw,
Makes some for ever, stand the more in awe.
Bleeding sometimes, does life it self preserve,
In some diseases, nothing else will serve;
He is most skillfull, that thy veins has struck,
And in thy bleeding does for healing look.
Then doubtless, till he, who has let thee blood
Does see thy bleeding, does do thee some good,
He will not stanch it; England then take heed;
Thou must grow better, or else dying bleed.
Our King turmoyling.
Distressed Charles! can any heart conceit,
A King can rest, and pent in such a strait?
Our rights, our Realms, our subjects, Crown, and all;
Some mourn, some torn, some totter, like to fall.
But that which most our Royal heart does break,
Is that our subjects, should us so mistake,
As to imagine, we have an intent,
To change Religion, which we never meant.
Cannot the word be taken of our grace?
Nor Protestations, of a King take place?
Hard hearted people, or with lies possessed,
To be thus doubtful, where we faithful rest.
But know sond subjects, they that do persuade
That we regard not such a promise made,
Do but possess you with deceits unknon,
So to erect some project of their own.
The Epigram.
Dread Sovereign, when the Sunns Eclipsd, we know
The world does suffer, darkness comes below.
Can then you suffer, Englands Sun, and we,
Your filly subjects not distracted be?
Great King, we cannot, nay believe that those,
Whom you, misguided, do misse-judg your foes,
More sorrow for you, reckon you more dear,
And pray more for you, then some draws more near.
Only, dear sovereign, that which is your care,
That is, indeed, your loyal subjects fear,
Change of Religion, only this; then see,
Are those most Rebels, that thus careful be?
Oh that your highness, could this cloud dispell,
Indeed your greatness has protested well,
But men Religious, do so deeply groan,
That some suspect, you bear not rule alone.
Our Parliament toyling.
Oh froward people, or unhappie we,
That from you, can thus ill rewarded be,
We seek your safty, as our souls to save,
And yet some murmur, some mistrust, some rave.
And dare accuse us, as the cause of all
These wars, these judgments, death and thrall,
For had we, say they, curbed Ambitious will,
These hidious wars, had long ere now been still.
But, how soever, thus your spleen to vent,
You dare to utter. what we never meant;
Yet God, our conscience, and good christians know
You pay us hatred, for the love you owe;
Which God we trust, will make ere long be seen:
But in the mean time, though you vent your spleen,
It shall not dant us, in our charge in trust,
Having such witness, that our cause is just.
The Epigram.
Most Noble Champions, valiant Captains sure,
Who in such onsets, thus resolved endure:
Who would not freely venture, on that side,
Where the Commanders, are thus faithful tried?
Could the reproaches, of malignant spite,
Could multitudes, against a few to fight;
Threats, smiles, or losses, have your minds perverted,
You had, like some, this case ere now deserted.
But none of these, nor ought that might resist,
Could either draw, or drive you to desist,
Or yield to such conditions as you thought
Would by such yielding, be too decrely bought.
But some dare say, you fight against your King,
But J dare say then, you lament the thing:
But can they justly say so in this case
When you fight for him, to redeem his grace?
Religion Shaking.
Oh! England, England will thou let me go?
Can thou be blinded in thy jugdment so?
Let me? alas, instead of all remorse,
Thou art in Arms, to drive me out by force.
Thou have already into corners pent me,
As if thou have a full commission sent thee,
From some infernal powers, would domineer,
To work my utter extirpation here.
But England, England, open thy eyes more wide,
I may have worth, thou have not yet descried;
Thy God is with me, I am his, he mine,
Where I go, he goes, we in one do join.
Will thou then England, drive me out indeed,
Because that Hell, or Rome, has so decreed?
When my departure, shall thy self betray,
And drive (besides) thy God of peace away?
The Epigram.
Dear, dear Religion, from whose breasts, indeed,
We draw the milk, which succors, most at need:
Succors in want, in war, in sickness, thrall,
In death, in judgment, succors soul and all.
Can we that have so many years been nourished,
And in thy Arms so tenderly been cherished,
Prove now abortives, bastard like, or worse,
And seek to bannish, such a tender nurse?
England, then England, this no doubt has bin
A mighty aggravation of thy sin,
That this true Mother, many years unknown,
Has suckled Infants, which were not her own.
Were we not false borne, or begot indeed,
But of this Mother, true descended seed,
Could we become so cruel, as to see,
Our Mother bannish'd, sure it could not be?
Our Laws now quaking.
Sure we must perish; more then suffer now,
What else in reason, can you hence allow?
When such as on our safety, should agree,
Betwixt themselves, now, at most discord be.
Those fountains, where we had our issues granted,
Are now so sealed up, nothing can be vented;
Or if some little courrents, break away,
They run too weakly, to bear wonted sway.
Oh then you Fountains, where should we have vent,
Give us more vigor, by your joint consent;
For if you keep us thus confind, confusion
Is likely to be our, and your conclusion.
But this were dreadful, you that are the eye,
To see all ordered, under lock and key;
And we your keepers, to make all things fast,
Should, through confusion, loose our selves at last.
The Epigram.
You laws thus quaking, which decyphers sure,
You have been faulty, how can you endure,
To see your chang now? and within the same,
The heavy charge is laid unto your shame?
It is reported you have winckd at sin,
And in your judgment, often corrupted bin;
That gold has been so precious in your fight,
That judgment dazel'd, where it glister'd bright.
That poor men's cases, could not please your care,
Because your wisdoms, did their purses fear,
That either favor, fees, or force thereby,
Has made you constant in inconstancy.
Nay it is reported, you have banishd some,
And courted more, because precise become.
Then in your conscience you must needs confess,
It Is time in conscience, you should have redress.
Delinquents Plotting.
Up Noble spirits, let us now be stirring,
Let us not venture all yet by demurring;
But let us strike now, whiles the iron's hot,
For now, or never must the day be got:
Our force increases, and does still prevail,
Our foes grow weaker, and do daily fail,
We have already, such on un-set given then,
As has, you see it, into corners driven them:
Indeed they dote of comfort in the Scots,
But we, we fear not, shall prevent their plots,
And if they fail them, as they do begin,
They will grow quickly miserable men:
The Scots have promisd (toprevent this thing)
That they will never go against their King,;
But, though some few may this their faith deny;
The greater part, may put the lesser by.
The Epigram.
Hold, hold, Delinquents, boast not you too fast,
You do conclude, as if all fear were past,
And you already had the day, no less,
Delinquents use not to have such success.
But, to speak truly, as indeed you ought,
What you have gaind yet, is but dearly bought;
And though of conquest, you can boast it out,
To gull the simple, it is yet in doubt;
Nay, whatsoever you have others shown,
You yet have no accquitance of your own,
But guilty, do as Judas did in this,
Betray your Master, with a deadly kiss.
And for the Scots, of whom you dare to vant,
As if they did a Christian feeling want.
They to their Sovereign, will be true, we know,
Yet not adhear unto Delinquents though:
The Papist plotting.
Come Christian Catholics, our case is good,
And many years, yea hundred years has stood,
And still shall stand, indeed how should it fall?
Built on a Rock, as Christ did Peter call:
And though this land, this fatal land of late
Has curbd our case, and us by act of state;
Yet both the first, and most of Englands Kings,
Have shrouded under our Religions wings.
And for the present, though we dare not say,
Our King is for us, yet our Queen we may,
And though she seeks not to usurp his Crown,
Yet where she smiles, we trust he will not frown.
Dear Queens of England, you have shown good will
Except some few, to our Religion still.
And sure her Highness, who does meetly sen
So near His grace, will not our case forget.
The Epigram.
Oh! Royal Mary, one of Englands pearls,
And set within the signet of our Charles;
Yea sealed in the center of His heart;
Though you possess it, do not it pervert.
Dread Sovereign, pardon I beseech your Grace,
Though I speak rudely, and before your face:
Many good subjects, thousands, as I hear,
Are jealous of you, do some danger fear.
But Oh, what fear they? Oh dear Queen it is this
That you should cause our King to do amiss,
To change Religion, if not, go about,
To race his dear professed Religion out.
But Gracious Sovereign, let there not he seen,
Such spots as these are, in so fair a Quueen,
But make your subjects, who have hearts thus shaken,
Unto their comfort, find they are mistaken.
Malignants Raving.
Great King, whose praises do through Europe ring,
Of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
And still defender of the Christian faith,
What ever damned precise rebellion says.
Oh that your Highness knew our loyal hearts,
Who now lie pent up in disloyal parts;
We are, indeed, enforced to aid your foes,
But know dread Sovereign, this does work our woes,
If we resist, they curb us at their pleasures,
Command us, yea and rob us of our treasures;
And force us often, through their infernal spite,
To speak them fair, as if their cause were right.
But were your Highness, and your forces here,
You soon should see our loyal hearts appear;
And know dear Sovereign, it our care has bin,
And Still continues, how to let you in.
The Epigram.
Great and dear Sovereign, I your Grace beseech,
Be not misled, thus by Malignant speech,
Build not upon such bare foundations laid,
Your Throne will stagger, if no better staid.
Your Throne, dread Sovereign, and so your command,
In righteousness established will stand,
The wisest King that ever raignd, has said it,
And woe be to those wretches, have betrayed it.
Great King, and gracious, be resolved that those,
We call Malignants, have been virtues foes,
Scarce one of many, ever understood
To have been zealous, any for good.
Heavens curb them then, that to your Throne propound,
Such props as these are, which were never found;
And in much mercy, let your Highness see
Your Throne by virtue must establishd be.
Good Christians craving
Oh! thou preserver of mankind give care,
Thou God of Abraham, God of England hear,
We have thy promise, that thou will draw nigh,
In times of trouble, if we to thee cry;
We call upon thee, we beseech thy aid,
Thou did hear Abraham, when he to thee prayed,
And in much mercy, answered him therein,
To save a City, for the sake of ten.
Lord, look on England, sure there thousands be,
That unto Baall, never bowed the knee:
Thine own dear servants, who do daily stand,
Before thee weeping, for this woeful land.
Thy servants suits, are powerful in thine ears,
And thou do surely bottle up their tears.
Lord let thy spirit of compassion move
Them on those waters, and their suits approve.
The Epigram.
Lord God of Hoasts, are Englands finns so great,
That pardon for them, no means can entreat?
What not thine own, and dearest servants cries,
But still unanswerd, England bleeding lies?
Sure, surely Lord, thy servants cries are heard,
Although their suits, may be a while deferd:
Thou can as well, from being God decline,
As can surcease, from being good to thine.
Oh then you servants of the Lord proceed,
Call, cry, and spare not, God will help at need;
It may be that your backwardness in praying,
Has been some reason, God is thus delaying.
Gods anger greatly, does against us rage,
Which will not, without great entreaties swage.
And you are they, and only they indeed,
Whom God will hear, whose suits, are like to speed;
Then cry, cry strongly, never was more need.
The Neuter Temporizing.
But ere my Pensell let this picture go,
There is a Neuter must not escape me so,
Though I confess, I did till now, not mind him,
Nor is it easy, as he is, to find him:
To find him; no, fond fugitive indeed,
He knows not where to find himself at need:
So vain, and so inconstant, that each wind,
Transports the man into another mind;
Indeed he moves not by his soul, but sense,
And so both acts, and resolves from thence,
From which it comes, that in these times of fear;
He is not led by reason, but the ear.
The ear indeed, for that he makes his guide;
But see thereby to what the ass is tied:
Now when a christian should be like a rock,
And rest unmoved, he is right a weathercock,
And cannot in his resolutions tarry,
But daily changes, as reports do vary.
To day he hears he must be for the King,
The wind to morrow, other news does bring.
For Essex prospers, which does so divide
This Neuters thoughts, he doubts on either side.
From whence this Neuter does resolve, in fine,
That he will unto neither side incline;
But will become a looker on, until,
He sees indeed, which side shall have their will.
And this he reckons, is the safest way,
For then thinks he, who ever gets the day,
(...) shall find favor, doubtless, in their eyes,
As one that has been moderate, and wise.
As for Religion now, it is so contrould,
And so in doubt, he knows not what to hold;
That to be zealous, in these times, therein,
He counts mere folly, if not venial sin.
Whiles from the world, his Athiesme to hide,
He in appearance, seems on either side;
With Cavaieers, is strongly for the King;
With others, can protest another thing.
Yea enter into Covenant, perchance
To aid that side, he means not to advance.
From whence it comes, that in this time of need
His purse, is with his purpose, so agreed,
That of one cross, this Neuter will not purge it*
But as constraint, or very shame shall urge it.
And what he parts with, goes so near his heart,
As if each penny, were thereof a part;
Which is apparent, when he comes to pay it,
His sighs, and sordid language does bewray it.
Thus this close Neuter, Athiest I suppose,
Appears, but would not what he is, disclose;
But only, that way to avoid suspicion,
Does seem to sit himself to each condition.
But Lukewarm Neuters, thou that countst it foll^
To be Religious, or to seem too holy;
Or Godless Athiest, thou who can not loose,
That prize Religion, having thine to choose.
Can thou remain now such a senseless stone?
Or soulelesse creature, a mere looker on?
Now, whiles the Kingdom, in such flames does fri^
Has't not one drop of water to supply?
Now when our Sovereign, does in bondage live,
VVilt not one penny, for his freedom give.
Now whiles Religion, lying at the stake,
Begging assistance, does so deeply shake.
Have neither hand to help, nor tongue to crave,
Nor heart to pity, what thou can not save?
Sure thou art sordid, more then senseless far,
And worse by much, then most Malignants are;
They can pretend Religion for excuse,
Thou can say nothing, for thy foul abuse;
But void of all Religion, all may see,
Thou else to one side, woulst adhering be.
And whereas through thy irreligious wit,
Thou hopst, hereafter much applanse to git;
Or find much favor, at the least, it is plain
That these thy hopes, shall prove at last but vain,
For since thou will, to neither side incline,
It Is just, that both should spew thee out in fine.
I Have a second part
Lies glowing at my heart,
Which quickly would increase
To flames, might we have peace.
But such a peace, it then must be
Wherein we farther bliss may see;
Or else those sparks must doubtless die,
Which rakd up in these ashes lie.
FINIS.

