HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT: Together with the
L. CHANCELLOR'S, In Christ-Church-Hall in Oxford, On Tuesday, October. 10. 1665.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURG^, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1665.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am confident you all believe, that if it had not been absolutely necessary
to consult with you, I would not have called you together at this time, when
the Contagion has so spread it self over so many parts of the Kingdom. I take
it for a good Omen to see so good an appearance this day, and I doubt not,
every day will add to your number; and I give you all My thanks for your
compliance so far with My desires.

The truth is, as I entered upon this War by your advice and encouragement; so I
do desire, that you may as frequently as is possible, receive information of
the Conduct and Effects of it, and that I may have the continuance of your
cheerful Supply for the carrying it on. I will not deny to you, that it has
proved more chargeable then I could imagine it would have been: The addition
they still made to their Fleets, beyond their first purpose, made it
unavoidably necessary for Me to make proportionable Preparations, which God
has hitherto blessed with success in all Encounters. And as the Enemy have
used their utmost endeavors by C^lumnies and false Suggestions, to make
themselves Friends, and to persuade others to assist them against Us; so I have
not been wanting to encourage t^ose Princes who have been wronged by the Dutch,
to recover their own by force; and in order thereunto, have assisted the Bishop
of Munster with a very great sum of ready Money, and am to continue a supply to
him, who is now in the bowels of their Country with a Powerful Army.

These Issues, which I may tell you, have been made with very good Conduct and
Husbandry, (nor indeed do I know that any thing has been spent, that could
have been well and safely saved) I say, this expense will not suffer you to
wonder, that the great Supply which you gave Me for this War, in so bountiful a
proportion, is upon the matter already spent: So that I must not only expect an
assistance from you, to carry on this War; but such an assistance, as may
enable Me to defend My Self and you, against a more Powerful Neighbor, if he
shall prefer the Friendship of the Dutch before Mine.

I told you, when I entered upon this War, That I had not such a Brutal
appetite, as to make War for War sake. I am still of the same mind: I have been
ready to receive any Propositions that France has thought fit to offer to that
end; but hitherto nothing has been offered worthy My acceptance; nor is the
Dutch less insolent, though I know no advantage they have had, but the
continuance of the Contagion: God Almighty, I hope, will shortly deprive them
of that encouragement.

The Chancellor will inform you of all the Particulars.




