A CALM CONSOLATORY View of the sad tempestuous Affairs in ENGLAND.

Romans 16.7. Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners,
who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me.

Boethius. Lib. 4. Prosa 1. Imperante florenteque Nequitia, Virtus non solum
Praemiis caret, verum etiam sceleratorum pedibus subjecta calcatur, and in
locum facinorum supplicia luit; qua fieri in Regno scientis omnia, potentis
omnia, sed been tantummodo volentis, nemo satis potest vel admirari vel
conqueri.

Prosa 2. Boni ita ferunt mala inferiora, dum interim a bono summo non
deflectunt; Mali ita bonis fruuntur inferioribus summum deperdentes.

By Theophilus Craterus.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the Critical Reader.
Do, snarle, and spare not; Bite the stone till thy teeth break; if I direct
my shaft amiss, stand thou in the Green, and give aim, meet and receive the
blow, and then snarle afresh: yet give me leave to tell thee, Thy very
Reprehensions, which are wont to fly at rovers, if they pitch here, shall be
embraced as some reward to the attempt; to please the well-minded, and to
offend thee, is an equal honest suffrage. Yet lest thou should in vain
work out thy own bowels (for the detracting man slayes himself in another
wound) and spend all thy venom upon a wrong object (though thou can not
arrest my Quill to take Arms against it self, and fight down that Cause
which it cries up) lest in this slender Cottage-Fabrique, thou should choose
out some inhospitable lath of Irish wood to lodge thy poison in, I will
vouchsafe to guide and instrust thy spleen; if thou would have him whom
thou tramplest on, submit to the ingenuous conquest, and my self acknowledge
thou have hit the mark which was set up on high, and beyond my reach Prithee
tell me, that as some Quodlibeticall Jurists, can put a good face upon a bad
cause, and smooth and curle ugliness it self into a beauty: So, how fair and
rich soever the matter I treat of be, in its own pure lineaments, and the
ample dowry with which the hand of God has instated it, yet my own plain
shallowness is so unproportionable to that depth and those graces, that what I
write, like the Cuttles black Stratagem does but veyle the Angel of Light,
and discolor the clear stream with dark shadows: If this be it, Hem porro!
scopum attigisti: yet I must needs replead upon thee, to mollify the
harshnesse of thy censure in this respect, that my entire love to the Subject,
my desires being wholly wedded to it, whether it thrive or break in this world
(as no otherwise regarding the excommunicative divorce of Romish Bull, or
English Apostasy, then as frightfull Chimara's to still children) may stand up
some Apology for my unworth in judgment, and my deficiency in that Dives Vena,
which would be a match more suitable (I confess they should be Cherubims of
beaten gold, which guard the Arc, yet staves of Shitim-wood have been accepted
too.)

So I remember when some in Plutarch complained to Alexander, that a Miller was
always speaking well of him (as if a dull homespun Panegyrique were but a
scandal well breathed, and a calumny of a better air, as if a native praise
would taint a Prince, and that at least it should be fetched from Sheba) the
King replied his joy, that there was not so much as a Miller, but did love
Alexander.

I have but one grain more to make up weight, and thy own hand must throw it
into the scales: It is but this, That as thy self can not refrain to dash
and blurre such petty draughts as these, with scorn and ignominy, only because
thy inward thoughts boil and rage with this disdain till they run over, So
out of the abundance of my own heart, my mouth must speak, especially since
the former way of uttering it self is now blockt up, Praestat vel sic otiotium
esse quam nihil Agere.

A calm Consolatory view of the sad Tempestuous affairs in England.
MY business the Title tells you, is Consolatory, and not Argumentative; for
though I sometimes make an offer at Proof and Reason, yet I look upon them
but as the Widows two mites, or the paring of the shell; the Treasure and the
Food you have had, and may have from wealthier hands, though I perceive that
amongst some, this very Manna has bred worms and stanke, by reason of its
long continuance; He therefore that will still gape after knotty Proofs, and
valid Reasons, notwithstanding this prejudicate Caution (for I will not flatter
the Printer with a dry Bush) of which I know so many have been already
tendered, which could not be untyed, but like that of Gordius, only cut
asunder, Nodum in scirpo quaerit. I write not from the Philosophers Schools,
(which have now changed their Gowns to Swords, and perhaps pray that those
Swords may be turned into Pruning Hooks, not to lop off a Heresy, but to feed
themselves with the sweat of their brow) but from the Orators Deske, and no
doubt the very strain will tell you, that both the Desk, and he that leanes
upon it, are made ex eodem stipite, so that neither of them will rise up unto a
Mercury; and indeed what use is there of a Demonstration? since those, to whom
I write, are already so really convinced, as not to believe that the best
Religion, whereby they may either retain their Old Tithes, or acquire some
New-fashioned Stipend, nor that sincerest Loyalty which does neither interrupt,
nor compound their possessions, but can quietly part with all, exchanging the
Ox and the Acre, for an inward wealth, which can never be surprised; 2 Timothy
1.12.
For which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed,
for I know whom I have believed. To these I should but (...); and who will not
adjudge that loss of oil, to show the luster of the Sun by the dimnesse of
a Taper? I might rather in that Cynick sense, go light my Noonday candle, and
seek for an honest man in the open Markets, and places of public concourse,
so many of them have forsaken our Island, or else because they have lived well,
they do been latere, Colos. 3.3.
Their life is hid even here too, with Christ in God; But to those who are
either stark blind, or resolve to close their eyes, Nox and dies juxta sunt,
not the Moon only, but the Sun it self is corpus opacum, who, if all other
physic fail may at least be capable of a dos of Hellebore; and yet, even
These, will have lofty eyes, and eye lids lifted up, to see and acknowledge,
that the entire complexe engagement, both of Man and Christian, is concerned
and absolved in the Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, under which he
lives; both Tables will be reduced to these, of which if I would give you a
sensible Hieroglyphick (unless even this kind of Imag'ry be abominable, so
that the reformed eye will not endure to be preached to) I would only draw the
pictures of Moses and Aaron.

Thus far we are well agreed, but many harsh scruples, like pricks in our
eyes, and thorns in our sides, though perhaps they do not naturally grow, are
yet grafted upon these stems, such as these.

When God himself shall command me, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change, Fear God, honor the king. 1
Pet. 2.17.
Prove. 30.13. when he shall join the fears of the King, next to that of
himself, as to intimate how little he regards God himself, who slights his
nearest image, betwixt whom (like that of Phydias and Minerva) there is such an
affin'd dependency, that the glory of the Man cannot be violated, unless the
Deity share in the defacement; as we know it has been the practice of
foreign Wars to express a scorn, and pass a judgment upon the absent
person, by hanging up his Pourtrayture (and quae non cernunt frangere colla
volunt) not to adorn a Room, but to scandalize the very Gibbet with so
defamed a weight, who at length if he fall into such hands, will in vain
expostulate an escape, or plead that refuge, Sed periisse semel, satis est.
When this command is amongst some of late, not a Religious, but an abject
cowardly fear; when the Moon herself is now out-chang'd, who in all her
circuits, never beheld such a universal alteration from the Full to the Wane;
when some Field-practitioners will tell us, that to fight against the King,
consists with this fear of him, and that none of our changes are understood in
that text, there is at least some hesitation to be allowed for tender
consciences; De vita (Aeterna) nunquam satis diu deliberatur.

It is the command of God, 1 Pet. 2.18.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward: if, Indefinitely to any Master, though of
inferior rank, principally to him, who is Pater Patriae, or as Homer styles
his Jupiter,(...), Father of us poor under-mortalls, and of them also of whom
it is said, that They are Gods.

But some abroad will tell us, Ps. 82.6.
we must not be subject to a Tyrant (indeed this is a leading case, and has no
precedent, that an unmatcht clemency, unparalleld mildness should be stamped
with the brand of tyranny) but I had thought a very Tyrant also might be
froward, and that frowardness were the only exception against him, I had
thought too, that Not only, for wrath, but for conscience sake, would
unscruple all demurres of obedience, Romans 13 5.
and that humane policy would strike sail to express the Law of Christianity.

We are commanded to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13.

Yet there are some abroad will put an humane ordinance in the scales against
that of Gods, and make that balance too not as a power derivative from God (at
least in facto esse) but as inherent and essential, I doubt not but against
the wills and desires of those who Ordain; and they tell us too, what ever the
Text says, that in this case the King is not supreme, but only an equal
coordinate power, to which I can assign no more proper portentous resemblance
then the fabulous relation of some bold Naturalists of men, whose Heads stood
not upon their shoulders, but within their breasts: and though all this be
required under the form of so potent a charm- For the Lords sake-yet a miss
interpretation of some humane constitutions shall evacuate all, let the Apostle
charm never so sweetly, though to my utmost apprehension, the Laws of the Land
(or rather the popular street-glosse upon them) are a much disapportionall
Commentary on the word of God; and when I would understand St. Paul and St.
Peter aright, I should count it but a flattering digression to consult with an
Attorney, or have recourse to the Bar; nay a piece of sordid unmanlinesse to
mould my opinion after the vulgar conception of their determinations, to make
the Law of the Land the Interpreter of the Gospel, and the people the square of
That, till the people be the only Orthodox Aggregat Divine, as Themistocles son
ruled Athens, because his wife ruled him, and his son her: the very Poet has
bid the Emperor to stand more firm, and not give ground to these fond-sicke
weaklings -- Mortalia quaerunt Consilium; A^^^mius Theodosio.
Certus,Jussa capesse Dei.

I have purposely made choice of St. Peter (though the same Doctrine streams
through every pipe) his Epistle being visibly general, unrestrained to times
or persons, to prevent the empty cavil of some (whom I have met so vainly
deluded) that what was writ to the Romans, respected the then present state and
face of things, and is now expired, not obligatory in another climate; though
certainly he had forgot that their obedience was enjoined to a heathen Prince,
to a very Tyrant; as far as persecution could make him one, at least that piece
directed to the Romans, will reach to him also, as a link that draws the
whole chain after it, Whatsoever things were written aforehand, were written
for our learning, Romans 15.4. And certainly God does not take less care of Us
under the Gospel, then he did of Us under the Law; but I would feign win his
full assent, and that I may do it with less difficulty, I will afford him one
Text more, whose echo I doubt not but he will snatch up at the first rebound,
in Romans 4.22.23. It was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was not
written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him but for us also, to whom
it shall be imputed. Now if his and my salvation be preached to us from the
imputing of Faith to Abraham for righteousness, so his, and my damnation are
denounced (for eadem est ratio contrariorum) if we impenitently resist, in that
it is thereupon denounced to the Romans.

But after all, every man who has but arrived to one sentence in Latin, is
ready to beat me down with the irresistible power of Axiom, the very center in
which all their circumferentiall lines are pointed, and unite themselves to
their maine strength; (in a word, their very King, whom only they will not
disobey) Salus populi lex summa; It is indeed a cordial of sovereign use, if
rightly applied, I will not therefore dare to annull or calumniate its rich
influence, but allow it, before competent Judges, in cases merely humane, its
liberal unlimited extent and efficacy; but then what think you of Salus
summa? of a truth, that rule will only preponderate in Naturalls; it will but
obliege, and sway in affairs sublunary; thus far it may go, and no further,
unless the ways thereof be proved; for where the dictates of Heaven do
interpose to pull down its swellings, and stop its course, it is then ultra
sphaeram activitatis, and cannot, must not, agere, being resolved into one of
the Preachers unities under the Sun; for it is a rule of the God of nature, and
therefore much more uncontrollable, that it is better to serve God then man.
Act. 4.19.5.29


And in all these, I foame not out my own rude thoughts and selfe-fancies; I
vomit not what ever undigested abortive Embryowims in my own rude Brain. I
have better learnt the task of self-denial, then to believe that so
Magisteriall, as to prescribe a delirium for a case of conscience to any man,
or my self to lie under its thraldom; nor yet have I so learnt Christ, that
because God does dwell in us, because to man he has given

Eximiam linguamque capaxque
Ingenium, Manilius de Comites.
volucremque animum quem denique in unum
Descendit Deus atque habitat --
And by all these has distinguished, and preeminenced us from all his creatures
upon earth, that therefore I should blaspheme God by intituling him to any my
own sudden, rash irregular effusions, and to improve them all supra captum
humanum, by abasing that most excellent gift of God, and by making secret
inspiration a cloak to all my blemishes -- Non hae nostre de pectore voces;
Statius lib. 10.
Ille canit -- but it is he too in his loud public voice, which reaches to
all Christendom.

And yet, if in this case that rabble, who make it their discourse and pastime
to despise dominions, who revile Majesty by the Glass, and till such an Hour
refresh themselves against the King, if they will mihi manus dare, that the
King is then only to be relinquisht, when his Commands run point blanke against
those of God, which they might learn from the late Annotations upon the Bible,
as comprising under the word, Resist not only an open rebellion as Absolons
(and though in that stole Comment, they write not the word King, yet that also
is powerfully employed in the Rebellion of Absolon) but also by not yielding
obedience to their command in those things, that are not against the word of
God; where I would only propose this question, that, since we must not obey the
King against God, Whether is the King (only of all mankind) bound to execute
that advice, the actuating of which he conceives a breach of his conscience
toward God? I confess I understand not, nor yet am so inextricably irratus in
verba Magistri, as stubbornely to resist a convincing reason, if yet they will,
by drawing thus near (like a leap revearst) fly further back -- tam prope,
tam proculque -- and assume that his commands run thus; yet the common
rumors (which is the guise of those who afflict Innocence) by the charge only
in Generals; my ears have not yet tingled with the relation of This or That,
yet my own experience of his Religious deportment toward his God (which no
doubt will be recompensed in Gods time here, or unfailably in Gods eternity
hereafter) will encourage me to avouch thus far (his present condition
attesting it to be no piece of remote flattery) that there is not that Prince
under heaven, who devotes himself with more zeal (and that, such as St. Paul
requires, according to knowledge) with more holy debates and inquiries after
the grounds and depth of truth, to the immaculate service of the great God; nor
indeed do I at all wonder, that after so solid settlements, and so elaborate
trialls of the spirits, he should not now shake and waver in the faith, I
should rather wonder if he did; and certainly he who relented at the error of
Star Chamber, and High Commission, at Ship Money, etc. will not be pertinacious
in any point of Religion, of which his conscience shall be persuaded, that it
is erroneous, the upholding of which would be prejudicial to him in that Court
where he is only liable to answer as much more as the Heavens are better then
the Earth; in such a case he will easily remember, and transcribe the high
pattern from whence he is descended, rising up with as forward and pregnant a
flame for Gods own immediate honor, as his Royal Father (of ever blessed
memory, whose halcion days God restore amongst us) did for the honor of his
Church; who when the sanctum sanctorum was vilified into his Wardrope, and the
Profanation preached freely down by the Parson of that Church to his own
Sacred ears, the same day swore him Chaplain for his integrity, which made
the righteous man bold as a Lion, and commanded a quick remove of all his
Robes, of his shoes (if any were there) because the ground is holy. Yet I
confess (though I would never speak of a King but with reverence, and presume
I do that too, whilst I only prefer God before him; neither Pope nor people)
should a slip in this kind, possibly escape him (as much as I esteem Monarchy,
and prise the gift at Plinys own rate, Nullum prastabilius aut pulchrius munus
Dei quam castus, and sanctus and Deo simillimus princeps) I would wave my
obedience here, In Panegit. ad Tr.
and submit to heaven, because as upon Earth, though I must submit to other
governors, 1 Pet 2.14.
as unto them that are sent by him, yet I must submit to the King as supreme;
thus as the King is head of the people, so as the King is Vicegerent to God,
though I must submit to the King as being sent by him ( For by him Kings
reign, Prove. 8.15. Dan. 2.22.
it is he that sets them up) so I must submit to God as supreme governor of
all the world, for he is a God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings: and where the
commands of these clash and interfere, where they are not subordinate, but
contradistinct, because I cannot obey both, I must desert my Prince, and this
is more my duty then disloyalty: the Philosopher has marked it with his (...);
Epictet. c. 18.
which is the sense of our Savior himself upon the Mount (the very place
elevating our obedience, and being it self part of the Sermon) No man can serve
two Masters, for he will hold to the one, and despise the other, Mat. 6.24.
ye cannot serve God and Mammon: In the highest and only instance, it is not, I
do not obey my King, but I cannot; yet even in this, I would be loath to be
altogether dis-subjected; I will still obey him passively, according to the
most commendable example of Scripture, and the purest practice of the Primitive
times under the Heathen persecute s, and not vim vi repellere: neither would I
so much as bring a railing accusation against him: the Prophet Daniel has
taught me a more suitable address even from the Lions den, (...) 21.
O King live for ever! nay were I to speak with him from Gods own mouth, and
to reform his errors against heaven it self, though in all cases, this alone
would admit of the harshest reproof, yet even in this case (though I am well
aware, that such particular commands are now expired, and that the written word
is the only rule of righteousness) an humble entreaty should be my severest
reprehension; it should be, with the Prophet Jeremy, Obey I beseech thee, the
voice of the Lord which I speak unto thee, Ch 38. v. 20.
and with St. Paul, I know thee, O King, to be expert in all customs and
questions, wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently; Acts 26.3.
nay should I dare to question him in principles, and fundamentalls of
Religion, King Agrippa, beleevest thou the Prophets? I would quarrel down my
own boldness and subjoyne St. Paul's check upon my too forward insolence, I
know that thou beleevest, ^.27.
else if I set my tongue loose to speak evil of so high a diguity, be my
cause never so good, and my affliction never so great, the King does but
persecute me, and I the King.

And throughout all this my intention is very far from defaming any of those
Honorable Members of either House, who are summoned by the Kings Writ, and the
Kings Authority, to consult de arduis Reip: Negotiis: the Heathen himself will
teach me better Divinity, (...): Tat. 9. lib. ult.
whose ever curiosity or prejudicatenesse shall cull out a Libell hence,
because he would be thought profound, and such a one as can search and pierce
deeper then common eyes, if he will needs swim where he should but wade, whilst
he does thus Male recitare without the expense of a new printed Disclaimer, I
do already disavow the Adulterated sheets and lay them at his door, as being
become the Reading author. I dare boldly hope who ever shall suspect those
great and high names of sinister designs upon the Kings honor and power (for
there is no place so high, not the very Throne, no person so upright, not the
very King, but these wild days will calumniate) of hollow juggling,
protestations to God and all the world, that they did never really intend to
contrive our Dread Sovereign into the most flourishing Prince in Christendom,
that all their many, many Declarations did but veil their own politic ends
under so glorious a mask of faith and sincerity, acknowledging themselves no
less then humble and loyal Subjects from that place of Judicature, where they
are as great as earth can make them: I dare boldly hope the time is now hard at
hand, in which it will appear all this was no mask, but their very face, no
forgid comeliness, but a native unpainted glory, and that Aaron, and all the
children of Israel shall see Moses and behold the skin of his face to shine
also; Exodus 34.30.
that their often attesting God, and adjuring us by so great a Name, Jerem.
42.5.
so true and faithful a witness, so just and revengefull a Judge of Falsehood
in such an act especially, and such an omission being circumstanced up to so
high a nature by the Representative National capacity of the joynt-persons,
whereby the Honor of God (of which he is so jealous, Exodus 34.14.
that it is his very Name, Esa: 42 8.48.32.
and which he will not impart to another) would not barely suffer, but be led
captive and insulted upon as conquered and invassalled to a greater honor,
will be looked back upon as a Religious vow and Prophecy, and their present
immediate actions conspire into a devout performance and lively fulfilling of
them, which otherwise would be but a dead, nay a killing letter, let any foul
mouth speak what infection it please; Such Wise men cannot but consider, that
the interest of a whole Kingdom is involved in such Public Vows, and by the
violation of them, and the Majesty of God must lie at stake, gasping for the
dregs of Gods last judgments, and such good men will not but prevent so
universal a mischief, so that I will not fear under the conduct of such
Pilots, a sudden Transmigration, a new living -- (...), that without crossing
the Seas, we should all start up Russians and Aethiopians, not that our glory
will be extinguished at home, which shines so clear abroad: Doctrus p. 80.
for the Italian, (or else his Favorable translator) ingenuously preferring us
to all the world, does give us this generous mark of disparity from those
(because amongst them, There is nothing worthy of observation, more then the
Tyrannous controuling of Laws, and the immediate prostitution of all sorts to
the imperious will of the Prevailer; and again, Anglia libera Gens: page 94.
As my business will be anon to encourage those, who have lost their Fleece
for their own conscience sake, to suffer Cheerfully, not only so, but that
they would Frui Diis Iratis, take possession of their loss, and enjoy their
misfortunes, not only so neither, but that they would possess their own
souls also in their patience, without which a man is besides himself, Luke
21.19.
and not a man: so it is now, that they would not forestall the great Court by
unwotthy fears, but suspend a while, and in imitation of the meek Lamb of
God, Isa 53 7. Acts 8 32. v. 3. v. 10.
not open their mouths before the shearers, and see if like Jobs, their flocks
and herds will not be returned with interest, the seven thousand in the first
Chapter, to foureteen thousand in the last: for my own part, though I am much
of their persuasion (and pray still that I may be so) who can like the resolved
Emperor, (...), and if I stray in judgment be content to do penance here to
the utmost farthing, that I may escape the eternal prison by an Involuntary
unbargain'd deviation, yet I freely confess my self so complicately
guiltfull; that transgressions are so twisted round about me, that I am tied
and bound with the chains of them; that I have drawn iniquity with cords of
vanity, and have sinned as it were with a cart rope; and again, Esa. 5.18.
with that rope have plucked down vengeance from heaven upon this Kingdom,
that I must confess (what evil soever some men may call it) there is no malum
paenae in the City but the Lord has done it; and if any shall ask me, Amos
3.6.
has not my wickedness cried aloud for this scourge? some charitable man may
return this answer, in an humble astonished sense, And he was speechless, I
had rather strike my guilty breast, then make a Pharisaicall Oration of
innocence, who have nothing else of good in me, but the acknowledgement of my
ill, and the justice of God upon it, and this may perhaps entitle me to some
one quality of Seneca's Goodman, Quicquid viro bono accidit, Epist 76.
aequo animo sustinobit; sciet enim id accidisse lege divina qua universa
procedunt. In such a case of trialls the very Atheist (like the Apostate Julian
with his Vicisti Galilaee) leaves out himself, and sets up a God, Lucian. 1
Tom Timon.
(...), which old repentant Eli, upon Gods sentence against him, has
indenizon'd into a Scripture-expression, Sam. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and if we may apply another
orthodox sense to the same words (the practice both of the ancient Fathers, and
of the Modern most learned devout Writers,) It is our Saviors almost
literally, It is I, be not afraid.

From what I have hitherto said, Mat. 14.27.
as the severest eye cannot discern a quarrel against my King, to whom there
is not only an obligation laid upon my words, but my very thoughts are also
tied up; Eccles. 10 20.
so I hope, no moderate indifferent man will arraign any piece of my language
against his great Court; I know I am bound there also, for Thou shall not
revile the Gods (i.e.) as some read the Judges; Exodus 22 28.
I would feign persuade my self, that at least, that one ingredient of an
entire Christian, spreads it self throughout my spiritual composition, to
love the whole world, I mean the persons, for I was never baptized into that
hatred, and would be loath (which in another kind of contraries, is the
devils tallest stratagem to stir up and inflame a contentfull pride out of
humility it self) to make my love of one (though of him who is the very breath
of our nostrills, and whose safety is worth ten thousand of us) protect,
Lament. 4.20. 2 Samuel 18.3.
and patronage my contempt of some others.

In the next place, give me leave to speak a few words in the behalf of my
languishing mother, the Church, and you shall have them as from a true son of
the Church, in the spirit of meekness.

In which there are three points of moment, which struggle for the Truth; Power
of Ordination, Jurisdiction, and Discipline: The two former I conceive to be
essentially in the Bishops as succeeding the Apostles; for the latter I humbly
conceive the form already established by full act of Parliament, to be the
purest in Christendom: All these I shall now much wrong, as being removed from
the advantage of books, which led me away a willing captive to them my
unconstrained opinions, having not tasted the edge of any sword, but that of
the Spirit which has subdued my very mind, yet I shall venture upon the
strength of that reason, quae nec decipitur, nec decipit unquam, at least to
woo a Toleration of them.

I have some Scripture by me for the former, though I wish I could readily
recall those other texts also, which have so irrefragably convinced my assent.

In the 6 of Acts and the 2. The twelve called the multitude of disciples unto
them, and said, v. 3. Seek ye out among you men of honest report, full of the
Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business: which Dr.
Gerhard applies to the Ordination of Deacons, and if to the appointing of them
the care of the Apostles did descend, much more to the appointing of Priests or
Presbyters, being a superior Order; it is the kind of argument a fortiori,
with which our Savior himself does encourage his Apostles, against the fear
of Persecution and death it self. The very hairs of your heads are all
numbered, Fear ye not therefore, Mat 27.30.
not them that can kill the body; nor did the Apostles only do this, but the
injunction lay upon their successors the Bishops, upon Timothy the first
Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, Lay hands suddenly on no man: upon Titus
the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, 1 Ep. 5 c. 22. v.
For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou should ordain Elders in
every City. The case is thus far plain; that it has been so, 1 Chapter 5 v.
it is plainer yet, that it may be so, by the Concession of the greatest
Divine-Antagonists, who having received their orders from such hands, perform
their Ministerial function without any new qualification. Now since their
power is confessed lawful on all hands, and necessary on some, the design
certainly of enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, and setting up his throne in the
hearts of men, might go on more cheerfully, whilst that way of receiving it,
is indulged to those thousands who can no otherwise receive it. It is as true
as Scripture, Except we eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood,
St John 6.35.
we have no life in us. That flesh and blood are imparted in the Eucharist,
that Eucharist by the Ministers of the Word; that those whom the Bishops
ordain, can administer the Sacrament is granted by All, that those who are
otherwise ordained, cannot say also that they are not ordained, is believed by
many (by very much the greater part of Christendom) and what then shall become
of those many souls, who hunger and thirst to be thus made righteous, who
passionately cry out, Lord evermore give us this bread, v. 34.
when they believe the Hand that reaches it out, might to as good purpose hold
forth a stone? and when they call for this blood to drink, they shall only
find that the Well is deep, and there is nothing to draw: Certainly this is
not such a common diet, John 4 6. 1 King. 17.6.
that with the Prophet Elijah, we should be beholden to the Ravens to bring us
bread and flesh in the morning (that bread which is flesh also) I mean such of
whom we suspect they have nothing else of the Priest about them, but the black
they wear: I cannot before I proceed, but humbly desire the Reader to be as
impartial as my self, and not to conceive any thing here to be dispatched by
an Incendiary, but from a conscience which groans under these very pressures,
and poures it self out to heaven for a relief. I would not (like her who
dreamt herself with child of a Firebrand) add the least spark to the
combustion already made, but only beg a plaster for the sores and scorchings
which rankle and fester our soul, in the best part of it, our mind: when thou
have believed my sincere purpose, I may go on to tell thee, that if we look
upon all Christendom and all antiquity, the universality of time and place
will be out loud Advocates: if I should tell a heathen, who like King Agrippa,
was almost persuaded to be a Christian, how much the Church of Rome agrees with
us, it should be no disadvantage to the General Cause, and it should have
moment too amongst our selves, wherein we are at one, unless with the
Invocation of S^^, we would also renounce the calling upon God, because the
Papists say, Our Father, especially (which had its full operation upon that
learned compacted friend of Truth, and enemy of Romish error) that our
acknowledgement must render unto God, the things that are Gods, Sir Edwin Sands
in spec. Eur. p. 77.
considering that all good things are from God, though they be found in his
very enemy, but amongst the Reformed, how lately has that Hierarchicall
extirpation prevailed in what a Nooke of the earth? He that remembers not when
it was rooted and brancht out of Scotland, is but yet a child; (he that can
tell me what blessings that Kingdom has since enjoyed besides English gold
and the impoverishment of her sister,) erit mihi magnus Apollo: for the
Reformed part of France, I remember learned Moulin, about six years since, has
printed their desires for Episcopacy, and their submission only to this fatal
necessity, that because there cannot be two Bishops of one Diocese, and
because, in that Government there must be a Popish Bishop, the Reformed part
must therefore only wish that happiness which they cannot enjoy is for
another Reformed Church, I remember their printed prayer, That God would have
mercy upon them in this behalf, for their want of Bishops, and the Comment
upon it, that whereas they desire mercy, they acknowledge the offense. For our
selves (I desire pardon for such a solemn Truth, as needing no fresh wound,
since I bleed whilst I speak it) if that government were abolisht by the same
full power which so frequently enacted (though with humility, I speak it, long
since Statutum est irreversibly in the Law of God, and to such Laws I presume
those of the Land, did never intend a confirmation by way of authority, because
they stand already upon a firmer Basis, but declare their submission) it would
be a grief as irremedilesse as unsupportable; but rebus sic stantibus, the
Aequilibrium is much doubted, when the party of one professed contrary opinion,
are the Judges and executioners of the other, the Assertors of it being yet
unexamined whether they can plead not guilty, it is a just sentence even
against a just sentence, part inandita altera Aequum lices stat^^rit hand
Aequus est, be they never so right in the bonum, the want of the bone spoils
all; it is a case not much unlike which we reprehend (and must for ever) in the
Council of Trent, That which is a stigma to them, will scarce become our
ornament, and decere Curios: I cannot but well relish the ingenuity of the
Orator, Cum de Religione agitur. T. Coruncanum, Cicero de natura Deorum Lib. 3.
P. Scipionem P. Scavolam, Pontificis Maximis non Zenonem aut Cleanthem aut
Chrysipum sequor; As in point of Religion he would not take advice from the
Philosophers morality (though that touched the borders of the garment, till they
almost kissed each other) so they should not be only Pontifices, but Maximi, whom
he would have recourse to; I cannot so far captivate my judgment, but this
will still be a stumbling block.

For these reasons, and for many other, I would gladly listen to, at least a
Toleration of their Government, and the old form of prayers (which should not
like us that use them, decay for having lived so long, but grow more vigorous
from their very age, if it were not a principle removed beyond the danger of
proof, why God will ever be, I would give this reason, because God always
was) and this, not only to satisfy my Oaths, (which as one well says of
friendship, Amare Non cito desisto, non temere incipio, should not be taken
without deliberation, nor forgone with rashness: and as another, Let thy
acquaintance be many, but thy friends few, though I may resolve often because
those may be broken, and my faith stand whole, yet I would seldom swear,
because a Violation of that will waste my conscience) but also that I might
obtain the same equal favor from my Brother-Protestants, which has sometimes
been indulged our Religion from the harshest enemies of it and us, nothing so
cruel as to be wounded by those of our own House. Quod tu facias, hoc mihi
paete dolet, a toleration to all those of the Augustane Confession was granted
by the Emperor in Conventu Ratisbon. anno 1532. nay by the Pope himself,
Lampad. Mellific. p. 429.
anno 1533. Pontifex Clemens misit legatum Hugonem Randonem ad Saxoniae Ducem
Electorem Protestantem, by whom he signified the Grant, it was the very year,
in which King Henry 8 did deficere a Papa, and our whole Kingdom became
generally Protestants; so that it is not any bold upstart, vnhear'd of suite,
but what has been approov'd, allowed, countenanc't by repeated Acts of
Protestant-Parliaments, if yet the Commencers themselves are branded with the
Idolatrous name of Papists, they are only such who will discourse, and preach,
and write against them, though Death stand in the gap, and swim in the Prophets
pots; besides, none can tell how much it would assuage the heats and risings
within, how it would stop the mouths of many against Oppression, in opening
them to their God. But to attempt a very scripturall reason, and at least by
consequence, and rational deduction, to show that this request is agreeable to
the Christian Policy of a very Paul, who, in Acts 15, forbad blood, and things
strangled to be eaten, only to comply with the Half-won Jew, that he might be
wholly Christian; now let the case be ballanc't; the abstinence from those was
fully abrogated by the infallible Authority of Christ Himself; I doubt not but
the modesty of each Abrogatour here, will acknowledge himself singly, and the
whole body to be fallible, because men; the permitted abstinence from blood
(under color of Religion and conscience) was as opposite to Evangelicall
Doctrine, as Judaisme to Christianity; such a difference betwixt observation,
and not-observation of our Ancient Liturgy, was never yet mentioned; and that
this is not the drift and sense of the Author only, but of the present
Assembly: you have the whole of it, at least collaterally in their Annotations,
the words are; he shows that these Ceremonies, to what they were accustomed
many years, could not without great distractions be abolisht, until they
could better learn their liberty in Christ. and that the word Necessary, v.
28. is not to be referred to the Ceremonies themselves, but to the present
occasion and persons; I will not pursue my purpose from the word accustomed,
nor from the, suddenly, but leave it to the judgment of any single eye,
whether there be not fairer, at least tolerability, in all respects, for this,
then for those.

That there should be a sub and supra, in the Church I conceive equitable from
the difference in parts and abilities, not only of the same kind, though not
of the same degree; but if the gifts be severally looked upon, we shall find
them not only gradually, but specifically distinct, and I am well aware of my
own insufficiency either way, which would easily persuade my Canonical
Obedience to the abler man. Cor 12 28.
God has set forth some, first Apostles, etc. and then he presently asks, are
all Apostles? are all Prophets? etc. from which Method I suppose I may
reasonably conclude, that God has set forth some more peculiarly enabled by
one gift, then others, and therefore think it unfit to be equally claimed by
all. We are already in a Conflagration; but we may remember that the whole
world was set on fire, when the Novice-Phaeton would needs hold the Reins, and
misguide the Chariot of the Sun: If yet this Parlty must be enforced, I would
desire that Churchman to ruminate the reply of Lycurgus (one of the wisest
Legislators that ever sat at Stern) who, when he was solicited to set up a
Democracy, slack't the importunity of the rash adviser with a (...): whereupon
he went away, like the rich man in the Gospel, very pensive for he had many
Servants, and shall Gods House endure that confused Anarchy which thy own
abhorres? Certainly, if we think it meet to transcribe from Heaven, we
shall find that without repining of the stars, (...) ^^ 10.
God made two great Lights, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the
night, and shall it be otherwise with those who are called the Light of the
world? Shall the seven Golden Candlestickes be remooved, Mat 5 14. Rev. 2 22.
or else a Blazing Star, or a Rush be put into them? Nay, in Heaven, amongst
the very stars, one differs from another in glory, and when your selves come
thither, 1. Cor. 15 ^^.
though every one of you shall be full of glory; yet there shall be a different
measure according to your several Capacities (Christ has told us there shall
be a least in the Kingdom of Heaven) and I have somewhere read it well
illustrated by glasses of a different size, Math. 11.11.
dived into the River, of which though one holds more, none is fuller then
another, the Amphora and the Vrcens are both brimmed up, and therefore no room
either for more Drops into it self, or for Envy at another stream, to which
I may apply that of Seneca, Hic plus edit, ille minus, quid refert? Vterque iam
satur est, hic plus bibit, Epist. 85.
ille minus, quid refert? Vterque non sitit.

Yet if the Episcopal word be only excepted at, as I have heard some moderate
judging adversaries, give in their verduit, that the Authority must be
retained, or else themselves shall fall out with any new intrusion) and the
name and thing may still be allowed us, if a Pastor or a super-intendent (the
Latine-English of(...)) shall turn out the Notion, and leave behind the Rem
substratam, I should not much strain at it, (though I know not how justly
queazy others might be) and fear the Title be only parted with, as an
Earnest, that all the Appendages shall follow, though any Bargain may be
legally evacuated with the loss of Earnest) such a Gnat, though with
reluctance, we might perhaps at length swallow, though the other Camel would
downright choke us, and like the Picture of Jonah, in the Whales mouth, stick
in our throat for ever; it would neither feed us it self, and would also stop
up the Avenew, that no other sustenance might have passage; in this case I
should bless God for one of Jobs Messengers, that the Caldeans had fell upon
these and the like Camells, and carried them all away, Job. 1.17.
as fearing also that such Beasts of space and compass, might fill up the
narrow way, and lie as another Gate before the strait-gate of Heaven to lock us
out. Math. 7.14.
But it is of late said by the Compilers of the Annotations upon the whole
Bible, that this kind of Clergy is inclined to Popery, Preface page 2.
and have used means for the introduction of it (that I may not over-expresse
any thing, and my relation be charged with malice, I will give it you in their
own language, which is, of it self, so high that I confess I have not fancy
enough to soar at that rate) And if ever those Masters of the Mystery of
iniquity (having a long since set on foot their design to make the Kingdom
retrograde in Religion, in turning toward the Tenets of Doctrine and Form of
Worship of the Romish Church) have any cause to mount it on horseback, it must
be by putting down the most found, sincere, and zealous preaching of the Word,
as by some experimental preparations we have seen of late, and our reason
may foresee and forecast for the time to come, for this has been, and it is
like may be hereafter their manner, who labor to extinguish (at least to
eclipse) the light of Evangelicall Doctrine; first, by picking a quarrel with
the most sufficient, diligent, and conscionable Preachers, to stop their
mouths, imprison their persons, or to drive them from their Country -- Pudet
haec opprobria -- a heavy charge I confess to betray the truth, but since the
bare assertion is the whole argument, I shall think it an honest payment to
return that Romish answer -- Ais, Nego, unless themselves introduce a
Doctrine of the R. Church, and speak infallibly; yet, if these kind of men
thus insimulated of Apostasy, have not been the stoutest Propugners of our
Religion against the Church of Rome, many of them by writing, some by sealing
the Truth with their blood, I have read no books, to the means they are said
to use, for the incompassement of so dark a design, I will not return that
answer, Quid minus est, non dico Oratoris, sed hominis, quam id objicere
Aduersario, Tull. Philip. 2.
quod ille si verbo negarit longius progredi non possit, qui objecerit, the
times give me another reply, and I am sorry I must par pari refer, lay down
payment in the same coin -- Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur; that many
sound sincere, and zealous Preachers are put down; that the mouths of the
most sufficient, diligent, conscionable Preachers are stopped; that the persons
of many of the^ are imprisoned here, and many others have got leave to be
driven out of their Country. Servi ut taceant, Jumenta loquentur, and Canis,
and Posts, and Marmora -- of which, though we, who are yours, and would be
their Servants in Christ, should be as silent to you, as we are to our Flock,
the stone out of the wall shall cry, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it, Habak 2.1^.
for want of the Antiphonaries, the Vox clamantis in the Priest, and the
responsals of the people; for that at the present there are many hundred
Churches in England lie speechless, or have no constant certain known voice
for the sheep to follow, the Epitome of it, London can witness at large: This
Altum silentium is but a sad offspring of Reformation, especially when the
general cry of it in those common mouths, where there is vox and praeterea
nihil (and that not half so (weet as the Nightingale,) does most vehemently
breath it self against dumb dogs, unless this late sacred silence be deemed
extaticall, and a devout imitation of that spirit, Romans 8.26.
which sometimes inwardly makes intercession for us with groans which cannot be
uttered.

But where I said Priest, I may perhaps be asked, why I did not call him a
Presbyter or Elder? and it is not much amiss, if I had called him so; but
then, let me briefly clear in what acception I would take the word, and
acknowledge my information received from that learned impartial Indagatour of
Truth, Jos. Mead B. D. in his Diatribae, or rather from God by him, (for I may
more immediately apply that here to a full explainer of Gods own word, which
Zanchius acknowledges as a due panegyrique to Aristotle, Tom. 1. pars 2. lib.
4. c. 2.
Ad singula sophismata dignoscenda, utilissimam nobis prabuit operam
Aristoteles, imo Deus per Aristotelem.

It is in his Tractate upon 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well,
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. From whom I learn that
the New Testament uses the word (...), for the Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, that hence was raised the Saxon word Priester; and from that
(neither from Jew nor Pope) the English word Priest: Hence some will have two
sorts of Elders, the Ruling-Elders from the first words, and the
Teaching-Elders from the last; but the ancient Fathers, Chrysostom, Jerome,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Primasius Oecumenius or Theophylact, as they had no
Ruling-Elders, so from these words understood Priests only: The words from the
original would be thus rendered, Let the Elders that rule well,(...), chiefly
those of them who labor. So that there are two duties, but not two sorts of
Elders; so Chrysostom, and other Greek Writers.

Another Interpretation is, that the Apostle speaks here of Priests and
Deacons, considering both as Members of the Ecclesiastical consistory; and
then the words bear this, Let the Elders that rule well (whether Priests or
Deacons) especially the Priests who rule and labor also, without this be
meant, no provision is made here for Deacons, which is improbable to be
omitted, seeing the very Widows are cared for in the verse before.

Others admit two sorts of Elders, but both Priests, the one residentiary, who
were affixed to certain Churches, and so did (...); the other of such, that
Traveled to preach the Gospel where it was not, or to confirm it where it was
preached, to this latter sort the (...) may relate, being used by St. Paul in
this very sense, 1 Cor. 15.10. (...), For it is manifest, he traveled much
more then they all. Now whether a Text capable of so various exposition, be a
sufficient (as it is the only) foundation for a New government never heard of
in the whole Church of God, since the Apostles time, till this last age, He
that can judge, let him judge.

But what if from hence we also grant them, Lay Elders, not Church Officers,
but Civil Magistrates? So we read of the Elders of Israel, of the Elders of
Judah, of the Elders of the Priests, of the Elders of the people; and then the
sense is, Let the Elders which rule well (even the Civil Magistrate also)
especially those (Ecclesiastical Elders) that labor in the word. Is not this
good sense? And does not the Apostle begin this Chapter with an Elder in the
larger sense, V. 1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the younger men as
brethren. So St. James calls the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, Ch 5.14.
(...) as it were in distinction from (...), the Elders of the Church being one,
and those of the Commonwealth another. Nor is this exposition ambitious, as
preferring the Elders of the Church before those of the Commonwealth, for the
name of Elder is never given in Scripture, to the supreme Magistrate, but to
the subordinate only.

I have Analised this piece from an heroicke pen, that I might not wholly
frustrate HIS READER, but tender something worthy his eye; I confess my self,
if I were displumed of my borrowed ornaments, and looked upon in puris
naturalibus as empty and naked as Aesops Crow after Restitution made; but
withal would have thee remember, that Truth also is wont to be limbed naked,
and that the drawn colors are not put upon her, but are herself. I count my
self the more happy, whilst I do thus, Aliena vivere quadra, yet so too,
that the taste of my own judgment does relish and approve the meat, though
another provides the dish, it is my own stomach, which makes the concoction,
and bids the diet sustain me.

The next sad object, which would be grieved for, is the utter change of our
form of worship in our public prayers to God, and woe is it with the repute
of our first and second Reformers, whose Ashes would deserve very ill of
mournful posterity, fit to be racked out of their Urnes, and (if the Liturgy
there be queathed to us, were indeed such an Idol as some black mouths would
make it) like the dust of Aarons Calfe, to be strawed upon the water, Exodus
32.20.
and we as the Israelites be compelled to drink of that brook in our way, if
their undiscreet piety, their zeal without knowledge, had defiled our worship
of God into such an entire abomination, as that it is left incapable to be any
other way reformed, then by exact abolishment, by a very contradiction; no
great need of a tough laborer to winnow that harvest, and separate the chafe
(if there be any) from the wheat, none, of a choice subtle head-peice to
distinguish Truth from colors, and reality from error, to purge out the one,
and to polish, refine, and approve the other, when the impartial doom shall
strike at all, not tainted with a (...) unallured with the beauties and graces
of the best face amongst them, which could implead no exception from that
sweeping common ruin -- Vna litura potest -- should the Spanish Inquisition,
Isay. 14 23
or the Popes Bulls; nay, should the Sword, and Alcoran of Mahomet (which have
both been wont to take their progress together, and to succeed alike; the
Alcoran has been the Book, but the Sword, the Pen) should all these defloure
our shore with uninterrupted passage, the worst of them could do no more then
put down All; pardon me if this sounds like passion, and a boisterous Surge
furrows the Calm face I promised, such a loss affects the most sensible
part, it touches to the quick of the soul, quod in anima tenerrimum est, and
the weight of it must squeeze out a word and a sigh, tread the Wine Press, and
mark if it do not bleed; thou can not so much as beat thy own drum, but it
will speak till it deafes thy ears with clamor: Yet all this noise, like
those sobs after the departure of a best friend, do not murmr at God, for
any Instrument he shall please to begirt with his permissive Commission to go
out, and destroy, to root out (I and branch out) and to pull down our most
holy desires, because of our former neglect of them; we acknowledge it just in
him to let our after-sins be an additionall punishment to those which went
before; so that what ever is here said, is but an unreflecting bewaylement of
our own sad condition, and I hope, as it is lawful for us to be wretched, it
is so too, to bemoan our selves, and not to let God alone (though we interpose
not amongst men) till he restore these blessings.

For the lawfullnesse, nay the Energy of set Forms of Prayer, because I
confess my self too low of wing, and not piniond for such a slight, capeable
of so much majesty of natural, historical, and scripturall reason, with which
it is richly furnishd by those solid, substantial pens, some of whose
deliberations I have formerly perused, and some I have now by me (and thank
God for all, that I may give you the more light, and not eclipse them, I shall
impart to you the Stream and the Fountain, their reasons, and the Authors
together, with some slender supernumerary account of my own observation and
greivance, though I well know this will only call back your intent eye from
the magnificent buildings, and stately inward ornaments to beg at least one
broken glance upon the homely disfigured out houses.

Where first, Mr. Mead will tell you, In his Diatribae page 1.
that our Saviors Prayer is prescribed, not only as a Patterue, though so
also, Pray thus, Math. 6.9. but in the very Form of these words, when you
pray(...) say, say these very words, Luke 11. v. 2.
Our Father, where it is marke-worthy that the delivery of this Prayer in St.
Matthew, as part of Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, was not upon the same
occasion, nor at the same time, as that in St. Luke, which was upon a special
motion of his Disciples at a time when himself had done praying; that of St.
Matthew in the 2. that of St. Luke in the 3. year after his Baptism; whence it
follows that his Disciples took that in St. Matthew, for a Pattern only, and
not for a Form; had they taken it for a Form also, they were already
provided, and then need not still ask how to prays that they may take it for
a Form also, it is commanded to be performed in haec verba(...): This was a
precedent and warrant to his Church to give the like Forms.

Next he tells us, the practice of the Old Testament is a good rule to follow
in the New, and instances in those 2 set Forms, appointed by God himself,
Numb. 6.23. On this wise, Deuteronomy. 26.13. Then thou shall say I have brought.

Next, that the Book of Psalms was the Jewish Liturgy, or the chief part of
their vocal worship in the Temple, evidenc't by the Titles of the Psalms,
which commend them to the several Quires in the same, to Asaph; to the Sons of
Korah, to Jeduthun, and almost 40 of them to the Magister Symphonia in
general; the like we are to conceive of those which have no titles, as of the
105. and the 96 Ps. which we find in 1 Chronicles. 16.7. to be delivered by David
into the hands of Asaph and his brethren for Forms to thank the Lord: we our
selves also, and all the Reformed Churches sing the Psalms, not only as set
Forms, but set in Meeter (i. e.) after a humane composure; are not the Psalms
set Forms of confession? Of Prayer? Of praising God? If they say these are
rehearsed only as Chapters, for Instruction (though my own general
observation amongst military men, and others disinclined to our Liturgy, will
reply them to be their devotionall, and not only their harkening part, else
certainly they would give as favorable and submisse an Audience to a Samuel,
and a Matthew, as they do to a Hopkins, and a Sternhold, they would not else
be so familiarly covered to a Prophet, and an Evangelist, when they appear
themselves, and bare presently to the advice of a David, when he only comes
abroad by proxi, and the King is lessened in the Ambassador; unless perhaps
the Reverence is the more, because, however he is now disguised, he was once a
King: Though I never forbear to communicate in this Matter-Liturgy; yet I
always look upon them cum venia, as an under-forme in the School of Liturgy,
whose skill I never yet heard any dare to equal, with those grand
Archi-Compilors, whom a very stake and faggot could not confute) yet no doubt
we may, and ought sing the Psalms as they in the Old Testament did; the
Churches of Israel used the Psalms, for Forms of praising, and invocating
God, what else mean those forms, cantemus Domino, psallite Domino etc? But
there are two more direct, and express Testimonies. 1 Chronicles. 25.1. It is
expressly said of the Sons of Asaph and Jeduthun, that their Office was to
Prophecy with a Harp, to give thanks, and to praise the Lord. 2 Chronicles.
30.21. We read that the Levites, and the Priests Praised the Lord day by day
singing with loud Instruments unto the Lord: and lastly to leave no place for
further doubt, we read, Ezra 3.10.11. that the Levits, the Sons of Asaph were
sent with Cymbals to praise the Lord after the Ordinance of David King of
Israel, and that they sung together by course, in praising and giving thanks:
Thus it was then, and thus it should be now, for the Priest is called the Month
of the people, whose Mouth he is not; if they are unacquainted with what he
says. It should be so for uniformity; for the Church being a mystical body,
cannot better testify her unity before God, then in her uniformity in calling
upon him. Thus far he to whom I also refer thee in the same Tractate for an
ample satisfaction to all voluntary extemporaneous prayer in public.

To these I will add some few reasons (yet so that there shall be (...) an
Ilyad of proof bosomed within the slender compass of a Nut-shell) which I have
borrowed from Dr. Hammond, In his practical Catechism.
and which do less coincidere with the former, whose holy life, who ever
knows, will easily believe he is such a man who does not stare a partibus is
of no side, but Truths and Christianity, and that his reading had taught him
the practice, and the practice wrote his book.

Where first let the practice of our dying Savior give life to the legality of
a prescription, when he repeats the ancient words of his Father David, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? to quicken us to repeat His own words, who
is now, Our Father in Heaven.

Secondly, The no-objection against a prescribed Form; for as it is lawful to
use them (after the uncontroled example of all Churches, throughout all times)
so it is lawful to prescribe them at some times, and for some uses, for that a
thing in it self acknowledged and proved to be lawful, should by being
commanded by lawful authority, become unlawful, is very unreasonable, unless
lawful Magistrates be the only unlawful things (which he that says, will
pronounce himself at one against both King and Parliament) and at other times,
to use other liberty is not forbidden, and so no Tyrany used upon our Christian
liberty.

Thirdly, by the great benefit that accrues to the Congregation in having
discreet well formed prayers, and so, not subject to the Temerity and
impertinencies of the sudden effusions, and the same still in constant use, and
so, not strange or new to them, but such as they may with understanding go
along with the Minister, and by the help of their memory the most ignorant may
carry them away for private use (he says by their memory, not by their
violence, as some late Ignorants have done, to carry away the Book and all)
and generally those that want such helps, are by this means, afforded them.

And lastly, that by means of prescribed Liturgies, Unity of Faith and Charity
is preserved.

To these let me add another practice of our blessed Savior, and occur to
an objection, which may perhaps infatuate some deceived minds (for I have heard
this, to be the gainsaying discourse of some who instead of the Spirit of God,
have set up a selfe-spirit,(...)) that though our Savior prayed in the very
words which King David penned, yet he never prayed again the same prayer (a
point of the new Creed amongst Commander-Divines) but that he did this also,
you shall find in Mat. 26. v. 44. for he went away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words; and that as a preparatory to his sufferings which
he saw at hand, for behold he is at hand that does betray me, v. 46. perhaps to
encourage mankind, after their own common guise, to give a more ample credit
to imitation of the last words and actions of one ready to expire, as being
then even amongst our selves stripped of all Pretense and Artifice, and nothing
else but plain solid Truths: so Lucretius tells us, that the World is man's
Theater, in which he personates others, whilst he expects a continued date of
life, and is then only himself when he begins to dye.

Besides, if it be true (as he that doubts it is either an ignorant or a
wilful Atheist) that by a man's own words he shall be justified, and by his
own words he shall be condemned (by thy words, and by thy words, Mat. 12.37.)
I cannot but presume that those words, if they have not the only, have yet a
more eminent place in those actions which more immediately concur, and
contribute to either our heaven or hell, and least of all shall I make any
scruple, that our prayers, either by the concomitancy, or by the defect of the
qualifications required to them, are those words, and amongst such, those
especially, which are powered out by a public Congregation, and in a place
defigned for that purpose (which some call the besieging of heaven, and the
taking it by violence, and the conquering of him who is Almighty; all of them
holy and significant raptures.) And to this purpose I take it is applicable
that of our Savior, ushered in with that authoritatis formula, I say unto you,
that if two of you shall AGREE on earth, as touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven; Mat. 18.11.
where though no doubt the prayer of a single person (when that very
singleness is not evil, as springing from an uncharitable separate humor) is
oft-times acceptable, and has its efficacy, yet, that God, who contains
within his One-selfe a Trinity, (Numero Deus impare gaudet) does more liberally
hear and grant the united prayers of many, which strive to imitate God
himself, and in that very plurality to have but one heart and one mind; and
though in that verse but two are mentioned, that does only magnify the mercy
of God, which will not be restrained, though but for two's sake, and yet he
had rather be importuned by a cloud then by a drop, with whom it is certainly
unacceptable that the people should be as clouds without rain round about,
and only the Pastors fleece, like Gideons be wet; as in Abraham's expostulation
with God, Genesis 18.
the righteousness of the fifty had been more powerful, though of the ten
only had prevailed; to which interpretation the next verse does direct and
admonish me, where the Bell instantly calls for more company, and better it
were if it could ring all in; for where two or three are gathered together: V.
20.
which agreement in prayer, as it comprehends the object, so that I can only
pray with them, who pray only to God, and not with the Church of Rome, which
invocates Saints and Angels, God being the only object of prayer which our
Savior himself has taught me by a necessary exclusion of al others, when he
commands me to pray, Our Father, which compellation I am well aware is
incompatible to Saint or Angel, though they also are in Heaven; holy David
has instructed me in the same lession, Praise waits for thee O God, Ps.
65.1.2.
O thou that hear prayer; so next, this agreement comprehends the very
matter, which if I am not well assured that it is stamped for Orthodox, by
having pondered the whole substance of it before, and past my assent upon it, I
may perhaps be there as an Auditour, I cannot as a supplicant; for, if I go to
Church only with an implicit faith, and resolve to pray, what ever he prays
that possesses the Deske or Pulpit, at best, is not this implicitenesse
somewhat a kin to Popery, and may not my very Prayer be turned into sin! by
owing the inadvertenuses and slips of him, who follows no other rule, but his
peculiar sudden dictates, Quicquid in Buccam Venerit, at least gives them also
leave to interpose; of which my self have been several times a sorrowful
witness; If it escape that brand, does not the other twig of Popery reach and
scourge it home, which makes ignorance the mother of devotion? and what
security can we have, that in process of time, this very Surculus will not
grow up to be an Arbor. Thus like Sampsons Foxes, though neither of them will
be called Foxes, which way soever their heads look, their design is one, to
ruin and burn down the grain whilst it yet ripens, that which after its due
growth would be our bread of life, and since it is true that we receive not
what we ask, because we ask amiss, do we ever ask more amiss, then when
we ask we know not what?

Or if I am not bound to let my assent wait implicitly upon his what ever
ejaculations, I must then either not pray at all (like him in the Gospel, who
had not on the wedding garment, but was speechless) or else it must weigh and
calculate, and summon all ad stateram, I must give my judgment power to call
them to the test before my affection subscribe, and then when I have
acknowledged this part or that period, right and useful, has not his feathered
pace outstript my leaden heel that I am at loss for many others, and may
as soon pursue the trace of an arrow in the air, though I cannot challenge to
my self any large share of quick and sharp judgment, yet my very judgment
from some measure of that reason which is common to all men, assures me that in
this case, the best sighted can steer no other course, though they may sail
much faster.

And in the last place (which is the most considerable number of Christians in
all places, in those very Cities which are elevated to some higher degree of
capacity, and whose souls cost as good blood as the brightest in the Parish)
what prop shall be put under the weak ones to uphold and inliven the devotion
of the ordinary sort of men? who if at all, must only pray per saltum because
they cannot apprehend (much less comprehend) the matter, they are unacquainted
with at the first infusion, nor the unwilling Errata's which the ablest
extemporaneous Orator is liable; for the best of them are but men, and suppose
too, they were as Apostolical and highly illuminated as Paul and Barnabas (and
perhaps some of them might have seen much more clearly, if they had not
presumed they had been already Eagles, Pervenissent, nisi pervenisse putassent)
yet such very men ought at least to acknowledge, Act. 14.15.
that they also are men of like passions with others; these congregations I
must needs say it, do clash against that Rock (and I pray God it never split
them) which they so seemingly abhor, Incidie in Scyllam, cupiens vitare
Charybdin; Their unknown piety does relish unawares of the Roman infection;
for I beseech you, look calmly upon it, and tell me seriously what is the great
difference betwixt praying in an unknown tongue, and praying I know not what
in English? St. Paul has coupled them in one sense, in that question (which in
these days is lawful to be asked again) Else when thou shall bless with the
Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.16.
say Amen, at thy giving of thanks (for this very reason he shall not) seeing
he understands not what thou say? nay, though all thou say be good and
sound, yet there is still an error because of his unreadinesse to conceive
before whom thou speak, For thou verily give thanks well, V. 17.
but the other is not edified; the substance of the exception is the same in
the matter, as in the language, intimated in the 14 v. my spirit prays, but
my understanding is unfruitful; and immediately he applies the remedy against
this merely spiritual praying, that though it is required, it is not only
required: what is it then? v. 15. I will pray with the spirit, and with
understanding also, and in v. 21. he shows it to be a foreprophesied threat
and judgment of God out of Esa. 28.11. With men of other tongues, and other
lips will I speak unto this people; which unknown tongues (whose error by his
own interpretation, consists in the not-understanding of the people) he stamps
also with the deplored mark of confusion: upon this ground it is he decryes
them, For God is not the author of confusion, V. 33.
but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints; and concludes all with that
peculiar Scripture style of wilful, acquired danger; but if any man be
ignorant ( i.e. loves his ignorance, and resolves to be so, notwithstanding a
whole Chapter against it) let him be ignorant, it is punishment enough; the
whole Chapter throughout relates to the particular Churches and public
meetings for the service of God, and the edifying of the people.

It is too true, that in many, many places, where formerly every Peasant of the
vilest rank, who had ploughed out his six days, could, on the seventh pray to
and praise his God with the heart and understanding, that now a vast number of
them, great enough at least to be pitied, have changed their upbraided sincere
Liturgy into a late lip-devotion (if they are suffered at all to speak) and
hollow eareservice, which how unacceptably it will ascend (if it ascend at all,
unless perhaps the Prince of the air carries it up as a witness against
them, and when he sums up his Bill of indictment, brings in the several
auricular prayer, conspiring into a) cloud of witnesses) to him, Prove. 4.4.
who bids thee, Let thy heart retain my words, and calls upon thee for that
choicest meat, disdaining thy inferior offalls, My son give it me (and let me
tell you, Prove. 23.26. Heb. 12 6.
He is his beloved whom he chasteneth his son whom he scourges) how much he
rejects thy other unvalued scumme, the mouth of God himself shall witness,
Wherefore the Lord said, Isa. 29.13.
for as much as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips
do benour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear
toward me is taught by the precept of men. Therefore etc. and so the curse
follows; and that God the Son is as little pleased with this shallow empty
complement, you may consult his own Commentary upon those words, Well did
Esaias prophecy; that is the Text, Math 15.9.
and the applicatory Sermon upon it is, That in vain do ye worship me; in
vain, when ye thus speak; much more in vain; when the silent lifting up of
the hands, is the only morning sacrifice; I can lie in bed and do that.

But I have heard after all that can be said, much rather after these slight
lamplesse attemps of mine (which I confess issue from one that is weakly
wel-minded, and has no other employment, but to sit still, and either write or
ruminate upon these distempers, and has learnt, that so much declaimed up
selfe-preservation, to wring out those drops which would be more dangerous
while they bleed inwardly) some will compare a devotion framed when it is
uttered (like the soul, which St. Austin says, Infundendo creatur) to the
whole walking upon a man's own legs, and any prescription what ever, to a
ridiculous pair of crutches, which though rumor fastens upon a name too big to
be grapled with, I shall also spare to mention, both because I am unwilling to
yield my self an over-credulous captive to reports, lest the opennesse of my
ears might be accused of the slander, since to defame, would be a toilsome
thrivelesse trade, if men would hear less greedily, and not set up this kind
of harkening to out-sacrifice the fat of Rams, and because though it were a
measured truth, my very Schoole-refreshments have civilized me into this Modum,
Parcere Personis, that I should not snatch at a shadowy repute from the
disgrace of any, Mihi de nullo, fama rubore placet, yet least some men swallow
it as a rational fancy, I will a little melt off the paint, and show you its
contrary face, how it will look most unlike it self, and halt out of your
sight from an apprehensive shame of its own lamenesse, at length only troubled
that it cannot outrun the Chase: Christ himself has prescribed me a prayer, a
very set form; he has give^ me that as a guide to my devotio^, whereby I might
tread upright; It is in this sense, the foot of my soul, that by it, I may
climb those steps in Jacobs ladder, which reach up to heaven; just as he has
bestowed upon me fleshy limbs to trace that earth which he has given to the
sons of men; He has also enabled me with a gift and power to frame other
supplications out of that fruitful form, just as he has imparted to me, out
of that equal docility indulged to the composition of whole mankind how to
make to my self a Crutch, if he will be yet perverse, and cry out still
against my prescribed Iamenesse, I shall satisfy my self in deeming it
better, to enter into life thus halt or maimed, rather then by having such feet
of mine own to be cast into everlasting fire: But perhaps, our Saviors own
prayer may escape scandal free, and the blow be only meant at those of the
Church, because they say, (I have heard some say so) the whole life of man must
not be once guilty of repeating the same prayer twice; and yet that part of our
Letany, O Son of David have mercy upon us, was so far from being reproved by
Christ, Math. 10.1.17.48.
that I doubt not but the very repetition of it in the same words wrought the
cure, for the importunate persevering in his request, under the very same
formality, and crying so much the more, though many charged him that he should
hold his peace (though they had no commission for such a restraint upon his
prayer) did give a pregnant testimony of that strong Faith, which our Savior
told him had made him whole, and immediately he received his sight: And that
other part in the Te Deum prescribed to us, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, was more cheerfully entertained by that Lamb which sat upon the
throne, and his copartners in divine worship, the Father and the Spirit (for I
may conceive, there is a particular holy to each of them, or else the prayer
would be in a manner said thrice together) which gives me the same advantage
because the four beasts did not cease day and night saying the same words, Rev
4.8.
concerning whom that reprooving prayer need not be used, which is wont to
impute darkness to us, that God would open their eyes; for as they were full
of eyes within, so none need scruple but those eyes were full of light, and
illumination; and in the holy Eucharist, where we use the same words, we
confess them to be the voice of the Angels, Archangels, and all the Companies
of Heaven; I shall never conceive how any Companies upon Earth have better
learnt to pray, then all in Heaven.

But for the Church-prayers entirely as they lie (for I would only speak of
public worship; each man's private devotions I leave betwixt God and his
Conscience, as having no key to any closet, but my own) If we look upon the
natural indowments of any single man, be they as Mountainous, as he shall
please to think them, I cannot in any reason, but count it a deluded
presumption that he would prefer his own unpremeditated fluencies, to the
elaborate, joynt-results of so many learned men, who contrive ex instituto,
where he but stumbles; or if the gift of the spirit be regarded, I shall never
doubt, but God does more plentifully power out his spirit upon the legally
representative Church, imploring his aid, then upon any one Member of it: nor
is this, to shorten the hand of God, which sure spreads it self farther in
such a universal benevolence: If he will still like the fained impotent, not
obtaining what he asks, hold up his very crutch against me (since, to a
resolved Contumacy, a Sarcasme is more operative then a Conviction) I shall
only desire him to turn Baker, as well as Canonist, because, else himself
should only feed on crutches, whilst the other eats up legs.

For these and many other reasons, which you may more copiously imbibe from the
obvious discourse of learned men, then from the unaptnesse of my hand to write,
I would feign implore some liberty to tender consciences, who are so well
assured of the lawfulness, and so much experienced in the benefit of our
Liturgy; and we hope this liberty will not be called licentionsnesse, since
we rather conceive it a bridle, then a spur to that, because the property of
that is to open an unlimited way for all to do what is good in their own
eyes, (the uncheckt misdemeaning garb of the very people of God, when there
was no King in Israel) and this fixes its eye upon the established Laws made by
Protestants in defense of Protestanisme, Judge. 17.16.
and calls in them to succor: It Is St. Judes advice, after he has charged you
to keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus, that your selves would show love and mercy to your Neighbor, that you
would have compassion of some, making a difference; Jude 22.
those, toward whom the difference is recommended, are they of a more tender
nature then others, (as the late Annotations) and certainly no tenderness of
so supple a nature, as that of conscience (declaring and proving it self to be
only conscience, without any adhesion of terrene mixture, by the contented
loss of all things else, then which there is no higher (...), imaginable of
sincere, uningaged conscience) which he that endeavors to force (there may be
an endeavor, there cannot be a forcing) will torture and vex it as a thing
that is raw, and make him cry out there is Death in the pot -- Idem facit
occidenti.

I shall conclude this, and leave all men to consider what that is, they carry
within their breast, how blunt an argument the keenest sword will appear, when
it incounters the mind, which as no violence can kill, so neither can it
inform. Those who have past their Minority in Religion, and are grown up to
the stature of men in Christ, may be charitably presumed to have tried, and
approoved their worship by fixed Principles, which like the Rocks in the Sea
are the same, and unmooved what ever Waves oppose, and break themselves in the
tumultuous conflict: A Principle which I have already digested, is not the
less a Principle to me, because some other man delights in contrary Rudiments;
the Milk of the Gospel is not the less sincere, though it be not served after
the Geneva-fashion; those, whose modern yeasterdayes constitution of
Government require it so, let them have it, as it trills from the teat, drop by
drop, unstraind from mixture of hair and dust, and godly filth, and much good
may the drench do them; for my part, I am not so eagerly bent, but I can stay
the dishing it, and I thank God, I find it nonrisheth me never the worse,
because it is the better cook't: amongst the giddy people, whose only Principle
it is to go by none, or else who make Religion subservient to their estate,
and can be content to serve God so far forth as Mammon will give them leave,
such whom the spear which opened Christ's side, can better teach to pray then
Christ's Spouse the Church, I cannot but expect upon any new thoughts of a fresh
alteration (to whom alteration it self, though it be to the worse, is better)
themselves will be the most vehement Reformers, as counting that to calcine
their Religion which makes it another, whom I look upon, as Aristotle's Materia
prima, which is Omulum for marum expers and capax; when the next tempest
assailes his house, do but tell him, the Heavens chide at his false worship,
and that the whole Fabrique will presently intombe him, unless the change of
his opinions divert the storm; tell him that -- In te militat Ether, and
conjurati veniunt ad Maenia venti, and then do but offer him a new platform,
you shall see and pity him, tossed too and fro, Ep 4.14.
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; upon such easy Articles, let
him but save a house, and you shall gain a Proselyte; for my self, he whose
proofs run in this Channel, will but beat the Air, till my inward part is
freely conquered, unballanc't with estate and advantages, and that I am glad it
is so, I can but oppose to all other assaults that Theorem of Phalaris which
swells with a Divine and Measured Truth, (...).

And now to shut up all concerning the Church of England, in a Close, which I
dare commend, I will give you in few the full of all which I can say or mean,
you shall have them as they lie in Sir Edwin Sandys Europae Speculum page 214.
without any of the least intruding advantageous gloss, a man whose report has
hitherto stood up unblemish't against Popery, which his very report does so
much blemish. England in their more sober Mood, many of the Church of Rome
will acknowledge to have been the only Nation, that took the right way of
justificall Reformation in comparison of others, who have run headlong rather
to a tumultuous Innovation (so they conceive it) whereas that alteration which
has been in England, was brought in with peaceable, and orderly proceeding,
by general consent of the Prince, and whole Realm Representatively Assembled
in Solemn Parliament a great part of their own Clergy, according, and
conforming themselves unto it; no Luther, no Calvin the square of their Faith;
what public discussing, and long deliberation did persuade them to be faulty,
that taking away, the Succession of Bishops, and Vocation of Ministry
continued; the Dignity and State of the Clergy preserved; the Honor and
Solemnity of the service of God not abased; the more ancient usages of the
Church not cancelled: In sum, no humor of affecting contrariety, but a
charitable endeavor rather of conformity with the Church of Rome, in
whatsoever they thought not gainsaying to the express Law of God, which is
the only approveable way in all mere Reformations.

At length I am arrived to the consolatory part, which I proposed as my
design, it has the luck of all ends to be first, and last, Primum in
intention, ultimum in executione, and falls out in its due final place, as an
Application after the explaining of the Doctrinall parts, which must
necessarily have preceeded, as the Pracognita to this.

Where first, that I may escape the sharp retort of Endamidas upon a
Philosopher, who labored to prove that only the wise man is the good
General, he acknowledges the pith and substance of the Oration, with an (...)
because he never heard the shrill sound of Trumpet, I confess I bear in my
estate the marks of that wound, which I strive to heal -- Qua tolerata mihi,
donec jam Aerumnajuvaret -- and therefore can pass the probatum est, Auson.
upon the Medicine, if it meet with a mind equally tempered.

The holy charm is intended against disrepute, and loss, for Gods sake, and
conscience, that we let not the receiving of honor one from another, hinder
us from believing, John 5.44.
that we count the best honor (as indeed it is) to serve the best Master,
both in Heaven, and Earth, our great God, and our good King; Nullum Theatrum
Virtuti conscientia majus est; that we do primas dare to our Creator, Tuse.
Quaest. Lib. 2.
and suffer not a piece of drossie wealth (which God has bid us to trample
upon, and not let that to tread down us, by the contemptible under-seate it is
bred in) to divide with him, and Rival his Honor; Impatiens Consortis, is a
maxim in the supreme Court above, as well as in the earthly Palaces; that we
be not only half believers and like those many amongst the chief Rulers also,
who meant no doubt, woudrous well, but because of the Pharisees, they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogus; John 12.43. Luke
12.22.
that we do not(...) hang betwixt 2, because of food and raiment, and though
we seem to propend heavenward, with the falling Metere, grovell into the
Daughill; that we do not shake off Providence, and instead of that, inshrine
a belly for our God, whose reward will be heavier, then that of Aarons Calfe,
as much as the fire of Hell scorches more then that of thy Kitchen.

If any droopes under the load of his present distress, St. James will reach
out his hand to life him up; Chron. 5. v. 10.
Take my brethren the Prophets for an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience; behold we count them happy that endure; they are already happy here,
because God deemes them worthy to suffer for his sake, and if they endure unto
the end, St. Mat. 24.13. Heb. 12.2.
they shall be saved, and be happy eternally hereafter. That Jesus says it,
who, himself endured the Cross, and despised the shame, for the joy which was
set before him. That Jesus, who has now, set the joy before us also, if we
will but despise the shame, imitating, and obeying both his example and
command, Mat. 11.24.
to take up the Cross, and follow him to the Crown of Glory. Be the weather
never so foul, he is but a bad worlds-man that will not venture abroad because
the ways are deep. When a fair Inheritance awaites the end of his Journey, a
Rainy Day will not respite thy next Distrainer, and if thou markest it well
when he has prized thy last stick of wood, he does but vertere sterquilinium;
let him spurn, as stately, as the fabled Cock, and do thou take care that all
his kickes and bruises do but illustrate, and brighten thy patience, he will
still hang down his head, and only feed on Mucke, as uncapeable to value so
rich a Jewel, very like that Pearl in the Gospel, which thy meek selling of
all thou have (selling it, in another Scripture Phrase, for naught) to him who
resolves to have it, will be a great fair help to purchase.

James mentions none of the Prophets (but the Author to the Hebrews tells you,
They had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea of bonds and
imprisonments; they were stoned, they were sawne in sunder, Chro. 11.2.36.37.
were tempted, were slain with the sword, destitute, afflicted, tormented) he
only tells you of a Job, and of the end of the Lord, that he is pitiful and of
tender mercy; let us amasse all the afflictions which oppress every of us, and
if we look steadily, we shall find them all in one Job, Juncta fluunt, his oxen,
sheep, and camels taken away; his very children slain; nay and (what was the
greatest plague Satan could inflict) he is robbed of the public worship of
his God also; boyles and the potsheard are his employment and company, he sits
down in tears, and corruption and ashes; he that has the greatest griefs
hang upon him, let him strictly view this glass, and compare his with Jobs,
how will his own misfortunes slide into advancements, and his flowing soul
melt into a compassionatenesse unsensible of any selfe-disaster, and only
tenderly afflicted, because Job was so much afflicted.

If we look nearer home, I can tell you of a Prophet whose Christian courage
out-faces and strikes back danger, who has attested to all the world, how far
he is from shrinking under the calamities, which do not confront but uphold
him, J.M.D.D.
that he shall count it as great a happiness as God can bestow him, whilst he
stays here on earth to call him to the stake, and let him fall a sacrifice
with the blessed Compilers of our Liturgy, to the long since Reformed Religion,
a piece of so masculine primitive Christianity; worthy to be written in letters
of Gold, or which is a style more agreeable to the Aetas Ferrea in which we
live, Pliny uses the same word for a writing instrument. Non minus agit stilus,
cum delet, quam cum scribit.
unless the Poets elegancy confute the life, and our own sad sense more
genuinely translate it then any May, Non est vivere vita, to be graven with
Jobs iron pen in a Rock for ever; which profession of his (and how much does it
become his profession, not to dawbe, not fear, but meet the wolf) joined with
the example of those many patient sufferers in these days, whose meekness,
and acquiescence in the glorious ruins which involve them, is so remarkable,
as if it would almost invert the Apostles sense, and make chastening for the
present also, not to seem grievous, but joyous, Heb. 12.11.
yielding the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby, even whilst they are exercised; and that by war; who count the honest
loss of their lively hoods, a new preferment, Tantusque malo fuit usus in
isto, should set a non ultra, to the deluge of Common tears, and wipe them
away from off all our faces at their first eruptions while they are yet
trickling down: when the Apostles had sent chosen men with Barnabas and Paul,
to suppress a Sect, v. 5. they gave this testimony to fit their reception,
that they were men who hazarded their lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Act. 15.26. if, simply, obedience be better then sacrifice, how much
more acceptably will they fall to God, who perform both, whose very obedience
shall make them a sacrifice? In these last and perilous days, That precept of
trying the spirits, whether they are of God, does equally concern us, as the
care of our own souls; I cannot therefore but remember you of the
Characteristicall marks, whereby you may know who is a true messenger of God, 2
Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought amongst you in all
patience, v. 10. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities,
in persecution, in distresses for Christ's sake, for when I am weak then am I
strong, V. V. I become a fool in glorying; ye have COMPELLED me; which signs
the late Annotations upon the Bible call Demonstrations a signo, evident
arguments, that he was indeed an Apostle of Jesus Christ; the reverend Diodate
calls them the certain and unreproveable arguments of St. Paul's full Office of
Apostle, and that the sufferings which he endured, and overcame by faith, and
constancy, were a sign of the Apostles LOYALTY, and of the presence, and
assistance of Gods spirit; fair Testimonies these, if none envy their
application to the distressed Fathers and Sons of the Church: I confess it
true, that I meet with diverse in the London-Martyrology, dead with grief, and
should my self only greive for those (passing by the many others, whom I read
Outed, Sequestered, Plundered, Imprisoned, Dead) but that I must in all charity
presume they did not greive for the weight, which sunk them down, down to
the very grave, but for the hands that laid it on. Writing after the fair,
though bloody copy, of the crucified Jesus, who, though he forbad not the
Daughters of Jerusalem to weep; yet he directed which way the tide of their
stream should run; Luke 33.28.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and children, whose guilt, which
I suffer for, does murder me: I doubt not, but when Saul persecuted the Church
of God (and thereby, God himself, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me)
believed that his duty, and I shall not cease to pray for those, who now do
errare, sed bono Animo, that God would open their eyes, and use some Ananias
Instrument (whom himself shall please) that there may fall from them, Acts
9.18.
as it had been scales, and his grace which knows no bounds, be sufficient
for them also, that we may unite against the common enemy of truth, and no
longer increase the foreign misse-call'd Catholic strength by intestine
divisions (which render so many several men, so many distinct Churches, like
Angels, amongst whom each indiduum is a species) and in the mean while, so
long as we are bruised under Gods hands (till both the Mountains smoke, and
the Valleys tremble) let us humbly kiss that hand, and look upon it, even
whilst it strikes as a badge of his favor to us; for, it has sometimes been a
curse, Ezekiel. 16.42
like that of final dereliction, that God would make his fury toward thee to
rest, and his jealousy to depart from thee, that he would be quiet, that he
would be no more angry; O Lord, God, thou do punish us worst of all, when
thon let us alone; thy anger is then greatest, when thou will not vouchsafe
to be angry; O Lord, let us run what toilsome race thou please, so that we
may obtain; let the temptations be manifold so that the trial of our faith,
though tried with fire, may be found unto praise, and honor, 1 Pet. 1.7.
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, that the great Accuser of the
Brethren may himself be weary in laying baits and traps in our way, and be
glad to spare us a little, because he shall perceive our soul is escaped as a
bird out of the snare, Psalm. 124.7.
and that his vanquished seducement dos but make us Birds of Paradise, and
further our flight to Heaven, our suffering with Christ will be but a preface
to our after-raigning with him, and that a Volume, without a subscribed Finis,
of writing this book, there will be no end; and then let who will reign here
as Kings without us, being so rich and full in spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 4.8.
that our superfluous instruction is counted but a drop to the River, and that,
perhaps, a poisonous drop to infect the whole River (for so vilely once were
the Apostles esteemed by those, who heapt unto themselves Teachers) whilst
Christ will hereafter, deigne us to sit upon Thrones, in his incorruptible, and
unbribed Kingdom; wherefore let us consider him, that endured such
contradictions of sinners against himself, lest we be weary, and faint in our
minds; Heb. 12.3.
the spirit of a man (whose contemplations have survayd that exact Map of
sufferings) will Iustaine his infirmity, Prove. 18.14.
and if it be a wounded spirit, look but unto the brazen serpent, and you
shall live, he is that anointed, whose oil, Number 21 9.
will not only cure, but make thee cheerful; his blood is the oil, and his
stripes will heal thee; look upon him, as he is thy head; if one member (the
head especially) shall suffer, all the members suffer with it; now ye are the
Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12 27.
and Members in particular; I should suspect my self no true Member, but a
chip of some other block, fit fuel for hell, and dead whilst I live, if I
were so paralyticall, as not to feel when my head aches, if I had not this
cause of joy in my sufferings that I help to fill up, Coloss. 1.24.
what is behind, of the afflictions of Christ; Look upon him again, how his
own agony sweats out blood through every Pore, as being himself more willing
to power it out, then the Soldiers thirsty spear to bereave him of it, how
his forward sufferings speak through every limb of his panged body to the
barbarous Jew, satiate sanguine, and check the delay of the thorns, and the
nails, as if it were never too early to fall an innocent expiatory sacrifice
for sin; consider the head, in which all the senses meet, and combine, to make
the torment as accurately rigid as a studied Tyranny can invent; or a mortal
man abide, and thou shall find, that no sorrow was like unto his sorrow, that
thy own secure pensiveness is but a faint shadowy reflection to those
tortures, which like Rays of darted fire, incirculed the Sun of righteousness.

The great style of these days honor, is the valiant man, but I may tell
thee, to endure, is the nicest prowess -- Fortius ille facit qui miser esse
potest, Martial
the Moralists cannot extend all the deeds of Alexander, to that height of
gallant daringnes, in which Scavola committed his hand to the astonished flame,
and went back a maimed Victour. Thus did his greatness fall, whom the beguiled
weapon spared -- Hanc spectare manum Porsena non potuit. 2 Ep. 3. c. 3.^.
St John tells us, that when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him,
especially if we follow our vocation, 2 Pet. 2.21.
for even hereunto are we called, because Christ suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps, even those in which he walks to
Calvary; whose obedience if we compare with it self, the virtue, and merit of
his passivenesse, will outshine all those collected acts, the thinnest Beam
of which does outshine all the World; this is that we hold by, and make our
Plea for an eternal Mansion: All his active obedience was no more then to pay
a debt, to which he freely entered into bond, after the discharge of which,
himself might pass to his former Seat in Heaven, (a very Seneca will give
way to it, (...)
Nemo improbe eo conatur ascendere, unde descenderat) do this, and THOU shall
live; by the efficacy of his passive obedience, he did not ascend singly as one
person, but as the head of the Church (and if the Head be taken out of the
great waters the body will never drown) as the first fruits of the harvest (to
sanctify the whole lump.) St. Paul linkes them all together: Acts 26.23.
first, that Christ should suffer, and then that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead; the Cross gave him the precedence, but not the
onelinesse to heaven: And now, let who will upbraid an imposed penury, the
scorned issue of an unpolitique piece of dull honesty; let him despise our
plain integrity, because it is not clad with the Silkeworms bowels; let him
tell us, we are but weak and over-scrupulous, that demurre upon the wearing of
a silken oath, that if we would but swear a little, with Peter, we might stand
amongst them and warm us, though we had rather bathe in his repentant tears,
Philip. 3 8.
and with St. Paul do doubtless (without suspense or blending with the world)
Count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord (and of him crucified) for whom we suffer the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung, that we may win Christ, V. 10.
that we may know the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death.

The very Heathens (amongst whom, as we pray for the conversion of them that
live, so we would be sorry if the virtue of them that are dead, should rise up
in judgment against us) snatch a buckler from the Law of Nature, against all
the insults and violencies of Fortune.

Quid quaeri Labiene, Jubes, An Noceat Viculla bonis? Lucan. l. 9.
Fortunaque perdat, opposita virtute, minas? His Interrogation will be resolved
into St. Paul's doubtless.

And it is Dogmaticall amongst some of their Philosophers, that a good man,
though he fryes and lows in Perillus-Bull, may indeed be scorcht, but he cannot
be unhappy, Marius capi potest, animus capi non potest; and shall we hang down
the Bull-rush head, where the persecution is less, and the remedy greater? not
a notion, but a God to bear us up? to walk with us in the fiery ovens, and to
break our bonds in sunder?

Above all, let us take special heed, that we murmr not at God, because we
suffer unworthily; it is so in those particulars, for which we mourn, if we
look downward only, and forget our Ossublime; but then our other high sins
have cried out to God for these Just plagues, Quicquid vult Deus ideo bonum
est, quia Deus vult, though we were inspired with such an Idea innocence, in
which Adam stood, yet the Potter may break his vessel when he please, May he
not do what he will with his own, and it is better, 1 Pet. 3 17.
since the will of God is so, that we suffer for well-doing.

When Socrates wife (not much unlike to Jobs) would stir up his indignation
against the sentence of death, with That Faeminine provocative,(...), He
returns a mild check, and confutes her error out of her own mouth, raising a
fort of patience from that, which she meant a Canon against it, (...); alas
fond woman! would thou have me deserve to dye? and S. Peter tells us, This
is thanks-worthy, if a man, for conscience toward God, 1 Ep 2. c. 19.^
endure grief, suffering wrongfully; and do thou repine, as at a stone, when
thou should give thanks for bread? It is not the nature only, but the
season of God, to sustain us in his own cause. To (...); Aristot. de
Rbetorica l. 2. cap. 5.
He that knows how to bear, knows no such thing, as an affliction (though
undeserved) as counting him only wretched that is sinful; It was Bions speech,
(...), He that grieves at the harsh fortune, when his untoucht conscience does
not smart, is his own Tormentour, and has great need to ask himself to have
mercy upon him: Job, (whose patience we were bid remember) etiamsi occiderit,
will trust in God, though he stay him. Abraham (to whom we would all be
entitled as he is, Father of the faithful) goes further, post quam occiderit;
He will, by the probatory command of God, slay his son Isaac, and yet believe
and hope, though beyond hope, that this slain Isaac shall have issue, like the
sands, when the only progeny which Nature could promise, would be the numerous
dust, into whose Fractions his body should resolve, and (like the prodigious
Viperine issue of our mother Church) holy worms first bred out of him, and then
devour him; the worms and the dust would be the children and the
Grandchildren.

It were ill with us, if our own contemplations could dive no further into
that piece of the Apostle, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth; nay not so
far, De malis quae videntur bonis accidere.
as the Paraphrase of a remote unchristian Seneca has done, Hos itaque quos
probat Deus, quos amat, indurat, Recognoscit, exercet; and that we could not as
well distinguish in truths of positive divinity, as he in those of natural,
who counts nothing more regardable then that we do not, like those beasts
which are only led by the eye, follow the Herd that goes before, De vita beata
C. 1.
Non qua eundum, sed qua itur: it will be well with us, if we stand separate
from the crowd, and not resolve upon any terms to join issue with the beasts
of the people, if we learn not of the people what we ought to know, and how
to live; but now (it is his own complaint) the people is the Bulwark of
defense to their own depraved opinions; and it was Gods, before him, The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and my people love to have it so, Jer. 5.31. Humane
affairs stand not so upright, Cap 2. And in his 108. Ep. Populus Honesti
Dissuasor.
as that the best things should please the most, Argumentum pessimi turba est.

Against all which contumelies and outrages of the people, we only buckle to
our selves the primitive weapons, Preces and lacrymas; the only Militia, in
which we desire to posture the inward man is the whole armor of Christ, that
armor which we bear and weild in the defense of All, and with which, as
Members only of the Church Militant, Mat. 5 44.
and such, who love our enemies, and pray for them that despitefully use us, we
fight for those who fight against us; Let them strive on to make us weep, and
hautily presume that this very remedy adds to our grief (lacrymis egeritur
dolor) whilst Gods holy Spirit shall teach us how to mingle a prayer with our
tears, and shall put the one into his bottle and the other into his Book;
whilst God himself shall tell us, That though we sow in tears, and go on our
way weeping, Ps. 12.7.
yet since we bear forth good seed, we shall reap in joy, and bring our
sheaves with us: Those tears, and that weeping will be as the first and latter
rain, to prepare and ripen those sheaves, and in the end, the valleys (those
against which the lofty hills have lifted up their heads) shall stand so thick
with corn, Ps. 65.14.
that they also shall laugh and sing, themselves partakers of the joy they
create.

Nature it self, by her dim light, takes aim from hence to press toward the
mark, forgetting the dangers which are behind, and reaching forth unto the
things which are before, Philip. 3. 13.
(...), we are already partakers of the reward; Phalaris Ep. 130.
for what the Moralists say of virtue in genere, St. Paul brings down to her
best shape, and complexion, in which she can particularly appear, that the
suffering virtue is sibi pramium, what ever malignant influence the spite of
man thinks he can breathe upon it, it is still a reward and a benevolence,
because this, Phili. 1.28.29.
Not being terrified by our adversaries, does open to us the gate of heaven;
for it is an evident token of salvation and that of God: unto us it is given in
the behalf of Christ not only to believe (that's no such wonder in this age,
every one has faith at will) but to suffer for his sake; nor is the Spirit
which blows where it lists, intailed only upon those, who inflict these
benevolences and rewards, and gifts (for thus, that God, by whose wonderful
providence, all things work together for good to them who fear him, and fear
nothing else, 1 Pet. 4.14.
does transform mischief into a portion) We also who are reproacht for the name
of Christ, happy are we, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon us:
the trial is made, and I hope it appears, that we are men gifted by the
Spirit of God at least to suffer; Be they of the smallest size, yet Dona
Regalia, quantumvis parva, evilescere ignorant, one drop of seasonable rain,
which otherwise is at best but common water, and perhaps tempestuous too, is
thus consolidated into a Jewel: If thou would be winged for Heaven, the
bird of the air will teach thee, at each drop to look upwards, and articulate
her silent praise into a digitus Dorest hic, may that it is his whole open
hand, and fills us with blessings: for behold this is no scantling,
parsimonious dowry, it is Sanctuary-measure, shaken and heapt together, 2 Cor.
1.17.
For our light affliction, which is but for a (...), works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory; so that I can hardly persuade my self
to let it be called Affliction, though but a light one, though but for a
moment, not only, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, Ps. 23.4.
but though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death; I will fear no
evil (in that very walk) for thou art with me (and so is in some measure a
heaven here, when God is with me like that hereafter, when I shall be with God)
Thy rod and thy staff, they do already comfort me, and call for a return of
gratitude; there must be (like a grace after the voyder) a blessed be the Name
of the Lord when he also takes away, as well as when he gives us Angels food;
nay this very blessed is that food, for as, to Christ upon earth, John 4.34.
to do the will of him that sent him, so to the Angels in heaven (who take
their name and office from this Mission) to praise his name is their meat and
drink -- Pudeat tanto ^^^a velle caduca; Quid Calo dabimus? What shall we
render unto the Lord? Manil.
we will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: nay
though that other cup, and the dregs thereof, Ps. 125.13.
which must not pass from us, be the way to it; if with holy confidence we can
affixe our fiat, though a veruntamen goes along with it, it will be a mark of
Majesty, that we are a Royal Priesthood, especially when we employ our selves
in that most priestly office of blessing the Lord himself, and giving thanks
in all things (Deo nullis rebus indigenti, posito extra desiderium, Seneca Tom.
2 lib. 2. cap. 30.
refer nihilominus gratiam possumus) and then quarrel with our own giving
of thanks, as a too low, and disproportioned acknowledgement, impeaching that
it self of some Ingrate Mixture, Dignas sed pendere grates, hand mortale opus
est.

To conclude, Stat. lib. 22.
The heavens indeed may rejoice, and they that dwell in them (the souls of the
Saints there, are separate as from their bodies, so from the distractions and
unsetlednesse in their worship; which shake the Communion and divide the
Remnant of the Saints, who still wear their earthly Tabernacles; This is the
woe to the inhabitants of the Earth, Rev. 12.12.
and of the Sea, for the devil is come down amongst us of these last days,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time: And I
persuade my self, he spends all his subtilty upon this last Stratagem, how to
uphold and cherish a constant fewdand discontent, by weakening that truth, which
he knows must be resolute, and by protecting error and mistakes, with strength
of Arms and color of Law, which thus fortified, he knows will be Resolute.

O Lord, the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble; why
should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save!

Quid refert, Dictis ignoscat Mutius an non? FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 24. read into. p. 4. l. 4. r. it out balance. p. 5. l. 33. r.
waves. ibid. l. proud. ibid. p. l. ult. vanities. p. 6. l. 5. Embry of wims. p.
7. l. 3. Iuratus. ib. p. l. 8. lay. p. 27. l. 7. (...). b. p. l. 28. once. p.
30. l. 10. owning. ib. p. l. 14. branch. p. 31. l. 13. add to


