blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
C. R.

HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE

By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas His Majesty by His Proclamation of the First day of March last, upon
the considerations therein expressed, prohibited the setting to Sea any Ships
or Vessels, to or for any parts or places beyond the Seas, until He should
Declare His Pleasure to the contrary, His Majesty by and with the Advice of His
Privy Council has thought fit, and does hereby Declare and signify His Royal
Will and Pleasure to be, That the said Proclamation, and the Prohibition, and
every other Clause, Matter and thing therein contained, shall from henceforth
cease and determine; And does also further Declare, That if any person or
persons will set forth any Private Men of War against the States of the United
Provinces, or any their Subjects or Inhabitants, they shall forthwith upon
request and application, have Letters of Marque in that behalf.

And His Majesty considering the inconveniences of many of His Subjects in and
about the City of London, and places adjacent, and elsewhere within England and
Wales, in the want of Coals, and for the prevention thereof, and encouragement
of all persons concerned in the bringing and supply of the same, has thought
fit, and does hereby Declare and Command, That no Saylors, Seamen, or other
person or persons employed, or to be employed in or about any Ship or Vessel
bringing or carrying Coals from the Town or Port of New Castle upon Tyne, from
Sunderland, or other Ports within His Majesty's Dominions, or any the Members
or Creeks thereof, or places adjacent to, or toward the said City of London,
or elsewhere in England or Wales, shall be Pressed, or otherwise hindered or
molested, either coming or returning, by any His Majesty's Press-Masters, or
other Officers or Ministers whatsoever.

And for the better Security of the Persons and Ships bringing and conveying
the said Coals, His Majesty is further graciously pleased, and does Declare,
That sufficient Convoys shall be from time to time provided for their safe
Passage and Conduct to and from the parts and places aforesaid; and all His
Majesty's Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, both by Sea and Land,
are required to take notice of this His Royal Pleasure and Command, and give
due obedience thereunto at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty sixth day of April 1665. in the
Seventeenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1665.


