His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, At their
Prorogation, On Monday the 26th of January 1679/80.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

DVBLIN, Reprinted By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's
most Excellent Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-Row. 1679/80.

His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both houses of PARLIAMENT, At their
Prorogation.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHen I declared in Council My intentions of putting off the Parliament to a
time so remote as November, it was not without having very well weighed and
considered the Grounds and Reasons that induced Me to it; Nor can I be
prevailed upon by any thing that has happened since (in refference to affairs
within the Kingdom) to alter or repent of that Resolution, but am rather
confirmed and settled in it. When I have said ths, I must tell you at the same
time, That considering the present danger which threatens some of Our
Neighbors and Allies, in whose Interest and Safety We are so nearly
concerned, it may be of very ill consequence to make a Prorogation for so long
a time as should in the least dishearten Our Friends that rely upon Us; for
this single Reason therefore, I think fit to appoint a Day for your Meeting
again in April; and having thus let you see My care of you, in relation to
Affairs abroad, I must observe to you, That the Distractions and Jealousies at
Home are of such a nature, and so heightened and improved by the Malice and
Industry of Ill men, that I am unalterably of Opinion, that a longer interval
of Parliament will be absolutely necessary for composing and quieting of Men's
minds; in order to which I am afraid the most proper Remedies would prove
ineffectual, without the assistance of some farther time.

I do therefore Resolve, That from the Day whereon you are to meet in April,
there shall be a farther Prorogation, unless the Condition of Our Allies abroad
do then require Our immediate Assistance.

And now, my Lord Chancellor, do as I have directed you. Where upon his
Lordship said, My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons, His Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure is, That this
Parliament be Prorogued to Thursday the 15th day of April. next ensuing, and
accordingly this Parliament is Prorogued to the 15th day of Apr. next.

FINIS.

