A GREAT FIGHT BETWEEN The Kings Forces under the command of his Highness the
Prince of Wales, and the Parliaments Forces, near the Downs With the number
killed and taken, the great execution done-by Key-shot from the Kings ships
upon the Parliamenteers* and the particulars of the Fight between the Lord
Hopton, and Col. Rich. And the Lord Cravens Declaration concerning his joining
with the Prince. Likewise, the Princes Propositions touching the Kings Majesty.
Signed, Charles. P. And commanded to be forthwith printed and published.

naval battle

Imprinted at Yondon, for R.VV. Anno Dom. 1648.

A GREAT FIGHT BETWEEN The Kings Majesty's Forces, under the command of his
Highness the Prince of Wales, and the Parliaments Forces, near Deal Castle,
Aug. 4. 1648.
Honored Sir,
IN my last I acquainted you of the proceedings of the Prince of Wales, Lord
High Admiral of the narrow Seas, and of his return from Yarmouth Roads to the
Downs: Since which time, His Highness has tendered an Oath to the Mariners
and Seamen, to be taken by all person or persons throughout the said Navy,
the effect whereof is as follows. That they shall endeavor to the utmost of
their power, to rescue his Majesty from the hands of his Enemies, and to
prosecute their Engagement for the advancement of the Kings Cause, with the
hazard of their lives and fortunes. His Highness has given command that the
great ship called the Convertine be forthwith sent to the North Forland, and
two Frigates with her, to attend the motion of the Earl of Warwick; as also,
another of the Royal ships to be sent toward the North Forland, to attend the
motion of the Parliaments shipping coming from Portsmouth: the rest of the
Fleet lies hovering up and down in these parts, and have landed some Forces
near Deal and Sandown, who thought to have fallen upon our men unawares, and to
have raised the siege; but by providence they were prevented: for upon notice
given of their landing in a private Creek, our Forces prepared to receive them,
and Col. Rich hastened toward them with his horse, engaged, and disputed the
ground, where Major Husbands, and Capt. Bavington deported themselves with much
gallantry, and charged quite through the Princes Van of Foot, commanded by the
Lord Hopton, and Col. Boys, doing some execution, the Sea-Royalists fought very
resolutely, their great Ordnance began to roar, the conflict was great, and the
dispute resolutely maintained by both parties; till at the last, the Royalists
run, our men pursues, and had it not been for the shipping which played so fast
upon us with their Ordnance, we had taken and killed most of them; by which
means we were forced to change ground and retreat, their Key-shot doing some
execution. In this action we lost about 13 men, some few wounded, the enemy 34.
though far more numerous, who is said to be 2400. Seamen and Soldiers. We
hear that more Forces are coming from Holland to join with them; but the L.
Craven has declared, That he will not assist the Prince, nor be any ways
instrumental for involving his native Country in a more bloody and intestine
War. The Prince has met with several ships at Sea, and boarded them.

Deal August 5. 1648.

Charles Prince of Great Britain, Duke of Cornwall and Albany, Highest Coptain
and general under His Majesty of all Forces both by Sea and Land, within the
Killgdome of England, Dominion of Wales, ad town of Beuwick.
WHereas we hold it very convenient and necessary for His Majesty's srrvice, to
Arm, or cause to be Armed, and set forth to Sea as many Ships and Vessels of
War es possibly can be, for the weakening and supyressing the Rebels usurped
Power, and for the effectual stopping and oreaking of their Commerce and
Supply by Sea: And forasmuch as we have received sufficient testimony of your
abilities and experience in Sea affairs, and of your good affection to the
King, our Royal Fathers service; we do by these presents, by virtue of the
Power and Authority given and committed to us from our most dear Father the
Kings most excellent Majesty, constitute, authorize and appoint your Captain
Richard Green, to be Captain and chiese commander of the good Ship called the
Christopher of Sunderland, authorizing and commanding you, with the said
Vessel completely manned and Armed for the War, and with such others as shall
associate with you for our dear Fathers service, to do and cause to be done to
the Rebels all possible damage and hostility in their shipping, Commerce and
Navigation: and in case of resistance to use your best vigilance and endeavors
during the time of this reb^llion, to take, apprehend sink and fire, or
otherwise to impair and destroy the Ships, Vessels and men, their goods, and
all things to them belonging, of all and every of those His Majesty's Subjects,
who are or shall be in rebellion against him, or of those who shall be aiding
abetting or assisting to them; and of all others who shall transport or convey
any goods belonging to them, or which shall bring or carry Arms, Aummunition,
Victuals or Provision of Arms, or Warlike Provisions whatsoever to them, or
for their use, or to any City, Town, Port; Creek or place in their possession,
and out of His Majesty's obedience, contrary to His Proclamations made or to
be made on that behalf: All which you shall and may do and perform by virtue
of this our Commission; as also to anchor, victual and refresh in any His
Majesty's Roads, Ports and Havens, and from thence again to put forth to Sea,
and to bring the Prizes by you taken, the Papers and Evidences found on board,
without breaking bulk into any Port or Haven within His Majesty's obedience and
Possession, and to have the same adjudged as lawful Prizes, and the same to be
divided, parted and shared, according to the ancient custom of the Sea.

And in case it shall so happen, that you cannot without eminent Prizes so
taken into some of His Majesty's Ports, without danger or hazard of having
them surprised or tataken from you again by the Rebels, then and in such
necessity you shall have free Power and authority to carry Prizes into any part
or Haven of any His Majesty's friends or allies beyond the Seas in League and
Amity, with him, there to dispose of the same, except always, and reserving
to His Majesty a^ Tenths heretofore used to be paid in cases of like nature, to
the Admiral of England, and all customs and duties due or accustomably paid to
his Majesty for or upon any of the said Prizes, which we will that you pay, and
justly account for to his Majesty. Provided always, that before the said Ship
or Vessel of War to be set out by you shall put forth to Sea, you shall enter
into security with His Maj. aceording to the course of the high court of
Admiralty of Eng. in such caution as shall be thought meet and necessary by the
Judge of the Admiralty or Vice-Admiralty in the place from whence you shall put
forth to Sea.

That you will do or suffer to be done no wrong or violence to any of his Maj.
Friends, Allies, or loyal subjects; but on the contrary, as occasion and need
shall require, to yield and afford all favor, furtherance and assistance,
excepting such of them as shall be employed in aid and service by the Rebels,
or any of them. And we further charge and command all the inferior Officers
and their Mates, and all the Soldiers and Mariners of the said ship, whom we
hereby likewise give you full power to nominate and appoint, you to obey and
observe as their captain and chief commander, and to receive, execute, and
fulfill readily all your Orders, commands, and all things tending to the good
and advancement of his Majesty's service; and you your self likewise to
accomplish such Orders and Directions as you shall re-from time to time from
his Majesty, from Us, or from any other superior Officer for the time being
touching the premises; for which this shall be unto you and to every one
employed under you, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge.

CHARLES P.

Instructions for Captain Richard Green, touching the execution of this
Commission of Captain of the good Ship or Vessel called the (...) of (...)
bearing date herewith, that is to say, tne 6 of June, in the four and twentieth
year of his Majesty's Reign.
FIrst, because it is not seasonable to put the said Commission in execution,
you shall therefore for the present conceal the same.

Secondly, You shall not put the said Commission in execution by taking any
Prizes, or doing any act of hostility by virtue thereof, until we shall have
published our Manifest and Declaration, whereby it shall be expressed who are
the Enemies against whom you are to execute our said Commission, or until you
shall receive further and particular Order from Us, or from Our right Trusted
and wel-beloved Henry Lord Jermin in that behalf.

Thirdly, you shall in all things concerning Our said commissio, obey such
Orders and Directions as you shall from time to time receive from the said Lord
Jermin, to whom we have given full power and authority, and in that behalf.

CHARLES P.

FINIS.

