HEART-SALVE FOR A WOVNDED SOUL; AND EYE SALVE FOR A BLIND WORLD, OR
Meditations of comfort for the Holy Living, and Happy Dying Christian; either
in the depths of dark Desertion, or in the height of Heavens Glorious Union.

The Second Edition, with an Addition of an Elegy upon an Eminent Occasion.

By Tho. Calvert, Minister of the Gospel.

When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? When he hides his face,
who then can behold him? Job 34.29.

O aeterna veritas, and vira charitas, and chara aeternitas; Tu es Deus meus,
tibi suspiro die ac nocte: Aug. Confess. lib. 7. cap. 10.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Tho. Passenger at the Three Bibles on
London Bridge, and William Thorpe in Ousegate in York, 1675.

To the Beloved and Honored Lady in the Lord, Ursula Barwick Widow, full of
Grace and Gravity.
Madam,
I Have borrowed some confidence to set your name in the front of this
Treatise, and concionary discourses, which my thoughts are you will freely
vouchsafe me without grudge. In this I put you not to be the lug or handle to a
common Pot, but to a choice and Golden Vessel: and whom you know of old
seasoned with Christ's liquor for his service. At first edition I did nominally
affix no dedication, there being some reasons preponderating in those wretched
times, full of the worst parts of Arithmatick, Divisions and Fractions of
Church and State, Now first press being all exhaust, and some urging to have it
in a 2d birth. I have yielded it the liberty of coming into the World again.
Nor I hope you will be ashamed of publishing the holy life of your sanctified
Neighbor. Matters there are all over in print of several natures: some Adoxa,
(...) Z^zer in Chiliad. 11.
as pamplets in praise of Fornication and Drunkenness, of being in Debt, in
praise of Baldness, of banishment, etc. Some are Amphilaxa, praising things of
a middle nature, and indifferent, in themselves neither good, nor evil. Some
Paradoxa, strange things cried up and commended beyond all men's sound opinions.
Other writings are Eudoxa, of good and stanch report withal are good and wise,
truly praise worthy, as Grace, St. Hieron in Psalm 147.
Virtue, Piety, Sobriety, etc. What I here give out is of this last sort, that
will suit every good and holy palate, as Jews fable, that Manna answered every
gust. If they thought of Honey, of Partrigdes, of any desired dainty, what they
had in their minds, Manna was the representative of it to their Mouths. your
Ladyship I choose for facing this Script, (...) you are much (...) she was,
(...)
much (...) upon the delicate (...) one word and prayer, p^^^^^ly, privately,
secretly And truly I must needs approve of your diet: for your body, caring to
live Epicratically, rather than Hypocritically, Studying a course daily of
slender, sober, and plain feeding (though compast with much infirmity, and
indispositions) rather then to live medically and Physically, translating the
Apothecaries Shop into your flesh. Barrad. in Itiner. Israel in Dis.
The first mischief that let in all misery upon us, was Eves and Adams ill
diet, neglecting the Tree of life to seek and taste the forbidden fruit. Indeed
all our sin, misery, sickness, death, wrath of God, and Hell came in at this
Gate of an ill diet: for our first parents made it not their meat to obey and
do the will of God, which should have been their corporal and spiritual diet.
But it is your spiritual order of diet I most aim at and commend, the humble
and quotidian feeding your Soul with waiting on God in the way he has commanded
you, and promised to bless you, you well digesting that word of our best Lord,
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life, Aquin. pust. 63.
which the Son of man shall give unto you. Other meat perishes, and nourishes
them that eat it to a perishing life; but Christ's spiritual food endures for
ever, abides with us, and nourishes us to the growing up to eternal life.
Neither this meat, nor the man perishes. A modern Roman Doctor of Physic
disputes the case, Paul Zachias in Quest. Medicolegal. lib. 7. Tit. 2. Quest. 2.
whether a Popish clergy man be excused and without blame, if sore troubled
with the Asthma he abstain from his office of reciting divine things, as
Preaching, Reading, Praying, Singing. He indeed determines, that unless a sore
Paroxysm, and a strong fit of the same be afresh come upon him, his speaking,
singing and loud voycing will do him no harm; for he says, all practical
Physicians say, it is profitable and helpful for them that are Asthmatick, to
read or speak with an high voice (that is, if they be able, and at the the
instant not oppressed with a violent assault) for it helps to purge the lungs of
the matter impacted in them. But you look not to be ruled by him, but in and
out of the strong invasions of the disease, you know how to breath high and
loud in your Soul to God, when you breath straightly and strainingly to those
about you. Madam go on in this wholesome diet for Body and Soul: and if, while
you are here below, you cannot in Body and Soul get into Heaven, yet continue
and abide on the threshold of this beautiful Gate of the Heavenly Temple of
Gods mercy: the Patient abiding of the meek shall not perish, nay such shall be
fatherly and sweetly supported to the end. Physicians cannot speak so much of
the advantage of good and orderly diet for Body, but from the word of God, we
may reason as strong for the benefit of spiritual diet for the Soul: Let them
tell us from their puni-godling, Hippocrat. lib. de vet. Med.
that if the sick would use the same diet they do, that are sound and whole,
the Art of medicines would fall to nothing. Hereby he intimates, that great is
the dignity of exquisite looking to diet, Aurel. Severin. in Trin. Chit.
as if it were all medicine. Wherefore they tell us, that the right hand in
diseases and wounds is Physic and Chyrurgery, but the left hand is diet, which
does very much. Now if we would study the most necessary Physic by direction
of divine Medicks, then is nothing so necessary, as to learn to know God and
our Al^uinus.
Souls. Philo the Jew tells us, the Essens three Principles were these, they
studied wholly to be (...), to season all their life and labors with love of
God, Philo. Jud
love of men, love of virtue. But we have a full voice of direction, Mic. 6.8.
and better particulared to us from Micah in his Ternary, He has shown thee, O
Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee; but to do justly, to
love mercy, and to walk humby with thy God. Or take we St. Paul's three, To live
soberly, Righteously, and Godly, Tit. 2.
in this present world. Or if we hearken to him he will tell us of taking good
heed to these two things, which are the complex of the whole counsel of God.
Acts 20. and 27.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Or lastly,
take his unum magnum, his one great point of exercise, To have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Men. Act. 24.16.
Genesis 5.12.
All comes to this one, to imitate Enochs holy Peripateticks, to walk with God
continually. Many things of beauty and novelty are looked after in this World,
outwardly glorious and rich things are applauded: men and great persons dote
upon rarity, and splendors of this World, and think those men are in a kind of
Heaven, though they be very fairly forward in a way to Hell. Plato in T^ae^.
Thus the glorious Tent and Tabernacle of the great Persian Kings were called
Ouranoi, the Heavens: you have learnt better to know Christ in the Soul, and
the Soul in Christ to be Heaven upon Earth. He that believes has everlasting
life. What a glorious vanity was that of Kings of Cusco and Mexico, one of them
having a glorious Garden, where all the Trees, Fruits, Lord St. Aug.
Herbs, Plants, Flowers according to order, and greatness they have in a
Garden, were curiously framed in Gold: and in his Cabinet all the living
Creatures were known in Earth or Sea curiously fashioned and cast in Gold. A
princely Heathenish vanity, would make his life no better then a, St. Augustine
calls this life, A shadow in Moonshine, which is little more then shadow of a
shadow. I know you more study to have all the fair flowers of Heaven, Faith,
Patience, Humility, Meekness, Love of Christ, Thankfulness etc. cast in a
sanctified model, by Gods Spirit kept in your heart and life, exceeding massy
gold. Carlo Boccomeo, Bp. of Millain, Canonised for a Saint, said well, A
Bishop should have no Garden, but the holy Scriptures. Go you on still to make
Prayer your Garden and Flowers, and by holy glorifying of God, as St.
Chrysostom directs, Give up your five spiritual senses to wait on God
continually. For the Soul has spiritual seeing, smelling, tasting, touching,
hearing; which in their way applied to God, and his manifestations, you shall
not only please God, but give him Music, and be his Decachorda Cithara, St.
Chry. in op. Imperfecto in cap. 22. S. Matthew. Hom. 24.
his ten stringed Harp to praise him. No farther will I detain you, but pray
for you, that you may have support of Gods Spirit in your great infirmities,
trials, and gravid years, to answer them from Heaven with grace sufficient for
you, and very efficient in you, that when your strength of flesh and heart
fails you, God may come in with fresh store and assure you of Holy Asaphs
viaticum, that he will be the strength of your heart, and your portion for
ever. He the Guide and Faher of his Israel lead you, till per (...) a right
Christian comfortable death, he bring you ad (...), to an immortal life, which
all good Mortals wait for by Jesus Christ the blessed Purchaser, and unfailing
Preparer of it.

So prays your observant servant in the Lord. T. C.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
FAith and assurance, the Christians Ourania, is better worthy Wooing and
fighting for, then the Grecians Helena; the one is but the subject of a
worm-eaten beauty, the other carries with it a decor and beauty that no old age
(no not Eternity it self) can wrinkle or furrow with uncomeliness: holy Souls
find it hard in the getting, and meet with (...) task, that makes them implo^
all their shoulders and sinews for the keeping of it. The Labors of the Saints
to fight with the Monsters that Satan sets on work against them, 2 Cor. 2.11.
Revel. 2.24.
the scruples, doubts, fears, distempers, temptations, hellish methods, noemata
and depths of the Serpent, do put a name of softness and facility upon all
Hercules his labors, Phil. 1.6. Phil. 4.13.
and sore trials with Beasts and Men; yet this is their comfort, their help is
more, for Christ having begun his Grace, will stand by them, and work for them
till all his Heavenly business be perfected; and though the Serpent may rend
the Skin, and wound the flesh of the Heel, yet Gods Servants shall end in
capite, in the Head, both bruising the Head of the Serpent, and being sure to
have the benefit as members of Jesus Christ their Head, of whom they hold. The
first of these Texts was addressed and dressed for the wounded Heel of a
gracious Saint, that was struck sick by the Serpent, of which sore (drinking up
the moisture of her Spirits) she was dangerously, deeply, and distressfully
sick, lying in the valley of the shadow of death 3 Quarters of a Year, day and
night combating with God, about Ecclipses of his Face, desertions,
manifestations of wrath, apprehensions of hell, which squeezed out frequent
confessions and complaints of an estate worse then Cains, an owning of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, a challenging reprobation as its due portion. And
besides the, sense of an angerful God, there was continual combating with the
spiteful Spirit of Hell, every day ready t^ write its own Epitaph with the
blackest letters of damnation, and a lost Soul: All these accompanied with
solitude, and secrecy, with two and three days together fasting, praying, and
weeping, till the eyes were turned into buckets, and few spiritual comforters
and legati pacis to be met withal, save one spirit of Grace, that had bound up
the Soul in this Resolution, Though God will not be my God, yet I will die
praying and seeking after him: and a poor messenger of God, who having but a
little Oil in his cruse, by daily dropping of it into the wound, it both
increased and healed with the dropping. It pleased God at length, to make the
winter and sad wea^her of this storm-beaten ^^^l to be over and end, so as the
flowers appeared, singing of birds was come and the voice of the Turtle was
heard, and a cheerful Soul, began sweetly to sing in its Cage of Clay. The
sorrows were deep, the comforts rose very high; and as once wormwood waters
were drunk in the Cellar of bitterness, and the banner over the Soul seemed in
^reat letters to have it The Lord has forsaken me: Cant. 2. Isa. 49.14.
Now ^t is led into the Wine Cellar of of Gods promises, the sweetest comforts
are broached and drunk, and the Lords banner of love is spread over. Here
Heaven out of Heaven, and some of the masters joy descended down, before the
Soul ascended up to it. After the Vesse^ had been seasoned some months with
this unknown and admirable new Wine of living comforts, Largissimum quoddam
caeli gremium, Bernard in Cantic. Ita mihi visus sim tanquam unus ex illis
beatis esse, O Si duresset. Idem in cantic. Ser. 23.
the Lord by a Chariot of sickness, and that a violent one, hurries the Soul to
Heaven, first giving it clusters of Canaans Grapes, and then making it walk
through Jordan to come into the promised Land, and eat of all the fruits of
blessedness to the full. The second Tractate was after the cure of the Heel, at
the celebration of the triumph in the Head Jesus Christ. Titulum frontis erade,
ut mutasit pagina, and quod sufficit, loquatur materiam, non loquatur autorem.
Sever. Sulpit. in Epist. ad. Histor. D. Mart.
We say no more of the discourses and treatises, but that they may still be
profitable even after the hours of their first hirth; they are of age, whether
they can speak much for themselves or no, I know not; you may see no great
desire there was in the Author to send them abroad, though they have been
desired. They were conceived and born in the year 1632. when the Womb they came
from could plead nothing but unripeness and youth, and therefore hopes his
pardon may be the sooner sued out; it is now fifteeen years since almost,
Horoces no^um prematur in annum; It has the same matter and form it had,
unaltered; only that ^f Esaias has the Conclusions all ^andled, and so suff^rs a
little ^ddition of what was not spo^en, to fill up the Text. I have ^^me
reasons why I make this walk in public, for, first, I owe so much to her
memory my self. 2. There is some need of ^eviving her graces for others that
knew her, among whom ^uch examples are rare living, and are rarely thought of
when the parties are dead; for we are very prone to bury good examples, but
evil examples have a daily Resurrection, 3. No great reason app^ars, but that
now when so many Wild Goose Quills are writing, and so many Soul poisoning, and
Faith blasting Themes are daily printed and published, to the detriment of many
Souls, set out with the plausible and gay flourishes of new Truth, and new
Revelations, but it will stand the servants of God in hand to put out something
practical, and sound, to fill the hands of their ^riends with that which is
wholesome, though it be not so glori^as to the eye and fancy, We run like the
Dromedary in the wilderness after Doctrines of new Theories, and we forget the
old rules of holy practical Theology; O that in Science we were more sober,
and in Conscience more sound! It was a true censure of our, and former times,
that the Primitive and foregoing servants of God had less Science, Beza in
Epist. lib. Epist. 1. Andreae Duditio.
and more Conscience: and our men and age have more Science, but less
Conscience. that is, less integrity and simplicity of Consciscience; the former
times were full of Fire, and ours full of Glowworms. That good Soul about whom
these ensuing lines were, might for a wakened and right Conscience) challenge
some praise, to set her forth as exemplary, specially to her rank, that they
might not strive to be called fine Ladies, Ladies always in the fashion, but
what is better, Ladies in the faith, and as St. John's Elect Ladies; But living
she desired it not, and dead she needs not any such thing. Flatterly commonly,
and Wit sometimes has gone very far in the praise of things, Pirkhaimerus
laudavit podagram. Janus D^uza umbram. Joannes Bruno Italus etiam Diab^lum.
Frid. Taubman in Virgil. Culic.
where all was an occult quality, so hidden as could not be found. Augustine
says of Julian the Pelagian, that he was [idoneus dicere panegyricum Satanae]
He was fit to make an Oration in praise of the Devil: And one Bruno an Italian
did expressly do it: But away with such fancies, it will be better for us to
enquire after the great Rabbis and Mastors under which she tutored did, and we
also may profit, and attain to exact holiness; and they were three great
Tutors, Melch. Adam. in vit. Luth.
that ( Luther writes) make a complete Divine, Meditation, Prayer, Temptation.
Reader, peruse, ponder, practice, thou may find what (rightly considered) may
teach thee to be a Christian Centinell, to watch thy Soul, and keep thy
spiritual peace carefully, lest thou come to the mournning and great cries of
Ramath, with Rachel, to weep if not for the Children of thy womb, yet for thy
peace and assurance, the Children of the Lords womb, and be much troubled
because they are not. A right use of the departure of good Souls may be learnt
so much the rather because it is so neglected, as if there were no more
thoughts of heart to be had about the withering of Roses, then the cutting up
of Nettles; the departure of a Stephen, and the death of a Cain. Thou may if
thou will receive some benefit, if not, this is one witness more against thee
then thou knew of before: good things if they profit not, they hurt. I will
not abuse my small leisure to a larger prodrom, or extended, Epistle, lest, as
the lips of a fool swallow up himself, Cicero de Accio. In orationibus multus
and ineptus. De legibus, lib. 1.
so my lines might be censured. If this and such like Treatises may keep any
from conversing in the frothy todder of Pamphlets idle and vain; or if any Soul
may hereby learn better to mind duty, and either keep or recover sense of sweet
mercy, he shall rejoice Who is

The Churches servant in the Gospel. T. C.

HEART-SALVE FOR A WOUNDED SOUL.
PSALM. 143.7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails, hide not thy face
from me, lest I be like to them that go down into the Pit.


IN this Psalm we have the Picture of David without his Harp, having laid aside
all his pleasant Tools, he is now in his poenitential plight: sadness sorts not
with Music: If we ask the reason of the metamorphosis of this holy man, from
his heights of joy to such depths of sorrow, he may answer with him who was a
Patriarch of the same Tribe of affliction, Job 30.30, 31.
My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burnt with heat, my Harp also
turned into mourning, and my Organ into the voice of them that weep. Or with
the words of this Verse, My Music fails, for my spirit fails: Let the living
rejoice, but I am as one dead and ready to be laid in the pit. The Septuagint
entitle the Psalm, In Hieronym. quadrupl. Psalterio. Quum furgeret Saulem.
Piscator.
A Psalm of David when he was persecuted by his son Absalom; the Original has
no such matter. The ground of the former is fetched from the 3, and 9, and last
Verses of the Psalm: True it is, this wicked Son often made his Father sing
with a heavy voice, where David was deceived in imposing on him the name of
Absalom, his Fathers Peace, his life signified no such thing, he being Benoni,
a Son of sorrow and mischief to his Father; whatsoever were the occasion, the
matter of the Psalm is evident, the light of Gods countenance, Gods audience of
his Prayers, the comforts of his Spirit, his power to sustain him, his Grace to
quicken him, all earnestly desired; these are the substance of this holy Psalm:
what the Father says of that Verse, Monachus qui non vigilat hunc versum non
potest dicere. Hieron in Psalm. 77.
Psalm. 77 4. Thou hold mine eyes waking, etc. a sleepy Monk cannot say that
Verse; the same may I say in another kind, a sleepy secure Christian, that
mourns not for his sins, and by faith and patience not earnestly trusting and
waiting upon God, cannot truly say this. The Psalm is a congress for a Combat,
or a pitched field 'twixt faith and distrust, the old and new man in the Soul
of a sanctified man; distrust of the flesh arms it self with a multitude of
sorrows, and fainting with waiting for Gods delayed help: Faith in the new man
comes strengthened with a multitude of Gods mercies against the multitudes of
miseries, waiting to spy Gods face, though he do for a while hide it; yea, as
winning the Battle, Ver. 9, 10
steadfastly concluding, Though thou hide thy face, yet art thou my God, and my
hiding place. Here, about Gods help, we have David requesting and reasoning
with God. The request are two, the reasons two, to move the Lord to grant his
re-requests. 1. Request is for audience, and that speedily. Hear me speedily, O
Lord. And that is backed with reason, why? What haste? why begest thou for so
speedy hearing? He gives the reason, My spirit fails, I can hold out no longer.
2. Request is for light of Gods countenance, Hide not thy face from me.

2. Reason, for that is the present peril he is in, even ready to die: If thou
hide thy face, Lord, I shall perish, and accompany them that lie in the pit. We
may frame him to our understanding, as if he thus pleaded with the Lord, Sum
and Sense.
How long, O Lord, will thou shut out my prayers, look upon me, and behold how
low I am brought; O hear me quickly, lest my tired spirit give over, lest my
faint heart, which has now no more strength to subsist without thy help, do
quite break off, as drowned in the whirl pit of my deep sorrows. Now at length,
O Lord, after my long waiting, send, and let shine the light of thy countenance
upon me, which may glad my Soul, show me thy face, which may raise me up again,
else if thou still delay, what is there can keep me alive any longer from the
company of them that are laid in the grave, and sleep under the c^o^s of death;
my life (without sense of thy love) being worse than death..

Hear me speedily: David he is in trouble and he betakes him to prayer: Prayer
is the sovereign Remedy the Godly fly to in all their extremities. The Saints
in sorrows have fled for comfort and healing unto Prayers and Supplications.
Heaven is a shop full of all good things, there are stored up blessings and
mercies; this the Children of God know, who fly to this shop in their
troubles, begging for help from this holy Sanctuary; Psalm 77.2.
In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. When any vexation makes our life
grievous unto us, what should we seek but help? of whom should we seek, but of
the Lord? how should we seek, Psalm. 116.3, 4.
but by prayer? My sore (says he) ran and ceased not; so his Soul ran and
ceased not to pray to the Lord. When the sorrows of death compassed him, and
the pains of hell got hold upon him, what was his course? then he got hold of
the Lord, and prayed unto him right humbly: Then called I upon the name of the
Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my Soul. We have to confirm this, for a
sure and saving way, Precept, Practice, Promise, Performance.

1. Precept, God commands us to pray at all times, especially in sad times.
Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. He commands us to depend on him for deliverance, and calling upon
him is the best dependence.

2. Practice, the Godly have walked in this way, which God has prescribed: All
David's Psalms will witness, that he coupled his troubles and prayers together,
Psa. 6. Psalm. 38. So Hezekiah, Esa 38.2.
at hearing the message of death, sent to the Lord a message of Prayers. So
Nehemiah in Jerusalems destruction, Nehem. 1.4, 5.
sought succor to her distress by prayer.

3. Promise, the Lord has armed us in our Petitions with hope, Esa. 65.24 John
16.23.
which is made up of sure Promises; we shall not pray to one that is deaf,
as soon as we can find our tongue, we shall find his ear: Every humble praying
sinner, shall have a hearing and helping Savior.

4. Performance; all Saints are ready to subscribe, We prayed, the Lord has
performed and delivered, This poor man cried, Psalm. 34.6.
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. This poor
woman, even Hannah prayed, 1^ a^. ^.19, 2^.
and the Lord heard her, he gaver her Samuel, the thing she asked of God, as
the name signifies: All the Saints cry, and by experience witness the Lords
performance upon their prayers: we have swimmed (say they) in all Seas of
sorrows, ready to sink, but prayer has held up our heads. I was in the stocks,
I prayed and am delivered, says Joseph; in the Lions den by prayer I muzzeled
those cruel Beasts, that they did not bite, says Daniel: our bed was made in
the fire, our coverings violent flames, prayer prevailed with the Lord to cool
all this heat, say the three Children. God has thus performed, he will still
perform; our evils are no greater, God is not deafer; he can still deliver, for
he is as strong; he will still deliver, for he is as loving and gracious; he
must hear and deliver us, for he is faithful, and will not deny his Seal and
Promise, which he has given us.

sent it, the arm of flesh cannot remove it. Has God wounded thee? seek not
then to the Devil, or the Witch his Agent for a Plaster: Art thou in poverty?
trust not to unlawful shifts, they may raise thee up again in the world, they
cast thee twice as low in the world to come. O the folly of worldly men, who
think with pleasures to drown their sorrows, with mirth to stop the mouth of
Conscience, and to laugh away the burden of their evils. Jer. 3.23.
In vain is salvation hoped for from the mountains; if God wound, worldly
comforts are but foolish Physic. There is no way like this, to fly to him by
Prayer; when we trust to earthly helps, we take no notice of Gods hand.

Secondly, 2 Use.
Lawful means may not be neglected; carnal and sinful means may not be used:
Better use none but prayer, then use all without prayer: As carnal and evil
helps are to be avoided, so let this give an exhortation for direction to the
Sovereign means of help in all our necessities and exigencies, to betake us
unto prayer, that, even for the time we pray, will mitigate and alleviate the
evil, and in Heavens appointed time will obtain a removal of it. The voice of a
good heart is that of the Prophets, Hos. 6.1^
Come let us return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us, etc.
Tender before God your troubled spirits, lay before him all your sorrows, he
will be overcome by fervent prayer, to lay unto them an equal, yea a far more
surpassing weight of mercies, in giving a gracious deliverance. The Prophet
knew the virtue of prayer to be so powerful, that he falls a wondering why God
can be angry with his people that prays: Psalm. 80.4.
For how can God be angry with a ^ruly praying heart? unless he will be angry
with his own Spirit, which teaches to pray, yea which frames the Petitions his
Children put up unto him. God cannot be displeased, and continue his wrath, if
there continue in me his Spirit of prayer, for then there should be discord
'twixt God the Father and the Holy Spirit, when yet they are but one God. If we
pleaded with the bare spirit of man, our Weapons were but Vitrea tela, Weapons
of Glass, Austin.
as the Father calls Heretics Arguments, quickly broken, of no force, but
being assisted by the Spirit of Grace, what shall stand in our way? not
tribulation, not anguish, not sorrow of mind, not temptations of Devil, not
malice of men, not the failings of our own hearts, for he that has given us
his Son to intercede above, and his Spirit to intercede below for us, and in
us, how shall he not wtth them give us all things else, especially things
concerning his Service? If God have any marks for his sheep, sure this is one,
that they call upon God, and are accustomed in all their needs to show their
rent fleeces, their weakness, their evils to the eye, and ear of the great
Shepherd of their Souls by prayer. If there be and so carnally foolish, as will
cavil at, and se^m this Heavenly habit of prayer, saying, Who can show us any
good that comes from it? many pray, but where is their Cross removed, and
blessings conferred by it? Zcch 12.10.
to such this good we can show, that though their deliverance do not appear,
yet this appears a sign of their adoption, and which shall certainly bring
them peace at the last, when all carnal men shall be accursed, Psalm. 14.4.
who have carried this mark of Goats, that they loved not to call upon God.
Besides, this good shall certainly come, their afflictions are sanctified to
them by prayer, and a sweet communion and fellowship is maintained 'twixt God
and the Soul, which is the only Heaven to be had upon earth.

Verse.
Here are two errors about prayer would be avoided. The first of wicked men, who
despise small evils, and use not to fly to the remedy of prayer, but at some
sore plunge and last pinch, when the Boat has tried all other Oars, and cannot
be brought safe into the Haven. It is not the custom of them that are
unaccostomed to Godliness, not to betake themselves to prayer, till worldly
helps are out of joint and cannot help them? Then when worldly means will not
delp our decayed estate, the last refuge is to call on God. When the
Apothecaries pots cannot draw them out of the bed of sickness, (after all)
prayer chooses God for the Physician. Mark 5.
When 12 years Physic will do no good, then the diseased woman cares not to
ask Christ his counsel. When death or the utmost end of any evil approaches,
then does the worldly spirit turn to God, because he cannot work it out
himself: an evil ordering, when God must be put in the second and last place.
Thus justly does God suffer men to despise small Crosses, till they by neglect
of prayer grow vehement and immense, like waters from the ankle to the chin.
Well worth St. Austine, who, In Confess. lib. 9.
when his teeth did but ache, did fly unto prayer, and desired them that were
present with him to pray for him, and with him: whereas we only foolishly,
ungodlily, do desire the prayers of others, and fly to our own prayers, only
when evils are grown great and ripe. Be our evils never so small, yet they may
grow greater, unless we take prayer the remedy for prevention.

Second error is of Godly men, who by the greatness of their sins, or
afflictions are kept and affrighted from prayer, as if it were only able to
remove lighter burdens; nay rather, they should be more diligent in prayer, by
how much more vehement their anguish is. If your evil be so great, why do you
increase it? Expectation of deliverance from the most leaden and heaviest
weights is not hopeless, unless we be prayerless. This is as if some silly one
should argue, Strong ropes and good tacklings, firm Masts, and whole Sails are
profitable in a calm Sea, but in a storm and violent tempest nothing will hold,
all will be broken with the Win^s, yea, ^^^^^^less, if in our calm or evil^
^^^^e^ be profitable, much more is it necessary when the winds blow, the rain
fall and the storms beat, for this will underprop and stablish a Christian to
keep him from falling.

But against prayer in those cases the Godly (deeply afflicted) have to shifts.

Fain would we pray, 1 Shift.
but in our prayers we find no delight, no spiritual relish in this duty: and
what shall we get in that if we go about it, for which we are so unfit and
indisposed? so shall we rather provoke God than any way please him. This is
called dryness and barrenness in spiritual exercises; yet why should this
hinder us? be our hearts never so dry and barren, this is the way to moisten
them: It may be through the trouble of our hearts we find no delight in our
devotions; John 5.
we know the Angel was in the Pool when the waters were stirred and troubled;
so though we think our troubled tumultuous thoughts, unfit to meet and commune
with God in prayer, yet even then Gods Spirit can move in those troubled
waters: our unfitness cannot hinder the fitness of Gods Spirit, whose best and
most prevailing language is troublesome groans and sighs that cannot be
expressed. Rhm. 8.
We may go to God unfit for prayer, and yet be marvellously fitted by him that
works upon hearts in the very act of prayer. Yea, surely, a prayer which is put
to God constrainedly, not to please our selves, for we find no taste pleasant in
it, but reemly to obey God, because it is his will, is very acceptable to him.
The more humble we are in misliking our prayers, the more commonly does the
Lord like them. This hindered not the Prophet in his distress, Psalm. 77.34
I am so troubled (says he) that I cannot speak; yet for all this he prays:
Esa. 38.14.
And Hezekiah, when his great sorrow so disturbed his prayers, that he seemed
rather to chatter like a reasonless Crane, than to speak like a man or pray
like a Servant of God; yet this cackling, chattering, troubled prayer brought
to him the sealed Patents of Gods Promise, for spinning out the thread of his
life to fifteen years length; what better prayer could the freest prayer have
brought? God knows our broken fighs, and loves our undigested troubled groans,
for he commonly dwells most pleasingly in troubled hearts; he takes our
prayers, not as they are heavy and distracted, dead and dull, but such as we
would have them, quick and fervent, lively and earnest.

Yea, 2 Shift.
but God seems to be our enemy, he hides away his face, and if the face be
turned away, the ear goes with it. Here the Serpent shows his tail, this is one
of Hells Arguments, to withhold the humbled heart from approaching the
welspring of comfort. Suppose God seem to be thy enemy, is not Christ's counsel
good, Matthew. 5.
to agree with thine adversary quickly, to appease him and make him thy friend
by supplication unto him? When two are at odds, the best way is to bring a
third person, to mediate betwixt them. Do thou feel a seeming sense of Gods
displeasure, then say I in like advise to that given to Abraham, Go take his
son, his only Son Jesus, offer him up to his Father upon the Altar of thy
contrite heart, pray him to be the third Person to mediate betwixt God and
thee; beseech this Heavenly Proctor and Advocate, to plead the causes of thy
Soul unto his Father; say unto Chrip, I dare not speak to God, he seems to be
my enemy, let thy blood speak for me, stand thou betwixt him and me and be my
reconciler, for in thee he is well pleased. The Prophet was in this case, he
would gladly pray to God, Mat. 3. Tantum aberat ut cogitatio de Deo mentem
inquietam micaret, ut contra nil aeque me perturbaret. Beza in Psalm. 77.3. in
Paraphrasi.
but the remembrance of God troubled him, when he saw (to his judgment) that
the tokens of Gods displeasure were upon him. But against this fear we may be
bold and confident in it, that if God be displeased, he cannot refuse the sighs
of a contrite heart, let this sacrifice smoke before him, and Gods displeasure
cannot long smoke against thee; Satan may be displeased at it, but believe him
not when he tells thee, that for all this God is displeased.

Speedily: his request is not only for hearing, but for speedy hearing: Hear
me, and hear me speedily: answer, and answer quickly; this is the tone and tune
of men in distress. Man in misery earnestly sues for speedy delivery. In our
afflictions and troubles, deliverance though it should come with wings, we
never think it comes soon enough. Weak man cannot content himself to know he
shall have help, unless it be present help. Accelera quia magna esset poena mea
tarditas tua. Card. de Aliaco in Psalm. 31. Qui nunquam Solemn nec orientem, nec
occidentem viderunt. Cicero de finib. lib. 2. Smyndirides the Sybarite bragged
of his blessed voluptuous life, that for 20 years he never saw the Sun either
rising or setting. Athen. Dipuos. li. 6. c. 8.
If evil fall upon us in the night, we would have it removed ere the morning;
if in the morning, we would not have it our bed fellow in the evening. We would
have the Lords Promise run thus, Your sorrows shall not endure the whole night,
your joy shall come long before the morning. The luxurious Emperor and his
drunken mates eat and drank all the night, and slept all the day, in so much as
it was said of them, they never saw Sunset nor Sunrise. Such would we have
our evils we suffer, of so short continuance, as might neither have Sunset nor
Sunrise, to see us in our misery. Which makes me marvel at that strange
Egyptian Beast called Pharaoh, who being demanded by Moses, when he would have
Gods Plague of the Frogs removed, answered, Exo. 8.1^.
To morrow. Surely here he spoke not as a man, to whom an hours trouble is
accounted a day, a day a month, a month seems a year. For in leaving of two
things we change our desires, and are much different.

1. In leaving of sin, there we procrastinate and put off; and when God says,
to day hear my voice, we answer, to morrow, and are like the Levites Father too
kind hosts to such bad Guests; Judge. 19.6.
O my sins, you shall not be left to day, tarry till the morning; our pace to
repentance is slow, far from haste.

2. But for afflictions to leave us, Psalm. 55.6.
there we wish they had feet like hindes feet, to run away from us, or we the
wings of a dove to fly away from them, and be at rest. The Prophet, who had
good shoulders to bear much, yet cares not how soon the weight were off them:
Psalm. 40.13
Be pleased (O Lord) to deliver me. How long time would he willingly lie under
his troubles? does he desire God to help him after some months and years? alas,
no, within some few hours; Make haste (says he) to help me. Yea, because God
seems to come slowly, he entreats him to amend his pace, Make no long tarrying,
O my God, Ver. 17.
in the day when I call, answer me speedily. He would be helped the first day of
his trouble; nay, Psa. 102.2.
and he would not have the day spent neither; speedily let it be, betimes, even
in that day. What Prisoner desires not to be presently set free, and that
liberties soft hand may loose his Iron knots? what Mariner wishes a long storm?
what Servant sighs not for his hard Apprentiship? yea, who is he, th^^ if there
were an appear^^^^ of (...) offering to take the C^p o^ calam^ty ^^om his
mouth, saying, Thou shall ^ri^k no more, would answer, This Cup shall not yet
pass ^^om me. I delig^^ to carouse and drink deeply of these bitter waters:
yea, this desire extends so far, as it comes to the Son of Man, the blessed
Seed of the Woman, who was so clad with our humane weakness, as that he
earnestly prays for speedy help from his heavy anguish, and that not once, but
often, O my Father, if it be possible, etc. and when his Father answers not, he
cries like one ready to fall under the burden, My God, my God, etc. The reason
in Christ thus complaining is to be fetched from thence, whence his flesh came,
even from us; it was our humane flesh not his divine Spirit which was so weary
of suffering; his Spirit was willing, it was our flesh that was so weak.

And the reason in us is that to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.11.
all chastisement for the time is sharp and uncoo^h some; affliction is
grievo^^ (...) present to mankind^, (...) among some Priests (...) Baal, th^^
(...) ^e lancing of (...) foolish ^^^rs of the Romans Baal, (...) d^^ght for
penance to lash and whip their own skins; few or else none but they shrink at
the Cross.

Or we may fetch the Reason

wisdom be not thrust out of the Chair, and carnal Policy put in the room of
it. There are such unlawful shifts and shifters, that when they have waited a
while and help comes not, they bid farewell to dependence on God, and as it were
resolve, we will tarry no longer, come brains plod for release; now Policy and
arm of fleshly helps play thy part; now carnal shifts invent a means of safety.
I do confess, we may thus get a deliverance, but it is a deliverance with a
vengeance, when there is neither Gods Hand and Seal at it, nor our faith in it;
it proceeds from an incredulous, impatient heart to say, when help is deferred
(with that impious King) Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 King.
6.33.
If we love help and release, let us cleave only to God that Rock of help, and
look for it only at his hand, It comes soon enough, and in a good time, what
time soever it come, if it come from him.

Simon of Cyrene) thou travel a long way with an heavy Cross upon thy neck. He
that believes makes not haste, for in too much haste we we may come to
stumble in Gods service. As the Prophet confesses, his hastiness made him
stumble; being long afflicted, Psalm. 116.11.
He said in his haste, all men were liars, that thought there were hopes of
deliverance. When we in passion cry out, God has forgotten me, does not our
patience stumble? our confidence, does it not here cath a fall, and cannot keep
his feet? Beware lest Satan give thee a reed instead of a staff, and cause thee
in thy weakness to think God is weak, and I am now past remedy; or his truth is
weak, he will not keep promise to deliver me. Oftentimes Satan raises in the
minds of Gods afflicted ones an hard conceit of God, that he loves them not,
that he cares not for them, and all is by dashing them upon this Rock, because
he delays and does not speedily help them. It is a point of precious wisdom to
learn with Paul and Silas to sing in the stocks; to be a Scholar in Jobs form,
praising God even upon the dunghill, patiently expecting deliverance, though it
come with a slow foot. Quod non verisimile scribit, Joan. Gerar. 1 Vossius de
Orig. Idololat. lib. 3. cap. 44.
The Jews Hebrew Language ('it is thought by some) shall be used in Heaven, but
their words in the desert are the very Language of Hell, to murmr, grumble,
and repine at the Lords doings, if the Salve be not as ready as the sore, and
meat as ready as their appetite. This same speedy deliverance is good, but to
trust and depend upon the Lord in his Word of Truth, when help lingers and is
long a coming, this is far better. Gladly would I with good Jonathan shoot some
Arrows, 1 Samuel 20, 55 36.
to let David in his trouble know what to do, and how to collect, that we may
have the Lords love, and the Lords Rod both together, and a long time to
scourge us without ease, and speedy help: and thus I shoot them in these
considerations, it may be some instead of Jonathans Boy will gather them, and
take them up.

1. Consider that the Lords reasons are for thy good, though he do not speedily
deliver thee; now the Lord means to try what is in thee; thou made good shows
in the day of prosperity and ease, now he has brought thee to the proof, to see
if thou made not false flourishes and gave the view of Clouds without any
water in them: Jude ver. 12.
He has brought thee into the field, to see how thou can clasp hold of him,
and wrestle with faith and patience. There were fair promises as great as
Peter's in thy mouth, he has brought thee into the High Priests Hall, to try
what is in thy heart: 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
thus he tried Hezekiah. God loved Joseph, though in the stocks, yet he made
not that haste he desired to help him; he suffered the Butler to forget him;
this was harsh, that both God and man should seem to fail him, yet was it for
his profit and proof, all this while was the Lord a trying him in his affiance,
patient dependence, and then he must be delivered, and the Prince looses him,
and sets him free, Psalm. 105.28, 19, 20.
when the time of Gods Word is come, and when the Word has tried him: our time
of deliverance is come, when time of trial ends. Thus is it with thee, look to
thy self, the Lord is trying thee, play thy part of confidence, and hope in God
well in thy troubles and then for one blessing thou expectest, thou shall have
two; God will both release thee and praise thee. Art thou not yet helped? why,
suffer a while longer, thou art not yet tried, the Lord knows well enough the
way he takes with thee, and when thou art tried, Job. 23.10
thou shall not only come forth, but thou shall come forth as gold that is
tried in the fire, fitter by the fire to make a vessel of honor.

2. Consider, the great benefit that the Lord would bestow on us by deferring
help: the Lord by this means teaches thee an Art beyond all the seven liberal
Sciences, the Art of prayer: In prayer we have special familiarity with God;
but prayer in deep affliction comes nearer him than at any other time, and is
more welcome to him! We should never learn to beg right and soundly, but by
begging often and frequently. Often visits breed stronger and dearer
acquaintance 'twixt friends. I will willingly be acquainted with troubles to
get acquaintance with the Lord, and his Court of mercy. When we are fain to
pray again and again, it teaches us to seek out several Arguments and motives
to move God; some from his power, he is able to help us; some from his truth,
Psalm. 77.8, 9
Lord what is become of thy true promise, is thy Covenant come to an end for
evermore? some from his love and mercy, Have thou forgotten to be gracious? Art
thou that God of whom they sing. His mercy endures for ever; and have thou no
mercy to hear and help me? Thus like a scruple in our estates, which makes us
seek all the Court Rolls, do our longing affections lead us to God with earnest
and urgent prayers, and seek out the wisest and movingst Arguments to put life
into our Prayers. O the excellent learning of afflictions, which teach us to
search out all Gods Promises, to lay to our own hearts and before his eyes by
faithful prayer. There is a great deal of difference betwixt a prayer in ease,
Coloss. 4.12. Agonizein en tais proseuchais
and that in adversity, especially spiritual troubles: there is more Art and
Arms, more wisdom, more life, and feeling in the one, than in the other: it is
one thing to pray, another thing to strive in prayer.

III.
Consider that the longest trouble is but short in several respects

1. In respect of the time of our sinning: Thou suffer but a week, thou have
lived in sin many weeks and months; or, thy grief lasts a year, have thou not
provoked God many a year? Job 11.6.
We love indeed long faults and short rods: we should never be free from
scourges, if the Lord continued striking so long as we continue sinning, God
exacts less than our iniquities deserve.

2. In respect of God it is long to us, it is short to him: with him a thousand
years are but as one day; we seem to suffer a thousand hours, this unto him is
but as one minute. 2 Pet. 3.8
It is not our sentence, but Gods Judgment that must stand for giving
estimation to any thing. He calls our suffer^^gs but a To 'nun, sufferings of
this present time.

3. In respect of tha^ (...) and en^less eas^ (...) bo^^ suc^^eds (...) ^^ese
sorrow ^^d sufferings (...) now criest, make haste to help me, hear me
speedily, how long shall I be vexed in my Soul? thou will one day say, O happy
heavy afflictions, for a night, which have brought such joy in the morning:
Blessed temptations, which though grievous and tedious in the end, have brought
me to glory and peace without end. Who will be afraid of suffering a little
while with Christ here, that he may be a partner of everlasting glory with him
hereafter? Jacobs hard seven years service, he counted but short, compared with
that sweet society he should have with his wife at the end. We suffer an hour,
we shall reign for ever. Compare a moment and eternity together: we shall weep
but a short time, we shall have a long time of joy for it. The Lord would have
us consider how he will make amends for our sufferings. Esa. 54.7,
It is but for a small moment that I have forsaken thee, but with great mercies
will I gather thee: In (...) little wrath I hid my self from thee, for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer. It is good being scourged an hour, to have the Rod cast away for
ever. O how well should we endure the sorest afflictions, if we did but
consider that they are light and momentany, yet work unto us an exceeding
surpassing weight of glory?

4. Consider, 1 Cor. 4.
thou have a safe way by resignation of thy self in to the Lords hands; Non
corrigat aeger Medica menta sua Austin. Psalm. 146.
Cast thy self upon him, he brought thee in, trust him with it, he will in good
time bring thee out: Conclude with thy self, if release do not yet come, it
must and will chme, for God is faithful who has promised; Submit to his hands
and handling; being sick do not correct and find fault with thy Physic; the
Physician knows best what and when any thing is fittest for us; when these
corrasives have eaten out sins foul matter, then the Cordials of Gods Spirit of
Peace shall refresh thy Soul. Paterete curari ita sananduses. Aug.
We would have no tart nor bitter Medicine, when God knows it may be Sugar
would mar our Physic. Impatient man would have the Plaster pulled off the
sore too soon, before the wound be either drawn or closed. Give the Lord leave
to do his pleasure, he continues thy grief, because hasty Physic might do thee
hurt. If the Lord heals us slowly, say to thy self, Be contented, O my Soul, it
is for thy good, that he may do it soundly.

5. Consider, that when one eye sails thou must get another, when the eye of
sense is shut up, open the eye of faith, and thou shall see wonders. Look up
and wait upon God with that eye, and then thou shall sweeten darkness with the
hope of light, peep under the black leaves of sorrow, and see a goodly fruit of
joy budding forth; which shall appear in time. Exercise faith to see him that
is invisible, and that secret arm which all this while supports thee. O! if
thou could well look upon that eye, thou should see there is one at Gods
right hand, who cannot forget thee, yea, in thy troubles he is at thy right
hand, Psalm. 16.
stopping and breaking the strength of temptations blows, so as thou shall not
greatly be moved; yea, he carries thee in his arms, Psalm. 22.14. Psa. 34.20
so that not one of thy bones shall be broken, though they may be astonished a
while, and out of joint. And if the Lord take care and count of thy bones and
hairs, surely his care is more for thy Soul, it shall never miscarry; only
learn thou a Lesson over, and beyond the leaf of sense, and present feeling, to
see something in nothing, to believe that the Bush shall not be hurt, though
the fire be in it; to hope for a sweet kernel within the hardest shell, and to
see the Son of Man walking with thee in the midst of thy furnace. Look as well
upward to the Crown, Revel. 2.17.
on which is writ, Vincenti dabitur, To him that overcomes, as to the bottom of
thy deep Cross; with an holy indifferency resolve to endure the Lords good
pleasure: Say unto him, this trouble (O Lord) is grievous, O haste to deliver
me: yet (O Lord) my will shall wait (as a servant) upon thine: I will suffer
any thing, only sanctify thou my sufferings, and strengthen me to bear them.

6. Lastly, consider and often ruminate upon the Saints carriage, and words in
the like extremities; if thou be wearied running with footmen, how would thou
ever have kept with the Horses? if thou be so discouraged in shallow foords,
what would thou have done if thou had swimmed with them in the swellings of
Jordan? J^^. 12.9. Esa. 8.17. Psa. 31.24 Esa. 43.1.
I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will look for him. Habak. 2.3. See Jonah 2.2. Micah 7.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 73.25, 26,
27, 28. Psalm. 23.4. Psalm. 42.11. Psalm. 130.5.6, 7. Job 23.10, 11. Jerem. 30.11.
Lament. 3.24, 25, 26. and 31, 32. Romans 8.18. and 35. to the end 2 Timothy 1.12.
Heb. 10.35, 36, 37. To this purpose the prayer of Fulgentius in his sore
sickness was not ill-beseeming a Saints behavior, Do^ine, da mihi modo
patientiam and postea indulgentiam: Lord, here give me a little patience, and
hereafter thy merciful indulgence.

My spirit fails: This is David's first reason to move the Lord, he is at the
last cast and even giving up the ghost, with long waiting for help: from his
low condition we may see what is often the condition of Gods Children, That the
best of Gods servants have waited for comfort and the feelings of his Spirit,
to the very failing of their own spirit. David, a man after Gods own heart, is
yet brought low with the faintness and failing of his heart, in waiting for
help from God. Genesis 3.19
In the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat bread; this lies upon the Sons of men.
But here not to sweat of face only, that were but small, but to sighs and
fainting of the heart lies upon the Sons of God, in seeking and hungring after
a taste of Gods Bread of life, inward comfort, assurance, and joy of the Holy
Ghost: Thus the Church was brought to this sick bed, ere her comfort came. Lam.
1.16
For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the
comforte^ that should relieve my Soul is fa^ from me. The Disciples spirits
were even failing in the Tempest when Christ slept, and seemed to neglect them,
as if he cared not though they perished. How should our spirits do other bu^
fail, when our Comforter sleeps when our only friend seems to b^ our enemy?
Psa. 88.15.
I am afflicted (says the Prophet) and even ready to di^ while I suffer thy
terrors distracted or, with a troubled mind.

The good man of an house may sit quietly at peace within his own house, and
under his roof, though there be quarrellings and tumults without doors: but if
there be no troubles without, if there be wounds, and fightings and terrors
within, this wounded spirit is hard to bear up, have we never for strong reins
of patience, all is little enough to keep it from fainting. The heart of man is
much like an unquiet Dame of an house, if she be not pleased, all is in a
tumult, the house is full of tempests, this dry land is more stormy than the
Sea; and till she be pacified, Pro. 21.9.
Solomon thinks if a man get to the housetop, he gets him not far enough from
the mischief. Such tumults in the thoughts, such fears in the mind does the
heart disquieted stir up, if it want a pacifying feeling, an inward settling,
it disturbs all without and within, it maks that there is no rest in the bones,
no soundness in the flesh, all strength fails, and all the Orderly Offices of
this little Commonwealth of Soul and body are thrust out of order. This
spiritual inward War being like a Civil War in a State, Faelix ille defectus
non veniens ex infirmitate animi, sed ex fortitudine desiderii i^ promossum
Dei. Alhinus in Psalm 98.
which brings the strength of the best things in it to weakness: So we hear the
Saints complain of eyes failing with waiting, hands with stretching forth, Soul
with sighing, and body pining, when God hides his face, delays grant of prayer,
removes not the hideous face of sin from being presented to the Souls eye,
without hopes of pardon; and thereby suffering the heart to be steept in gall
and wormwood that if their strength were strength of stones, and flesh o^
brass, yet it can harldly hold out, as Job argued. Job 6.12.


Ex difficultate and delatione sanitatis, fit diligentior custodia receptae
sanitatis. Card. de Aliaco in Psalm. 6.
they will do them the most good when they get them. When we come so hardly to
the sense of Gods love, it will make us hug it, and embrace it the more, and
safely lock it up in our hearts, that we lose it not, to be put to as much cost
and care in recovering it. When as the Captain said of his Romish freedom, so
we can say of our spiritual freedom, With a great sum I obtained this freedom:
we shall then count t a precious prerogative, and look well to it that we lose
not the comforts of it. None is so careful of that Lesson, 1 These. 5.
Quench not the Spirit, as he whom it has cost much labor to kindle the
sparks of that fire. Bid such an one in Paul's Text preached to him, Quench not,
Ephesians. 4.
and grieve not that good Spirit; he will answer, I have good cause to look
that I grieve it not, for with great grief obtained I the joy of it. The Spouse
in the Canticles represents every careful Soul that comes hardly to its
comfort, Cantic. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
when she has had weary heart and foot in seeking Christ in bed, City, streets,
broad ways; at last when she finds him, she lays not a slack hand on him, but
careful to keep her dearbought comfort, she holds him fast, and will not let
him go, and carries him to her Mothers house, and Chamber, is very watchful in
keeping him, whom she (after long labor) found. And indeed if God should let
us come to our desires more easily, we should be the more careless in keeping
those good things. Short gettings have commonly short cares, or less esteem,
and valuing of them.

I will not contend sait^ the Lord) for ever, neither will be always wroth;
Why? we deserve his wrath should last an^ take fire for ever against us; yea
but (says the Lord) this is the reason, Esa. 57.16.
The spirit should then fai^ before me, and the Souls which (...) have made: I
love and pity the fainting Souls and Spirits of men, I will help my Children;
how can I see my Creatures whom I made, and do love, to perish for want of my
help? David knew the Lords nature, and that this was a speeding argument in
prayer, which made him here and elsewhere, so often use it. A p^tiful Father
will no^ (...) ^his Children utte^^^ (...) opportunity, he usually helps when
all other helps fail, that we may ^he more strongly cleave to him, and ground
our selves upon him, as knowing how infirm we are, if he confirm us not. When
man's Cruse of Oil is dry, and fails, can drop no more, then is Gods time to
prepare his. Thus helped he the Israelites at the Red Sea, when all man's
strength and wisdom was at a stand. He loves to be seen in the Mount, in
extremities. These are the truest glasses to show Gods truth, power, wisdom,
goodness, and to show to man his own Nothingness, Valiant humana praesidia quae
nos deserunt modo in anima spes firma ma^eat, Deum nobis servatorem non de
fore, qui saepe gentem harc eripuit exitio. Philo Iud. in Legate. ad Cajum.
Emptiness, Vanity, that he can do nothing with the strongest brawn of his own
fleshly arm. We should never learn rightly this Lesson of dependence upon God
alone, if he did not delay deliverance ofttimes to the very failing of our
Spirits.

1. Art thou then in that shi^ which is tossed, and Christ sleep^ and helps
thee not? does thy spirit fail in struggling with the stro^ sense of inward
misery, want (...) Grace, or want of the joy (...) Grace? Learn at that time t^
look on thy condition aright: Loo^ not on thy self in thy self, but loo^ upon
thy self in the Saints se^ thy case in the Saints common case. Thou art not
singular, God sheep have commonly been thu^ marked.

Thou think God has forgotten thee: yes, he has forgot thee as he forgot his
Children heretofore. Thus he forgot David, Job Paul, they were brought to
perplexity, though not to despair; we are cast down but not destroyed I entreat
thee, tell me if this ^hy, comfortless estate, shall bring thee the jocund
offspring of the world, whom conscience sleeping never troubles; ^ Cor. 4.8, 9.
Cain the Builder, Juba^ the merry Musician, worldly Nabal, carnal Ishmael,
temporizing Demas, or any of that fleshly Tribe, who never knew one sigh of a
penitent heart, nor ever came ^ear to the failing of their spirit in waiting
upon God. O no, ^hou say, it is fearful to be sor^ed with these, whose
Candle God will put out, who spend their days in jollity, Job. 11.13.
and in a moment ^umble into the grave. But now the Lord has dealt well with
thee, having joined thee to the number of his own; thus has he scourged
(though not in the same degree) every Son and Daughter he has received, thus
have they been taught to mourn before him. Great joy ought it to be to us, that
we bear the same Livery and Badge upon earth, which they once wore, who are now
the blessed Courtiers of Heaven.

The Apostle was so far from troubling himself for it, that he bids all others
cease troubling him, and take heed what they do to him, for he carries in his
body the noble marks of sufferings, and wounds for Christ; he gloried in it:
Gal. 6.
Let no man henceforth trouble me, for I bear in my body the mar^ of the Lord
Jesus. O high dign^tion, to be like Christ in any (...) state, yea, though it
be in h^ sweating, suffering, and sighi^ out his My God, my God, why ha^ thou
forsaken me? 2 Cor. 4.10.
For if we bear about the dying of the Lord Jesus, is for our future comfort
that the li^ of Jesus may be manifest in our mo^tal bodies. Remember we the^
always, that be our spirits never so low, Gods dearest Children have been in
the same pit yea, an^ lower than we, and yet God a^ length raised them up from
these hopeless depths. Psalm. 22.15. Psalm. 119.82.
They cried til^ their tongues failed, with long praying for deliverance; their
eyes failed with waiting, their hands failed with being lif^ up. And yet which
of these waited upon God in vain? None of them; tell us amongst all these
failings that God failed, and did not at length give them their hearts desire.

Meque istis potius societ quam congreget illis, Prosper. in Verse de
Providentia.

Quos jam summoto permisit verbere, cursu
Ire voluntatis --
David's course, though he cried out of failing, yet he failed not of crying to
his God. The weaker we are, it should make us cry the faster. So long as the
Spirit of prayer fails not in us, so long the Spirit of power will not fail to
uphold us: only cry we as men far cast down, Lord, if thou will forsake me, yet
Lord, forsake me not long: Psalm. 119.8. Defect enim Spiritus meus, ut impleat
me Spiritus tuus Prosper. in Psalm. Esai. 40.29, 30, 31.
My spirit now fails me, that thy Spirit may help, and fill me; for so some
gloss upon this Verse. For this is is the ground of the application of Gods
Promise, and for our encouragement. Are we weak? now is the time come he
promised to help us: He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might he increases strength: Even the youths shall faint and be wear^ and the
young men shall utterly fall But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength, etc. An^ again, when we are thinking, (...) I shall never get out of
this troublesome evil: the Lord answers Fear not, Esa. 41.10.
for I am with thee, be n^ dismayed, for I am thy God. Ye^ but I have no more
strength t^ wait upon God; then have w^ Gods answer, I will strength thee, I
will help thee. O but the Cross is so heavy, I shall fail an^ perish under it.
No (says he) will uphold thee with the right han^ of my righteousness. Here is
(...) large and liberal promise: Tho^ have Gods Word, Gods hand^ Gods help,
Gods strength, tho^ may utterly fail if his strengt^ fail thee. If thou
criest on him t^ look at his Promises, and remember his Covenant with his
Children, he cannot finally neglec^ thee, unless Christ sleep in his sea^ of
intercession, or his memory perish that he forgets his Children, or he forget
his own hands, where his Childrens names and necessities are engraven. Esa.
54.11
For this end in crying and calling upon him, the failing spirit may plead with
these two strengthening Arguments.

As first, that it stands much for Gods glory that he do help us in respect of
ungodly and impious men. Thus may it be urged, If thou suffer my spirit to fail
and me to perish, then Lord thou losest not only thy Creature, but thy Glory
also: let none of thy glory be diminisht; Psalm 79 10.
For why should the Heathen say, where is now their God? If God cast off his
Children, and give them not deliverance, Religion would receive a great blow,
and ungodly men would speak evil of his ways and worship. They whose service is
sin, when they see Gods devout Children are at a low ebb, and in a deep
extremity, then they throw dung in the face of Religion, and cry, there, there,
Psalm. 35.25. Job 4.6.
so would we have it. Is not this the fruits of your fear, confidence,
uprightness of your ways, and your hope? This is the fruits of Religion and
profession, it spoils all our mirth, see how it makes them melancholy and
pensive, they are all alike unsociable, and uncomfortable; who will enter that
path which leads to such sadness? Beseech God to let thy case be no impediment
to his Glory, by hindering and deferring those that are without, from coming in,
lest they dislike Religion for thy sake. God has sometimes said, he would do
good to his Children, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27.
that their enemies might not have cause to lift up their Horns.

Call on him to do it for his own Childrens sake, that are within the Church;
Psalm. 69.6.
Let not them that wait on thee be ashamed for my sake, O God of Hosts, let not
them that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel. As if he said,
There are many weak in the the faith, O Lord, who trust in th^e, and if thou
fail me, they will be scandalized, their weakness will make them stagger, and
start back, when they see thy Promises fail toward me; how shall they trust in
those Promises for themselves, which they see have failed others? Nay, Lord,
rather deliver me, that the weak thereby may be the more strengthened thou
shall get glory by bringing many both to praise thee, and trust in thee more
confidently for my sake, or for thy promises gracious performance toward me;
Psalm. 66.16.
They that fear thee will be glad when they see me, because I have hoped in thy
Word, yea, the righteous shall then resort unto my company; I will call them
and tell them what great things thou have done for my Soul: Further, in thus
delivering me, much praise and glory shall come to thy name, thanksgiving shall
be sent to thee by many in my behalf, who will shout for joy, and say, Psalm.
35.27.
Praised be the Lord, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.

lesson'd who has his Soul replea^ with peace and quietness in his God, ^eatus
es, si cor tuum triplii timore repleveris; ut ti^eas quidem pro accepta ratia,
amplius pro amissa, nge plus pro recuperata. ^rnard supra Cantic. Sermon. 4.
to lock the Promises within his heart, to cherish and keep burning that good
fire lest wit^ many strong blasts of prayers he cannot get it kindled afresh,
when once it is somewhat quenched, and dying out. For this purpose it behooves
those who are yet in the Sunshine of peace, and lightsomness of heart, to
rejoice in God and his mercies, to labor as much to keep it, as ever they
labored to get it.

1. To beware of sin, that they fall not into any wickedness, for that will
devastate the Conscience, and spoil its peace.

2. They should cherish and make much of Gods Spirit, and the joyous motions it
stirs up in them. Guests stay with us according to their welcome; bad
ente^tainment, and neglect of them, gives us their backs instead of their
faces: Ephesians. 4.
Grieve not the Spirit of God.

3. Keep we our hearts exercised in good things, prayer, hearing, reading,
meditation, those put forth our Talents we have, to come in with more increase.
Take we heed, if such good means be not used, we may come to see our Candle
burn dim, and with perplexed hearts, and sorrowing spir^ts, as Joseph and Mary,
we may come to seek our Comforter, and be long without him, till our spirits be
ready to fail in seeking, because our care and diligence failed in keeping.

spiritual dejections, and spiritua^ resurrections. Where is ^ha^ man, and who
is that Saint an^ Servant of God, that perished in waiting upon God, and
expecting his help? Our comfort may be long in coming, but at length it shall
come and not deceive us: either the tongue shall cry it after long waiting, Mr.
Glo^^r Mattyr in Fo^es Acts and ^onum.
He is come, he i^ come; or the heart shall feel it, or find it, it may be
without, but certainly beyond expressions. It may be that the noon, afternoon,
evening, night, may all hold him in the bonds of vexation, but (undoubtedly)
joy comes in the morning: If it cannot be found in the beginning, no nor in a
long time in the proceedings; yet, Mark the perfect man, Ps. 37.37.
and behold the upright, for the end of that man shall be peace. There are who
have been brought from those desperate conclusions made in the strength of
temptations, Geoffry of Peronne in vita St. Bern. lib. 4. c. 3.
I shall never be mermerry again so long as I live, to tell the same party,
being strongly filled with new quickening hopes, If I told thee before I should
never in my life be joyful, 2 Timothy 2.
now I assure thee, I shall never any more be sorrowful. Though we should be so
low, as we were hopeless, yet God must continue faithful, he cannot deny
himself, 1 Cor. 10.13.
he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.

David's request that God would not hide his face, see this Position, That God
has his times of hiding and showing his face to his Children, and all for
their good: both by declared favor, and seeming displeasure, God leads on his
Children unto blessedness. All the months of the year are not alike, some make
the earth horrid with frosts and mists, and large expenses out of the Lords
Treasury of Hail and Sow, as in Job, Job 38.22.
the Lord calls ^t; others make the fiel^ (...) with abundance of flower (...)
fruits, the Sun with his revi^ing heat, putting life into bird bud, and beast.
Shall, we than^ God for May and not for March The dispensing of fair and foul
seasons are both acts of Divine Providence, for the good of man and beast.
Epiphan.
He that is God of the Summer, is as good a God of the Winter, in spite of the
blaspheming Manichees, procuring our good in the one, as well as in the other.
Thus is it with Man the abridgement of Gods Creation, and with the holy man the
object of his more special love; The Sun shines not always alike on him, he is
sometimes joyed with a sense of Gods love, by and by in sorrow through some
growing afflictions: his months are sometimes watery as April, sometimes
mirthful as May, and yet by all these varieties his field of sanctification
becomes more fruitful. All the months of Jobs years were not alike, Job 29.2.
O that I were (says he) as in the months past: What were those seasons?
lightsome days, prosperous, favorable, Gods Candle burnt over my head, all
went with a sweet stream. But now he possesses months of grief and darkness, he
goes mourning without the Sun, Job 30.
yet we know all these wrought for his good, the glory of his patience, the
excellency of his affiance, the worthiness of his hope, when the blind eye of
man could epsy nothing but what appeared hopeless. These changes of joy and
sorrow are not because the Lord is changed, for he is immutable and changes
not; but they signs of our changeableness. When God bestows good things on us,
and his favor is toward us, we are ready to change this into occasion of
pride, and security; thereupon the Lord strips us of our consolations, and
sends some Messenger of Satan to buffet us, lest we should be puffed up, or
because we are puffed up. 2 Cor. 12^.


1. Lest we should, for prevention: And is not this for o^r good, when the
poison is taken out (...) our hands, which we are ready t^ drink?

2. Because we already are, for our humiliation: and is not this for our good
also, that like Tenant we might acknowledge of whom we hold? In a short time
yo^ shall see David both up and down, Psalm. 30.6.
by the Lords hand so setting him in prosperity; up, by his own security, Ver.
7.
I shall never be moved: Presently he is down; down, by the Lords hiding his
face, as a pricking of this windy Bladder, that his proud confidenec may fall;
and down in own sad apprehensions; then I was troubled, and saw how quickly the
Lord can abase our highest thoughts, and turn away his face from us.

We do not always find God writing pleasant Epistles to his Children, he
sometimes writes bitter things.

all things always continue alike. The Sun if it rise with us, in its very
rising it is passing from us to the West. In Heaven the glorious light rides
always in the East, there is no declination, nor setting; the Lord is an
everlasting light. Here all things are full of Transitions, joy sits but while,
then sorrow takes the room. Eccl. 1, 4.
One generation passes, and another comes. In our way to Heaven we must look
for change of ways, many turnings; only at our journies end we find a good,
and always remaining good estate, durable and immutable: When once we come in
presence of that face of glory, there is no Cloud can ever be interposed 'twixt
us and it, to hide it from us. Earth would be too like Heaven, if our good
things did fasten their foot with us, and we should know no change.

he will burst like a bottle, unle^^ God give him some vent: If (...) be empty,
he will burst with impatience, unless God put some meal into the barrel. Man's
han^ is paralytick, cannot hold the balance even, one of the Scales go too
low by too much sorrow, o^ is lifted up by too much presumptuous and secure
joys. 2 Cor. 2.
We cannot well grieve, but over-grieve; and when we joy, we are subject to be
over joyed. Only we have a wise God, that knows our temper and whereof we are
made, and so disposes of us, that we shall sometimes have matter o^ patience in
our afflictions, other times matter of praise and thanks in a condition more
easy and prosperous. Surely I think these two excellent virtues would scarcely
be found, were it not for the vicissitude and changes of sweet and bitter. For
where would God get his due thanks, if he did not sometimes manifest his face
and favor to his Children? and what use had we for patience, Heb. 10.36,
if God suffered us not sometimes to wait for his countenance to shine on our
persons, and his accptance of our prayers, and grant of our desires? Here is
now some work for that Grace.



Consider the workman, it is Christ, who can bring light out of darkness, heal
with wounding, fetch water out of flints, and beget good to be brought out of
the womb of evil. That God who made waters stand like a wall, who quickened the
dead and barren womb of Sarah; that God who made a Maiden a Mother, Was not the
Virgin Mary meter anandros parthenos brephotrophos. Joan. Euchaitens. in
Jambic. Genesis 1.11 and 16.
who raised the Prince of righteousness and glory out of a Manger who made the
earth bring forth fruit before there was a Sun to shine upon it; that God, I
say, who works by contrary means, and without means, why should we distrust him
working by unlikely means? He turns away his face from thee, it is for thy
good, to strengthen thy faith in waiting and praying, to bring thee to loath
and distaste worldly comforts, when thou find so little health and help in
them, and to raise thy affections to run the faster him. When we think God is
so angry with us, Psalm. 39.
as no better end can be expected, than that his sore strokes should consumes
us, and make an end of us, then has the Lord worthy ends intended; working for
his own glory, and his Childrens fuller consolation thereby; for it is the
privilege of his Divine Power to effect matters far above all that we can
either ask or think, or conceive with the most quick eye of humane wisdom.
Ephesians. 3.
What if we be cast into the dungeon with Joseph, cannot God bring him through
this room, and make it the high way to seat him a Compeer with Pharaoh? though
cast out with Moses into the Bullrush-boat, it may be God sees this the ready
way to advancement. When we look upon a man rowing in a Boat, we see him look
one way, and row another way; he looks from home; but his boat goes homeward.
Whatsoever the Lords dealings be, cast not away thy confidence, O distressed
heart, though he seem to be a going from thee: he is coming to thee: Thou
think the Lord in anger turns away his face from thee, yet the Boat of thy
Soul for al^ this is rowed homeward and Hea^ venward. These afflictions of thy
spirit, faintings of heart, strong groans after sense of his love, are
infallible Sea-marks in thy way to the Haven of life and comfort: only keep thy
self in the Boat, leap not out with diffidence, though great waves leap in,
trust the Lord with the rowing, commit thy ways unto him, Psa. 37.5.
and he will bring it to pass.

Jer. 48.11
Let my Soul never sleep the sinners unbroken sleep of security; they have no
change, Psa. 73.5.
and are not in trouble like other men. But the righteous and whom God loves,
find manifold diversities of Gods proceedings with them, because he means to
make something of them.

His reason for his last request, Lest I be like them that go down into the
pit: Not the Pit or Lake of Hell or Purgatory; nor the depth and profundity of
sins, as some would have it; but the pit of Golgotha, the place of dead men's
skulls, the Chambers of mortality, the Grave. Elsewhere he seems so to reason,
Psa. 30.9.
Shall the dead praise thee? what profit is there in my blood, when I go down
to the pit? Note here how David joins Gods love and his life together, and
counts the hiding away his face to be death, and that which carries him to the
grave.

The faithful heart finds no life, but in Gods love. Gods favorable face is
the Christians health and life; his maintenance lies all in Gods countenance.
The basest low conditioned life is royalty with Gods favor, and the royallist
life, is but a painted dunghill, or a golden grave, if his face be hid from it,
and shine not there. Yea, but David, thou may be a living man, eat, drink,
and sleep, though his face be hid from thee; Thou have Music to cheer thee,
art thou not a Prince? the have the Sovereignty of a Kin^dom to comfort thee,
Nobles a^ High Estates to attend and a^ company thee, thou may ha^ all the
delights of the Sons of m^^ and earthly contentments to e^hilerate thee; why
do thou the speak of a grave or pit? can man die among so many livin^
comforts? Thus indeed mig^ reason reason the case: But D^vid spoke advisedly,
he did n^ (as sometimes he did) speak (...) his haste, he is often saying the
same, Psalm. 119.77. ver. 88.
Let thy tender mercies co^ unto me that I may live: There Is n^ life without
assurance of his me^cies: Quicken me after thy lovin^ kindness: He counts
himself dea^ without his loving kindness, the quickens him, and puts new li^
into him. It is a great dignit^ and comfort to a man to have birds, beasts,
fishes, Sea, Ai^ Earth and all things to be mad^ for him, and subjected to him
Now David looks higher than the Psalm. 8.
8th Psalm, there must be more than all this to make a man to have a true and
worthy life. Though the body live by the Soul, yet there wants Gods favor and
face, which is the Soul of the Soul, and more to it, than it is to the body.
The spiritual life, to have to have the vital powers of grace, the inspiration
of Gods quickening Spirit, an inward sight ^iewing of Gods face in Christ, and
sweet s^nse of his loving coun^enance, as John says of the true ^ight, so this
is the true life. In anotner place he has the very words, His anger endures
but for a moment, Psalm. 30.5. ver. 7. Anima hominis Christiani Tulipae instar
est, quae se ad Spiritus Sancti radios explicat, iisdem absentibus
contristatur. Causin. Parab. Hist. lib. 10.
and in his favor is life. Again, Thou did turn away ^hy face, and I was
troubled: There is death in ^he hiding of his countenance. In the first Psalm
the righteous man is compared to a tree, and here methinks the righteous man is
compared to a flower, the Tuli^ or Marygold; if the Sun open h^ bright
lightsome face upon them these open their leaves; but if (...) set and shut up
his shining shopi^ Heaven, these lour, and clasp t^gether their leaves on earth
Such is Gods favor and fac^ of love; David's Soul, and ev^ry Christians holy
Soul rises a^ sets with it. Absalom cou^ tell us, though he had lands a^^
maintenance from his father, y^ he lived bion 'abion, Principis sideris
absentiam gemere diceres.
a lifeless lis^ so long as he might not come in his fathers presence, and
beho^ his face. The face of God reconciled, has more ravishing swe^^ness in it
for every adopted Chil^ who has tasted how gracious t^^ Lord is: and how can
they b^ droop, when that is hid from them, under se^ and feeling of
displeasure? Psalm. 90.9. Read oculos mea vita tuos ni cenere pergam, Frigidus
exanimi pectore dispeream, Jan. Lernut. in Poem. Ocelli. Cain, Saul, Judas,
Spira.
W^ thou art angry our days are go^ The Idolizi^^ Lover will t^ you his life
lies in his Mrs eyes; an amorous and pleasant look quickens him, a frown or
neglecting countenance casts him into deep vexations of heart. This is but the
Creature; shall there not be thought there is more power of life and death in
the Creator, appearing graciously favorable, or displeased?

Real proofs of this have been the horrible vexations, even to despair, of
wretched men, when the ireful face of God has been set against them for their
sins, and presented to their Souls. As also those bitter cries, and prayers of
the Godly in deep afflictions, when no glasses could show unto them the face of
Gods favor, this made them averse and pull back their hand from all offered
comforts, Natura speciem ita formavit oris, ut in ea penitus reconditos mores
effingeret. Is qui appellatur vultus, qui in nullo amimante esse praeter
hominem potest, indicat mores, Cicero de Legib. lib. 1. Psalm. 51.
because they wanted the sense and sight of this only comfort. And this is a
common phrase of Gods favor and love, the showing of his face, because the
heart acts all the parts of its several affections upon the Stage of the face,
it is the outward Map of the inward passions of the mind. If there be fear
within, it may be seen in the trouble of the countenance, and paleness clothing
the face without. If anger rise, then cloudy frowns and angry demonstrations
give warnings of it. If love and favor sweeten the disposition of the Soul,
then a pleased look, a cheerful eye, a gladsome contented countenance will
declare the good pleasure and acceptance of the mind. According to those
variations of Gods face do the Saints vary their prayers; one while praying the
Lord to show them his face, and the light of his countenance to shine upon
them; that is, to show them his divine favor, and fatherly good pleasure;
otherwhiles praying him to turn away his face, that is, his angry countenance,
and face of displeasure.



2 Corint^ 8.8.
To ^nesion tes 'agapes, the sincereness and genuineness of our love whether
our service and obedience be grounded upon a right love to God or no. How are
we affected to the Lord, do we lay up all our treasure in his love and loving
countenance? can we content and ^uiet our hearts with this, that God is well
pleased with us in the midst of our calamities? Can thou say in the midst of
ease, riches, friends, honor, and the fullest streams of wordly contentment.
Alas! foolish vanities, one glance of Gods face, the persuasion of Gods favor
do I delight in more than all you? yea, I had rather be the basest footstool of
the world with Gods love, than a glorious Monarch with a graceless Soul. Wicked
men always love Gods hand, better than his face, the gifts better than the
giver. Give them the worlds marrow and fatness, let their Corn and Wine, and
Oil increase, let them walk in Sunshine of earthly prosperity, and they never
find a want of inward assurance of Gods love in the Soul, they want eyes to
see the want of spiritual life, and want Grace to long after Gods countenance,
to shine upon their Souls in sanctification and true peace. The worlds voice
is, who will show us any good? that is, gifts of Gods hand: but the Godlies
voice is, Psalm. 4.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. If thou can make it
all thy care to keep the assurance of Gods love, and all thy joy to rejoice in
his face when thou have it, and make it all thy grief that nothing can comfort
thee when thou want it, and all thy labor for to regain it; doubtless thy
love to God is sincere and true, you are reconciled ones, for one friend cannot
brook the absence of another.

Jude ver. 12.
For first, he is dead in sin; next, he is more miserably dead, because Gods
face is turned away from him, he loves him not, delights not in him, and which
is worse than death, this wretched Soul perceives it not, and is not grieved
for it. O man, pray for an Heavenly light, that thy eyes may be opened to see
thy misery. Thou art merry and jolly, for all things fall out to thy wish. Thou
growest from weak to strong, from young to old; this is but the life of trees
and plants. Thou walk, eatest, drinkest, sleep well, this is but the
sensual life of birds and beasts. Thou buildest, talkest, reasonest, this is
but the life of men, even Heathens, and strangers to Christ: thus thy life
passes; but alas! among all these thou want the life of Grace, the loving
countenance of God in Christ, the assurance of salvation by faith in him. Thou
yet want the seeds and principles of a true Christian life, and therefore
art a poor dead wretch before God, and can not but perish, if thou seek
not for better comforts, and a better life than these; even that Christ may be
thy life, and visit thy dead Soul with his quickening Spirit, Colos. 3.4
and set his face of favor upon thee for his own chosen One. This is the
misery of a senseless sensual Soul, Ahab. like, to grieve for no wants, but
only of earthly things. If the Children of the most High so hardly come to
Heaven with faintings of spirit, and approachings to the very grave and pit, in
seeking Gods face, what shall become of them then, that count Gods face not
worth looking after? sure against such the Lord has set his face of wrath and
displeasure for ever.

Facies hominis est speculum cordis. Bernard. ad sorot. de modo been viv, cap.
65.
Whenever they fall into any temptations they pass an hard sentence against
themselves, that God has turned awy his face from them, and is angry with them,
because their anguish continues, and he does not presently deliver them. When
Gods face is toward thee, why do thou deny it? the Sun shines, though there
be a Cloud 'twixt it and me; and even now Gods face shines upon thee, though
Satan has placed some foggy vapors and clouds of distrust and temptations
'twixt thy Souls eye and it. It is no difficulty to prove, that we complain of
Gods hiding his face, when it is not hid from us. The best parts of a man's face
for comfort, is the eye, and the ear; the one to see, and look kindly on us,
the other to hear us willingly. Do thou (though sore afflicted) trust in God,
and wait on him, are thy eyes to him? then I am sure his eyes are upon thee,
his eye of pity, of love, of tender compassion; he will not withdraw his eyes
from the righteous; and his ears are open unto their prayer. What would thou
have more than an open ear, and piteous eye? what do thou in this thy
trouble, thou call on God by prayer, thou mortifiest every known sin, thou
labourest to find God in every promise? who guides thee to do this? not the
tempter, for this is the way to break in pieces all his Temptations; not thy
self, for thou know not aright what course to take; it is because Gods eye
is upon thee, for his eye guides thee to these ways. Job 36.7. Psalm 34 14.
Ignoras Agrippa, me oculis non minus quam v^ce, loqui solere? Cajus Agrip Philo
Iud de Legate. ad C^^um. Profecto in oculis animus habitat. Plin. lib. 11. cap.
37.
I will guide thee (says the Lord) with mine eye. And they say the seat of
Love, though it be in the face, yet it is specially in the eye. Again, Gods ear
is toward thee, thou prayest, and he hears; thou beggest strength and comfort,
he gives the first? he delays but the last: he gives thee the comfort of
strength, makes thee able to hold out in thy trouble; though he do not yet give
thee the strength of comfort, to get out of thy trouble. Surely we want not his
face and favor, when we have thus his good eye and gracious ear, and can say
to to the Tempter, Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall, Psalm. 32.9.
Vid. Guazzum de civil convers. lib. 4. de oculorum vi in amore. Sunt cordis
fenestrae and pedisse qui.
but the Lord has been my helper. What want thou then of his face? nothing
but one word from his mouth, that he would speak peace to thee, and say within
thee in the voice of his Spirit, I am thy salvation: This I know is that the
Saints oft-times want, Psalm. 118.13. Psalm. 35.3. Proverb. 12.25. Cupiendi
amoris visus est ansa. Plutarch.

His mouth is most sweet. Cant. 5.16. Cant. 2.14.


that God is long silent, speaks not comfort to them. Heaviness having seized
upon the heart of man makes it stoop, but then a good word makes it glad. One
good word from God would build up thy Soul, if he should but say, Be of good
cheer thy sins are forgiven thee. And doubtless, this thou have also, he speaks
to thee in his promises; only Satan, and thy wrestling heart drown his voice,
that thou can not hear his promises speaking particularly and distinctly to
thee. In the mean time call and pray unto God, that is a seeking of his face,
and howsoever for a while he stand behind the wall, thou see him darkly, but
through the windows, and he show himself to thee but through the lattice, Cant.
2.9.
yet thou shall in good time enjoy his face of comfort more fully, and have a
more complete presence of him bringing sweet consolations to thy wearied Soul.
Thou have already his countenance, he will grant thee the joy of that
countenance.

I conclude with that discourse of the Father concerning Gods face.

If God should come (says he) and with his own voice speak to you (though he
is not silent, but speaks by his Letters) and should say to man; Wilst thou
sin, sin on; do what delights thee; what ever thou love on earth, let it be
thine, whom thou art angry at, let him perish; whom thou would have taken
away, let him be taken away; whom thou would stay, let him be slain; whom
condemned, let him be condemned; whom possess, thou may possess him: Let
none resist thee, none say to thee, so much as, What do thou? etc. Take thee
abundance of all earthly things thou desire, live in them, and not for a
time, but for ever; only upon this condition, thou shall never see my face.
Wherefore is your heart smitten, if God should say, Thou shall never see my
face. Behold, thou shall be full of all earthly felicity, of all things, all
temporal good things shall flow about thee, thou losest them not, never
forsakest them; what would thou have more? Surely chaste fear would weep and
lament, yea, and say, Rather let all these things and this felicity be taken
from me, so I may but see thy face; chaste fear would cry out with the
Psalmist, August. in Psalm. 127.
Turn us again, O Lord of Hosts, let thy face shine on us, and we shall be
saved; Psalm. 80.19. And, One thing I have desired of the Lord, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of
the Lord, and to visit his Temple, Psalm. 27.4. O Brethren, would you know where
Paradise is situate, and what Quarter Heaven lies in? It lies in Gods
countenance, and in his reconciled face; and the sorest torments of Hell lie in
the everlasting hiding away of Gods face. O Lord, we are helpless, Psalm. 42.5.
give us the help of thy countenance When we are in darkness, O lift thou upon
us the light of thy countenance, and our darkness shall be as Noonday: When we
are full of sorrow, thou shall make us full of joy with thy countenance: Turn
thou unto us, Act 2.^8, Psalm. 80.
O God of our salvation, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

The end of the first Book.
EYE SALVE FOR The blind World: OR, An Excitation to the secure World, to see
and fear the Judgments of God are a coming upon it, when God frequently calls
his Rare Saints by death to go out of it.

By THO. CALVERT, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word in York.

Luke 10.42. But one thing is needful: Mary has chosen that good part, which
shall not be taken away from her.

Foelix domus and beata semper congregatio est, ubi de Maria Martha
conqueritur. Bernard. in Assumpt. 6. Ma. Sermon 3.

London, Printed by Fr. Leech for Th. Passenger, at the Sign of the the three
Bibles upon London Bridge. 1675.

EYE SALVE FOR The blind World.
ESAI. 57.1. The Righteous perishes and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.


THe preaching King has put this among his golden Observations, Eccl. 7.8.
Constet finem praecipuum esse, and eo semper spectandum, omnia propter illum
patienter ferenda. Mercer. comment in Eccles. 7, 8.
That the end of a thing is better than the beginning: His intended purpose
therein, being to animate the faint-hearted, not to start back at the first, as
afraid of enterprising weighty matters, because of an harsh entrance into them.
Yet the beginning of this Chapter is much better than the end: it begins with
Christ's Legacy, Peace to the Righteous; but the dregs are bitter at the
bottom, which the ungodly shall suck up. 12 last ver.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Who cares for a blasted Rose?
or what verdict gives the world on a righteous man in his life, but this, which
the Prophet gives of Christ for his humane base appearance? Esa. 58.3.
there is no form or comeliness in him, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him. And yet these blind Balaams, when they have
done Satan all his work, would willingly exchange their best wages of
unrighteousness for the godly man's Vineyards penny. Is it not a misery, to see
a Soul, that has all the days of this life, been drunk with the wine of
worldly ^usts, the body now standing upon the brink of the grave, not shaking
the hands of others, but wringing their own hands in a woeful farewell, the
fingers pidling with the bed-clothes, Animam quod imodo inter dentes habentem.
August. id Epist. Joan. tract. 10. Aristaeas Proconnesis. Hujvs animam corvi
specie visam ex ore evolantem tradiderunt. Plin. Hist. lib. 7. Jo. Franc. Picus
Mirandula praenot. lib. 9. cap. 2. Maximus Tyrius Platonicus, Sermon. 22.
and the Soul now standing upon the lips, like a bird ready to take her flight,
and if it were visible, should be seen like his soul, which was said to be seen
to fly out of his body in shape and color of a Crow; that then at last, alas!
too late, it should come to this sober and sad reckoning, O let me die the
death of the righteous, and let my later end be like unto his, Number. 23.10.
Children, when they are asleep look the prettiest; the Godly man is a fool in
his life, yet the worlds deepest heads would be no wiser in their deaths, his
last sleep has form and comeliness in it. Our Prophet intends i^ these words to
tell us as much, tha^ under the hard shell of death, h^ finds a sweet kernel of
life; h^ is taken away from evils an^ troubles, quietly to rest; as if he were
laid in his own Bed chamber. This Prophet has many drops to comfort Gods
Servants; he writes like an Evangelist, our Savior and his Apostles dwelt much
in his leaves, for he spoke the Gospels Language of consolations, Verse 3.
Musculus in Praefat. ad comment. in Esaias.
the New Testament has honored him above other Prophets, with quoting his
Prophecy 60 times, from Chapter 40. to the end of the whole Prophecy; it is
like Canaan, full-stream'd with milk and honey, almost altogether consolatory.
This very Chapter, among the rest, is not so short, as sweet, having goodly
beams come from it.

First, It gives a bright and clear beam, to stand like a light over the grave
of the Right^^^s, to let us see how they are buried in ^eace, to the third
verse.

Secondly, a sharp piercing ^eam of reproos for conviction of the ungodly of
diverse sins, mocking of the Holy, Idolatry, etc. to the thirteenth Verse.

Lastly, an heating beam of comfort, promises of favor, reconciliation and
peace, to stay the tears of all Zions mourners, to the end of the Chapter.

These words otherwise may be named, the short Table or view of the Child of
God, in his life and death.

1. In his life, and so he is described two ways. 1. Godward, so he is
righteous. Life,
2. Manward, so he is merciful.


2. In his death, which we consider two ways. 1. How expressed. Death.
2. How respected.


1. Expressed two ways, he is said to 1. Perish. 2. Be taken away out o^ the
world.


2. Respected two ways: 1. Of God, he respect^ them with care, to free them
from the evil to come. 2. Of wicked men, their respect is respectlesness, set
out


Two ways, by two Phrases of careless neglect: 1. They never take it to heart.
2. They little consider or mind it.


Or more briefly, the whole may be summed into these two Heads:

1. Gods Judgment in the death of the Righteous, taking them away to himself,
when he means to punish the world.

2. The worlds want of judgment and consideration of Gods end of it, None
considers it, none lays it to heart.

Let some light of explication make clear the words.

The righteous. Romans 3.10 Eccl 7.20
] Righteousness is hard to find. Are there some Righteous? is it not the voice
of the Scripture, there is none righteous, no not one: Not a Just man upon
earth? True, when we name Righteousness, we call to mind our lost Pearl: God
made man Righteous. This Apple of our eye was given away for an Apple of the
Tree of Knowledge. If we speak of men Righteous and Just, in respect of their
deeds among men, we mean upright and honest dealing; if we speak of
Righteousness in respect of God, then we mean no more a righteousness of
inherence, that is gone; but of adherence and cleaving to Christ by faith.
Christ's Righteousness and merits are imputed to us. Just and righteous is that
style holy and good men are honored withal in the Scriptures, denoting fruits
of righteousness in an upright life, according to that, 1 John 3.7. Mat. 1.19.
Act. 10.22.
he that does righteousness is righteous. Thus Joseph is called a Just man; so
Cornelius; where the word Just notes the universal and general carriage in
uprightness, holiness and Gods fear.

Perishes.] This word sounds harshly, as to die miserably, untimely; but
surely the righteous so perish not, unless the Prophet speak after the opinion
and in the phrase of the ungodly. Wisd. 3.2. Perishing is taken for any
ordinary or natural kind of death, as well as violent, Job. 34.15. Prove. 31.6.
to him that is ready to perish, that is, ready to die.
In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die or perish, and their departure
is taken for misery; yet to perish is expounded afterward to be nothing else,
but to be taken away, and depart this life.

No man lays it to heart.] No man, that is, very few or none mind to take
care for the worlds loss of the Righteous, their hearts are nothing at all
moved, or touched with it. Things that come near the heart most affect us. To
lay to heart, is a common phrase in Scripture, and is expounded after by the
word consider: It is used again verse the eleventh, Thou have not remembered me,
nor laid it to thy heart. It seems to imply three things.

First, to understand the thing we would consider.

Secondly, To consider and earnestly to think of the causes, and consequents of
it.

Thirdly to be affected with it upon that consideration, so as the heart joys
in it, if it find it good; is greatly grieved, and sorry for it, finding it
evil: the affection of sorrow arising in a matter deplorable, of joy in a thing
comfortable. So then, none lays it to heart, is thus much, None considers at
all Gods anger intended to the world in the death of the godly; none repent of
their sins, or stand in fear of some ensuing Judgment.

Mic. 7.2. Psalm. 12.1. Significat pro natura loci, vel benign acceptum a Deo,
vel benignum erga alios. Tarnov. in Psalm. 4. and ver. 4.
Merciful men.] The word signifies Good or kind men, and it is Translated
Good, or Godly in other places: To show us, that Mercy is a great part of
Godliness. It is taken passively, for one that has received mercy from the
Lord, or Actively, for one that shows mercy to others, in which acception it
stands here.

Are taken away] Colliguntur, are gathered together; so the Patriachs dying are
said to be gathered to their fathers, which is not so meant of their bodies,
which were it buried in Tomb purchased by their Kindred, for a burial place to
that family; but especially it is meant of the Souls of the faithful, which in
the death of their bodies are gathered to the blessed number of the righteous,
Heb. 12.23.
glorified in Heavens; gathered to the rest of the spirits of Just men made
perfect. This taking away, or gathering, may be considered doubly, as a
gathering out, or a gathering in. This is selectio potius quam collectio.


First. A gathering out, which is when there is a mixture of things good and
bad together, when we pick out one sort from the other, it is a gathering or
selecting collection. As when the Net catches all kind of fishes, the good are
picked out, and the bad cast away. Sometimes they are thus gathered, when danger
is likely to seize on al together, then that which is good gathered out, that
the danger may not fall on it. Thus the righteous are mixed in this world with
ungodly men, and the Lord picks his Children from among the rest, he is
preparing plagues for the world, and before hand he takes care for his, by
gathering them out of the danger: so that phrase imports, from the evil to come.

2. A gathering in, Both these gatherings in the Parable of the Drawnet, Mat.
13.47, 48.
which is after the picking out, to lay that which is good in a better place by
themselves. Thus the Righteous (separated from the world by death) are gathered
(like the good fishes) into a vessel by themselves, into one blessed society
and unmixt company, into heavenly glory, where no wicked men shall enter among
them any more. And of this gathering is this Colliguntur, they are thus taken
away.

None considering.] Before, none laying it to heart, for so they are both taken
one for another, Consider your ways, Hag. 1.5.
in Haggai in the Original is, set your heart on your ways.

A facie mali.
From the evil to come.] From the face or presence of evil.

From the evil of sin, lest if he should live any longer, he might be infected
with the sins of wicked men: But the truest is, from the evil of punishment,
Wis. 4.11.
wherewith God means to plague the wicked world, that they may not smart with
the sinners. When God has a quarrel with the earths Inhabitants, he takes his
Children from among them, that he may be revenged upon those who have provokt
him. Thus the meaning of the words appearing, the Prophet seems to speak to his
people, and in them to us, after this manner.

O how great and graceless is our security, Sum and Sense of words. Which
careless and sinful security is plain in the verse foregoing. Esa. 56.12
with what hasty feet do all men run to their pleasures? How blind are we,
that cannot see the Land falling under the hand of the Lords severe Judgment?
Do we not daily see the Lord fetching away by death his dearest and holiest
Servants? Surely therein he would signify to us, that his intentions are to
bring punishments upon us, he taking his own out of the way, that they may not
see nor feel the vengeance which the world has deserved and shall undergo. Yet
where is there a man that thinks of this, or lays it to heart, or takes notice
what the Lord is about to do, when he takes the righteous from among us?

From the words (like clay thus tempered and prepared) we may make up these
five Vessels, 5 Conclusions or Doctrines.
or extract these evident Conclusions.

First, that Righteous and holy men are also merciful men.

Secondly, Gods most Righteous Servants must die as well as others.

Thirdly, The Souls of the Saints in their deaths are gathered to the Lord, and
(by the Lord) into blessedness.

Fourthly, When the Righteous go from among us, some Judgment is to be feared
is coming toward us.

Fifthly, The secure wicked world is little moved with the removal of the
Godly. -- None considers it, none lays it to heart. How easily these rise, we
need not fly to Reasons to demonstrate it: Righteous men are merciful men. 1
Doct.
-- Our Savior has enjoined it them, and they lay up his sayings in their
hearts, Luke 6.39.
Be ye merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. These have received mercy
of the Lord, and are thereby transformed into such a merciful and pitiful
nature, as his is. If we should ask fire why it burns? It must be answered, It
is the nature of fire: Why does the Sun shine? It is the nature of the Sun to
do so: How is it the Godly man is so merciful? It is the nature of him, I mean
the new nature that is ingrafted in Christ, to be like affected to the misery
of othors, as he has found Christ to him. These may truly say, We cannot but do
it, the love of God constrains us to it. 2 Cor. 5 14.


There are no Graces poured by God into a good man's heart, as water into a Tub
or Pond, which keeps all to it self, and lets the ground be dry about it; but
every gracious man is a Spring, a Fountain, that sends forth streams to water
the eatth, and feeds the rivulets that flow from it. When we once come to
Christ the great Spring, he makes us little Springs to others: Zac. 13.1. Joh.
4.14.
The waters that I give (says Christ) shall be in him that receives it a Well
springing up to everlasting life: yea, might some say, it springs up for
himself: yes, and for others also, for out of his belly shall these waters flow
to the benefit of others. The woman of Samaria had no sooner drunk of this
water of Christ's receiving her to mercy, Joh. 7.38.
but it burst and flowed out of her belly, in pity she labored the salvation
of her Neighbors, crying earnestly on them, Come and see a man, etc. Come and
taste of that mercy which I have tasted of in Christ: Joh. 4.
the Prophet David has the very words of this conclusihn, the Righteous is
merciful and liberal; that is, he shows his mercy by his liberality. Elsewhere
he sings the Marriage song of these two in God, Psalm 37.21.
Mercy and truth are met together; and as sweet is Righteousness and Mercy,
Piety and Pity conjoined in a Christian: A sweet pair and lovely couple of
young Pigeons, not the offering of the poor, but this Offering to the poor,
which the Lord loves better than a fat Bullock laid on his Altar; With such
sacrifices of mercy (for he loves mercy better than sacrifice) is God well
pleased. Hos. 6.6. Heb. 13.16.
This mercy is an holy affection of the heart sympathizing with them that are
in misery, and a liberal and holy action of the hand helping and refreshing
those in misery. Piteous affection that is the root; actions of liberal
distribution, and relief, that is the fruit, which like the fruit of the Vine,
Judge. 9.13.
chears both God and man. Misery which is the object of Mercy is corporal or
spiritual.

1. Mercy looks at them both, to the bodies sickness, nakedness, poverty,
beggary; there mercy will make a Christian a Dorcas, to clothe, and relieve, to
visit and refresh.

2. To the Souls misery, as ignorance of God, impenitencie, living in sin, etc.
there mercy will be a counselor, to counsel them for God; an instructor, a
reprover, a builder, pitying those blind Souls.

Briefly, all misery is the object of mercy, upon every occasion it has (like
Christ) an open side to show the bowels of compassion.

let two several sorts of men read legibly in it their condition and estate,
thereby to learn what it is.

1. If Righteous men be merciful men, then here is a note to try our
Righteousness by, here in this Leaf may thou read thine estate toward God,
in thy piteous compassion toward man. Art thou pitiful-hearted to any in
necessity? do thou love to stretch forth thy hand, and reach out bounty to
the poor Members of Christ? Heb. 13.2.
can thou fee Christ in a stranger? then art thou no stranger to Christ.
There are many notes of Righteousness, the Lady and Queen of all is Faith; yet
Faith is dead if she want breath; the breath of Faith is Love, and Love is dead
if it show not Mercy. How can any have a surer characteristick sign of his
sins pardon than this, that in injuries he can feelingly say, I will pardon,
for Christ has pardoned me; in poverty he can say, I will help this miserable
wretch, for the Lord might have made me far more miserable: Yea, when he meets
with these objects of pity, The oppressor the only Cannibal, by whom the poor
and needy are crushed, Amos 4.12. their skin pulled from flesh, and flesh from
bones. Mic. 3.22. chopped in pieces as flesh for the pot Mic. 3.3. eaten like a
loaf of bread, Psalm. 14.4. they are swallowed down like meat, Amos 8.4. and
quite devoured, Hab. 1.13.
he can say in himself, Lo, Christ has cast this man in my way to try my bounty
and compassion, I will not lose this opportunity. If upon all occasions thou
art ready to distribute to the necessity of Gods poor Children, doubtless thou
art one of Gods Children, for he begets Sons like himself, piteous and
compassionate.

2. If the Righteous be merciful, then let us turn to the other leaf. Look here
churlish Nabal, unmerciful Christian, covetous Iron-bowel'd oppressor, let me
say as Christ, What is writ in the Law, how read thou? What is writ in this
leaf? this may thou read to the shame of thy face, and terror of thine
heart, that such unmerciful men are unrighteous, yea, godless wretches. Are
there not some, whom the Lord has filled with earths good things, and yet the
Box of Spikenard, that those in necessity might smell the odor of Mercies
Ointment? The Godly man puts his earthly trust in his hand, Esa. 3.15.
it never comes in his heart: the ungodly covetous put it in their hearts, it
never comes in their hands to distribute; and can there be any room for Christ,
or his Grace in such earthly hearts, where earthly metal takes up all the
place? Be not deceived, you that have abundance, and riot in that abundance,
never pitying nor rembring the afflictions of Joseph; you that by oppression
and hard dealing, as Satan's grindstones, Oppessores Molaras Satanae.
do grind the faces of the poor, shut your ears and hands at the cry of the
needy, and worse than Bethlemites, will not help Christ (in his Members) to
Stable-room, you (running in this course) are strangers to righteousness, Pro.
12.10
and enemies to mercy. Doubtless such never tasted of Christ, nor love Christ;
for who loves the Head, which hates the Members? If the righteous man be
merciful to his beast, then surely such are unrighteous, and very beasts who
will not show mercy to man. Learn of me (says Christ) what will he teach?
pity, compassion, meekness, love: If we will not learn this of Jesus, we may
seek out another Master; unmerciful men may go to School to Judas and profit
under him, he will (of all men most unmerciful yet) read unto them a Lecture of
mercy, might not this have been sold and given to the poor? Joh. 12.5.
sorry that the Ointment was not better spent; the lesson was good, though his
meaning was naught. Little and slender are the hopes for Heaven, who go on in
the path of covetous mercilesness. If unmerciful men ever come in Heaven, then
unrighteous men may come there also, and then where will the truth of Gods Word
appear, Romans 1.^^
which threatens those who cast away all piteous affection, an^ consider not
the cause of the poo^ and needy. Such may perswad^ themselves with presumptuou^
hopes, that for all this they have claim; but sure they build (...) goodly
house which forget to la^ the foundation: Saint Paul has herein given us the
way to make sure hold and hopes of eternal life, 2 T^m. 6.18, 19.
by being rich in good works, and ready to distribute, this lays a sure
foundation for time to come. Mercy (in one word) marks us for God,
unmercifulness for Satan, and is the cognizance of an unrighteous man; Mic. 6.8.
to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with God, must be found in him
that belongs to God. 2. Use.


Where might exhortation be better bestowed, and largelier urged, then in
stirring up all men, to let their light shine before men in works of mercy.
Col. 3.12.
O that we would all put on these bowels of mercy ^and tender-heartedness,
clothes that wax not old, which will keep us warm with a comfortable heat in
the coldest day (...) distress, in life, death, and judg^ent. The only way to
be rich, (...) to be trading with the poor in ^cts of mercy and pity. We take
^reat care to lay up our wealth ^ase; it is never so safely laid up, ^s when it
is thus laid out, in clo^hing the naked back, and filling ^he empty belly, and
main^aining the right cause of the Fa^herless and Orphans. So many ^s have been
refreshed by our ^ounty, are made our Intercessors ^n earth, and are bountiful
in their prayers to us and for us, that when we pray, we have all their prayers
joined with an holy importunity, overcoming God to grant our requests. 2 Timothy
1.16.
Happy was O ever nesiphorus, that he looked mercifully upon Paul in his Chain,
for he got Paul's prevailing prayer, that for mercy to him, the Lord would have
mercy likewise on him at the last day. Especially, Learn we to pity sinners,
blind, naked, and beggarly Souls: Save such ungodly wretches with fear; Dubio
procul flamma ignis, five Gehennae intelligitur, Phil. Pareus in Epist. Jud.
tom. Jude verse. 22, ^3.
wh^ fear? with fear, lest thou suff^ them to perish in their sins; a^ pull
them out of the fire, ev^ out of the fire of Hell, towar^ which every sin
(unrepented o^ carries a man; of such have compassion, by correcting them f^
their evil course, and by directin^ them into the way of Go^ fear.

In four actions may we she^ our merciful disposition.

First, In bearing, for mercy h^ an ingredient of patience to be^ wrongs.

Secondly, In forbearing revenge and showing a meek and gentl^ nature.

Thirdly, In giving, whethe^ corporal or spiritual Alms.

Fourthly, In forgiving, yea praying for our persecutors: a high degree of
mercy, so to for give, as we can pray for God mercy to forgive our enemies.

Motives to this might be many but that one most powerful, the the Judicatory
Sentence of Christ Judging the world, shall pass according to the works of
mercy done, or omitted; Mat. 25.34.
I was an hungry, and you fed me, naked and you clad me, etc. Therefore, Come
you blessed Children of my Father, etc. For the mercy of a crum you shall have
the mercy of my Kingdom. On the contrary, how dreadful is that voice, I was
sick and you visited me not, naked and you clad me not, etc. Therefore, go you
cursed, etc. you shall have Judgment without mercy, because you have showed no
mercy. Jam. 2.13 Canes ante mensam impastos esse non patimur, and homines
extrudimus? Ambros. offic. lib. 3. c. 7.
How deeply will that wound the merciless heart, when Christ shall lay it to
his Charge. The dogs were fed, and my Children famisht. These Actions of mercy
are that which procures God to be our Orator, when he, in the general concourse
of all them that ever lived upon earth, will mention and declare the Alms and
compassion of the good man to his Children. What Abel suffered, how Noah
preserved the World, Abraham kept the faith; Christ tells not of these at the
last day, but Angels and all Saints shall hear of the bread that the poor have
eaten, of the clothes that have covered their nakedness, of the drink which
quenched the thirst of their throats. Some wish the Crown of Jobs passion I
desire the recompense rather of his compassion; happy is he that has skill to
pronounce his language of mercy: Job 29.12, 13, 15.
I delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless and him that had none to help
him: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy: I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame: I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out.

the Womb; at one common door we all go out, the Grave. All men came upon the
Stage of life upon this condition, that having acted our parts we should go
off. There is a way that is called the way of ^ll flesh: Christ himself, if he
take upon him man's flesh, mortality ^eizes upon that which is mortal, ^e dies.
I may take David's words, speaking of another Gate, and apply them to this Gate
of ^eath, This is the Gate of the Lord, Psalm. 118.
^ven the Righteous shall enter in ^hereat. Gods Servants (even ^is best) must
be taken away, and that in a threefold respect.



1. This Candle is sometimes ^iolently dashed out, as Abimelechs ^andle of life
with a stone thrown ^t it. Judge. 9.53.


2. Sometimes a great wind lows it out, as Herod's breath puf^ed out John
Baptists light.

3. Sometimes it burns it self to ^e very last, and spends it self in the
Socket, as Methusalem and Abraham, dying in their old age, and full of days.

4. Yea, often this Candle is no sooner lighted up, In puncto temporis sal^e
pariter, valeque dixerunt, Hieron. de Ausonio subito proficiscente. Ad Julian.
epist. 34.
but it is presently thrown down and put out; so died the Innocents, and so
many young Children; the world had scarce bid them welcome, and they turned
their backs, and bad it fareful. The Clew of life, though it were not violently
cut, yet voluntarily would it in time unwinde it self, and let it appear that
humane life is wound up but upon a bottom of Clay. Righteous men in the world
are Flowers among Grass and Weeds; yet are they but Flowers, these Lillies must
wither, these Roses must cast their leaves: 1 Pet. 1.24
For all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field; the
grass withers, the best flower will fade.

with all Divine fullness, to make them full Heirs, in bringing them to the
Fountain and Wellhead of life. Achsah gets the upper-Springs granted to her,
as well as the nether; so God has upper-Springs of perfection for his Children,
whose best Graces are here mixed with many imperfections: the Grace of
Sanctification is here perfect for the nature, Ephesians. 4.13. Prove. 4.18. Mors
Hebraice Mavet and Met. per Metathesin Tom and Tam, in nostra patria sonat apud
sinceros maternae linguae scrutatores, perfectum and Innocens. In hac enim vita
nihil est perfectum, sic Rabbi Jacobus apud Nic. Crogerum in Amphitheatr.
mortis conflict. 13.
because it is holy, divine, and comes from God, but not for the stature, the
strength and growth of it: it is always a growing here, there is a perfect
measure and stature of the fullness of Christ, which once attained (and must be
attained by death) it is ripe, and grows no more: then all planting and watring
shall cease by Word and Sacraments, the Tree of Grace being come to full
growth. It is called, The righteous man's perfect day; now tha^ which is
perfect, cannot come till that which is imperfect (...) done away, which is by
death that conveys us to our estate an^ place of perfection: so some have drawn
the Original of Death, t^ signify that which is perfect. The^ shall our Wheat
grow without either Straw or Chaff, when temptations and imperfections shall n^
more trouble us, all corruption being perfectly weeded out of the heart, which
cannot be her whiles we are absent from the Lord.

3. Lastly, the Righteous mu^^ die, in respect of the miseries o^ this life,
that their afflictions an^ troubles may die and have an end The world laughs
and the godl^ weep: But shall the Righteou^ man's Cheeks always be an Islan^
compassed with Tears? No, the Lord has told of a time, wherei^ all tears shall
be wiped from h^ eyes. Who is persecuted, mocked scourged, the Butt of Satan's
temptations, the subject of the worlds ^corn, but the Servants of Christ? shall
this time last always? No, ^urely the Lord has a time for them, called, Rev.
21.4.
The time of refresh ^ent, when they shall be fuller of ^lory and rest, than
ever they ^ere of troubles and miseries. We are here set in a warfare, Act.
3.19.
as^aulted with fightings without, and errors within: 2 Cor. 7.5. Exoothen
machai, esoothen phoboi.
we are compast ^ith an unruly body of flesh; we ^re laden with corporal
maladies, ^ains, infirmities; pestered with ^piritual faintings, qualms, and
^eak fits, that if we had not better comfort brought us for the fu^ure, to free
us from these cum^ersom anxities, a servant of God ^ere of all men most
miserable: but ^weet Death looses our Chains, and sets us free. Upon this
ground ^id the Holy Father build that ^ghing prayer of ^is to God, Domine solve
hanc tunicam ita mihi gravem and ponderosam, and da mihi leviorem. Nazianz.
O Lord (says he) ^elp me off, loose and unbuckle this ^eavy Coat (meaning the
flesh full of infirmity which lies with such a ponde^^ pressing weight upon my
should^ and give me a lighter and easier g^ment; meaning the garment eternal
life, so pleasant, so eas^ and free from all troubles, whi^ death brings us,
and clothes withal. If there were (...) such Sugar at the bottom the Christians
Cup, and the b^ Wine kept to the end of the Fea^ he had the worst fate of all
me^ but he may with a patience dig^ these earthly troubles, because t^ Lambs
Supper shall make amen^ for the worlds sharp Dinner. Psalm. 27.15.
I h^ utterly fainted (says David) (...) that I believed verily to see the go^
ness of the Lord in the Land of the ^ving. That is meant of this li^ much more
may thoughts of et^nal life keep us from fainting. T^ hope of death, is the
hope of (...) life: it is necessary we die that (...) sorrows may die.

Genesis 2.17.
^riginal corruption, wherein all ^ankind lies drowned. It is too ^rue, that
being made of dust, sin ends us to retur^ to dust again. Who will defend nature
to be im^aculate, and unwounded? ^eaths Weapons could not enter ^lesh, had not
our original impu^ity weakened us, and streng^h^ned ^im. Man first brought sin
into ^he world, sin brought death; Romans 5.12.
Let one be so bold as to defend nature to be untainted, unless he ^an bring
this Argument to ^rove it, Here is one free from ^eath, Ergo, free from that
sin. We are born Heirs and Coheirs (annexed with Adam) of sin and death. Pray
we and strive we against Original lust, yea, repent we of this sin, as that
which put death in office, and reached the dart into his hand.

so) especially is set on him at his death, to fetch him to a blessed Mansion.
We must die, but oh! that that last Act were made the Axle-tree, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
on which all the actions of our life might turn about, by continually thinking
on our later end. A paper newly written is kept from blotting, if dust or sand
be cast upon it: The remembrance that we are but dust and ashes, often, and
daily cast upon our hearts and meditations, would keep us in an holy watchful
course, that our lives should not be stained with so many blots of impiety, and
neglect of Gods worship. Death indeed shall come to all, but our lives are that
which makes death bitter or swee^ unto us. For he shall come to the wicked and
rigtheous in a different manner.

1. To the wicked and unrighteous he shall come as a man of War to a man where
sin lives as long as he lives, where Satan sways the Scepter of his Monarchy in
his Soul, living impenitently in fleshly lusts, deaths message is astonishing
to such a one; Such a sinful wretch looking approaching death in the face, his
Conscience cries a loud, 1 Kin. 21.20. 1 King. 14.6.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? as Ahab to Elias. To whom death answers with
no better answer, than Ahijahs to Jeroboams wife, I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings, a hard message, I have brought thee thy wages of sin, which is death.
And then does the desperate sinner tremble and quake, Romans 6.23.
remembering how bad a life has made way for death, and death to torment; then
(too late) his sins affright him, and he cries out, but one day longer to
repent, as did that man in his death, O spare me, Chrysaorius in morte
clamabat, Inducias usque mane. Gregor. Hom. 12. in Evang.
and give me but respite and truce till the morning, that I die not in my sins,
and for my sins. O where are those many hours neglected in vanity?

2. But to the Godly and Righteous Soul, his appearance and face is glorious
and amiable, he speaks a comfortable language to him. I cannot hurt thee, thy
Savior has taken thy weapons from me; 1 Cor. 15.55.
his death was my death was my death, for his Children, I come but to be thy
Bridge that thou may pass over me into eternal life. So great a difference
is there 'twixt the Godly and the wicked. Christian, get thy debts paid in
Christ, and thy Bond cancelled in his blood, get into the crowd, and touch but
the hem of his Garment by faith, to draw virtue, holiness, and his
righteous-making merits, then shall there be no terror in deaths Vizard, that
will sweeten the bitterness of the Grave unto thee, and finding that thou art
righteous and accepted in Christ, thou may challenge him, O death where is
thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? O! by repentance keep thy Soul from
dying and the death of the body will be a blessed prelude to immortality. And
so much for a general view^ of the necessity of death to the very righteous.

The Souls of the Saints at their death are gathered to the Lord, and by the
Lord into blessedness.

This Conclusion has inclusively in it two parts.

1. That in this life there is a mixture of good and bad.

2. That in death God gathers the Souls of the righteous into a^ happy unmixt
society by themselves. Eccl. 3.20
-- Do not all go to one place? says Solomon, yes, for bodies in death, the
Grave is the common receptacle of good and bad; a Murderer and a Martyr may be
laid in one Grave together, but for Souls they change Countries. The Sanctum
Sanctorum is for those Souls which have been Kings and Priests to God; the
Righteous are gathered into Heaven, but the wicke^ they shall be gathered into
another place, they shall be turned into Hell, into the Company of all them
that forget God. Psa. 9.17.
This Phrase of being gathered together in death, may be an allusion to the
custom of the Jews who in death are said to be gathered to their Fathers when
they died, Genesis 23.9 Genesis 49.29. Genesis 50.25. Rut. 1.17. 2 Samuel 19.37.
for bodies as well as Souls, because they purchased burial places for their
family aapart. So both Jacob and Joseph charged their Children to carry them
out of Egypt, and bury them with their Fathers, and their own people in Canaan.
Which desire of theirs to be buried nea^ their holy Kindred did,

1. Show their love to one another, desiring their company being dead, whom
they loved living

2. They did it to testify the faith in the Resurrection, hopin^ by this means
at the last Resurr^ction, they should all rise togethe^ in glory.

3. Not to mention a third s^perstitious reason, by which p^^haps they might be
induced, (...) opinion of receiving some wo^ or acceptableness to God, by ^^ing
near to those in the Gra^ who for holiness were dear to hi^ and beloved of him.
Thus J^ahs death was a gathering to his others, of his Body to the Sep^^chres
of his Fathers, and of his Soul to the company of all the Holy Fathers, that
died in the same faith, pose may be seen To this purin the knowledge of the
words Sanctuaria and Brandea, Habeo sepulchrum super quod jaceam, and commenda
biliorem Deo futurum est me credam quod super sancte corporis ossa requi escam
Ambros. de excessa fra^ Saty. in cap. 2. Baron. Annal
how far this Superstition afterward grew; which Scolars may inquire after. Our
Savior tells of this happy gatering, I say unto you, that many shall come from
the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Our departure out of this life, wheresoever we live. East,
West, North, South, sends all holy Souls to sit at the same Table of Glory with
all Patriarchs and Believers that have been since the beginning of the World.
Here we sit at Table hand over-head, Judas has his hand in the same dish with
Jesus, Goats and Sheep go in the same Pasture; good and bad are mixed; but
hereafter there shall be a separation, there shall be a society of the blessed,
where no unclean thing shall enter. The Godly shall sit at a Table by
themselves, none shall come there without a wedding Garment. Here is Mega
Chaos, a great confusion, Habak. 1.4.
but there will be a time when there shall be Mega Chasma, a great Gulf
seperating distance, whereby sinners an^ Saints shall be kept from blending
together. Luke 16.16.
That same last division which shall be made, i^ fearful to think on, when Goat
shall go among Goats, and Shee^ with Sheep: yea, (that we man quake and tremble
at it) of tho^^ many hundreds that hear me the day, there shall be a divisio^
some shall go to the right han^ other shall be gathered to the le^ we are all
gathered together her^ there will be a separation, Mat. 24.^^ 4^.
yea two that sit in one Seat, of t^ that lie in one bed, the one she he taken
and the other left; the (...) gathered to glory, the other tu^bled into a lake
of wrath, ne^ to meet again. To confirm t^ doctrine of gathering, we have the
Parables of our Savior of the Wheat and Tares, which here grow together, but
at length shall be separated, Mat. 13.
when Wheat shall be gathered to the Barn, The Jews Liturgy print, at Venice.
Of ancient this was the common Epitaph, Sit anima cius in fasciculo viventium.
Hen. Kornmannus in lib. de mirac. mhrtuor. cap. 30.
and Tares to burn. The modern Jews have a prayer for their dead, which has
more of Babylon than Zion in it: 1 Samuel 25.29.
The Lord (say they) have mercy on the Soul of N. or such a one, who is gone to
his World, therefore I vow to give alms for him, that his Soul may be bound up
in the bundle of life, with the Souls of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Sarah, Rebecca,
Rachel, Leah, and the rest of the Righteous men, and women, Amen. Though part
of this prayer be foolishly superstitious, to pray for the dead, yet that which
is for our purpose in hand, is the phrase of the bundle of life, which the
Scripture acknowledges. Which manner of speaking instruct us, that God keeps
all the Souls of his Saints bound up by themselves, as it were, in one blessed
bundle.

A bundle it is called, first, to signify that they were once dispersed one
from another here on earth, but are there collected into one company and place.

2. To signify the unity of the blessed, These fly not asunder in discord,
there is perfect agreement and concord. A bundle, a tied up Fagott, a Wheat
Sheaf, is an emblem of unanimity.

3. To signify the firm perpetuity of their estate; God has bound them up
fast, and surely, and what can break Heaven's bundles?

4. It notes their felicity and happiness, its a bundle of life and glorious
immortality: Thus are they gathered all the faithfu^ Members one to another,
and al^ to their Head Jesus Christ. Death gathers Souls, but the great
gathering day is, when Bodies and Souls shall all be gathered together unto
Glory.

Why should not the Saints be gathered together by themselves, they never
desired the society of the wicked? yea, it is an heavy part of their Cross that
there are Ishmaels in the same family with them. Here living among the wicked,
their bodies are joined, but their affections, hea^ts and wills are distinct
and separate.

Luke 10.20.


1. They have their names (and they only) all written and gathered in one Book
of Life, by Election. Mat. 24.11.


2. They all fly and are gathered like Eagles unto one Carcass, and food of
life, Jesus Christ, to seed on him in Word and Sacraments. 1 Cor. 19.




Are the Saints Souls gathered in death, till then must there be a mixture?
This will meet with them who accurse the Moon for some spots they find in her,
such as will either throw away the Church, or themselves out of the Church,
because the Fringes of her Coat are somewhere rent off, and all is not aright
in her. True it is (and O that the Lord would purge his Temple, and set up
Pastors after his own Heart) that there is something in the Church as black as
Tents of Kedar, Cant. 1.
for which good hearts will mourn; but withal in many other things she is
comely as the Curtains of Solomon, for which we owe the Lord much praise. It is
one thing to live, where means of pure worship are wanting, Greenh. in his
common place of religion chap. 13. Title the Church.
another to be where false worship is erected for the first we are not to fly
the Church, but by purges and patience to stay the Lords mercy for the other,
we must depart, because of that abomination. Who is so mad as to set a fire on
his house, because he finds some Spiders webbs in it? Here will be always in
the Church good and bad Shepherds, sound and unsound Members; It is the time
she must be militant, when she is Triumphant, there shall be none in her but
those that are sound, and righteous.

Abuses have bin and will be in the purest Church; she must suffer Cramps and
Convulsions, in Schisms and Sects, that good members may be approved. The
fanning time is not yet come, when God will blow away all the Chafe; these
spots and wrinkles will be in her face, till the last day, when Christ will
present her to his Father without spot or blemish. In the mean time pray we
that she may be purged, and seek we for as pure a congregation as may be,
though we could thrust our selves into Noah's Ark, (Gods Church in a little
compass) we should find among those eight Righteous Souls, one Cabin full of
Beasts and dung, something in our judgment off^n^ive, either crossing orders
decency, or doctrines verity: And for our parts let us be so wise, as to let
God use his own Fann, and not to separate our selves, because the time is not
yet come, harkening to these directions,

1. Join we our selves to the soundest and best parts of Christ's Body.

2. Remember we to build up our selves in Christ's sufficiency, to be a careful
Superintendent and Governor of his Church, to amend what is amiss; censure no
farther then the Lord censures. 3. Though he say to the Church of Ephesius he
has something against her, P^ev. ^.2.4.
yet he does not un^ church her, he still loves her as a true Church, which had
many good things in her. 4. Lastly wait, and waiting meditate or that time,
when there shall b^ gathered a glorious Church together, and all her chalk
stones that are now in her, shall b^ stamped to powder, and she buil^ upon
preceious stones, free from all fault, and the least blemish, Christ
immediately in his own person governing. That shall not be Domecratia, but
Theocratia, as Josephus calls the Government of the Jews commonwealth, and
Church.

2 Pet. 2.7.8.
It is a good trial of our Hearts sincere love to the Lord Jesus, when we are
often in the Prophets ditty, O that I had Wings like a Dove to fly away and be
at rest, from seeing or hearing the Lord dishonored: It grieves him that he
lives or living, that he has eyes to see it. As that Bishop of Chalcedon Maris
in the Primitive Church, who being blind and meeting with tha^ Arch enemy of
Christ Julian the Apostate, Socrat. hi^s. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 10.
who called him reproachfully a blind wretch, an^ asked him whether his
Galilaea^ God would not cure him? h^ presently replied, I thank my Go^ that I
have no Eyesight to see suc^ a sworn Enemy of Christ, as thee. But how will
this medicine b^ applied to do us good? even thus that we apply our selves to
submit to the Lords will, and pleasure, in patiently undergoing this, that we
must converse amongst wicked men; for if all the Saints should live together,
it would be Heaven upon earth. There is no such holy ground our seat can stand
on, but we shall find cause to sing that tune, Woe is me that I am constrained
to dwell with Mesech: to have my habitation among the Tents of Kedar. P^.
120.5. Sit a te justus r^motus nescio quot milibus and manqiu^^d: sim^l
habi^atis, siunu^ ^ot ^ aba is Aug. in Psalm. 101.
We must content our selves, for a while, the time does not yet appear, when
none but the righteous shall live together. Gods Children seem to be fa off us,
and we grieve that there is such a distance often times betwixt us,
notwithstanding how far soever they live from us, we have the benefit of their
best society, their communion and fellowship in pity and Prayers; though Bodies
be severed, we have the best conjunction of their wills, and Hearts to ours. We
must rest in Gods pleasure, who out of this mixture, fetches much benefit to
his Church.

1. The godly are dispersed into several Angles and Corners of the World (like
the Levites all over the Land) to work the fear of God in the hearts of wicked
men where they live.

2. We must remain among those that are stangers to God, that our patience may
have the perfect work, in bearing their reproaches daily which they have cast
upon us.

3. That our conversation in holiness may ashame and convince them, Heb. 11.7.
as Noah's preparaing an Ark condemned the World.

Rev. 2.13.
It is a secret in Ga^denings Art, Satione rerum foetidarum prope flores odore
evadent suaviorce. ut si allium prope rosam collovaveris Ioa. Camerar. Med c.
in Centur. Symbos. feu Emblem.
to Sow and Set Roses near the unpleasant smelling Garlic, as a means to bring
forth Roses far sweeter, and more fragrant then others not so planted. So is it
in grace, they that honor the Lords name, being amongst wicked men, where are
least encouragements; these Roses are the Lords sweetest flowers, their
devotion is most acceptable to the Lord.

Thirdly, this may lend comfort to the Friends of some dying, and to the person
dying. 1. To the Friends of men dying.

1. Commonly we send away those that we love swiming in our Tears, and make the
Coffin, as it were a Boat; This is the drink offering of natural affection. And
what is the burden of our grief, but this? why, they are gone away from us,
whose love, and society was sweet and dear unto us. What then? if they loved
us, why then do not we love them? would we have them out of Heaven, and the
company of the blessed, to whom they are gathered? we our selves shall
discontinue but a small time, then shall we have their blessed society again:
Our Souls and theirs (by death) shall meet and be gathered together never more
to be parted. As Saul and Jonathan, if we loved one another in our lives, 2 Samuel 1.23.
so in death we shall not be divided. Away then with that tearing of Hair, and
immoderate sorrows for a dead Child, sweet Wife, or loving Husband departed
this life; they are gathered to the Lord, and his flock of blessed ones, Do we
envy their happiness? would we have them break off their blessed company, for
ours? and have their Souls reinspired into these Clay-Tabernacles, and then to
live again below in these smoaky Houses of sin, and vanity? No, let us set a
period to our plaints, and say, Blessed be God, who has delivered these our
Friends from all mundane miseries, and gathered them so near unto himself; 2 Samuel 12, 23.
We shall go to them, but they shall not come to us, as David said of his dead
Child.

2. To the person dying Death indeed seems terrible; but shall we fear it, as
that which destroys all our joy? What is there else that we need fear, if we
fear God? Does thy Conscience witness within thee, that all thy endeavors have
bin to honor the Lord in thy life? never start then for fear of death, all the
harm he will do thee, is a gathering of thy Soul unto the Lord, and to the
society of the blessed. Socrate^ could fly to this, to sweeten his poisoning
Cup of death, to which he was condemned, saying, Count ye it not an high matter
to have conference in another life with Orpheus, Musaeus, Homer, Hesiod?
Xenophon
O how shall I swimm in abundant pleasures, when I shall meet with Palamedes
and Ajax, and other fasly condemned? Truly (says he) I would willingly often
go out of this life, if it might be to find these men my Companions. Lo,
Christian, blush before the Heathen, who could warm himself with these poor
Chipps, and this cold comfort: How far sweeter will be the Heavenly
inhabitants, when thou shall see Adam, Abel, Abraham that glorious Friend of
God, and Father of the faithful; Moses and Elias, those picked out by Christ to
conferr with at his Transfigurations: There shall thou see David and Samuel,
Paul, who has filled the world with sweetness by his honied leaves, Paulus,
John the darling of Christ; yea, that Jewel of women, Mary the blessed Mother
of Christ, and Christ himself the Lord of Glory, with all the faithful Saints
that ever the world had; yea, all our dead Friends departed in the faith of
Christ. Would he go often to see such blind Heathens whose Heaven (it is to be
suspected) is Hell, and shall we be afraid once to be transported into such a
glorious Clew of Heavens Citizens? Go out therefore undaunted (O my Soul) fear
not death, thou go to God, thou art gathered to Christ, to Angels, to Saints
glorified, to the society of the Spirits of just men made perfect. Shall the
Souls of righteous, etc. Abaddon have a great mercy that you live mixed with
Saints, whose examples might be made unto you at occasion of blessedness, but
from their lives you will not learn holiness: you shall not be always together,
hereafter, you shall be separated, and go Goats with Goats. The righteous when
they die go to Heaven, Genesis 30.25.
and the blessed Canaan, that is their own place, as the earthly Canaan was
called Jacob; and so wicked men when they die they go the Kingdom of perdition,
that is their own place, as Judas when he perished. They have a place of their
own, Act. 1.25.
(where no righteous man shall come among them) they have wrought for it, and
they shall have it, the place of darkness and horror. Which made the Prophet
cry out, O Lord, Ps. 26.9.
gather not my Soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men. O what mirth and
joy is here upon earth, Drunkards made songs of me. Psalm. 69.12.
when a knott of lewd and licentious livers, that hate Christ and laugh at his
Word, do meet together, and he is the happiest counted of this unhappy Crew,
that can coin some scurrilous and base jest upon a Christian, that walks after
Paul's rule circumspectly, strictly, Ephesians. 5.15.
or (as they call it) precisely: yet these blind wretches in their death shall
wish to be the Dogs, that might but lick the Crumbs which fall from the Table
of these Children of the most High, whom they have despised and reviled. O
sinner, learn betimes the way of the righteous, Without holiness no man shall
see the Lord. If thou die unreconciled to God, thou shall not have part with
the righteous, thou shall be gathered among thy miserable Companions; as the
faithful are gathered into Abraham's bosom, so shall thou be gathered into
Judases bosom (the Patriarch of them that perish) with Cain, Perditorum
Patriarcha.
Saul, Demas, Herod, Julian, etc. And all that wicked crew which hated Christ.

2. Seeing the Righteous shall be gathered together hereafter, let it exhort us
to love their companions in Heaven; seek out the Godly man, affect his society,
talk with him, walk with him, for he walks with God. As he that rubbs his hands
on Musk, or Civit, shall savor of it; so by thy society with the righteous,
Cant. 5.5.
thou shall get a savor of good things: his conference will quicken up thy
Graces, his zeal provoke thee, his hands drop myrrh upon thee.

3. Hate all wicked associates, partners in sins shall be partners in sins
scourge. As thou desire not to be gathered with the wicked men and their
black Angels hereafter, so hate thou to be gathered into their counsel and
company here.

When the Righteous go from among us, some Judgment is to be feared is coming
toward us. It is to be suspected that some great evil is ready to fall on that
people, out of whom God selects them. When mercy gathers the godly, some
judgment is like to come and scatter the ungodly. God in this may be compared
to a careful Husband, whose House beginning to burn, here he snatches his
Plate, there he gathers up his Jewels, conveys away his Trunks of Linen, and
Goods o^ most worth: as for baggage^ wood-vessels, and other cheap an^ baser
Furniture, he lets that bur^ because he has saved that he love^ the best. Thus
does God, when a sinful nation is kindling hi^ wrath against it in some
judgmen^ the Lord before it begin, or in the beginning, takes, and snatche^
away here an holy man, and ther^ an holy woman; he gathers u^ these his Jewels
and choice^ Plate, to lay them out of the reach of the fire, that only the
wicked may perish in those flame^ their own sins have kindled. Se^ it in Lot,
so long as he is in Sodo^ their Table is not spread for God^ hot banquet of fire
and Brimstone^ but as soon as the Lord has go^ him out, Genesis 19.22. Non posse se
dixit, quod sine dubio porerat per potentiam, non poterat per justitiam. Aug.
cont. Gaud. l. r. cap. 30.
fierce wrath overwhelm^ them, it stays not long after hi^ departure. The Lord
said before, I can do nothing till thou come hithe^ that is out of Sodom into
Zoa^ Why could the Lord do nothing while Lot was there? Because,

1. Either Lot with his prayers bound the Lords hands, as it were, that he
should not smite.

2. Or because the Lord will not destroy the righteous with the wicked. Justice
indeed cries against sinners, Tumble them down into the Sea of thy wrath. Mercy
then stands up and says, nay, Aut Serva, aut fepata,
but rather save them for the righteous sakes, or at least free them from the
vengeance, let not the Wheat be burnt with Chaff, The like is manifest i^
Josiah, he is like Wheat among Tares. The Lord purposes to burn the sinful
Tares with a judgment, but he first plucks up the Wheat from that evil to come.
I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be gather-into thy Grave in
peace, 2 Kings 22.20.
and thine eyes shall not see all the evil, which I will bring upon this place.
Josiah goes, and Judgment comes.

When the Leaves fall fast off the Trees, then we say Winter is at hand: so
when we see not Leaves only, but the fruitfullest branches, even righteous men,
cut off from the Tree of this life we may judge there is some Wi^ter-weather of
Judgments abo^ to fall on the World.

Solomon's reason Righteousness exalts a nation, Prove. 14.34.
b^ sin is a reproach to any people: If the Righteous and righteousness
continue in it, it is likely to flouris^ but if nothing but sin and sinne^ be
left, wrath is not far off, (...) cannot prosper. Weeds are fence about in a
Garden for the Her^ sake, and wicked men may than God for the holy men that li^
among them, for they are bett^ unto them than the Roman Tutel^ Gods, wrath is
held off for the sakes; they build Walls about the place where they dwell wi^
their Prayers, and Righteouness.

Q. It may be demanded, C^ there no wrath seize on a nation or place, or
people, while t^ righteous are alive, and rema^ among them?

A. Yes, But not upon t^ righteous in that nation, it is n^ wrath to them; and
if it do fall upon the people, or place:

First, it is a long time deferred, and kept off, it comes not till after Gods
long patience, even for their sakes.

2. When it comes, it comes not so sore; the cup of Gods fury is cast in a
lesser mould, and he puts in fewer dreggs, gathers less Gall and Wormwood to
imbitter it for their sakes.

3. It continued the shorter for their sakes; God sounds a re^^ at the sooner
to the Hosts of his wrath, for their prayers, Esaias. 62.9, 7.
that are continually sounding in his Ears: They will not let him alone, until
he let the land alone, and pull back his wrath.

Neither does the death of the Righteous foretell Judgments, but besides that,
look at their usage in the world, and it will prove the best Almanac to
prognosticate it fair, or foul weather, that is likely to come on the Church,
or Commonwealth.

Look we into the Sky of the Righteous, it is an infallible Astronomy; if
their Sky be fair, if the righteous, and holy be advanced and honored, with
high places, either in Church or Weal-publick, it is a sign of fair Weather;
God means a blessing to that land, for they will maintain truth and equity,
that they shall like streams run in the streets; when God means to bless a
people he sets up such; even Egypt shall not want a blessing whilst Joseph is
the Governor. See Iere. 22.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 9.1.


On the contrary, if the Sky be lowering, if good men be the despised Branches
of the Land, if they that fear God be not set up, and honored, but wicked
Heads and Governors (not fearing God) get all the power into their hands,
foul-weather cannot be far off, the Lord has a purpose to punish that people.
When a^ King arose that knew not Joseph, and he was not in favor in the
Egyptian Court, as before, then the Egyptian Sun declined toward setting, and
(not long ofter) wrath fell on them and rooted them out, in sore plagues, and
drowning in the Red Sea. King Solomon has long since observed it, who had the
best insight into matters of kingdoms, Pro. 22.2.
When the Righteous are in Authority, the people rejoice; God smiles upon that
Land; But when the wicked bear rule the people mourn; some Judgment lies at the
door.

The Application of this, and the last conclusion, shall be joined together.

The secure wicked world is little or nothing moved with the removal of the
Godly. None considers, none lay it to heart, and says to himself, Sure these
are taken away from some evil to come. Our consideration is never so much to
seek as in matters 'twixt God and us: In a private loss of a dear friend, we
can mourn, and take on, and lay it to heart, but in a public damage, where
Gods Church is cast into danger, there we fear not at all, take no care for it.
When we see one great stone after another fall out of the Wall, we consider it,
and say, This Wall will not stand long: The righteous, the best and strongest
stones of ou^ wall, Esaias. 26.11.
are daily falling, and dropping into the Grave and yet no man regards it;
sensual security still makes the land drunk. It is the Lords complaint, that we
have no eyes, his Judgments are far out of our sight, Lord, when thy hand is
lifted up, Jer. 5.4.
they will not see: Surely these are poor and foolish peole, for they know not
the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. It is the plague of the
world that they shall have Eyes and see not, and hearts which consider not the
things of God. Has the World neither Eyes, nor Heart? yes but none for God.
These things are hid from their eyes, and far from their Hearts. Their Eyes and
their Hearts are but for their coveteousness, and for to purvey for these
earthly things.

Jer. ^2.17.
The Reasons among many, may be judged these.

Am. 6.3. Esaias. 28.15.
whereby they mind nothing of this nature, and are prone to put far from them
the evil day, making covenants with death.

2. Act. 17.21.
There is the Athenians disease of curiosity, which makes us inquire after
novelties, and the Lords dealings are altogether neglected, not thought upon.

The Lord in Judgment suffers it, 1 The. 5.4.
that evils may overtake the wicked, before ever they thought on them.

The righteo^s are not regarded in their lives, Job. 12.4.
and therefore are despised, and little consideration had of them in their
deaths.

So far are the ungodly from thinking they are taken away from evil to come,
that they lay it another way to Heart, even as matter of joy, that the Land, or
place is well rid of them.

Are the Righteous taken away from evil which is to come upon others, then much
more from evil to come upon themselves.

1. Then away with Purgatory the righheous are taken from tha^ evil to come. An
evil it is, where there is the punishment of loss and want of Gods presence,
yea which differs nothing in punishment of sense from Hell, but for the
continuance. If the Lord take away the Righteous from evils on earth, much more
from that evil of a temporary Hell. When they die, they go to rest and peace,
but small is the rest that those torments will afford them.

2 Kings 22.20.
2, Again it will cut off prayers to Saints departed, they are taken away from
evils, they know not our evils, Dr. Field in apprehend. to the fourth book of
Church chap. 22. shows the very pontificians doubting this clear Glass?
they see not the miseries we suffer upon earth. So the Lord says of Josiah,
his eyes shall not see all the evil that he will bring upon that place; No, he
shall not see it in that Glass of the Trinity. The Saints departed see not our
particular miseries; they can help us living upon earth with their Prayers, but
when they are dead, Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge
us; Esaias 63.16. Scultetus in Esaiam, 63.16 ibi plura contra specul. Trinitatis
imaginarium.
Our praying to them to see and help us out of our evils, is like the vain
breath of a bowler, who having thrown his Bowl out of his hand, calls after it,
and entreats it to run this way or that way. If the Saints be taken away from
seeing, or knowing our evils, then do we call upon them for help in vain.



O Brethren, let us meet the Lord, and hold his weapons, for doubtless when he
comes thus, he comes with a purpose to strike.

Zac. 3 2.
For are not these as brands plucked out of the fire? Now the Lord may deal with
us as our sins deserve, and God knows that is an heavy doom; for the Righteous
that would have broke the strong streams of his indignation are carried away.
If the Righteous abide among us, though they do but hold up their hands, Amalek
shall not prevail; Exodus 17.11.
but if we have no Moses left to do it, then Amalek, the enemy may overrun
Israel. Why did not the plague now of late destroy all where it came? why came
it not among us? thanks be to God for the prayers of the Righteous, for their
sakes we are kept from the infection.

But what if the Lord thus deal often with us, to take from among us such
praying Soul as this, what shall we then do, God being provoked, and we have
none to quiet him and appease him, none to clap the hands and stamp with the
feet, and cry, Ezekiel. 6.11.
alas, for the abominations of the house of Israel? O let us be entreated (as
wise Christians) to observe these evil days, and not be so sensual and
senseless, as no think but meanly of the death of Gods dear ones. In them we
lose our horsemen and our Chariots, 2 Kings 13.14.
the strength and munition of Israel consists in them. We had better lose many
Pieces of Ordinance, then to have one of these taken from among us, for it is
to be feared God has a controversy with that place where he picks out these
persons in their flourishing age, and the prime of their years. Hard before the
destruction and overthrow of Jerusalem there was a voice heard in the Temple,
Migremus, Migremus hinc, Let us away, Josephus Sepe etiam stellas vento
impend^^^^; vi^^^ Precipites celo labi, Virgil. Georg. lib. 1.
let us away from hence: We have heard this voice, many of Gods Saints both
have cried, let us go away, and they are gone away from among us, yet we fear
not, yet we tremble not, and never dream of any evil to come.

And though we see the Stars falling, have not the wisdom to Collect, that it
is a sign of some great Winds to blow upon us.

The prophet David might teach us to make better use of these things, who
seeing the number of the godly daily diminished, he creis out, Help Lord. He
cries as if the axietree of Heaven and Earth had bin split asunder, as if the
poles had knapt in pieces, and the World had received an inrecoverable loss;
and what is it that makes this good man thus cry out, nothing but this, that
the godly grew scarce, and the righteous fell into a small number, whereby some
great judgment was likely to follow and destroy the corrupt World.

Besides Nations, it may be a warning to our Towns and families, if the godly
in our Towns, or houses be taken from among us, it will not ^e ^n (...) ^^r us
to ^o^k e^r^estly to (...) y^ lest ^he Lord make this as (...) ^^ologue to some
Judgment coming upon us. These are like good Angels, while we have them to
guard and procure blessings to our dwellings and inhabitations.

Q. It may be asked, yea, but how shall we lay their deaths to hrart?

Answer, This way and by this means.

First, Prayer, beseeching God and praying for these two things.

1. That his taking of them away be in mercy, and not in Judgment: It is in
mercy always to them, but pray we that he do it in mercy to us also.

2. That he would raise up holy and righteous ones in their room, that there
may never want some holy ones to stand in the Gap.

Secondly, Repentance: so laying it to heart, as that we seek out and repent of
those sins of ours for which the Lord might take them away, and bring his wrath
on us.

Thirdly, Imitation: so thinking of the righteous gone from us, that we labor
to tread in those holy footsteps, and imitate those Graces which were eminent
in them, and left for our pattern. Thus though they be taken away for evil to
come, yet by this, our laying it thus to Heart, the Lord will avert the evil
from us.



When profane and Godless wretches die, the wicked should lay it to heart that
live, lest they die so, and (as the Rich man said) come into the same place of
torment. Alas, when they die all their good days are done; now they are taken
away from evil, and vengeance to come, The Godly should lay it to heart also,
and it should cause them to depart from iniquity. Psalm. 73.
This was the Prophets practice, and ought to be ours, to consider the end of
them, how God sets them in slippery places, and at length they rumble and fall
into the pit, and sin and death push them down into perdition.

Yea, but are we not to mourn for them as such, by the loss of whom the Church
and Commonwealth have received some sore stroke?

No such matter, nay rather it behooves us to joy when these horns (that pusht
at Jurusalem, and hurt Gods Children) are thus broken in pieces: It is for some
good to come unto the Church that they are removed out of the way: yea, when
God picks out profane and wicked men (especially great Branches) then may we
have hope he is procuring same great blessings for his people. Take away the
dross from the silver and there shall come forth a Vessel for the Finer; Take
away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in
righteousness. Prove. 25.4.5.
When the Godly are taken from among us, we lose a precious liquor of soverain
virtue for good to the Church: if wicked ones be taken from among us, let their
sinful associates mourn for the loss of one of their hellish Confederates and
Companions. But count we no better of them then the Holy Ghost does, Ps. 108.9.
their death is but the emptying of a filthy washpot, (Moab is my wash pot)
Corn will grow the better when Weeds are taken from it, which hinder the growth.

Our account must go like Gods account. The wicked are vile and base in their
lives in his esteem, but more vile in their deaths.

Precious is the life and death of the Saints in his sight, so let it be in
ours, for (...) and laying to heart their departure from among us; lamenting in
Jeremiahs tone, The Crown is fallen from our Heads, woe unto us that we have
sinned: they are taken away for our evils of sin, Lam. 5.10.
and for some evils of punishment to come upon us.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY OR The flowing Tears of a mourning friend, poured upon the Grave of
the Holy living, and Happy dying Christian, the Lady Mary Gryffith, first wife
to Sir Henery Gryffith, Barronet of Burton Agnes, who ascended to Christ the
day named from his Ascension, An. Dom. 1632.
THus run Heavens Wheel! Then Peace my plaining Heart;
Such Heaven-born purposes it is not thy part
To cross with Murmers. May not Providence
His Colonies of Hopefull'st souls from hence
Translate, to seat them in a happier Clime,
Far above these Regions under the Line
Of frailty and sin? Are there not Eastern Fruits,
Whose Seeds disdain with us to spread their Roots,
Bread in more generous soil and purer air?
Each flower has its own Orb, where it most fair
Does grow and show; and in strange Earth does pine,
As being from home. Thus thou, O Soul divine,
In this great Garden of the world did spring
Amongst lewd Mortals, and such fruit did bring,
As shamed our barren plants, sin-blasted Trees:
Yet, for all this by manifold degrees,
Our ground it was base, yea too much unfit
For thee a Graffe of Grace celestial Slip.
Therefore that hand, which first thee planted here
(Heavens holy hand) because thou could not bear
Such flowers and fruit in this corrupted soil
As thou desired'st, (O now incorrupt Soul)
Has thee transplanted: Happy thou so dies,
To Re-grow a Prime-rose in Gods paradise.
Our eyes are needless Garden-pots with Tears
To water thee, there are no doubts or fears
Of parching heat, which siccity does bring
So near to living water, blessed spring.
But O my thaughtful Heart, thy Sighs supply
The Rainy moisture of my Aprild Eye.
Oh that the puling Poet, whose purest skill
Was threneful Elegies, writ with Ravens quill,
Would now lend Verses to my grief-drown'd Muse,
Or into me their poetic Souls infuse:
Sure then this Name posterity and all times
Should find Immortalized in my lines,
Yet shall our Pen drop some black Tears for thee,
And write long Virtue's short Epitomie,
Dumb grief shall lend us Mutes, Liquits wet eyes,
Which joined with Vowels of Sighs, thence will arise
Words, to set forth that which Mankind may vex,
All virtues, strong in one of weaker Sex,
Two things there are denominate, one complete,
Concurring in her, she was Good and Great.
Twice born, first great next Birth did style her Good,
Noble by man, far Nobler by Christ's Blood.
O, how swells Wormseed Man, lifts Crest on high,
If Or, Gules, Argent deck his Blazoncie?
This honor here counted such Glory loss,
Choose Faith her Herald, for Arms, a bloody cross
Thus Born, choice education brings her up,
Seasoning with sweetest liquors this fresh cup.
Her Infants age gives Childhood full of hope,
Childhood brings youth, where Piety is the scope
Of all her actions Single, Married, both
To virtue, Husband, Christ she keeps firm troth.
And now my Boat being entering on the Main,
For life full-stream'd with good gifts fullest strain
Of Art is needful, Since I cannot skill
To handle curious Pencil, yet I will
Use shadowing Charcoal, Virtue needs no lace,
No Jaggs, or Fashes, her plain Coat to Grace,
When Sea, Earth, Air, Woods Gardens at on time
Do, deck, and dish a Table with the prime
Of all Tooth-witching Cates, stomach does stand,
A doubtful Question is it how to move the hand.
This's good, that dainty palate likes the other best,
This sauce, that Junket's rarity, 'bove the rest.
Such is the Tooths tempation, like's my case
A Squadron of air qualities are in Chase
Before my Pen, which first to single out
In midst of such rich choice I stand in doubt.
Yet none so fit I find to have first place,
As that Great-little Virtue, High-low Grace
Humility, which never could Trumpet blow,
Plays least in sight, and hides it self from show.
Who ever saw Prides Chair set in thine eyes,
Or like the swellig Bubble saw thee rise
Above the level of Waters? Glories seat
Follows the lowly-little, flies the great.
Thou sought'st not earths applause or fumy same,
Whose heart was modeld to a better frame.
It is in the Sphere of Saints as in the Sky,
The highest Stars seem smallest to the Eye.
What needs it name thy Faith, thy love! we guess
Poor long since styled the Pities patroness,
Touching thy Zeal, whiles here we thee did hold,
Winter was warm, now midsummer is cold,
Some Querists ask, what this cold weather meant?
Why? Have we not lost Zeals fervid Element:
Chaste, modest, sober, patient, discreet,
A very Center, where Virtues did meet?
Thrifty in words, shunning her Sexes blot,
A Tongue that hangs too loose without a knot.
Yea you corrupted Times, worlds worst, cursed dreggs,
The Dam that daily hatches some bla^k Eggs
Of Lust, Soul-rusting pride, and fashions strange,
Whose brood's Court Lunaticks in monthly change:
(How many traps, alluring baits do lie
And rest in naked breasts for an adulterous Eye?)
Tinctured by you not she, knew not your toys,
Nor dieted her Soul with Dunghils joys,
Smells as foul earth: your Sophistry she fled,
Which makes a two-fac'd Monster with one Head:
An Act calls God Bungler, Blush stars and Sun:
Art perfects that face Heaven had not well done.
Three things were deemed precious (...) Eye,
Time, Faith, Christ's Blood for which her prayers did vie.
In first the second, by second third she got,
'Bove both Indie's treasures a surpassing lot.
Put to the Trial Temptations hotest flame
She du'd, endured, stood, withstood, quenched, orecame:
And from Whales belly, out of sorrows Hell
Of Gods supporting Grace could wonders tell.
O Heavenliest Art, (that sweet Experience)
She could decline Afflictions in each Tense,
What Present, Past, and future fruits they bring,
How Saints do sometimes sink, then float and swim.
Yet here is not all, more Virtues could I pick,
To puzzle and gravel all Arithmetic:
Which makes me pity that poor S^agyrite,
When he did his Ethnic Ethick Volumes write,
Where all the moral Virtues he could count,
The number of eleven did not surmount.
Our living Volum fair printed had far more,
Our little World says his great world was poor:
For whose dear sake Grammarians may define
Virtue always of Gender femenine.
Thy death shamed not thy life, thy dearest friend
On his day chose thee to him to ascend.
Thy green years promised life, Virtue full grown.
Pronounced thy field was ripe, fit to cut down
Living, each one had part of Joys in thee,
Dying, like griefs as having from our Tree
Best branch rent off, O loved Spousess c^ys one!
Dear Daughter another, Sister, Companion.
Kind Lady these, all Friend bo^^^ tied and true
With love engrain'd that never, changed the hew.
Thy Battel's ended, Laurel decks thy brows
Deaths livery ours, the fadest Cypress boughs
Had death spared thee a while, and given leave
Amongst us thy friends some legacies to leave,
Our griefs had lower ebbed, Lo, I desire
For Legacy some coals of thy hot fire
Of Zeal, to heat my freezing frigid heart:
Or else of thy Humility a part.
Against innate Pride. O thou might well have given
Thy Love divided amongst six or seven.
Thy worlds contempt had been an excellent gift,
That eight or nine amongst us might it shift.
And knowing our hasty spirits, when thou slipped hence
Why did thou not bequeath thy Patience?
Thou knewst how many walked with that bad note
Of busy scullers in another boat:
Could not thou say, Friend, take thee this bequest.
Handle thine own Oars, that becomes the best,
I leave thee it 'cause I loved it? Thus, good heart,
Thou mighst have given us every one a part.
I see Death will engross, say what we list,
He scorns our Laws, will be a Monopolist
I Will not Chide fate, nor curse dire destiny,
Nor challenge Death to field, nor rage and cry,
O hateful Heavens! when Providence will and must
Have the perledst Mortals once to kiss the dust.
Here Heart from sighs, our Eyes from brackish tears,
Body from weakness, Mind from horrid fears
Cannot be privileged. Earths Cushions, pillows best
Be stufft with thorns: or life is stuck and dressed
With netles, briars. Blessed be thy Pylat Death,
Who hence from Pirates on these Seas beneath,
Sin, Misery, Vanity, does our Souls transport
Into Heavens blessed Harbor, Rests true Port.
Where neither boistrous North, West, South or East
Raises ambitious Waves, nor yet that Beast
Leviathan below can Cables break,
Or with Temptations make our Pinnace leak:
Where we forget those Threnodies of grief,
VVeep watery Eyes; and, Who can send relief?
For me, (Impar^dis'd Soul) to thee once dear,
Assistant, witness in thy assaults of fear.
And sore Soul-combates, were Saints power to mind,
As mind here was I should not stay behind:
For reason and religion both this prove,
Heaven doubles Gr ce, and so it doubles Love.
Some curious Eyes did look I should rehearse
Some light-heel'd lines in a wit-woven verse.
Wise Men will think the match is very base,
To lay on cloth of Gold a Buck-rams lace,
Or motleys purls and edge. The sobred Grave
Hate feathred leightness, and substantials crave.
Her aims o'rclimb'd the Stars, who gravity
Slight neither know themselves nor her nor me.
Nor ear I what capriccious Judges think,
Who say, here it flatteries mart, and Oil for Ink:
I Will glue these lines on envious slanders bar;
And Twelve of Malice's Clients, that would mar
A World of honesty shall empaneld be,
To vent galls verdict against this verity.
Truth fears no blasting breath; come, slander speak,
Or bite thy lips in anger till the Heart break.
Had she no faults? yes some, thou more, none's free;
Adam fell once, we often, sometimes she.
When Marbles moulder, and pounded are to dust,
Yet fresh shall be the Memorial of the Just.
When in my Memory enrolled I find thee not.
Well may I doubt all virtue I hove forgot
Sanctities pen writes such an Epicede,
Quaint'st brains mere Pernasian does exceed.
Ermins are vermin base in Arms and Coat,
Where Grace powders not life with holy note.
Good Day thou have gotten, and bidst us Good night,
Leaving thy virtuous pattern to guide us right:
An holy course chalks the way to Heavenly light.
Let vain World dress its Carps, spit, spite, fume, laugh,
A Gracious life leaves fairest Epitaph.
The Epitaph on the Lady Mary Gryffith.
FRom mothers womb unto earths womb the grave,
Through the Worlds desert some years I wandered have.
Nature gave being, Grace well-being, Death the best,
Heavens happy Being to Soul, to Body rest
I lie here waiting till the last shrill-voic'd Trump
Shall breath new life into this dead Clays lump:
Then shall be at once two Nuptials solemnized
Of Body to Glorious Soul, and both to Christ.
O Mortals learn of me, make Christ your scope,
By Prayers and Tears I came to rest in Hope.
FINIS.

