C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
THE KINGS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious LETTER and DECLARATION To the Bishops, Deans
and Prebends etc.
CHARLES R.

AS nothing is more in our desires then to provide that the (...) ^ngland,
under our Reign might be furnished with a Religious, Learned, Sober, Modest,
and Prudent Clergy (...) we are ready to give encouragement to their labors
and study in their several degrees and stations, that they may give Check to
all Profaneness and Superstition, and as zealously affect to remove all
scandalls, and reproach from them and their callings, conceiving therefore a
competent maintanance to be a necessary encouragement: And that all other
persons who have power to dispose of Tithes, may be invited to cherish all
Learned and Godly Ministry. We do resolve that because where Tithes have been
appointed for the support of Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Collegiate Churches,
and Colleges: And other single persons that have not taken due care to
Provide, and ordain sufficient maintenance for the Vicars of their respective
places, or for the Curates where Vicarages were not endowed, to settle for the
future some good addition and increase on such Vicarages and Curats places. Our
will therefore is that forthwith provision be made for the augmentation of all
such Vicarages, and Cures, where your Tithes and profits are appropriated to
you and your successors, in such manner that they who immediately attend upon
the performance of Ministerial Offices in every Parish may have a competent
portion out of every Rectory impropriate to your See. And (...) this end our
further will is, That no lease he granted of any Rectoryes or Parsonages
belonging to your See, belonging to you (...) ^uccessors, until you shall
Provide that the respective Vicarages or Curats places, where are no Vicarages
endow(...) Tithes, or other emoluments, as commonly will amount to 100 or 80 l.
per annum, or more (...) it will bear (...), settle it upon them and their
Successors and where the Rectoryes are of small value, an^ cannot permit of
such pr^^ortions (...) vicar and Curate, Our will is that one half of the
prof^t of such a Rectory b^ reserved for the maintenance of the V^^ar or (...)
Curate. And if any Leases or grants of such forenamed Rector^^^ have been made
by you since the f^rst day of June last past, and (...) you did not ordain
competent Augmentation of the Vicarages or Cures in their respective places,
our will is, That out of the Fines which you have received, or are to receive,
you do add such increase to the Vicar and Curate as is agreeable to the Rates
and Proportions formerly mentioned.

And our further will is, that you do employ your Authority and power, which by
Law belongs to you as ordinary for the Augmentation of Vicarages, and
stipends of Curates, and that you do with diligence proceed in due form of Law,
for the raising and establishing Convenient maintenance of those who do attend
holy duties in Parish Churches; And if any Prebendary in any Church (the Corpse
of whose Prebend consists of Tithes) shall not observe these our Commands, then
we require you, or the Deane of the Church, to use all due means in Law, where
you or he has power to compel them, or that otherwise you report to the Bishop
of the Diocese, where the said Corpse does lie, that they may interpose his
Authority for fulfilling this our Order; and if any Dean, or Dean and Chapter,
or any that holds any dignity, or Prebend in the Cathedral Church do not
observe these our Commands, that you call them before you, and see this our
will be obeyed; And if you or any Bishop do not your, duty, either in their own
grants, or seeing others to do it then we will that upon complaint, the
Archbishop of the Province see all performed according to this our
Declaration, Will and Pleasure: And whereas there are diverse rural Prebends,
where the Vicarages are not sufficiently endowed, we require you to see those
our Commands be fully observed by them. And we do declare our Will and Pleasure
in all the perticulars forecited to be, that if you or any of your Successors,
or any Dean, or Dean and Chapter, of (...) our Cathedrial Church, or any other
person holding any Office, Benefice or Prebend in the same, do or shall refuse
or omit to observe these our Commands, we shall judge them unworthy of our
future favor, whensover any preferment Ecclesiastical shall be desired by them
from us.

And lastly our Will and Command is, that you and your Successors do at or
before the first day of October in every year, render an account to the
Archbishop of (...) how these our Orders and Commands are observed, That the
Archbishop afterward may represent the same unto Us,

By his Majestyes Command. EDWARD NICHOLAS.
This is a true Copy of the King Letter, showed in the House of Commons by Sir
Allin Brawdriff the 7th of August 1660.



LONDON, Printed for John Jones. 1660.


