By the King A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Times of holding this Summer Assizes.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Justices assigned for the several Circuits of Our Realm of
England, have prefixed and published the days and places for holding the
Summer Assizes within their respective Circuits, and since the publishing
thereof, the Commons in this present Parliament assembled have made an humble
Address to Us, and represented weighty and important Reasons which induced Us,
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to give Order for deferring the days of
holding the said Assizes for some time; and in observance thereof, Our said
Justices have agreed upon, and given in Notes of other and further days for
holding the said Assizes; We therefore of Our Princely Care, that Our loving
Subjects may have timely notice, and to prevent, as much as in us lies, all
inconveniences that may happen to them by the alterations, and that the due
Administration of Justice may (as we earnestly desire) proceed effectually, and
be equally distributed, Have thought good, with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to publish and Declare, and do hereby Publish and Declare, the
several prefixions given in by Our said Justices for holding the Assizes in
their several Circuits, as they are herein after expressed and set down in the
Foot of this Our Proclamation, to the end that our said Subjects, whom the same
shall concern, having knowledge thereof, may conform themselves accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the Three and Twentieth day of July, in the
Twelfth year of Our Reign 1660.
Surrey ss. Monday the third of September at Kingston upon Thames. Sussex
Friday the seventh of September, at East-Greenste^d. Kent Tuesday the Eleventh
of September, at Maidstone. Essex Monday the Seventeenth of September at
Chelmsford. Hertford Friday the One and twentieth of September at Hertford.
Bucks Thursday the thirtieth of August at Aylesbury. Bedford Monday the third
of September, at the Town of Bedford. Huntingdon Wednesday the fifth of Sept.
at the Town of Huntingdon. Cambridge Thursday the sixth of Sept. at the Castle
of Cambridge. Suffolk Monday the Tenth of September. at Bury St. Edmonds. Norfolk
Saturday the fifteenth of Sept. at the Castle of Norwich. City of Norwich The
some day at the New-hall of the City of Norwich. Berks Tuesday the fourth of
September at Reading. Oxon Friday the Seventh of September at Oxford.
Gloucester Wednesday the Twelfth of September at Gloucester. City of Gloucester
The same day at the City of Gloucester. Monmouth Monday, the Seventeenth of
September at Monmouth. Hereford Thursday the Twentieth of September at
Hereford. Worcester Tuesday the Five and Twentieth of Sept. at Worcester. City
of Worcester The same day at the City of Worcester. Sal^p Friday the Eight and
twentieth of September at Bridgnorth. Stafford Wednesday the Third of October
at Stafford. Lancaster Thursday the Thirtieth of August at Lanc^ster.
Westmorland Thursday the sixth of September at Appleby. Cumberland Monday the
Tenth of September at Carlisle. Northumberland Friday the Fourteenth of
September at the Castle of Newc^stle upon Tyne. Newcastle upon Tyne The same
day at the Guild Hall of the same Town. Durham Tuesday the Eighteenth of
September at Durh^m. York Monday the Twenty fourth of September at the Castle
of York. York City The same day at the Guild Hall of the same City. Southampton
Monday the Third of September at the Caistle of Winchester Wilts Wednesday the
Fifth of September at New-Salisbury. Dorset Monday the Tenth of September at
Dorchester. City of Exeter Thursday the Thirteenth of September at the
Guild Hall of the city of Exeter. Devon The same day at the castle of Exeter.
Cornwall Wednesday the Fifteenth of September at Launceston. Somerset Tuesday
the Twenty fifth of September at the city of Bath. City of Bristol Saturday the
Twenty ninth of September at the Guild Hall of the city of Bristol. Northampton
Tuesday the Fourth of September at the castle of Northampton Rutland Friday the
Seventeenth of September at Okeham. Lincoln Monday the Tenth of September at
the castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln The same day at the city of Lincoln.
Nottingham Saturday the Fifteenth of September at Nottingham. Town of
Nottingham The same day at the Town of Nottingham. Derby Tuesday the Eighteenth
of September at Derby. Leicester Friday the Twenty one of September at
Leicester. Town of Leicester The same day at the Town of Leicester. City of
Conventry Monday the 24th of September at the city of Coventry. Warwick
Tuesday the Five and Twentieth of September at Warwick.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker Printers to the KINGS


