The Author to the Reader.
THE Composing of a Book is not sufficient to entitle a person to the venerable
name of Author; there must also be a Preface contrived, or something of that
nature, by which Advertisement the Reader is to understand, that he appears in
print at the solicitation of some considerable persons, who compelled him to
publish his Treatise, contrary to his intention; or else, that it was
occasioned by the deceit of some Friend, which by making the Preamble in his
name or that of the Bookseller, is a sufficient Justification. After he has
with affectation taken upon him this counterfeit kind of modesty, and lavished
his whole stock of Rhetoric, to move the Reader to that which he takes least
notice of, he endeavors to captivate his benevolence, and so running from one
extreme to the other, the Author usually persuades him before hand, by the
Elogies he himself bestows upon the product of his own brain, or which he makes
his Copartners place at the front of his Book, what an estimate he ought to put
upon the work he exposes to public view. These authoritative Customs are so
modish, that he seems to entrench upon the Privileges of Parnassus, that is
inclinable to deviate from them. Now if Authors do so confidently assume the
Liberty of expatiating in their own commendation, the Readers will take as much
privilege in criticizing; and we may safely say that there never was any Book
extant, but had it is censures and censors. It seems that the Major part of
mankind, think themselves unworthy the Title of Virtuosi, if they are not so
industrious as to build up their own esteem at the expense of those that write,
and establish the reputation of their Judgment, by some shaking nod, or being
critical in word or thought: most things in the World depend upon opinion
sometimes well, sometimes ilgrounded; every one studies to make himself famous,
and it frequently happens, that some well-worded expressions applauded, or some
kind of raillerie neatly performed, is more advantageous to the Author, than
the product of a solid Judgment married to a cleanly and curious Wit. And as
repute is gained but by the applause of a great number of people, so the
success is usually very uncertain, being subject to the capricio as well as the
Judgment of this multitude; besides there is a certain kind of malignity in
most men proceeding from inordinate self-love, that hinders them from praising
any thing in other men, unless they can heighten their own commendation
thereby, and hurries them on with delight to the contempt and censure of all
things that are not their own production. This manner of proceeding is not
wholly taken up with the Issue of the mind, but extends to all human actions,
and you scarce ever met with any, though never so much addicted to vainglory,
that were universally approved of. I do not pretend, Reader, by my discourse
here to divert you from censuring this small Treatise; I am absolutely
persuaded, that to court you to be favorable to me, (unless your disposition
inclines you thereunto) is but labor lost for let me say what I can, you will
notwithstanding determine with absolute authority. Yet I must advertise you,
because I have spoken of malignity in the judgment of some men, I meant that
discourse only of that sort of people who are perpetually judging and
censuring, and who endeavor to shroud the imbecility of their own
understanding, under the authority they so imperiously assume to decide all
controversies, who if they would undertake to enter the List, and show what
they are capable of performing, would become an object of derision to the whole
world. I know there are others, who by subtle and curious judgment look upon
all things judiciously, and without pre-occupation, who freely praise what
merits applause, and speak modestly of that which has had the ill fortune to
displease them, these are the persons with whom I desire to ingratiate my self,
by informing them what motives I had to present my Logical-Love unto them: I
must acquaint you therefore, if you are in the number of those rational and
refined understandings, to whom I address my self, that it was my persuasion,
there was no better way to create a desire of learning Logic in those that are
ignorant of that Art, than by facilitating her rudiments which are knotty to
young Tyro's, and familiarly acquainting them with those crabbed words of
Categories, Universals, and Syllogisms, by the application I make of them to
the most delightful Subject in the World, which indisputably, is that of Love:
you are now about to take a view of this Art, which comprehends all Subjects,
enveloped in those that concern this passion; and I must farther inform you,
that as this Subject is of it self too barren to be neatly handled thorough all
it is parts, I thought I might take the liberty sometimes to step a little
aside, provided, I did not stray so far as to go quite out of my road, into
which I constantly endeavor to return; and that I might have the same
privilege as to the matter of Logic, as the Authors of Romances have in matter
of History, who though they stick close to her in the principal events, yet
often take the liberty to embroyder it with their own inventions, which are
pertinent to the Subject in hand. It Is now your part to judge whether I have
well or ill managed the design which I proposed.

THE Lovers Logic: OR, LOGICAL-LOVE.
Love discoursing to his Pupils.
THe Art that I have undertaken to teach you, most Generous Offspring, who
profess your selves my followers, requires no great study, nor laborious toil.
The sympathy I have lodged in your hearts, in bestowing a being upon you,
inclines you sufficiently to receive my instructions; and Nature her self is
not backward in acquainting you with the pleasures that I confer upon all my
Pupils. This prudent Mother places you under my conduct, as soon as you are
capable of understanding me, and you no sooner are acquainted with me, but you
take great delight in following me, and harkening to my instructions. For the
rest, as I am a Beardless Philosopher, so I must have youthful Pupils, not that
I desire to expel those that are somewhat more advanced in years from my
School; but I must let them understand, that though they are as capable of my
Doctrine, as those that are young; they are not in a condition to make so great
an improvement thereby; in this their experience is offensive to them, and the
number of their years, tends only to the abatement of their felicity. All
things appear in their season, the Flowers budding forth in the spring, and my
joys are tasted in youth; it is only therefore to you that enjoy it, that I am
preparing to read my Lectures, as persons capable of making greater advantages
thereby. And as I am not ignorant, that in this age there are many Learned
Women, who take upon them to Philosophize, I shall not scruple to make use of
the ordinary terms of Philosophy, and in my Precepts to resemble here is as near
as I can possibly. I will therefore begin my Logic with the Definition thereof.

The Lovers Logic is the Art of discerning true Love from that which is
counterfeit, and of arguing exactly upon all things that may befall them.

Of Amorous conceptions.
YOu must understand that man never really loves, unless the Object that is
capable of creating it be presented to his sight. Some there are that have been
enamored by hearing, others by touching, but that is of no continuance, unless
confirmed by seeing. Then this very Sense is the Porter that gives me entrance
into the heart; it is by these two windows of the Soul that I am inrroduced to
co-habit with her: not but that the other Senses afford me their assistance,
but I must first enter by the eye. And to the end that this passage may lie
open to me, and that I may without difficulty gain my design of the rest, I
must be accompanied with a certain Gentlewoman, whom they call Wealth. But when
I am destitute of this Pilotess, I have much ado to cruze about with all the
craft I am Master of: I find it difficult to pass; nay, when I am just upon my
entrance into a heart, I am oftentimes repulsed, if the Lady Wealth does not
accompany me: all that I can do to preserve my self when I am destitute of her
company, is to strike a League with Wit. It is a Youth well shaped as to his
Person, acceptable in Society, and who is author of rate Compositions as well
in Verse as Prose; he has always a kind reception in all good company; he
understands how to gain esteem among people of the greatest integrity, and does
also succeed indifferently in obtaining the favor of women; but when Wealth is
at a distance with Wit, it so falls out sometimes, that he is despised. She is
an arrogant Baggage, who is accustomed to treat all those unhandsomly, she is
unacquainted with: Prosperity her usual companion, swells her excessively with
pride, and makes her carriage insupportable to good people. She will often play
at football with Wit and Desert, and raise up ignorance and stupidity. In
fine, she values none but those that enjoy her, unless she be attended by
virtue.

I give you here a description of their Qualities that you may know how to
appropriate them; but though the Qualifications of Wit are far more noble than
those of Wealth, yet for all that, they are not so advantageous: for in the age
wherein we live, her treasures cast a mist before the eyes of all persons in
the world; but when we meet all three together, and that we proceed
unanimously, we make a great progress in a little time, and scarce encounter
any heart that resists. There is another great Youth known by the name of
Good-face, the Brother of Beauty, whose society is of very advantageous to me;
it is he that opens the doors of the eyes, and causes his Daughter Idaea to
enter with me: they are as like one another, as two drops of water, in so much
that he being absent, she supplies her Father's place.

This ingenious Idaea lets slip no opportunity of speaking well of him that
gave her being, she many times entertains the Lady with whom she sojourneth,
with the passion that he has for her, and puts her in mind of those delightful
minutes that she enjoyed by his conversation. Whilst she is young, she is very
serviceaable to him, but when she grows in years, she is not so sollicitous.
She does not then so often entertain her Mistress; she appears but seldom in
her sight; she begins to seem less obliging; and is at length expelled by some
other person, if not speedily assisted by the presence of the Lover.

How deep soever the impression be she made in the heart; absence will soon
wipe it away; that which must be done to continue it fresh a little longer, is
to summon Nature to the assistance of Art; and this is practiced several ways.
First, let the accomplished Lover endeavor to gain his Mistress Picture, and
that afterward he persuade her to accept of his.

Though the Portraictures of these Lovers are dumb, yet they entertain them
very pleasantly. But there is another kind of speaking-Picture, that is more
effectual; this softens the rigors endured by absence, by complaining of those
evils which she causes them to suffer: she speaks without a mouth, and is
understood from the remotest parts. It is she that serves as fuel to the fire
that I have kindled reciprocally in two hearts; it is she that links them
together invisibly by a chain, which time it self can hardly break.

There are two sorts of speaking, as well as of dumb painting; the one called
Prose, the other Poetry; this latter resembles Miniature, which is far more
delightful than the other, when well composed; but the eye of the understanding
must be very sharp-sighted that can prompt you to give judgment thereupon;
therefore it is prudence in the Painter not to expose it to the view of all
persons. Now the Lover must be satisfied that his Lady is ingenious, before he
present her with a Copy of Verses, that she may not mistake his witty Sonnets,
and passionate Stanzas for Ballads: but, as often in this kind of Language,
they abandon their reason to catch at the Rhythme; and that they many times say
more, sometimes less than they desire; the use hereof will not prove effectual.
Not but that Poetry enjoys many Privileges which Prose is denied; and that you
may express your love to a fair Lady in Verse, which cannot be so freely done
in Prose; for there you must take a greater compass, and above all, be sure at
the first, you mention not my name. Women do observe this kind of foppery among
themselves, and feign a displeasure when they hear me named, though they lodge
me in their heart, with the greatest joy imaginable: when I am entered, I cannot
forbear smiling to see all the close-stool faces they make, to conceal me; but
it is to no purpose; for I am seldom long in a place, before I am discovered.
The way to divine it is, for a Lover to strive to discover by some she-servant
upon whom he must exercise his liberality or else some she-Confident whom he
must make his friend, whether she often discourses of him: he may also desire
one of his most intimate friends to speak somewhat amiss of him before his
Mistress, yet so, that it may no way blast his Reputation, to see with what
heat she will maintain his concerns; and if she be so cunning as to say nothing
Pro or Contra; let them observe the Aer of her Countenance, which undoubtedly
carries less dissimulation with it than the tongue; it is she that oftentimes
publishes the most mysterious secrets of the heart, whose comply ruddiness
discovers my flames, which they with so much pains endeavor to keep secret.

Indeed it is natural to the fair to blush, when they hear a Person that is dear
to them discoursed of; and though they stand upon their guard, this petty
accident usually happens as soon as that ruddiness begins to rise in the face
the shame that they apprehend will attend them in the discovery, forces them
to blush the more, and appears with the greater luster. Let not then the Lover
doubt of his being beloved when this accident happens upon his occasion; but,
if possible, let him endeavor to make a discovery in his own person of what is
suffered for him, and not rely too much upon his friend.

To Court by Ambassadors and Proxies belongs only to Kings and Princes;
besides, a Lover is more Eagle-ey'd in that which concerns him so nearly, than
a second person, that has but a slender interest; he must always in matters of
this moment suspect the most faithful, and believe nothing but his own eyes.
The best friend in the world, loves himself better than you, and if he find
himself smitten with the same passion, he will make no scruple to dethrone you
out of the heart of your Mistress, that he may reign there. Such Treachery as
this, is the product of every day the whole world over, because not foreseen:
and when they resolve to follow me, there are few persons who stand upon their
honor so much, as not to violate their faith to their friends.

Hence arise the greatest disorders and and most irreconcilable enmities; but
this would force me beside my subject, therefore I will treat of this matter
more exactly, when I have given it a proper place; and having sufficiently
explained this first Chapter of Conceptions, which will serve to let you know
how I get into the heart; we will pass to the Categories or Praedicaments.
Logic usually makes Ten: which are Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation,
Action, Passion, Where, When, Situation and Habit. And I for my part lay down
five that are Principal, with their contraries, which make the same number.

viz. Their contraries are: Beauty. Deformity. Wealth. Poverty. Youth. Old age.
Gallantry. Clownishness. Wit. Stupidity.

Which you may make use of in the framing of all sorts of Propositions both
affirmitive and negative, that conduce to the distinguishing of true Love from
that which is false.

The Definition of Beauty. Of Substance.
BEauty is a Substance and perfect being, the subject and support without which
I cannot long subsist in any one place whatsoever. There are two sorts of
Beauty, viz. Immaterial and Material: the former belongs to the Soul, and the
latter is lincked to the Body: the one comprehends all the virtues, and good
inclinations, that are capable of attracting Love; and the other c^ntains the
Symmetry of proportion, the luster of Complexion, and the comeliness of
Stature, some add the Action; but that is in the same sense under the
Jurisdiction of the mind. As there are an infinite number of Beauties,
comprised under this didivision, so are the Subjects infinite, that are capable
of creating love; some persons are captivated with the beauties of the Soul,
and others enchain'd to those of the body; but since these last exceed the
first in number, I will make a more strict examination, and exact division of
them than the other.

The Division of Immaterial Beauties.
Magnanimity. Generosity. Gratitude. Sensibility. Constancy. Liberality.
Complaisance. Fidelity. Tenderness.
To these are added the accomplishments of the Voice, which participates of
both.

The Material are:
A Smooth Complexion, white and red, and each color be truly placed, and lose
themselves imperceptibly the one in the other; which some Ladies would express
by the new French Phrase, demeslee.

Full Eyes, well made of a dark or black color, graceful and casting a luster.

A Nose well made, neither too big, nor too small.

A little Mouth, the upper-Lip resembling a Heart in shape, and the under
somewhat larger, but both of a vermilion color, as well in Winter as Summer:
and on each side two small dimples easily to be discerned in their moving
upwards, which look like a kind of constant smile.

White Teeth, very clean, well ranged in order, of an equal bigness, neither
short nor long, but very close set.

A forked Chin, not too short nor too long, and hanging double.

A full, round, or oval Visage.

The Temples high raised.

As for the color of the Hair, opinions are various.

One the fair hair, another brown admires,
A third a color between both desires,
But herein all concentre and do rest,
The color of the loved object is the best.
Therefore it is indifferent to me which of the three they be, provided the Hair
be very long, and thick, loose, cleanly kept, and a very little frizz'd or
curled in rings; but above all that it be not red, nor come near that tincture.
For it were disadvantageous to them to have all the other species of Beauty, if
they are of that color, I have a natural antipathy against it, insomuch, that
I oftentimes betake my self to my heels, when I spy it: not but they are
usually accompanied with a pure skin, for which I have a great inclination; but
the aversion I have for the one, makes me sometimes abandon the other.

All the remedy that can be is to deceive me at the first, by shaving off all
the Hair, or by an industrious concealment of them, show me those that are of
another color: and as they are purchased, you may have those that are most
curious, and of what color you desire; but this foolish kind of disguise is
sufficiently practiced in this age, so that I need not put my self to the
trouble of instructing it; and I have been so often deceived, that it is now a
business of no small difficulty to surprise me: my diffidence makes me
oftentimes mistake natural for artificial Hair; far from taking the artificial
for those that are natural; their extraordinary comeliness renders them
suspected, especially among Ladies of Quality, although Nature denies it to
them, no more than to the most innocent Shepherdess. But in this age Art
carries so great a sway in the Macrocosm, that I mistrust all.

Nay, the very men that I have seen impudently masque themselves, for so term
the light colored Hair of those that are naturally black. But to return to the
Ladies, to whom beauty de jure belongs, I am acquainted with some who by their
damned Art destroy the most beautiful works of Nature.

I am sometimes so incensed against them, that I have a great mind to put an
affront upon them; and I have a kind of itching desire to go and rub their
cheeks with the little end of my, to give men to understand the artifices
wherewith they endeavor to abuse them. For I phancie no beauty but what is
natural, which I have framed; and am an enemy to those kind of disguises, that
in vain strive to imitate the naturals. But as the Lover cannot take the same
liberty, that my absolute Empire over all that is beautiful furnishes me with,
to reform all abuses that are committed; that which he may do, is to take the
Lady he waits upon, and suspects to be guilty of such artifice, when she rises
out of her bed. It Is then that the paint-box has not as yet played its part,
unless by a neat foresight she made use of it the last night. In this case he
must address himself to the waiting Gentlewoman, as to an Oracle, that can
only clear all his doubts. But if he will oblige her to relate the truth, he
must open his purse, for that incloseth the most mysterious secrets. He shall
no sooner produce certain Guests, that dwell there, which they call Guinnies,
but they will unriddle him the most obscure aenigmas, not only upon this, but
any other subject whatsoever, that his curiosity prompts him to understand. But
since we have not examined all the natural beauties, let us leave those that
are artificial, and return to what remains.

After the Face the Neck, Arms and Hands fall under our consideration; which
some Buffoons have called la petite Oye: though their beauty is inferior to
what we have already described, ye^ they produce sometimes strange effects, and
there is no heart that can resist the charms of a fair Neck, when she satiates
your eye with beholding: those graceful Apples which they bear inflames the
hearts of those that are most insensible. These two fruits are so lovely, that
a person is ready to die with a desire of approaching with the mouth to taste
them: and is sensible of a pleasant convulsion, when he does but grasp them in
his hand. In fine they are capable of creating my content, but never to satiate
me.

Lovers that touch their Ladies lovely breast,
Do feel a matchless flame within their heart;
And are with amorous designs possessed,
To enjoy wonders in some other part.
For greater pleasures they require
To satisfy their fond desire.
The comely proportion has many charms to move an affection, especially when
accompanied with a free Aer that attracts the inclinations of all persons. We
will name six sorts, Great, Small, Mean, Fat, Lean, and in good case which may
all delight, if well-proportioned, and furnished with that obliging and
disobliging Aer, for which I want a name.

It Is by his means insensibly that I
Creep in a Lovers youthful bosom, who
Without examining the reason why,
Finds he is surpised, and yet he knows not how.
There are besides many other beauties, but as the knowledge of them is of no
great consequence, every person bestowing a form upon them according to the
dictates of his own Phancie; we will only discourse here of those that are
generals, and assign the others a place in the number of Accomplishments.

The Definition of Wealth.
WEalth is a quantity or heaping together of goods, that may be divided into
many parts.

And it is of two sorts: the one is composed of separate and disjoynted parts,
and the other of those that are united and continuous.

Disjoynted Riches is a great number of money, because the parts that go to the
composition of it, have no mutual union between them. This quantity is not
measured, but counted. Number is an accumulation of Unities. Unity is not
number, but the principle thereof. The greatest number is always best; and is
boundless, because you may still add thereunto in infinitum.

Continuous Wealth is a quantity, the parts whereof are joined together with a
continued series, and may be measured; as fair Lands composed of great Parks,
long Avenues, Woods full of tall Trees, large Meadows and vast champagne
grounds, adorned with sumptuous Castles, stately Walks, Orchards and
Flower-gardens, the whole enriched with clear waters, as well Rivers as Ponds
and Fountains, fit for the breeding of good fish, and the refreshment of Lovers
during the violent heat of Summer. In this kind of quantity, we admit only of
the superficies, the line being insufficient, and having no occasion for the
whole body; unless it be the great bulk of an Apartment which must be furnished
from top to bottom as well with large beds, rich hangings, with silk or golden
fringes, as the best Tapistry, and guilt Leather, Pictures, Vessels of Silver,
and other materials, which make a man styled Rich.

When Fair and Rich in competition stand,
I Am at a loss and know not what to say:
One has more charms, yet on the other hand,
Wealth with it is weight quite bears the bell a Way.
When these two Rivals are se parated and in diverse Subjects; this has a great
advantage above the other; not but that I have a strong inclination to the
former, and would freely abandon Riches to be of the Retinue of Beauty; but I
have a Brother known by the name of Self-love, that opposes with his whole
strength, and will never permit me to do it. There also accompanies him a
certain Relation of his called Interest; that leaves no stone unturned in order
to my obstruction, they come often and ravish me by violence out of the very
embraces of Beauty to enslave me to Wealth. It Is no small disturbance to me,
but I am the weakest, and therefore I must obey them. What am I capable of
doing against them both. My Brother Self-love is lustier than I, and is of
himself able to work my ruin, when I walk not hand in hand with him; I must be
in favor with him if I intend to continue long in any one place; and I never
could find a better way for my own preservation, than tacitly to submit to his
pleasure in all things; not but that I often do things of my own head, without
his advice; but he soon makes me repent it. Which falls out seldom when I have
Wealth my Companion.

Not but that I frequently tire my self in the pursuit of one and the same
object, in the midst of plenty as well as elsewhere: for I naturally affect
variety, and cannot long subsist with enjoyment that is not attended with
difficulty. It Is this that reinvigorates my desires, and furnishes me with a
new supply of strength; but I am no sooner Conqueror, then the inclination I
have to fight makes me carry any arms elsewhere. If you would have me continue
in one place, you must occupy me; that is, you must always lay some petty
Remora's in my way, that I may master them.

Which has sometimes caused in me this reflection, that the jealousy of
Husbands was of no use ordinarily but to entertain me in the hearts of their
Wives, and of their Gallants a longer time, because of the difficulty of the
fruition of their pleasure, whereas on the contrary I find that too great a
facility makes them slight one another, and forces me, either to change my
Residence, or my Object; because I never stamp so high an esteem upon what I
possess; as what I do not enjoy.

Beauty and Wealth, as amiable as they are, cannot afford me satisfaction, when
I enjoy them peaceably. I would besides have Youth, without which I cannot judge
my felicity complete.

The Definition of Youth.
YOuth is a necessary quality of Love, and an Accident almost inseparable from
its Substance, which is Beauty.

We will lay down two sorts, viz. from twelve to twenty years of age, and from
twenty to thirty. As for men they may make it of longer continuance, and it is
more acceptable to them above than short of twenty. But with women it is
otherwise, and the greatest part of men, imagine the first age more amiable
than the last. Yet there are some who do not love those that are too young, but
would have persons perfectly made, and not to be made again; but there is a
smaller number of this sort of people, than of the other. Which is the reason
why

When once a Maid's fifteen,
She breathes, and her rest takes.
And long slow journeys then
Onward to twenty makes.
As these years are more esteemed by her than the other, it is but just that
she make them continue a little longer, and they cannot afford them less time
than that of the Roman Lustrum; and as they are promoted in stature as they
grow in years, their years are longer as they increase. When they arrive at the
age of twenty, they take up their rest, as being tired with so long a journey,
and make a stand, till they come to thirty, and then they affirm they are one
and twenty, and when at length the hair begins to shed, and that they have
passed the age of forty, they contend so long with old age till they are
overcome, and then they strive daily to repair the damages it does them,
sometimes by the artificial application of a small piece of Ivory, to stop up
the breaches that old Age has made in their mouths, sometimes by putting some
Pomander sweet-balls the smell whereof is more pleasant than that which usually
proceeds from thence. Sometimes by smoothing the furrows in their cheeks, or
making them more full and plump with small Spunges which they place on ^ach
side of their mouth, to supply the ^efect of their maigreness: and sometimes
also by coloring their hair as black as (...) Crow, when they are as white as
(...) Swan.

Yet there are some of these fair-aged women, who pretend a right to create
Love, especially when accompanied with Gallantry; it is by this means that ^hey
imagine a possibility of supplying the ^efects of Youth in them, and repairing
^he losses they have made. This design ^bligeth them to sweeten their aspect,
and to use constantly obliging and flat^ering language, and to make the best
^dvantage they can of their decorum. If any one lets slip a word that relisheth
of ^he flourish or complement, they have an Answer ready, and endeavor to
engage ^im more deeply in the Combat; it is to ^o purpose for him to recede,
for they ^ursue him, till they have extorted a ^onfession from him, that he
has no ^hancy to make. After they have thus ^lapt (as I may so say) a Pistol
to his Breast, to compel him to an acknowledgment of what is false, they give
him fair hopes of enjoying that which he least desires. In fine, they set
themselves forward as much as in them lies, and there wants nothing but his
consent to make up a speedy agreement; but he is no sooner absent, but he
forgets what passed in discourse, it flies away with the breath tha^ gave it
birth, without leaving the lea^^ impression in his mind. Nevertheless th^^
superannuate Beauty flatters her self with a new Conquest.

Not but that Gallantry proves often effectual, whilst accompanied with Youth
and Beauty, but she is but weak of her self yet she is longer lived than either
of these two, and time has not the same power over her. When she is bestowed
upon (...) Lady, she seldom deserts her, and usually attends her to her grave.
It Is true tha^ when she grows old, and at a certain stay, she appears no longer
a la mode; she will not ordinarily alter her decency as others do; she rejects
the new modes of discourse, and finds none so gentile as those which were used
in her time. And it fares alike with her in all things else; nothing seems so
commendable as what was then in use. The World is not so polite, nor molded to
her fancy; they dance not with that grace, they are not so dexterous in all
sorts of exercises; they have not such active Spirits; the wearing of Apparel
is not so exactly understood; Treats are not so sumptuous, and their Diversions
are not so well managed: but ^ow we have discours't of Antique Gallantry, we
must say somewhat of that which is Youthful.

If she has never so many Courtiers she studies to satisfy them all by feeding
them with fair hopes; and when she has many in her Company, she makes as if
^he would please them all;

The One she discourses with a speaking Eye,
And softly whispers the other in the Ear,
It Is you that I love best, or let me dye,
Makes him hope wonders and be of good cheer.
And if a third his sad fate blaming stands,
Treads on his Toe, or wrings him by the hands.
Not but that in this great number (...) Admirers, she has some single pers^^
whom she makes choice of; for as pu^sant as I am, my Empire cannot be di^vided,
but a dissolution follows. So tha^ when I give a Lover dominion over (...)
Heart, the rest can find no Residen^ there: but as Galantry exactly understands
the method of my proceedings she is careful how she declares her self i^ favor
of a single Person, for fear of lo^sing all the rest. Which breeds in the^
minds a certain monster called Jealousy who although indebted to me for his
being, yet is sometimes so unnatural as t^ strangle me: but as Jealousy owes
its Being to my Enemy, which is Hatred, a well as to my self; it is no wonder if
she be not always on my side; this wicke^ Mother gives her pernicious advice
which still tends to my destruction.

To animate her the more against m^ she puts him in mind of the ingratitude o^
her that bore me, she gives him a Catalogue of all my past service, she shew^
him the defects of him that is favored by this fair one, and forgets not her
own neither. In fine, she leaves no stone unturned to persuade her and my
Danghter to banish me out of the Heart, to supply my place, and remain sole
Mistress Regent.

But as Jealousy is as much indebted to me as Hatred, she does not accomplish
her designs without some difficulty, and I usually obtain the victory being
assisted by Beauty. It Is she that makes Jealousy espouse my quarrel, and
immediately dissipates all the conjurations of her Mother Hatred; it is she that
calmes the tempests that were raised in the Hearts; it is she that disarms Envy
and Anger, that lie in ambush for my destruction, and that makes me gain a
glorious victory over all my Enemies.

Of Relatives.
RElatives, are two things that have a mutual dependence one upon the other,
and so are so concatenated, that the understanding cannot conceive the one
without the other. As for example, I cannot fancy to my self that there is a
Lover, without concluding he has a Mistress; nor a Mistress without imagining
she has one or more Lovers.

There are several sorts of Relatives; some are perfect, the other imperfect;
the perfect are, the party Loving and the party Loved; because these two are so
linked together, that the one subsists by the help of the other, and seem to
make but one and the same; though they are two distinct things.

The imperfect Relation is that, which is between the Lover and his Mistress;
for it is probable that she may not answer the passion of the former, and the
Lover can have but one Mistress; but she may have several Lovers, who will be
related to her as many several ways, as the punctum in the Center of a Circle,
which is made as often as you draw a Line from this point to the Circumference.

One and the same thing may have the name of two Relatives, but in several
respectts; as, she can be but Mistress to one person that is Lover to another.
There are also some other Relations, that are contrary and opposite. As Beauty
and Deformity, Wealth and Poverty, Youth and Old Age.

Of Action.
MOst amorous Actions are subject to the Government of the Spirit that imprints
its virtue upon the Object which I present, and sooner finds out the Art of
pleasing that person, that has pleased her.

There are several sorts of tempers; some are serious, the other jovial; some
are full of fire, and others attended with languishing, and yet come to the
same end, though they make use of different means to attain thereunto.

At first I have no small trouble to insinuate my self into him that is
Melancholic; but when I once have admission, I make so strong an impression;
that time it self finds all the difficulty in the world to wear it away. And
these are the persons I make constant Lovers.

When charmed with rays shot from a lovely eye
And that they once have sworn fidelity,
Their faith and life we coextensive find.
Nor for fair objects do they chang their mind.
As they are naturally apt to conceive things of great moment; so they manage
their Passion after a more lofty and stately manner than others do, as if it
were an important affair for the good of the State.

If they declare their Love, it is done
With very great precaution.
Stanza's or Elegies they write in Verse,
And every word's a Sentence they rehearse.
Those that are of a Jovial Spirit do steer a quite contrary course: they
proceed in their most weighty concernments, as if they were but bagatels. They
laugh in the midst of their sufferings, and make it their business to jest with
all things: not but that they have their hours of disturbance as well as
others; but their natural propensity to jollity, soon buries all things in
oblivion. They oftentimes accomplish their desires more successfully by playing
the Buffoons, than others by their passionate Complaints; for I naturally avoid
grief and sadness, and love to live and be among divertisements and pleasures.

The Fiery Spirit usually comes short of the success of the Languishing. The
fiery temper cannot endure a repulse, he is daily transported against those
impediments that oppose his felicity. And because he usually undertakes so
much, he seldom succeeds in any thing; unless he attaque such Places as are
taken by Parley, and yield at the first Summons.

Then a rash Lover better far succeeds
In his designs, than one that is circumspect:
For to be happy and to please, there needs
Not constantly a durable respect.
It Is my usual custom to confer my favors upon those that are bold, as well as
Fortune's; but sometimes I inflict punishments upon those that are too
impudent: for by this means it falls out, that a person might have gained a
Ladies favor, who loses it by a precipitate attempt. So a man may also work
his own ruin upon the account of his Mistress, for letting slip a favorable
opportunity offered, and for not making advantage of that happy moment, which
they call the Critical Minute: yet the first way of procedure is far less
dangerous than the last, and I should advise a Person to incline rather to
boldness than fear; for it is the former discovers this fortunate hour, though
it seems but short in comparison of an eternity.

Yet he who meets with it must not trouble himself with others, provided upon
the discovery he find himself disposed to make a right use of it.

But let us return to the Spirit; it is this then that acts well or ill, as it
is well or ill inclined: there is besides another kind of malicious Spirit yet
artifieial, that creates a great deal of business to it self, that others may
not want it; it is naturally supple, complaisant, and very fruitful in
Invention. He that is so qualified, leaves nothing unpractic'd to obtain his
designs, and he is forced ordinarily to make use of Obloquy, and Flattery, as
he finds the one or the other favors his Undertakings, The latter is very
proper to ingratiate him into the Ladies favor, and the former renders him a
redouted Enemy to all his Rivals.

But if his crafty wiles come once to be discovered, it serv's to unite them
more firmly, and he seeks his own ruin in the destruction of others, he becomes
the Object of his Mistresses hatred, and his Rivals revenge, and then is the
time that he stands in need of Valor to repel the affronts that may be thrown
upon him.

For if they know he is destitute of this quality, he runs the risque of
leading an ill life: 'twill be to no purpose for him to hover about with his
accustomed adresses; he will ever encounter with some person or other who will
take off this vizard, which will not happen if he be valiant. They will
deliberate upon it more than once, before they resolve to offend him, they
pretend ignorance of those things they certainly understand, and he has the
power to make himself feared, though he cannot make himself beloved.

But it fares otherways with the Spirit, that is no sooner hated than rifled;
and as there is no great hazard in encountering it, so they crowd after it to
attaque it; not but that it has Arms defensive and offensive, but they are not
so dangerous as those that belong to Valor: for the one aims at the life, and
the other endeavors only the shipwreck of honor and reputation: but though
the world is of opinion, that the latter is more acceptable than the former;
yet they are no^ so careful in the preservation thereof: the reason is, because
it is easier to repair the injury done to them, than to cure great wounds: and
those that love to sleep in a whole skin will tell you, that Reputation, like
the hair on the Head, soon returns again. To conclude this point, they agree
that it is better to have the Spirit your Enemy, than Valor: and that it is a
more facil business to re-establish an injured reputation, than to gain a new
life.

Wit void of Valor does unvalued seem,
And wants such a support to gain esteem:
Yet Valor must of Wit still have some share,
To animate and pilote it with care.
Without this it is a brutish thing, capable of bad as well as good actions: and
they account it a piece of Honor to venture pleasantly upon affronting
another: they spend the greatest part of their time in rashness, or at least in
playing the Rodomontado's; when they are destitute of Spirit, they usually are
attended with the contrary stupidity, it is a blind guide that makes them
frequently mistake falsehood for truth, that leads them to Precipices, and
renders them altogether incapable of noble Actions: it seldom prevails in
obtaining Ladies favors, 'its heavy and dull humor cannot fuit it self with
the subtilty and delicacy of theirs; they have too good judgment to make so bad
a choice; and all that it can expect, is to be their laughing stock and scorn.

Stupidity, otherwise called Sottishness, is of two sorts; the one mute, and
the other talkative; the latter serves to divert good Company, and affords a
good subject of mirth at its own expense, by its foolish questions or
ridiculous stories: sometimes the person would appear to be some body by
affording his advice in what he understands not, and venturing boldly upon a
decision of the most intricate questions; but never appears so pleasant, as
when he intends to be wel-worded, then he gathers together a mass of hard
words, but is ignorant of their signification, and perpetually harps upon them
that are not the cause; but they receive a return with use for the diversion
afforded, when he begins to be impertinent and troublesome by prolix and
tedious discourses, and when he has engaged himself to relate you a story,
your whole day must be spent in hearing. You cannot possibly withdraw your
self, for he proceeds from particular to particular, and every minute sallies
out of the subject. Not unlike a traveller who has lost his way in a Wood, who
knows not on which side he marches, nor how to extricate himself. Now as the
Spirit has a natural antipathy against Sottishness, he is upon an
insupportable rack, if compelled by any consideration to give ear unto it, then
he becomes the Patient, though upon all accounts else whatsoever he is usually
the Agent.

Of Passion.
PAssion is the reception of the Virtue of the Agent; as when a curious eye
darts love with its glances, this effect is called passion.

And there are several kinds of it; the most insupportable of all is Poverty,
and it is almost impossible that we two should continue long in one place;
there are some Passions that would in the conclusion destroy the Patient, if
they went on increasing as this does, and there are others that perfect the
subject that receiv's them, as increase of Riches, Wit, Beauty: As for Youth
that is always decreasing.

There are besides pleasant Passions, as the sight of a beautiful object, and
the reception of the love created thereby.

The Agent oftentimes suffers whilst acting, and the Patient acts upon its
Agent: and this happens when a Beauty receives me, at the same time that s^e
gives me; then the Lover and the Party loved are Patients and Agents both at
once, and have each of them particularly both these distinct powers within
themselves. When this happens, the Lover has reason to hope that he may have
the fruition of his happiness; but if this fair one recede and denies the
reception of my love after she has created love in me, he must storm and
exclaim against me for injustice: nay I permit him to rail, and to speak
injuriously of me in her presence, and to reproach me before her with the evils
that I force him to undergo. But when he perceives that his complaints begin to
take effect, according to his desire, he must never put a period to them, till
he arrives at the chiefest point of his happiness: when he has received a
favor from his Mistress, he must look upon it as a step to raise him to a
higher degree of good fortune. In this I imitate Ambition, that sets no value
upon what is already possess't, as long as there remains any thing to be
desired, yet he must not fail to testify his gratitude when he receives some
inconsiderable favor, but his hopes must be boundless. If therefore he find
that he begins to creep into her affection, let him complain that is not
satisfactory, till he has received some infallible testimonies, that will put
the Passion she has for him beyond all scruple whatsoever; then let him enjoy
his felicity at large, till time and habit joined to the natural inclination I
have to change, make me take Wing to some other place: for I do not love to lay
long Siege to a place that makes no farther opposition.

It Is nimbleness of wings that makes Me Love
Unsettled, and Lovers inconstant prove:
But this great secret Ladies must not know,
For then to Courtship they will rebellious grow.
It Is therefore to you Lovers only that I relate these things; for as to the
Ladies, I do not make it my business to discover my thoughts so freely to them.
On the contrary, I employ my best Oratory to persuade them as much as in me
lies, that they will never forsake them, that the favors they bestow upon
their Lovers, are as so many chains to oblige them more strongly to their
service, and that they have too noble a Soul not to acknowledge it; that they
are too generous to violate their faith, that they have by frequent Oaths sworn
to keep; and that they themselves are too amiable to admit of this fear, that
they will ever take up a resolution to desert them.

But we must proceed no farther in the explanation of this Chapter, let us
therefore return to the Predicament of Passion, and conclude, that to render it
acceptable it must be reciprocal in two hearts, and that the Beauty that
causes it, receive it at one and the same time.

Of the Predicament Where.
WHere, is no other but a Term that denotes the particular place of a Subject,
when you answer to a Question. As for example, if they should ask where is the
young Climene? She is at a Ball, at a Comedy, she is Hunting, Where is Love? It
is in the Eyes, and frequently in the Heart; for I can be in both these places
at once: which is the reason why My Philosophers affirm, that the beautiful
Ladies are a in a place circumscriptive, and I in them definitive i. e. that I
am there without taking up any place. I have also the faculty of being in
several places all at once.

Though I Am in Climene, who seeks me, spie^
And meets me sometimes in fair Iris eyes:
And though in London I am found, yet you
May seek me somewhere else, and find me too.
In what place soever I am, I am still the same Love; it is true that every one
clothes me according to his own fancy; and makes me deliver my self in what
Language he pleases; but I change not my Nature, though I do the Country: and
though I am now in England, and at present speak to you in English, yet I am
nevertheless at the same instant in all the corners of the Earth, and speak a
thousand several Languages.

Subject to my Laws is the whole World's frame
All things that breath feel my inspired flame.
I with my fire fill (though a Child) the World,
And am at once to thousand places hurled.
Of the Predicament When.
WHen, is not time it self, but it is a designation or remark of time; as for
example if the Question be, When is it proper to love? The Answer is, in Youth.
When are Lovers happy? In the Critical Minute. When does that happen?
Oftentimes, when you least think of it.

Of the Predicament of Situation.
SItuation denotes the posture of the Subject; As when one would know whether
Climene lies extended on a Couch, or stands upright. Whether a Ladies Lover is
kneeling, standing, or in some other posture more advantageous to him, as you
may say, incircled in her arms.

There is another kind of Situation, that is worthy observation, viz. Whether
the Lover or his Mistress are rich or poor; for my Situaiion often depends upon
that of Fortune. Heretofore I did discharge my self very well without her, and
I could unite two Hearts without any regard had to the inequality of their
conditions. How many Kings have been captivated with Shepherdesses, and how
many lovely Gentlemen have assumed the boldness to raise their thoughts up to
the very Thrones of their Sovereinesses, and have prospered in subjugating of
their Wills? But this time has made it self Wings, and is flown away, and
ambition has so strongly seized the empire of Hearts in this latter age, that
I am not permitted to act, but when I can contribute to her promotion, she is
an imperious and cruel Dame, that enrols none in the List of her Retinue but
such as can aggrandize her, and looks upon one with no other eye, but as a
person that can satisfy her Coveteousness. If I propose a person to her whom
Fortune has rancked in a lower Sphere, she looks upon me as ridiculous, and
despises him though he be the absolute Model of perfection and virtue.

Of the Predicament of Habit.
BY the Habit we understand all sorts of external Ornaments, as well for Men as
Women, as Garments of fine Stuff enriched with gold-plated Buttons, curious
Venetian Points, and other toys which make the accoutrements complete; but
here are certain Maxims to be observed.

First, That all the Garments worn be a la mode, that they be always new, and
that you have variety for change: to avoid all extremes, and extravagant
Fashions, and not to be concerned with the introducing of new ones, but follow
these that are most generally approved; to change when others change, and never
to have any thing that is extraordinary, or affected. If at the same time
different Garbs are in Fashion, in that Case it argues Prudence to make use of
those that are most commodious, be it either to shroud some imperfection of the
body, or to show some perfection which others have not. E. g. If a man has a
handsome well-shap'd Leg, let him show it as much as he can, and let him wear a
silk Stocking drawn up straight without pestring himself with large Tops, as
the major part of young Courtiers do, who had rather expose their expenses to
the public view, than the advantages that Nature has bestowed upon them. If
they have a good head of Hair that is somewhat brown, they will not scruple to
hide it under a very light Perruque: but this is not the use that should be
made of it; for a person should never make use of those advantages that may be
drawn from Art, unless it were to repair the defects of Nature.

Not but that Habillements are very advantageous, especially to Women; for that
Lady may be judged an extraordinary Beauty, whilst she is seen in a noble
Dress, who will lose the greatest part of her charms, when divested of her
Apparel. And those that are experienced do not love to be seen in a careless
Garb, and when they are surpised, will take sufficient notice of it: and as
they know the advantages of a Dress and their other accoutrements, they make it
their most important and ordinary business. In the Morning, as soon as they are
up, the first thing they do is to salute their Glass, and consult with it, to
know whether they have gained or lost any Graces since they last conversed with
it. And as the Meroir naturally hates dissimulation and flattery, it never
masks the truth, for if their Eyes be sunk, it freely gives them notice of
it, though this does not much please them. No flowery Compliments or other
expressions are so acceptable as what comes from hence; the ambition they have
to attract them, makes them attire themselves in their Glass, it is true they
make many strange Faces before the Mirvir gives a pleasing Representation. Then
they immediately bridle in their Chin, and make horns upon their heads with
their Hair, the Looking-glass, that is like an Ape, counterfeits them, and
shows them the horns also, when they smooth their Hair the Looking-glass
smooths it also; and when they raise it, it raises it likewise, and generally
does every thing they do. After that they have spun away the Morning in
ordering their Hair, and their Pendents, and making little rings upon their
Foreheads, which they fasten with mouth-glew, and rightly placing their
Earrings and other Toys, and that the Glass acquaints them their Head is well
dressed; then they begin to commit their Body to a close imprisonment, and pinch
it in so narrow a compass, that the best part of it is plumpness, is forced to
rise toward the Neck, to emancipate it self from such hard captivity: and being
proud of her liberty, appears with a kind of pleasant briskness, which becomes
her infinitely. As for her fair Breasts they are half imprisoned and half free;
and do their utmost endeavor to procure their absolute liberty, by shooving
back that which veils the one half; but they are too weak to effect it, and
whilst they strive to free themselves they cast over a Veil, which perfectly
hides them. The desire they have to be exposed to view makes them beat it back
continually, and not being able to remove that small obstacle, they look quite
through it: there is nothing constantly free but the upper part of the Neck,
which is also more vainglorious, than all the rest, and is adorned with a
Neck-lace of great value, which adds to its vanity. When the fair one is thus
accoutred, she turns on all sides before the Glass, as if she would ask the
question, What it thinks of her? And when he likes it, she takes her leave, and
orders the Horses to be put in the Coach, and then she goes to bestow a visit
upon some Assembly of Ladies, that she may not altogether lose the pains she
has taken in her attiring: after they have done complementing, their discourse
is generally about the Habit; and if one, Woman among them has any new thing
on, that has not been formerly seen by the rest, they will seldom pass
without taking notice of them all, and make a strict examination of them; and
will express themselves, during their observation, in this manner,

Lord! How this Stuff does please my fancy! How
Neat is the Trimming and well chosen! I vow
I like those Colors, their order and place,
Besides, Madam, you have a stately Lace;
What cost it? Thirty Guinnies? No not so,
Yet I had much ado to get it though.
It is the best that e're I saw of late;
Would I had such an one at such a rate,
And so they turn her round to see if her Robes are well made, every one
considers of it, and delivers her opinion; and though they sit as exactly as
ever Garment did: they will always find some fault, and then it runs the hazard
of being sent back to the Tailor more than once; nay there are none, but those
that bear one another a spleen, but will advise one with another, when they
perceive any defect: and on the contrary it is then, they speak most in
commendation. But let this suffice as to the Predicame^^ (...) ^abit.

All things that are in the Universe are contained under these ten Categories
or Predicaments, which I have made use of to assist me in the framing all sorts
of amorous Propositions, or Enunciations; which go to the Composition of my
Arguments. But it is not sufficient to have considered them in themselves,
abstracted from all manner of Subjects, we must also look upon them as fit
instruments to frame an Argument, and as things depending upon Persons, of
which we desire to discourse: and as the way to understand thoroughly the nature
of every Subject, is to examine it in general, and in particular, to know its
Difference, Property and Accidents, we will explain all these things, before we
frame our Arguments.

Of the five Predicables; Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium and Accidens.
Of the Genus, or Gender.
THe Genus is a Term that contains many things differing in Kind; as Beauty is
a chief and universal Genus, which comprehends within it self all kinds of
Beauty; as well those that appertain to the Soul, as those which are annexed to
the Body, as you may see in the Division before mentioned.

Of the Species or Kind.
THe Species ought to be considered two ways: the former respects the Genus
that overrules it, and the latter the Individuals that are subjected
thereunto; insomuch that to give it a true Definition, you must say, It is a
nature comprised under the Genus, which comprehends within it self several
Individuals. As for instance, The comely Stature is a Species, that falls under
the summum Genus of Beauty, and which may be communicated to several distinct
Persons, and yet no necessity that they be endowed with all other Beauties; for
one Person may have excellent Eyes, that has no good Mouth; and she may be of
a good Stature, that has a very deformed Look.

Men in their Walks frequently do
'Oretake one single Lady or two,
Whose comely Stature and Majestic grace
Makes them desire much to see their Face.
Yet they a Lady seldom meet
That is in every thing complete.
There are some sorts of Species that may sometimes admit of the name of the
Genus; because they contain several other Species, though contained under a
summum Genus. There are others that are very particular, altogether made up of
Individuals; but because they help to complete the Species, 'twill not be amiss
to explain what Individuals are. The Individuum is properly a Subject distinct
from all other, which cannot be divided without being destroyed. Thus Phillis
is separated from Aminta, and they between them both have nothing in common,
though they both of them have the same Species of Beauty. I my self that am
communicated to every Being in Nature, that am a summum Genus, under which are
contained an infinite number of Loves, yet I cease not to be an Individuum; not
but that a fair Lady may bestow me upon many at once, but she can never receive
me but from one single Person. When I make a Lover affect any Person, it is in
vain for others to pretend to find room in his heart, unless he expels the
first Object: and the Spirit of man, though of so large a capacity as to be
able to comprehend the whole World, cannot love two different Persons with one
and the same affection, at one and the same time. So that I cannot divide my
self but I must be ruined: yet I can easily unite two Hearts with so strong a
tie, that they will seem to be but one, provided they be of a different Sex.
For as to those obligations between Man and Man, which they call Friendship,
they are so weak, that the smallest inconsiderable Interest in the World is
able to cancel them.

When Thyrsis Amarantha lov's, you find
His heart's so linked with hers, I being come;
That of the Lover and his Love so kind,
I only make one Individuum.
Of Difference.
DIfference is a Word, by which we understand all the distinct parts of a
Subject, as well in regard of the Genus as the Species and Proprium. As for
instance when they ask me, What is a Woman? I answer, she is an amiable
Creature, who by her external form, which is Beauty, differs essentially from
Man; and so of the other Differences, which it is not convenient to mention
here.

If I into this Deep should farther wade,
The true distinctions give you that are made
Between the Lover and his Mistress I,
I fear should spoil my amorous Mystery,
And those things which in me most charming are;
Therefore it is better to be silent far.
I will content my self with acquainting you, that I ow my being to that
distinction of both Sexes: and there is a certain Lady known by the name of
Modesty, who commands me to instruct you no farther in this subject; therefore
I leave you to guess at the rest.

Differences are of several kinds; but the greatest of all is, when two Persons
meet in two contrary Predicaments, as when Climene is in the Category of
Beauty, and Callisto in that of Deformity. When Thyrsis is in that of Riches,
and Silvander in that of Poverty

The essential Difference is between subjects that differ in nature, as Thyrsis
and Climene, the accidental in persons that differ only by accident, as in that
which is met with between Thyrsis and Silvander, it is by this that the same
Individual person may differ from it self, by reason of the various Accidents
that may happen, being quite another thing in Plenty than what he is in want,
and in Youth than in Old Age.

Besides I have several other Differences which bestow as many several names
upon me.

I am both constant and inconstant Love,
Sometimes I Am fond, and sometimes lively prove;
Yet above all things Youth I most affect,
And nothing so much as Old Age neglect.
They that think they have cause to exclaim against me, call me Tyrant Love;
but they injure me by that Title; for I never force any one to love against his
Will. It Is certain that I treat not all my Subjects alike, and that I have
always a certain number of Favorites: but they that are not in this Catalogue,
must complain against Nature that has denied them those qualities that are
capable of creating love. But you will say Natures Masterpieces for Beauty put
up their complaints against me as well as others; To which I answer, most men
cry out, before they are hurt, and to convince them I do them more good than
injury. I find they are so infinitely pleased with the torments I expose them
too, that they would not for all the good in the World be exempted from them;
besides when I find that they are too severely handled by a Lady.

I freely give them liberty to chose
A second Beauty and the first refuse;
But when their Souls are subject unto all
The Statutes of a God they Hymen call;
Then there is an alteration in the case,
And we cannot long cohabit in one place.
It Is him that you may justly call Tyrant; for when he has brought two hearts
under Subjection, death only can affranchise them. He and I cannot agree, he
pretends a right of Command over me, and I am unskilled in Obedience; He would
fetter me, and I enchain others, and he endeavors to clip my Wings, which is
my greatest beauty; not but that we agree sometimes, and act together by
consent; for he frequently stands in need of my assistance; yet I seldom give
him admission into any place, but I my self am soon turned out.

Of all the Differences I am capable of receiving, I am never more taking than
when I am a Gallant Lover.

I Am civil, pleasant, complemental, mild,
And Sonnets can compose, although a Child,
Understand Presents, and the Art to please,
And all my Projects act with so much ease,
That the most stubborn and obdurate heart
Cannot avoid the bearing of a part
In all my cares, and will at last confess,
He cannot chose but show some tenderness.
But to explane my Differences to you, is not sufficient to make you understand
my Nature, I must also teach you my Properties.

Of Proprium or Properties.
PRoperty is that which essentially agrees with the nature of every thing; as
it is the Property of Beauty to produce Me, and it is My Property to make
Beauty beloved: not but that I can subsist without her; but that only happens
by chance, and virtue of some occult quality; yet the person that produces Me,
must have some kind of Beauty, though she has not all perfections in general;
for else I am but short-lived, Youth her self though never so charming, were
not capable of fastening upon me if attended with Deformity. But as Beauty is
rarely found without Youth, so you seldom encounter Youth but accompanied with
some kind of Beauty.

There are Properties that agree with the Species, but not with all the
Individuals; as, Beauty is proper to Women, and yet Iris may be judged
beautiful, though Climene may not be so accounted for the same thing.

Each Female has her proper Gifts, and she
May in her Category prove to be
Beloved proportionably more or less,
And so in part shares of my happiness:
One phancies Wealth that she may feed her vain
Fantastic humor, the other will be plain
And free from affectation, thus you see
Amidst this strange and great variety
One shuns me, and the other, that she may
In Beauty all her Sex surpass, does pray.
In effect Women have very different inclinations among them, and every one
phancies some peculiar Property. This person will be proud of her Beauty, which
consists in the Symmetry of her face, the other will boast of her noble
sentiments and grandeur of her Soul; another desires to be commended for the
warbling notes of her sweet Voice; and another to hear the noble qualifications
of her mind praised. It Is the same with men, for they value nothing at so high
a rate, as that in which they believe themselves singular, insomuch that to
please one another they must commend what is peculiar to them above all other
qualifications whatsoever. E. g. If a man boasts of the Nobility of his
Ancestors, you cannot lay a greater obligation upon him, than to entertain him
frequently in discourse about that Subject; because he is persuaded that honor
is so appropriated to him, that it can belong to no other person. It is my
custom to produce this effect in every Individuum, to make them love that
which is a part of their Being, and that which essentially agrees with their
nature; which is the reason I am sometimes called Self-love; and whilst
confined to one subject they may well style me so; but as soon as I act
externally, by uniting two individual persons, I change my nature, then I cause
the person loving to abandon his own Interest, and follow that of the beloved
Object.

It Is by this mutual sacrifice that their Souls seem to transplant themselves
that they may be reciprocally united and metamorphos'd. And this is the reason
my Philosophers maintain, that Love is more where it loves, than where it
animates. I have a great many more Properties, but as they are almost all
accidental, 'twill be sufficient for my purpose to explain what an Accident is.

Of the Accidents.
WE call all Circumstances moveable or separable from one subject, that may
subsist, or not subsist, without the destruction of the subject, Accidents. As
Wit and Valor are two Accidents which may, or may not be inherent in a Man,
and yet he continue Man still; since there are many men that live in
slothfulness and stupidity.

There are certain Accidents called inseparable, because they never separate
selves from the person with whom they are connate; as those four that I named
but now. There are some passant, which have but a certain prefixed duration, as
Youth: and some there are that may be lost or gained, as Honors and Riches.

Accidents are divided into three different Classes, viz. Antecedent,
Concomitant and Subsequent. The first usher Me, and serve to persuade that in
all probability I ought to come into a place. The second accompany Me, and are
an infallible testimony, that I reside there. The third lacquay Me, and make it
appear, that I have been formerly there.

My usual Antecedent Accidents are Balls, Dancings, Comedies, Serenades,
Banquetings, Feasts and Walks as well by Coursing and Promenades, St Jameses.
Park, as in stately Country Apartments, Compliments, pleasant Letters, Sonnets,
Madrigals, Songs, and diminutive cares.

My Concomitant are Sighs, Languishment, Transports, amorous Complaints, tender
glances and passionate Stanzas Some add Jealousy, but she is a Monster that
must be banished as far as may be, for in the end she may destroy Me as well as
beget Me.

The Subsequent are usually desire of Revenge, Ruptures and Revilings. The
Maxims that we may draw from hence are these. The Antecedent supposed, the
others probably follow. The Concomitant or Subsequent being granted, the
Antecedent must of necessity precede.

There is another kind of Accident which is no more than an unexpected
rencontre, as when a Lover meets with his Mistress where he did not expect her.

How pleasant must this Accident needs be.
If that alone he could embrace and see
Th'adored object of his Soul; but then
It is an Accident that is fatal, when
He meets his Rival, there withal he will find
Distracting Jealousy that galls the mind,
You see that this circumstance alters the nature of the Accident, and makes
that very troublesome which was at first very pleasant: But if the presence of
his Mistress joined with that of his Rival is but one sad accident to him; the
absence of her whom he adores, is another and as insupportable: this makes him
send forth a thousand vain Complaints, and a thousand amorous regrets. It Is
this that makes him call the Trees and Rocks to testify the pains that he
endures. There is an infinite number of other Accidents, which would be too
long for my discourse, without which one may apprehend what is most
advantageous in my Logic; but now that we have examined all manner of
conceptions under the title of Universals and Categories, it remains that I
explain what use we must make of them in forming our amorous Disputations.

Of Propositions.
WE call that a Proposition which affirms or denies any thing; as, Iris is
fair. Thyrsis wants Wit.

These Propositions or Enunciations are made up of two things; the one whereof
is called the subject, the other the attribute; as in the first Proposition,
Iris is the subject, and Beauty the attribute.

Where ever there is an affirmation or Negation, there is a Proposition; though
expressed in a single word, as when a person says, I love; this word signifies
as much as if he should say, I have an affection for some beautiful Lady; And
when any one asks another the question, Do you love Climene? If he answers, No.
He makes a tacit Enunciation, which is as much as if he had said, I do not love
her.

To make a good Argument, the Propositions must have their utmost extent; that
is, that there be no subintelligitur, nor any addition.

Propositions are Simple or Compound.

The Simple which are also called Categorical, are those that simply affirm, or
deny without any condition whatsoever; as,

Every man has a Spirit.
Every woman is fair.
Phillis is not young.
Thyrsis is not gallant.
Of these some are Universal, and others Particular; the Universal have an all
or none added to them; the Particular affirm or deny, not of all in general,
but of one in particular.

The Compound Enunciations, are either Conditional or Disjunct; the Conditional
(and they are also called Hypothetical) have the additional if; as, If Climene
be beautiful, she will create love. This Enunciation is compounded of two
things, the one is called Antecedent, and the other the Consequent, sometimes
the one is Affirmative, and the other Negative; as, If Climene be old, she is
no longer beautiful. If she be beautiful, she is not old. Or they are both
Negatives; as, If she be neither beautiful nor youthful, she will never be
beloved.

The Disjunct Propositions are composed of contrary parts, the one whereof
destroys the other; as, Phillis is handsome or unhandsome; these Enunciations
are not true, but when the parties are directly opposed one to the other; for
if I should say, Climene is Beautiful or Gallant, I may be deceived in both;
for it is probable she may be ill-carriag'd, and Deformed; some Propositions
are called Indefinite, because we cannot discern whether they are Universal, or
particular: some add also the Necessary, Impossible and Contingent, which may
or may not be. I omit the Contradictory, when the Subject and Predicate
disagree, as also the difference between Modal and Categorical Propositions,
and several School-questions, which I have expelled my Academy: for I hate
nothing more than Litigiousness, and make it my chief design to arrive at the
Conclusion.

But before we come to explain what Argumentation is, and the way how to find
out the fallacy of Sophismes, which is no other than a deceitful Argument,
which always draws false Consequences, being supported by a bad Principle, and
which strives to make counterfeit love to be mistaken for that which is real,
we must first explain what is meant by Definition.

Of Definition.
DEfinition is a succinct Speech, which explanes the nature of the Subject in
few words; as, My nature is almost incomprehensible and it is hard to give a
Definition of me: however I will afford you some Definitions of my Subsistency.

If therefore they ask you, What Love is? You may answer, That it is a noble
Passion produced in the heart of Man by the Sight of Beauty, and it is properly
a desire of what is beautiful. But because it may be objected, that all persons
in whom I create love, are not beautiful, and that women themselves fancy
those that have nothing of comeliness in them. I say that I am an ardent desire
of uniting and transforming My self into the object that gave me birth. This
Definition is more perfect than the former, because it comprehends as well the
Love which proceeds from Sympathy, as that which is caused by Beauty; and
generally all sorts of love, for there are none of what nature soever, though
occasioned by Deformity, which desire not this Transformation into the person
beloved. But as they that love make inquisition after an impossible thing, so
their desires can have no plenary satisfaction. The want of this causes their
pains; but these are never unaccompanied with delight.

The Definition of my Being serves to discover my Properties, and not to take
the counterfeit and disguised for real love: thence are drawn the most powerful
and convincing Arguments, to prove or disprove the question proposed: to make
an advantage of it, I must establish this as a Canon, with whomsoever the
Definition agrees, so does the Definitum likewise, and reciprocally. With
whomsoever the Definitum, the Definition does also agree.

Of Division.
DIvision is comprised under Definition, which is no other than the Anatomy, or
Dissection of the parts of every Compositum. There are several sorts of
Divisions, for sometimes they divide the Genus into its Species, sometimes the
Whole into its Parts, and sometimes the Subject into its Accidents, or an
Accident into diverse Subjects.

First, the Genus is divided into its Species; as Beauty into the luster of the
Complexion, the symmetry of Proportion, and that of the Stature: it may be
again divided into its parts, by examining the Eyes, Mouth, Teeth and the rest.
The Subject is divided into several Accidents, when Women are distinguished by
Old and Young, Gallant and Illbred; the Men by Poor and Rich, Dull and
Spritely: or an Accident is divided into other Accidents, as when Spirits are
divided into Serious and Jovial. Sometimes also Accidents are divided into
diverse Subjects, as when Youth is divided

In Iris as well as in Licidas,
In Climene and Amarantha, as
In Thircis and in Cloris, in her too
That courted is, as in him that does woo.
A good Division must have but few parts, and if possible but two, and those
opposite, as when Women are divided into Fair and Fowl; but that is not always
faisible, for you will sometimes find, that some do participate of handsomness
and unhandsomness, Youth and Age: farthermore a Division must have nothing
superfluous nor deficient: for if one should say, that Beauty consists in the
Stature, Hair, Color and clearness of the Complexion, there would be somewhat
wanting in the Division, and somewhat abounding by omitting many things that
are necessary, and that we might place clearness of complexion which is
comprised therein, under the comeliness of the Complexion. My Accidents may
without difficulty admit of a Division, but my Substance is indivisible, as I
have said elsewhere.

Of the Syllogism.
A Syllogism is an Argument made up of three Propositions; one whereof
concludes the other two. The first is called the Major, the second the Minor,
and the third the Conclusion or Consequence Example,

Major, Every man loves Beauty.

Minor, The young Thirsys is a man.

Conclusion, Ergo, he loves Beauty.

A Syllogism ought to be composed of a Major that is affirmative or negative
universally, and of a Minor affirmative or negative particularly, and in the
Major, of the foregoing Syllogism, the word Every is a term that makes the
Proposition universal; the Minor is particular because Thyrsis is an
Individuum, that has nothing common with other men, an Example of the Argument
Universally, Negative

Major,
We cannot commend the Eyes deformity,
Minor,
And yet in Iris nothing else we see,
Conclusion,
Then Iris cannot amiable be.
All Arguments or Syllogismes are reduced to three particular kinds, viz.
Infallible, Topical otherwise called Probable, and Sophistical. The Infallible
Syllogism is that which is proved by Demonstration, as when I say,

Major,
All men that feel the flames which I inspire
The object of their Martyrdom desire:
And constantly complain
Of this their amorous pain.
Minor,
Thircis near Climene will still be sure
To tell the pains he for her does endure,
And by degrees still follows her you see.
Conclusion,
Then Thircis does adore his Climene.
This Consequence cannot be denied, the two antecedent Propositions being
agreed upon.

The second sort, which they call Probable, is where opinions are divided, and
they must dispute upon them pro and contra, because they may both be, and not
be. Example,

Major, Beauty in younger years we often find.

Minor, Licidas lov's a Mistress that is young

Conclusion, Then she it is does captivate his mind.

In this Argument the consequence is not absolutely necessary, because there
are many young persons that are not handsome, but as there are a greater number
of more lovely persons among those that are young than those that are old, this
is called a Probable Argument, that is capable of proof.

The third sort which they call Sophistical, is when one of the Propositions is
not universally true, so it passes without examination.

Sophism.
Major, Love without Wealth never makes a happy state;

Minor, Old Amarillis has a good estate;

Conclusion, Then she must courted be, since fortunate.

The fallacy of this Argument must be discovered by the Major, which ought not
to pass unexamin'd; for although wealth contributes much to the welfare of
the Lover, that is, not solely capable of doing it; you must therefore
distinguish this Major, and say, if any person happens to court this rich old
woman,

He is a Lover of her gold,
But enemy to her, 'cause old.
Whence I conclude, that the Major must be universally true, affirmatively or
negatively, if you would have the Consequence so.

Sophismes may also err in the Minor; as in this.

Major,
Proper to beasts it is only said,
To wear two horns upon the head.
Minor,
Iris and Climene don't scorn
To make their husbands wear the born.
Conclusion,
Then their two Husbands are two Beasts.
If ever any one proposes this Argument to you, and that you take the defense
upon you as a party concerned, you have no more to do, but stoutly to deny the
Minor; for if you were the greatest Cuckold in the World, it were a very hard
task to prove it by Demonstration, provided they did not graft horns upon your
head in your own presence; in such a case it is beyond dispute.

Every Sophism is defective either in the form or matter; in the form, when the
rules are not observed: in the matter when one or both Propositions are false
in part, or in the whole: if it err i^ the form, you must rectify it according
(...) the rules; if in the matter, you must deny the false Proposition, and if
it be but in part, you must distinguish.

The end of Sophistry is to teach how to deceive, and not to be deceived.

Of the Enthymeme.
THe Enthymeme is an Argument, from which they cut off one Proposition, either
to abridge or surprise: to abridge; as, Phillis young, fortunate and fair does
prove,
And therefore with her Thircis is in love.
Another example, Love is all charms, and therefore we
Must all resolve in love to be.
To deceive, when Amaranth's riches short of Climen's are,
Therefore she is of the two more taking far.


In this kind of Argument the most imperfect Proposition is artificially
suppressed, as in this the Major is, which is not universally true, as I have
already observed in the first example of Sophisms.

In this Argument the Conclusion is sometimes first placed to render the
discourse more polite.

Young Iris is in love they say,
Because she watches night and day.
Sometimes I argue from the Major to the Minor; All living souls do feel my
inspired flame:
Then Iris too one day will do the same.
From the Minor to the Major; Iris is subject to my Laws and me,
And so all other persons too shall be.


You may argue from like to like; as, Happy was Celadon in Astraeas love,
Then may another Shepherd happy prove.


There is an infinite number of other Arguments, which I omit, judging them
unnecessary for my Subject.

Of the Dilemma.
THe Dilemma is an Argument or Syllogism, whose Major is composed of two
Propositions, the one whereof you must make choice of; so that on which side
soever you engage, you will be always surpised; as to prove that a man must
never marry, thus they argue; If you a fair Wife chance to wed,
She Will prove a pain unto your head:
And if you marry one that is fowl,
She Will be a torment to your soul.


Observations upon all amorous Arguments.
All Syllogisms and Dilemmas too,
All Sophisms and Enthymems that do
Prove useful to a Lover, the intent
No other is in any argument:
But to convince their Ladies, and to prove
The passion that they have for them, their Love.
When a person has perwaded a Lady by strong arguments that he loves, then
there is a strong inclination in the party to make himself beloved; but these
kind of Declarations are seldom made by Syllogisms in Mood and Figure, nor do
they so speedily persuade as a confused and disjoynted discourse; upon such
occasions as these the Lover must lay aside all regular Laws of Logic, and
when he is unwilling to amuse himself in ratiocination, he must endeavor to
bring them to a belief, that he has lost his reason. Then must his Eyes be
more eloquent than his Tongue, in expressing the commotions and regret of his
mind; and his sighs be the Interpreters of his Desire and Pain. Yet the Lover
must not be always sighing, for though Ladies understand that kind of Language
sufficiently, they almost all pretend ignorance of it. To the end therefore
that you may be beyond all doubts, clear them all; and if the Lady will not
understand the Language of your Eyes and Sighs, speak and tell her freely what
those Sighs and those Tears mean.

And then the Lover must his flames disclose,
Not fearing to offend her; for suppose
That he by this sincere Address should move
Her anger and displeasure, this will prove
Of no continuance, but such as may
Believe it, be by time soon wipt away;
And that he never could her favor win,
But by committing of this venial Sin.
FINIS.

