His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH, Together with the Lord Chancellor's, To
both Houses of PARLIAMENT, on Wednesday the 30th of April, 1679.

By His Majesty's special Command.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred MAJESTY, Anno Dom. 1679.

His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Wednesday
the 30th of April.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe Season of the Year advancing so fast, I thought it necessary to put you in
mind of Three Particulars:

1. Prosecution of the Plot. 2. Disbanding the Army. 3. Providing a Fleet for
Our common Security.
And to show you that whilst you are doing your Parts, My thoughts have not
been mis-imploy'd, but that it is My constant Care to do every thing that may
preserve your Religion, and secure it for the future in all Events; I have
Commanded my Lord Chancellor to mention several Particulars, which I hope will
be an Evidence, that in all things that concerns the Public Security, I shall
not follow your Zeal, but lead it.

THE Lord Chancellor's SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons,
THat Royal Care which His Majesty has taken for the General Quiet and
Satisfaction of all His Subjects, is now more Evident by these New and fresh
Instances of it which I have in Command to open to You.

His Majesty has Considered with Himself, That it is not Enough that your
Religion and Liberty is secure during His own Reign, but He thinks He ows it to
his People to do all that in Him Lies, that these Blessings may be transmitted
to your Posterity, and so well secured to them, that no Succession in after
Ages may be able to work the Least Alteration.

And therefore His Majesty, who has often said in this Place, That he is ready
to consent to any Laws of this Kind, so as the same Extend not to alter the
Descent of the Crown in the Right Line, nor to Defeat the Succession, has now
Commanded this to be further Explained.

And to the End it may never be in the Power of any Papist, if the Crown
Descend upon him, to make any Change either in Church or State, I am Commanded
to tell you, That His Majesty is willing that Provision may be made, First to
Distinguish a Popish from a Protestant Successor, Then so to Limit and to
Circumscribe the Authority of a Popish Successor in these Cases following, that
he may be disabled to do any Harm.

First in Reference to the Church, His Majesty is content that Care be taken
that all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Benefices and Promotions in the Gift of
the Crown, may be Conferred in such a Manner, that we may be sure the
Incumbents shall always be of the most Pious and Learned Protestants; And that
no Popish Successor, while he continues so, may have any power to Control such
Presentiments.

In Reference to the State and Civil part of the Government, As it is already
Provided that no Papist can Sit in either House of Parliament, So the King is
pleased that it be provided too, that there may never want a Parliament when
the King shall happen to Die, but that the Parliament then in being may
Continue Indissoluble for a Competent Time, Or if there be no Parliament in
being, then the Last Parliament which was in being before that time may
Re-assemble and Sit a Competent Time without any new Summons or Elections.

And as no Papist can by Law hold any Place of Trust, so the King is content
that it may be further Provided that no Lords or others of the Privy Council,
No Judges of the Common Law, or in Chancery, shall at any time during the Reign
of any Popish Successor be put in or displaced but by the Authority of
Parliament. And care also be taken that none but sincere Protestants may be
Justices of Peace.

In Reference to the Military Part, The King is willing that no Lord
Lieutenant, or Deputy Lieutenant, nor no Officer in the Navy during the Reign
of any Popish Successor be put in or removed but either by Authority of
Parliament, or of such Persons as the Parliament shall entrust with such
Authority.

It Is hard to invent another restraint to be put upon a Popish Successor,
Considering how much the Revenue of the Successor will depend upon consent of
Parliament, and how Impossible it is to raise Money without such consent. But
yet if any thing else can Occur to the Wisdom of the Parliament, which may
further Secure Religion and Liberty against a Popish Successor, without
Defeating the Right of Succession it self, His Majesty will most readily
consent to it.

Thus Watchful is the King for all your Safeties, and if He could think of any
thing else that you do either Want or Wish to make you Happy, He would make it
His business to Effect it for you.

God Almighty Long Continue this Blessed Union between the King and his
Parliament and People.

FINIS.

