royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Letter And DECLARATION, Sent to the House of PEERS, By
Sir John Greenvill, Knight.

From BREDA: And read in the House the first of May, 1660.

Die Martis, 1o Maii, 1660.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That His Majesty's Gracious
Letter and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published, for the Service of
the House and Satisfaction of the Kingdom: And that no Person do presume to
Re-Print either of them.

JO. BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
Lords, 1660.

TO THE SPEAKER OF THE House of Peers, And to the LORDS There Assembled.
CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty and Right Well-Beloved Cosins, and Right Trusty and Well-Beloved
Cosins, and Trusty and Right Well-Beloved, We Greet you Well: We cannot have a
better reason to promise Our Self an end of Our Common Sufferings and
Calamities, and that Our Own Just Power and Authority will with Gods Blessing
be Restored to Us, then that We hear You are again acknowledged to have that
Authority and Jurisdiction, which has always belonged to You, by Your Birth,
and the Fundamental Laws of the Land: And We have thought it very fit and safe
for Us, to call to you for your help in the composing the confounding
Distempers and Distractions of the Kingdom, in which your Sufferings are next
to those We have undergone Our Self; And therefore you cannot but be the most
proper Counselors for removing those Mischiefs, and for preventing the like
for the future: How great a Trust We repose in you for the Procuring and
Establishing a Blessed Peace and Security for the Kingdom; will appear to You
by Our Enclosed Declaration; which Trust, We are most confident You will
discharge with that Justice and VVisdome, that becomes You, and must always be
expected from You; and that upon your Experience, how one Violation Succeeds
another, when the known Relations, and Rules of Justice, are once transgressed,
you will be as jealous for the Rights of the Crown, and for the Honor of your
King, as for your Selves: And then you cannot but discharge your Trust with
good Success, and provide for, and Establish the Peace, Happiness, and Honor
of King, Lords, and Commons, upon that Foundation which can only support it,
and We shall be all happy in each other: And as the whole Kingdom will bless
God for you all, so We shall hold Our Self obliged in an especial manner to
thank you in particular, according to the Affection you shall express toward
Us: We need the less enlarge to you upon this Subject, because We have
likewise writ to the House of Commons, which We suppose they will Communicate
to you: And We pray God to bless your joint Endeavors for the good of Us all;
and so We bid you very heartily farewell. Given at our Court at Breda, this
(...) Day of April, 1660. In the Twelfth Year of our Reign.

Charles R.
CHARLES By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our Loving Subjects of what degree or quality soever, Greeting.
If the general Distraction and Confusion which is spread over the whole
Kingdom, does not awaken all men to a desire and longing, that those wounds
which have so many years together been kept bleeding, may be bound up, all We
can say will be to no purpose. However after this long silence, We have thought
it Our duty to Declare, How much We desire to Contribute thereunto; and that as
We can never give over the hope in good time to obtain the possession of that
Right which God and Nature has made Our Due; So We do make it Our daily Suit
to the Divine Providence, That He will in compassion to Us and Our Subjects,
after so long Misery and Sufferings, remit, and put Us into a quiet and
peaceable possession of that Our Right, with as little blood and damage to Our
people as is possible. Nor do We desire more to enjoy what is Ours, then that
all Our Subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a full and entire
Administration of Justice throughout the Land, and by extending Our Mercy where
it is wanted and deserved.

And to the End that the fear of Punishment may not engage any conscious to
themselves of what is passed, to a perseverance in guilt for the future, by
opposing the Quiet and Happiness of their Country in the Restoration both of
King, Peers and People to their just, ancient, and Fundamental Rights, We do
by these presents Declare, That We do grant a Free and General Pardon, which
We are ready upon demand to pass under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our
Subjects of what degree or quality soever, who within forty days after the
publishing hereof shall lay hold upon this Our Grace and Favor; and shall by
any public Act declare their doing so, and that they return to the Loyalty and
obedience of good Subjects: Excepting only such persons as shall hereafter be
excepted by Parliament: Those only excepted, let all Our Subjects how faulty
soever rely upon the Word of a King, solemnly given by this present
Declaration, That no crime whatsoever committed against Us, or Our Royal
Father before the publication of this, shall ever rise in judgment, or be
brought in question against any of them, to the least endammagement of them,
either in their Lives, Liberties or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our
power) so much as to the prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach or
term of distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects. We desiring and
Ordaining that hence forward all Notes of discord, separation and difference of
parties be utterly abolished among all Our Subjects, whom We invite and conjure
to a perfect Union among themselves, under Our Protection, for the
Re-settlement of Our just Rights and theirs in a Free Parliament, by which upon
the Word of a King, We will be advised.

And because the Passion and uncharitableness of the times have produced
several Opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged in parties and
animosities against each other, which when they shall hereafter unite in a
freedom of conversation will be composed, or better understood: We do declare a
Liberty to tender Consciences; and that no man shall be disquieted or called in
question for differences of opinion in matter of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; And that We shall be ready to Consent to
such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us
for the full granting that Indulgence.

And because in the continued distractions of so many years, and so many and
great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and
by, many Officers, Soldiers, and others, who are now possessed of the same,
and who may be liable to Actions at Law upon several Titles, We are likewise
willing, That all such Differences, and all things relating to such Grants,
Seals, and Purchases shall be determined in Parliament, which can best provide
for the just satisfaction of all men who are concerned.

And We do further declare, That We will be ready to consent to any Act or
Acts of Parliament to the purposes aforesaid, and for the full satisfaction of
all Arreares due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under the Command of
General Monck: And that they shall be received into Our Service upon as good
pay and Conditions as they now enjoy.

Given under Our Sign Manual and Privy Signet at Our Court at Breda this 4/14
day of April 1660. in the twelfth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Macock and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
LORDS. 1660.


