THE Beginning, Progress, and Conclusion of the late Troubles in FRANCE etc.
Faithfully observed, and written from a Gentleman now in PARIS, To a Person of
Honor in this Kingdom.

Dated at Paris March 23. 1649.

LONDON Printed in the Year. 1649.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THat you may be a little more assured of the verity of what follows in this
Paper: know, That the Gentleman that writ this, is a man of that quality, that
as he has been constantly in an eminent civil employment in Paris, so he has
had (during these troubles) frequent access to the Court at St. Jermains, and
been conversant with most of the Counselors of State, both there, and the
Parliament at Paris.

THE Beginning, Progress, and Conclusion of the late Troubles in FRANCE.
Sir,
I Believe I have lost three or four letters that I sent you in the beginning
of these troubles and I am like to be at a greater loss by not receiving your
answers to them: But I shall desire you by the next Post to send me an abstract
of yours, that I may understand whither they contain any thing so necessary,
as will constrain me to inquire after them at St. Jermins. I will take no
notice of the last actions in England, nor tell you how impatiently they are
supported here, and every where, as far as the correspondence of this place
can reach: but you shall observe in France the greatest cure of the most
desperate diseases, that perhaps is mentioned in story.

The Prince of Condy had beseidged this City with his own Army, the chief of
that drawn out of Catalonia, that out of Italy, and some Troops out of
Germainy. The Parliament of this City had raised 14000 Mercinaries, and had
10000 Burgois, ever attending extraordinary Convoys. Duke Longivile was
marching with 8000 Mercinaries from Rovin, an Army in Britain, and another
(though very small) in Province: The Arch Duke Leopold, and Duke of Loraine
entered into France, and Marshall de Turin come out of Germany, (and after many
Letters of promised Loyalty to the King, Cardinal and Prince of Condy)
declared for the Parliament: This war continued very hot during this Seidge:
wherein the Parisians were continually beaten from their Convoyes, by the P. of
Condy, and D. Longevile as often defeated by the Count de Harcourt; and at last
(which gives to be of greatest importance) Count Erlock ( Turin being declared
Traitor at S. Germans) wrought so with the Officers of that Germain Army, that
the Marshal was glad to escape with fifty of his own Guard: These successes you
might imagine would humble the Parisians into a Treaty, but it was more
occasioned by those observations the Parliament here, and elsewhere made of the
people and their Generals: For three times they have been ready to revolt, and
tear them out of their Robes, the Burgois have been jealous, and both Burgois
and Parliament jealous of the Princes their Generals; who now have only the
popular voice. But those Princes, and Parliament, that began this War by the
example of England, did mistake the constitution of their own Nation, or did
not observe the constitution of ours.

For ours are more open handed, and more apt to disburse franckly toward the
maintenance of their wills, and (as they are more fluingly phlegmatic) more
constant to their affections, or hatred than the French, for here the people
have shifted four times their Favorites; and when they came to leavy moneys,
(though in a small proportion) the Parliament found more Enemies, and fiercer
within the walls, then abroad: Thus several causes has begot this Treaty, so
much unexpected by the world, and finished by the Deputies in two days, with
all perfectings of hands, and Seals those Deputies being Plenipotentiaries.

But those Articles they brought from Court were as honorable, and as solidly
essential for the Crown as could be wished, and such as left the revolted
Princes, and Generals in their first condition, without any reward for raising
this storm; which they knew by secret intelligence from Court, before the
Deputies brought them to the Sessions at the Palace.

Therefore the Princes raised the people into such a Fury as they assembled
like a whole Nation about the Hostell Devile; and meeting the Parliament denied
the peace, and were ready to sacrifice them, if the Burgois had not come in a
strong body to their rescue; and all this Tumult was begotten by the specious
advantages the Princes have against the Court for the protection of Mazarine,
whom the Prince of Condy preserves and defends in his first condition, and
would not suffer the Articles to pass unless the Cardinal signed them.

Monday the 14. from 6. in the Morning, till 6. at Night, the debate held; the
Princes and their Confederates moved to have the Articles burnt by the hand of
the Hangman, because the Cardinals hand was to them, but that would not be
admitted; then it was propounded, not to accept of them, and to send down for
new conditions; but at last it was concluded (the Burgois awing the people
without, which fomented the choler within) that the Articles should be
accepted, and only by the same Deputies, the Queen should be humbly requested
to moderate two of them, one concerning the lict de Justice to be kept at St.
Germains; the other concerning the Parliaments not assembling during this year
49. but it was likewise concluded, that though the Queen did not consent to
that moderation that they should sign the peace, and the Princes and Generals
are obliged to accept of such Conditions as the said Deputies can procure for
them: Duke Longivile) who has already united himself by a civil Message to
the Prince of Condy) is included in this peace, and the City of Rovy, if they
sign it in ten days, and so is Britain, and Provance, if they sign it in
twenty; and the chief of the Articles consented to by both sides, is that some
chosen from the Deputies of Paris, shall immediately accompany the Ambassadors
of the Court for the general Peace.

Now, Sir, I must tell you, my opinion is, that it is happy for the Crown,
that they had this Civil War, because the Parliament and Princes have gained
so much experience from it, as gives them a perfect knowledge of the
inconstancy of the people, and of one another, and of such parsimony in the
natures of all as cannot give them any courage to a new undertaking; and it is
well their humors are found out, and purged, whilst so excellent a Physician
as the Prince of Condy was extant; who is a true State Physician, and gives
violent Medicines. I am weary, and

Sir, Your most humble faithful Servant, F. C.
Paris 23. March, 1649.
FINIS.

