CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER, DIRECTED TO THE PRESBYTERY OF EDINBURGH. And by
them to be communicated to the rest of the PRESBYTERIES of this KIRK.
Received the third of September, 1660. CHARLES R.
TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well:
By the Letter you sent to Us, with this bearer, Mr. James Sharp, and by the
account he gave of the State of Our Church there, We have received full
Information of your sense of Our Sufferings, and of your constant Affection and
Loyalty to Our Person and Authority. And therefore We will detain him here no
longer, (of whose good services We are very sensible) nor will We delay to let
you know by him Our gracious acceptance of your Address, and how well We are
satisfied with your carriages, and with the generality of the Ministers of
Scotland, in this time of trial, whilst some, under specious pretenses,
swerved from that Duty and Allegiance they owe to Us. And because such, who, by
the countenance of Usurpers, have disturbed the Peace of that Our Church, may
also labor to create Jealousies in the minds of well meaning people; We have
thought fit by This, to assure you, that, by the grace of God, We do resolve
to discountenance Profanity, and all Contemners and Opposers of the Ordinances
of the GOSPEL. We do also resolve to Protect and Preserve the Government of
the Church of Scotland, as it is settled by Law, without violation; and to
countenance, in the due exercise of their Functions, all such Ministers who
shall behave themselves dutifully and peaceably, as becomes men of their
Calling. We will also take care, that the Authority and Acts of the General
Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, in the year, 1651. be owned and stand in
force, until We shall call another General Assembly (which We purpose to do
as soon as Our Affairs will permit) And We do intend to send for Mr. Robert
Dowglasse, and some other Ministers, that We may speak with them in what may
further concern the Affairs of that Church. And as We are very well satisfied
with your resolution not to meddle without your Sphere; So We do expect, that
Church-judicatories in Scotland, and Ministers there, will keep within the
compass of their Station, meddling only with matters Ecclesiastic, and
promoting Our Authority and Interest with Our Subjects against all Opposers;
And that they will take special notice of all such, who, by preaching (...)
private Conventicles, or any other way, transgress the limits of their
Calling, by endeavoring to corrupt the people, or sow seeds of disaffection to
Us, or Our Government. This you shall make known to the several Presbyteries
within that Our Kingdom: And as We do give assurance of Our favor and
encouragment ^o you, and to all honest deserving Ministers there; So We
earnestly recommend it to you all, that you be earnes in your Prayers, public
and private, to Almighty God, who is Our Rock and Our Deliverer, both for Us and
for Our Government, That We may have fresh and constant supplies of his Grace,
and the right improvement of all his Mercies and Deliverances, To the honor of
his great Name, and the peace, safety and benefit of all Our Kingdoms. And so
We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 10. of August, 1660. and of Our Reign the
Twelfth year. By His Majesty's Command, LAVDERDAIL.

Edinburgh, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in (...) Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1660.


