His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To Both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday, July
30. 1661. the day of their ADJOURNMENT.

Together with the SPEECH OF Sir EDWARD TVRNOR, KNIGHT, Speaker of the
Honorable House of COMMONS, TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.

Delivered on Tuesday the thirtieth day of July, 1661. at the Adjournment of
the Parliament.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1661.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

His MAJESTY'S gracious SPEECH to both Houses of PARLIAMENT on Tuesday, July
30. 1661. the day of their Adjournment.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Perceive by the thin appearance of the Members of both Houses this day, that
it is high time to Adjourn; In truth, the season of the year, as well as your
particular affairs, require it, and therefore I do willingly consent to it.

I thank you for the many good Bills you have presented Me with this day, of
which, I hope, the benefit will redound to the whole Kingdom. I thank you for
the care you have taken for the safety of My Person, which, trust Me, is the
more valuable to Me, for the consequence I think it is of to you, and upon My
conscience there is no body wishes ill to Me, but they who would quickly
revenge themselves of you, if they could.

I thank you for the care you have taken of your selves, of your own safety and
honor, in the Act against Tumults and Disorders upon pretense of Petitions, to
which license We owe much of the Calamities We have undergone; but I thank you
with all My heart, indeed as much as I can do for any thing, for the repeal of
that Act which excluded the Bishops from sitting in Parliament; it was an
unhappy Act in an unhappy time, passed with many unhappy circumstances, and
attended with miserable events, and therefore I do again thank you for
repealing it; you have thereby restored Parliaments to their primitive
Institutions: And I hope, My Lords and Gentlemen, you will in a short time
restore them to the primitive order and gravity of Debates and Determinations,
which the license of the late distempered times had so much corrupted, which is
the only way to restore Parliaments to its primitive Veneration with the
people, which I heartily wish they should always have.

My Lords and Gentlemen, you are now going to your several Countries, where you
cannot but be very welcome for the Services you have performed here: I do very
earnestly recommend the good Government and Peace of your Countries to your
care, and your counsel, and your vigilance. There are distempered spirits
enough, which ly in wait to do mischief, by laying reproaches upon the Court,
upon the Government, reproaches upon Me, and reproaches upon you; your Wisdoms
and Reputation, and Authority will, I doubt not, weigh down their light Credit;
and the old and new good Laws will, I hope, prevent any mischief they intend;
however, you have done very well (and I do very heartily thank you for it) in
declaring My sole Right over the Militia, the questioning of which was the
Fountain from which all Our bitter Waters flowed. I pray make haste to put the
whole Kingdom into such Posture, that evil men, who will not be converted, may
yet choose to be quiet, because they find that they shall not be able to do
the harm they desire to do.

I know you have begun many Bills in both Houses, which cannot be finished till
your meeting again; and that they may be finished then, I forbear to make a
Sessions now, but am contented that you Adjourn till the twentieth of November,
when, I hope, by Gods blessing, We shall come happily together again.

In a word, My Lords and Gentlemen, I thank you for what you have done, and am
confident, that what you have left undone you will dispatch with all alacrity,
and to all Our satisfactions at Our next meeting: and so you may Adjourn till
the twentieth of November.

THE SPEECH OF Sr. EDWARD TVRNOR, KNIGHT, Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS, TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY;
Delivered on Tuesday the Thirtieth day of July, 1661. at the Adjournment of
the Parliament.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
THe Wise man tells us, there is a time to sow, and a time to reap. Since Your
Majesty did conveen the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament, they have with unwearied labor consulted for the Service of Your
Majesty, and the good of this Nation; and now the Fields grow white to Harvest.
In the great field of Nature all fruits do not grow ripe together, but some in
one month, some in another; one time affords Your Majesty Primroses and
Violets, another time presents you with July-flowers. So it is in the course of
our proceedings; some of our fruits are in the Blossom, when others are in the
Bud; some are near ripe, and others fit to be presented to Your Majesty.
Amongst the number of our choicest ripe fruits, we first present You with a
Bill for the Safety and Preservation of Your Majesty's Royal Person and
Government.

Your Predecessor, Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, in the Thirteenth year of
her Reign, by Pius Quintus, then Bishop of Rome, was Excommunicated and
Anathematized: John Felton posted up a Bull at the Bishop of Londons Palace,
whereby she was declared to be deprived of her Title to the Kingdom, and all
the People of this Realm absolved from their Allegiance to her: The Queen of
Scots was then a prisoner in England, and the Duke of Norfolk for many Designs
against our Queen committed to the Tower. Historians tell us, the times were
very troublesome, full of suspicions and conspiracies: But, Sir, what then was
only feared, has in our time been put in execution: No Age has known, no
History makes mention of such sad Tragedies. It therefore now becomes Your
People, after this glorious Restitution to endeavor all just ways of
preservation.

The Queen in her time of trouble and danger summoned a Parliament; and such
was the Love of the People to her and her Government, that they forthwith made
a Law for her security: According to which President, We your Loyal Commons
also, who have before them no less cause of fear, but more Obligations, and
Affection to your Majesty, do humbly tender You a Bill, wherein we desire it
may be Enacted, That if any Person shall compass, imagine or design Your
Majesty's Death, Destruction, or bodily Harm, to imprison, or restrain Your
Royal Person, or depose You, or shall levy War against Your Majesty, within or
without Your Realm, or stir up any foreign Power to invade You, and shall
express or declare such his wicked intention by Printing, Writing, Preaching,
or malicious and advised speaking, being thereof legally convicted, shall be
adjudged a Traitor.

And because much of our late Misery, took its rise from seditious Pamphlets,
and Speeches from the Pulpits, it is provided, That if any man shall
maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm Your Majesty to be an Heretic, or
a Papist, or that You endeavor to introduce Popery, or shall stir up the
People to hatred or dislike of Your Royal Person or Government, then every such
Person shall be made incapable of any Office or Employment, either in Church or
State. And if any man shall maliciously and advisedly affirm, That the
Parliament begun at Westminster, the third of September 1640. is yet in being,
or that any Covenant or Engagement since that time, imposed upon the People,
does oblige them to endeavor a Change of the Government either in Church or
State; or that either, or both Houses of Parliament have a Legislative Power
without Your Majesty, then every such Offender being thereof legally convicted,
shall incur the Penalties of a Praemunire, mentioned in the Statute made 16. R.
2.

In the next place, Sir, Give me leave, I beseech You (without any violence to
the Act of Oblivion) to remember a sad effect of the Distempers in the last
age: when the Fever began to seize upon the People, they were impatient till
they lost some blood; The Lords Spiritual, who in all ages had enjoyed a place
in Parliament, were by an Act of Parliament excluded.

Your Majesty's Royal Grandfather was often wont to say, No Bishop, no King, We
found his words true; for after they were put out, the Fever still increasing
in another fit, The Temporal Lords followed, and then the King himself: nor did
the humor rest there, but in the round, the House of Commons was first garbled,
and then turned out of doors.

It is no wonder when a Sword is put into a mad man's hand, to see him cut off
limb by limb, and then to kill himself.

When there is a great breach of the sea upon the low grounds, by the violence
of the torrent, the Rivers of sweet waters are often turned aside, and the salt
waters make themselves a Channel; but when the breach is made up, good husbands
drain their lands again, and restore the ancient Sewres.

Thanks be to God the flood is gone off the face of this Island; our Turtle
Dove has found good footing; Your Majesty is happily restored to the
Government, the Temporal Lords and Commons are restored to sit in Parliament,
and shall the Church alone now suffer?

Sit Ecclesia Anglicana libera, and habeat libertates suas illaesas

In order to this great work, the Commons have prepared a Bill to repeal that
Law was made in 17 Car. whereby the Bishops were excluded this House: these
Noble Lords have all agreed, and now we beg Your Majesty will give it life:
speak but the word, Great Sir, and Your servants yet shall live.

We cannot well forget the method, how Our late miseries, like waves of the
Sea, came in upon us: first the people were invited to Petition, to give color
to some illegal demands; then they must Remonstrate, then they must Protest,
then they must Covenant, then they must associate, then they must engage
against our lawful Government, and for the maintenance of the most horrid
Tyranny that ever was invented. For the prevention of this practice for the
future, We do humbly tender unto Your Majesty a Bill, entitled, An Act against
Tumults and Disorders, upon pretense of preparing or presenting public
Petitions or Addresses to You Majesty or the Parliament.

In the next place, we held it our Duty to undeceive the People, who have been
poisoned with an Opinion, That the Militia of this Nation was in themselves, or
in their Representatives in Parliament: and according to the ancient known
Laws, we have declared the sole Right of the Militia to be in Your Majesty. And
for as much as our time has not permitted us to finish a Bill intended for the
future ordering of the same; we shall present You with a temporary Bill, for
the present managing and disposing of the Landforces: And likewise another
Bill, for the establishing certain Articles and Orders for the Regulation and
Government of Your Majesty's Navies and Forces by Sea.

According to Your Majesty's Commands we have examined many of the public, and
private Bills which passed last Parliament, and have prepared some Bills of
Confirmation: we have also ascertained the Pains and Penalties to be imposed
upon the Persons or Estates of those Miscreants who had a hand in the Murder of
Your Royal Father of Blessed Memory, and were therefore Excepted in Your
Majesty's Act of Oblivion: Wherein we have declared to all the world, how just
an Indignation we had against that horrid Regicide.

We have likewise prepared a Bill for the Collection of great Arrears of the
Duty of Excise, which I do here in the name of the Commons humbly present unto
Your Majesty: the Reason we conceive why it was not formerly paid, was because
the People disliked the Authority whereby it was imposed: But understanding
that it is now given to Your Majesty, it will come in with as great freedom.
Aliquisque malo erit usus in illo.

Your Majesty was pleased at the opening of the Parliament to tell us, That You
intended this Summer to take a Progress, and see Your People, and at Your
return did hope to bring a Queen home with You. Sir, this welcome News has
made us cast about always for Your Accommodation. And therefore that no
conveniences might be wanting, either for Your Majesty, Your Queen or Your
Attendants, We have prepared a Bill, entitled, An Act for providing necessary
Carriages in all Your Royal Progresses and Removals.

Your Majesty was likewise pleased at our first meeting to say, You would not
tire us, with hard Duty, and hot Service, and therefore about this time
intended a recess. That Royal Favor will now be very seasonable, and we hope
advantageous both to Your Majesty and our selves: We know in our absence Your
Princely Heart and Head will not be free from Cares and Thoughts of our
Protection: And when we leave our Hive, like the industrious Be, We shall but
fly about the several Countries of the Nation to gather Honey; and when Your
Majesty shall be pleased to name the time, return with loaded Thighs unto our
House again.

FINIS.

