THE Biggest IDOL IN THE WORLD Knocked in the Head.

The Verb's Triumph: Or the Second Part of Calverley's Notes.

Which NOTES rightly Distinguish the hitherto horribly misdistinguished Grounds
of Speech; And proves the Rules of the Common Grammar so false and ridiculous,
that it is Dishonor for any Learned Nation to Teach or Account them for RULES:

Therefore all Grammarians and Lovers of True Distinction are desired to stand
up quickly in Vindication of the Common Grammar, or else to procure a Grammar
sensible, brief and pleasant, lest (by our slighting of this Method) other
Lands entertain it first, and we (for our Ingratitude) be forced to learn it of
them, to our grief and shame.

Be not to God s' ingrate, of the World the scorn,
But let us the whole World with this bright Gem adorn.
Then England's the Mistress, sole Emperess,
None but her self distinct Rules does express,
For the Grounds of Speech, wherein both great and small
Learned but to go, to creep Babe-like by the wall,
Till she them taught to walk, nimbly to run,
As Innocence when the World at first begun.
London; Printed for the Author. 1681.

A VERB is the Queen or Grace of Eloquence, relating the action of something;
as, To love.

A Verb (in Latin) ends principally in re; as Amare, or in i, as Dignari.

A Verb is distinguished by Notification, Illustration, and Personation.

There be Four Families of Verbs; And Notification shows of what Family each
Verb is, by the vowel long or short preceding the said re or i in the Verbs
Palace, as,

Verbs of the first Family have a long before re, or i; as Amare, Dignari.
Verbs of the second Family have e long before re, or i; as Latere, Tueri. Verbs
of the third Family have e short before re, or i; as Bibere, Gradi. Verbs of
the fourth Family have i long before re, and i; as Audire, Oriri.
Illustration is the mustering up of the Verbs, Dignities, or several Endings,
which are Eight, and orderly showed in and by the Queendom of the Verb; which
Queendom consists of a Royal Palace and Seven flourishing Principalities or
Ladies, as follow: viz.

Amare, amavisse, amatum, amans, amandi, amando, amandum, amatu, amaturus.
Latere, latuisse, latium, latens, latendi, latendo, latendum, latitu,
latiturus. Bibere, bibisse, bibitum, bibens, bibendi, bibendo, bibendum,
bibitu, bibiturus. Audire, audivisse, auditum, audiens, audiendi, audiendo,
audiendum, auditu, auditurus.

The first in each Family, is the Queen-Verb, as Amare.

The next is the Sister, as Amavisse; they two live and cohabit together in the
Palace.

The Seven Ladies of Honor each in her peculiar Principality as they stand
directly in the Queendom or Illustration, which is that which is mistakingly
called the Infinitive Mood.

England be the first these vast Mistakes to amend,
So shall thy Fame spread World without end.
Verbs which have any difference from the Examples in the Illustration are
Irregulars.

The Irregularity of Verbs is twofold, viz. Natural and Illustrative.

The Natural Irregularity of Verbs is first by exchange of the first Letter in
the Queen-Verb into another Letter in the Sister, as Agere, Egisse. 2. By
changing the first Syllable into another Syllable, as Far, Tulisse. 3. By
change of a Letter in the midst of a Word into another Letter in the Sister, as
Incipere, Incepisse. 4. By a Letter in the Queen whereof the Sister does not
accept, as Cumbere, Cubuisse.
The Illustrative Irregularity is,

1. When the last Consonant in the body of the Verb is changed into some other
Consonant or Consonants, as Dicere, dixisse. Scribere, scripsisse. Sinere,
sivisse. Flectere, flexisse. 2. When the said Consonant does (in the Sister)
assume to take the Vowel is after it, as Vomere, vomuisse. 3. When the Queen's
Sister swerves from her Rule, as Tonuisse of Tonare, Jussisse of Jubere,
Cubuisse of Cumbere, Campsisse of Cambire. 4. When the first Lady swerves from
her Rule, as Sepultum of Sepelire.
The sixth and seventh Ladies are after the first, as Sepultu, sepulturus, of
Sepultum.

The first, second, and seventh Ladies are changable from Verbs to Adjuncts
whenever the signification requires. Be ready to tell on; demand what, and
where the Irregularity is, for Radical Understanding renders that infinitely
delightful which Ignorance and misordering render grievous and irksom.

So the Verb for prime Use and Delight is crowned;
Late Ignorance therein our Senses drowned.
Here follow the Irregular Verbs hitherto called, As in Praesenti.

Irregular Verbs of the first Family.
LAvare, juvare, nexare, secare, necare, micare, plicare, fricare, domare,
tonare, sonare, crepare, vetare, cubare, dare, stare.
Irregulars of the Second Family.
JVbere, sorbere, mulcere, videre, prandere, stridere, suadere, ridere, lucere,
sedere, ardere, pendere, mordere, spondere, tondere, urgere, mulgere, frigere,
augere, flere, lere, plere, nere, manner, torquere, herere, fervere, nivere,
siere, viere.
Irregulars of the Third Family.
B. CVmbere, nubere, scribere. C. Vincere, parcere, dicere, ducere. D.
Scindere, findere, fundere, pendere, tendere, pedere, cadere, caedere, cedere,
vadere, radere, laedere, ludere, dividere, trudere, claudere, plaudere, rodere.
G. Jungere, legere, agere, tangere, pungere, frangere, pangere, spargere. H.
Tr^h^re, vehere. L. Colere, sallere, psallere, vellere, fallere, cellere,
pellere. M. Vomere, come^e, promere, demere, sumere, premere. N. Temnere,
sternere, spernere, linere, cernere, gignere, ponere, canere. P. Scalpere,
rumpere, strepere, crepere. Q. Linquere, coquere. R. Serere, serere, verrere,
urere, gerere, querere, terere, currere. S. Accersere, arcessere, incessere,
lacessere, capess^re, facessere. SC. Pascere, poscere, discere, quiniscere. T.
Vertere, sistere, mittere, petere, stertere. Ct. Flectere, pectere, nectere. V.
Volvere, vivere. U. Statuere, pluere, struere. X. Texere.
Facere, specere, fodere, fugere, capers, cupere, rapere, sapere, parere,
quatere.

Irregulars of the Fourth Family.
VEnire, cambire, farcire, sartire, sepire, sentire, fulcire, amicire, vincire,
salire, sepelire.
Of above One Hundred and Fifty pretended Verbs preceding Praeteritum dat
idem, in that called, As in presenti, in the Common Grammar, not one of them is
a Verb; there be so many Nouns indeed there, for every Final o there is a Noun,
and the rest of the pretended Verbs are but remnants of dismembered Bodies,
woefully weltering in their goar, so that its an admiration that Grammar
Teachers can have the hearts so needlessly to tossicate such multitudes of
mangled Ladies, whose sufferings in the Personation are sufficiently
lamentable. Add not affliction to afflictions any more for shame.

No less ridiculously stands o in the pretended Rules bo, co, do, go, etc. for
the o is useless there, for it is the Consonant only which is concerned there,
and fully performs, as is plainly showed in the Exceptions aforesaid.

And in like manner in Dictionaries, Vocabularies, etc. o is nonsensically set,
as in Abigo, abigis egi, abactum ere, and the like; for three of those five
supposed Terminations of a Verb, are not any thing of a Verb, but plainly
Nouns. And the fifth is misplaced; set the Queen first, as Abigere. She shows
the Family, and how to personate.

Next set down the Sister, as Abegisse: she (the noble Verb, not the Preter, a
Noun) ought to stand there.

And thirdly and lastly, Set down the first Lady, as Abactum. She unlocks and
leads into the spacious walks of the most harmonious Adjuncts. And by these
three we have all which we would have had by those five.

Learn to muster up Regulars and Irregulars so readily as can be.

The Illustration is no more, nor other but only that (mistakingly) called
Infinitive Mood. Adds not any labor, but the apprehending it rightly brings
abundant knowledge and delight. So that what has heretofore been troublesome
and irksom, will now be done with ease and recreating pleasure.

For he goes merrily on that knows his way,
Whilst Ignorance (in doubts and fears) must stray.
Personation is the joining and expessing of the person of a Noun together or
in one with a Verb, so that the World has (through all Ages hitherto) taken it
for one word, which are (indeed) two distinct words and Parts of Speech, as
Amabam. The abam is Ego's second Lord Lieutenant, and also the distinction of
time, signifying I did, and am is the remainder of the captived and woefully
dismembered Queen. She and her English stand invariably, whilst the Person's
Lieutenants skip nimbly about in joylly triumph, making her serve their humors
at their becks; for she is (when personated) a slave, not a Verb, but a
personated or Noun-Verb; for there being not any Verb personal, and the Verb
(Ipsa pietas) having not any Mood, the Noun (to force the Verb to answer to the
humor of any of his three persons singularly and plurally) sent for two
hundred and sixty of the wildest and fiercest Barbarians, by whom he made War
on the Verb, took her and her Sister and Ladies Prisoners, barbarously murdered
or dismembered each one of them. And so, subjecting them to Personation,
constituted the Conquerours Lords Lieutenants of his Persons, placing and
uniting those his so victorious Vassals with the Verb in pretense of the Verb's
Terminations, though the Verb has not any Termination, but only those eight in
the Illustration.

The Personation is performed by cutting away from Verbs of the first and third
Families the two last Syllables, and in place thereof setting the pretended
Termination, as Am-are Amo, Leg-ere Lego.

From Verbs of the second and fourth Families, cut away the last Syllable, and
in place thereof set the pretended Termination, as late-re lateo, audi-re
audio. Yea cut away head, body and all, save only the feet, and add the
pretended Termination after the Reservation, as Ir-e Eo.

A Noun will have his Action expressed in three Moods, viz. Indicative,
Imparative and Potential.

Indicative Mood in the first Family.
^ret. o I love, as thou love, at he loves; Pluraliter, amus we love, atis
ye love, ant they love. ^res. abam I loved, abas thou loved, abat he loved;
Pluraliter, abamus we loved, abatis ye loved, abant they loved. Am avi I have
loved, avisti thon have loved, avit he has loved, Pluraliter, avimus we have
loved, avistis ye have loved, averunt vel avere they have loved. averam I had
loved, averas thou had loved, averat he had loved, Pluraliter, averamus we
had loved, averatis averant. ^ut. abo I shall love, abis thou shall love, abit
he shall love; Pluraliter, abimus we shall love, abitis ye shall love, abunt
they shall love. Imparative Mood. a ato love thou, et ato let him love;
Pluraliter, emus let us love, ate atote love ye, ent anto let them love.


Potential Mood. em I may love, es thou may love, et he may love; Pluraliter,
emus we may love, etis ye may love, ent they may love. arem I might love, ares
thou might love, aret he might love; Pluraliter, aremus we might love, aretis
ye might love, arent they might love. Am averim I might have loved, averis thou
might have loved, averit he might have loved; Pluraliter, averimus we might
have loved, averitis ye might have loved, averint they might have loved.
avissem I might have had loved, avisses, avisset; Pluraliter, avissemus,
avissetis, avissent, they might have had loved. avero I may or can love
hereafter, averis thou may love hereafter; averit, Pluraliter, averimus,
averitis, averint, they may love hereafter.

Indicative Mood in the second, third and fourth Families.
Late o, s, t, Pl. mus, it is, nt, Bib o, is, it, Pl. imus, itis, unt. Audi o, s,
t, Pl. mus, it is, unt.


The Personation is all one with that in the Common Accidence or Grammar, as if
those pretended Terminations and these Distinctions had been made at once, only
here abbreviated, right titled, and radically understood. O strange, that the
World should not distinguish such notable Roisters, deboist Murderers and
Usurpers, as the Personating Nouns be from Verbs!

Here Is the Plot of Plots discovered indeed, the late tedious and irksom way
made brief, easy, and pleasant, by throwing away whatsoever was burthensom to
memory, As Propria quae Maribus (so imperfect and difficult, that not any yet
in the known World, unless by these Notes) is perfectly Master hereof) is now
made an easy Lesson for the (...) reading Child, and that within compass of a
Crown-piece. Even so is all the woeful clutter about formation of Preter and
Supine found to be vain, senseless and ridiculous, for that called Supine, is
the first Lady, formed from all eternity. And as for the Preter the Personation
does it; Besides, do but cut away sse from the Sister, with a dash of a Pen, or
thought thereof, and the remainder is (in any Verb) the Preter, as Amavi-sse,
Docui-sse.

Furthermore, to show the Incomprehensibility of the Verb, you may (of any
Verb) make all the Parts and Particles of Speech, as is taught in the
thirteenth Page of the first Part hereof.

Also the Verb has the honor to be natural Mother of the most noble and
graceful Nouns as of the sixth Lady, by change of u for or comes Amator,
Doctor, Creator, etc. as is also at large showed in the first Part hereof. And
so that you (after you perceive these Distinctions, and what a learned Synod
will make thereof) will say, That former Ages have seen nothing but Dreams in
the Grounds of Speech.

For this Great Bliss, England, give God due praise,
Who thee 'bove other People high does raise.
FINIS.
If other Nations you desire to Teach
The most glorious things of the Grounds of their own Speech,
Me buy, and quickly you will their Master be,
So England triumph in God's love to thee,
For the World Distinction true never found before,
So England's Glory's now (by much) the more.


