ZIONS thankful Echoes from the Clifts of IRELAND.

Or the little Church of Christ in Ireland, warbling out her humble and
graceful addresses to her Elder Sister in England: And in particular, To the
Parliament, to his Excellency, and to his Army, or that part assigned to her
assistance, now in her low, yet hopeful Condition.



Printed for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1648.

The Messengers humble Presentation.
REnowned Christians, what I here present,
As from a persecuted Sister sent
By my rude hand, to your judicious eye,
Please to accept, and graciously survey:
It Is neither hyperbolicall; nor news
From either Turks, Antipodes, or Jews;
But Echoes sounding, what you ought to know,
The state of Zion in a Land you owe:
Her sighs, her suits, and in the same made known
Her thankful spirit for your kindness shown,
And hopes of comfort by you late assigned,
And blessed assistance to relieve her mind.
As in this humble tender you may view
In her own language; Characters full true;
Which I her servant, though the most unmeet;
Am thus enjoined to offer at your feet,
Which Heavens make powerful in your hearts, so be it.
EDWARD CALVER.

Zions thankful Echoes from the Clifts of IRELAND.
To her Elder Sister in England.
OH, thou my English eldest sister dear,
Who have took notice of my troubles here,
These times of sorrow, and have had a heart
To yield me succor, (which thou have in part,)
But wanted power to make thy purpose known,
By reason of distractions of thine own.
Thou have again recal'd my cares to mind,
And such assistance to my aid assignde,
That, if that malice do not it prevent,
I may be happy in your blessed content.
But thou that have this blessed help assignd,
Wilt not, I see, by a contrary wind
Be beaten off thy purpose, when I see
The winds again do with thy will agree.
No, no, dear sister, thou have more respect
Unto my case, then to my cares neglect,
Thou will not so our sister-hood betray;
Nor does thy safety stand with my decay.
Our heavenly Father, in his tender care,
Does to his children like affection bear;
And has us ti'd by his most sacred laws,
We one should venture in another cause.
But I have sinned, it is true, but I repent,
And tears have virtue to dissolve a flint.
But tears distild from tender childrens eyes,
They stir the fountain where compassion lies.
God such affection to his children bears,
That, out of question, he bewayles their tears;
And in his time, will also still their cries,
And grant their suits, and wipe their watery eyes.
But in his wisdom, he for us thinks meet,
We should have here much bitter with our sweet:
His grapes must be the most exactly pressed,
His wheat must be with greatest labor dressed:
His Dove must live where Ravens and Vultures fly:
His Lambs must feed where Wolves in covert lie:
His Lillies must amongst the thistles grow:
His Rose of Sharon, with the briers blow:
Ishmael and Isaac must be kept alive;
Esau and Jacob must together strive.
And therefore it is policy divine,
That Isaac should with Israel combine
And be united in a mutual band,
Who have such potent forces to withstand.
Besides, our concord and our mutual care,
They are the garments we are bound to (...)
By Heavens injunction, that we may thereby
Appear we do belong to the most High:
Whose children here are clad in peace and love.
To make them fit to dwell with him above,
Where faith, and hope, and patience shall surcease,
But love, and peace, and unity increase.
Faith, hope, and patience, are our we^pe no here;
But Love the spirit that gives life and cheer.
And we shall fail in all our other parts,
Unless that sacred fire enf^ame our hearts.
But wherefore, Sister, should I go about
To bring thy love and care of me in doubt?
When as I see thy love is so divine,
Thou can not from that principal decline.
To the Parliament of England.
AND You, whom God, who passes all selectors,
Has made his choice of to be our protectors,
To labor to defend us by your Laws,
Who have besides, some intrest in our cause.
I bless the Heavens that you have heard our cries
Which have been earnest with you for supplies:
And out of sacred sympathizing care,
Have took in hand our low estate to rear,
And still are acting, and in counsel sit
To add more comfort to our causes yet;
Like brave and Christian Senators in trust,
That fear no danger in a cause so just.
Most brave resolve, ride on and prosper still,
And what you have so well begun, fulfill:
No doubt, but God, who set you such a hard
And tedious task, has set out your reward,
And will bestow it on you, if not here,
Yet when it shall to all the world appear.
Indeed, it is true, your weighty labors call
For great rewards, which yet have been but small;
Unless reproachful language and disdain,
With deadly hatred, may be counted gain:
For this from millions has been all your pay,
Unless what force from such has fetched away.
Whose tongues envenomed with malignant spite
Have breathed out vapors to obscure your light;
Infusing into foolish peoples brains,
That stead of freedom, you procure their chains.
These, and too many such like scandals base,
Have vented been, to further your disgrace,
By such as have been enemies, and stood
Against the progress of all Christian good.
Nay these reproaches have so public bin,
And so enticing to suspect herein,
That many Christians, and good Christians some,
Have so suspicious by this means become,
As if they had deluded bin, because
Their expectation could not brook a pause,
And wait with patience for those things which will
Be worth a wonder, if an age fulfill.
Nay in this nature, I my self have bin,
Too much forgetful; pardon me therein;
Poor wretch, because that in my state of grief,
I had not from you, as I wished; relief:
But, notwithstanding many speeches fair,
I still lay under notions of despair;
I grew impatient, and was much inclined
To many perturbations in my mind:
One while resolving that you were my friends,
And would declare unto no other ends,
But loo'd upon me with a melting eye,
And were resolved that I should have supply,
And to my comfort would your selves enlarge,
Both out of pity, and your special charge.
Another while these hopes of mine were shaken.
And I begun to think my self mistaken;
And that you did not, as I hoped, respect me,
But either did delude me, or neglect me;
And that the voice of people in this kind,
So common, was not all malignant wind.
Thus like the Phoenix, feeding on the air,
'Twixt heaven and earth, twixt hoping and despair;
My thoughts were restles, and my time was spent
In various musing upon the event.
When I considered what you had begun,
And had already for my comfort done,
Together with your promised supplies.
My heart got comfort, and my hopes did rise;
And hourly looked you should my aid renew
By every wind that from your confines blew.
But when, alas, I looked, and looked again;
And yet at last I saw I looked in vain:
No colors for me on my coast displayed,
But winds and tides came empty still of aid.
Whiles what I had already did abate,
Through the increase of such as do me hate,
Who still persisting, and my life pursuing,
With Oaths combining to effect my ruin.
My heart often fainted, and my fears got ground,
And sometimes cast me into such a swound,
That I did almost all belief refrain
Of ever seeing good day here again,
And that it was but trusting to a reed,
To wait for help of mortal men at need,
Whose strength was like their promises, but frail,
And at most need, most likely then to fail,
Thus like a Turtle mourning for her mate,
Or like an Orphan in a helpless state:
Or like a Captive in a Tyrants hand:
Or like a Virgin in a Brutish Land:
In forced silence, with my face obscured,
Through tears distilled, and griping woes endured,
My life has long time in sad discontent,
And fears, and cares, both night and day bin spent.
Thus, worthy Patriots passion has bin strong,
And caused me sometimes to conceive you wrong,
And look upon you with a frowning brow,
Neglecting what I had more cause to know,
Which were mine own infirmities, my sin,
In viewing which I have too partial bin,
When under heavens correction for the same,
I laid on others (not my self) the blame.
Nor did I duly, as indeed I ought,
Regard the task wherein at home you wrought;
How hard it was, how difficult, and vast,
And through what care and dangers must be past;
How many hills and mountains leveld be,
Before you could have passage unto me.
Besides, my elder Sister in your hand
Must be secured, before you took in hand
To state the younger in her freedoms fit,
Which would another tedious work beget.
In these respects I was, indeed, too blind,
The woeful sense of present grief of mind,
So far my senses, and my soul oppressed,
That I thought little of ensuing rest.
But you, whose judgments are p^ofound and wise,
And foresee dangers, you have cleerd my eyes,
And made me see and sensible in fine,
That you did never pu^pose to decline
Or slight my cause, but only were withheld,
Or by a strong necessity compeld
To rest content, till Heavens should permit
Both time and opportunity most fit.
But now so soon as that eternal hand,
Which turns and orders all things at command,
Has set his wheel of providence some stay
Within that Nation where you do bear sway,
You have, unto your everlasting fame,
To my rejoicing, and unto the shame
Of such as have most wretchedly belied you,
Assigned me, by that providence that guide you,
So brave an Army, such a strong supply,
To aid your part here, and my cause to try,
That if brave Worthies; here may be no want
Of those supplies you have been pleased to grant,
I doubt not but my cruel foes ere long
Will prove as weak as ever they were strong,
And fly as fast, and faster out of fight,
As ever they did gather and unite.
For though the Heavens have used them as a rod,
Yet in their hearts, they fighting against God,
He hearing his afflicted ones complain,
Will cast his tod out of his hand again,
And make it known his children are beloved,
Though by the wicked, for their good, reproved.
This is most certain, therefore you that have
So kindly sent to raise me from the Grave,
And give me life and freedom, once again,
In spite of all my enemies disdain;
I bless you for it, and beseech you still
Persist therein, and now the work fulfill.
And let not such impediments prevent,
As spring from mere sinister discontent;
But let the dread of the divine displeasure
Which is concerned herein in such a measure,
Exalt your thoughts above such trivial causes,
As may incite you unto needless pauses.
That God, whose hand did ever so appear
To aid at home, will not be absent here:
Your case is still the same it was before,
And your engagements equal, if not more.
What though your foes be numerous? alas,
Heavens, by your hands, bring miracles to pass:
And though the work you have to overcome.
Does threat to shake the very walls of Rome,
And seems a Writ of Privilege now hurld
Amongst the Saints throughout the Christian world;
Yet fear not, it is not multitudes nor art,
Can rout that side, with whom the Heavens take part.
Let not your hearts then, nor your hands decline,
That work shall prosper which is Heavens design:
You have a warrant that will bear you out
In any Christian work you go about;
Especially that work above the rest,
Suppressing of the Antichristian beast.
And you, whose wisdoms have so well been tried
In circumventing of this man of Pride,
You having courage, need not counseled be
Which way to act to set me soonest free.
Yet, out of feeling of my former woes,
Admit me leave to show what I suppose
Has been a special or the master plot,
Whereby the Papists here such part have got.
The watchful soldier that does center keep,
When foes are waking, will not be asleep:
The skillful boatsman that would make to shore,
The winds not serving, plies his Oars the more:
The Garden-dresser, that sowes tender seeds,
Takes the more labor to prevent the Weeds:
The prudent Husband that has Corn to sow
On grounds are doubtful, the more seed does throw;
And when with care he has bestowd his cost,
He still does labor that it be not lost.
Even so, this many an unhappy year,
The Romish seeds men, Seminaries here
Have been most active, diligent, precise,
By art and labor, what they could devise
To sow this Land with their corrupted grains,
And through their subtle and uncessant pains,
This work has so far prosperd in their hands,
That crops are plenteous in the very sands.
But, to the scandal of the English care,
Good seeds men in this Nation have been rare,
And that amongst the English too, a shame
That English Christians, who desire the fame,
Of the Professors of the truth indeed,
Should take so little pains to sow good seed;
For want whereof so many grounds lie wast,
So many souls are barren, or at least,
Let lie, as Land that has on purpose been
Designd the foe, to sow his tares therein.
Nor lies this blemish only here, no doubt,
But partly upon such as sent these out;
Those Pilots that sat at the helm to guide,
They should this Charge with more repect have eyed;
They should as well have took the work in hand
For to convert, as to subject this Land;
Have sought to save the precious souls of men,
As well as seize the substance was therein.
And questionless, the want of this same care
Of gaining souls, converting people here
Has moved that God who gave us this possession,
Thus now to bring our holding it in question.
But herein you that now are at the stern,
I mean you not, this does you not concern:
This fault is ancient, these are passing by's,
Or doors left open before you had the keys.
But now you are in trust in like condition,
Your care already may prevent suspicion;
That when you have possession in your hand
Of this rebellious, and revolting Land,
You will proceed in what you have begun,
And no good action shall be left undone,
That heavens agreeing with your resolution,
May by your means be put in execution.
And in especial that your care will be
So far extended in respect of me,
That you will use all diligence and speed
To sow this Land with uncorrupted seed;
Will plant a plentious Ministry herein,
And far more faithful then before has bin,
That every cornet of this continent
May have a watchman from your confines sent.
Or that some happy nursery of wits
May here be founded, as indeed besits;
From whence, as from a sacred foord, may flow,
Such streams of knowledge, and such seed to sow:
This void, or rather this corrupted Isle,
That it in time may prove a fruitful soil,
Or second Canaan, where may safely dwell,
The seed of Abraham, sons of Israel
Without disturbance by the native part,
The sons of Belial, or the Romish art.
This famous Founders, I ^xp^ct^^ s^y
If ^^^vens again shall give you here the d^y;
L^^ in a pl^nteous Ministry, and sound
In lif^ and Doctrine pious, and profound,
D^^ssenting not in judgment, as of lat^,
Consists the safety both of Church and St^te,
And when an able Ministry is plant^d,
As it is sit such maintenance be granted,
As may both keep their spirits up from filling,
And add a glory to their sacred calling:
So it is needful, on the other side:
That it relates not to excess, or pride.
For what especially but the desire,
And avaritious longing to aspire,
And be above all moderated scope,
Did first incite, and now has set the Pope
Upon the head of Emperors and Kings,
Yea climbes above all sublunary things?
But you that do these weighty causes pond^r,
And whose especial charge they do lie under;
I need not question that you will be just,
And wise, and watchful in your charge in trust,
Not only in relation to that hand
That made you great, and put you in command;
But also in a serious respect,
So many eyes upon your acts reflect,
That almost all the Christians of this age
Are gazet on the Actions of your stage;
And lastly in regard unto the cry,
My elder sister, in your arms, and I
Within your trust, upon our knees do make,
That you will not our case in hand forsake,
But speed and prosecute it in that kind
And blessed manner that you have designed.
And that division, that same bane of Peace,
And foe to virtue, do not make you cease
That work you have begun, and so far wrought
Until it be unto perfection brought.
To His Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX.
MOst Noble Champion, Englands chief Commander,
Who in the tedious dangerous Meander
Of Englands winding, waving, desperate ways,
In wars intestine, have got through with praise;
And brought those swelling, raging, roaring Seas,
Through Gods assistance to a calm, and peace.
For which your Kingdom, and therein my sister,
That through your labors, God has late so blessed her,
Are bound to write your name in gold so pure,
That time, nor envy, may the same obscure;
But after ages may so happy be,
To read your worth, which we are blessed to see.
And now you have those craggy mountains past,
And gained a valley, well secured at last,
Whiles friends at house are singing your deserts,
Your care is how to succor other parts.
A truly worthy General indeed,
Whose actions are so generous at need,
That no good motion can have your denial.
To aid where Christian quarrels are in trial.
Of which brave Warrier I have cause of boasts,
Or c^use to bless you, and the God of hosts,
Who in my great nec^ssity and gri^fe,
Have out of pity thought o^ my relief;
That I who long time have been forced to shifts,
And d^iven for safety to the rocks and clifts,
Am now in hope I shall ere long disclose,
And show my self in presence of my foes.
Your foes at home are forced now to sooth,
And out of fear do give you language smooth,
Dissembling in your presence sugared Notes,
Hiding like Aspes, the poison in their throats;
Which in your absence they are bold to v^nt
With secret friends, to your disparagement;
And if they could advantage find, and place,
Are ready yet to spit it in your face.
Whiles such as are your foes abroad, no doubt,
In your disgrace are ready to speak out;
And do proclaim their malice, and invite
All others they confide in to unite;
That it concerns you to have Argus ey^s
To foresee dangers, and their plots surprise.
But heavens, upon the other side I know
Do aid you, and the better part below
Are on your side, and do esteem you dear,
And out of doubt, are ready to appear
With help, and hearts united to assist,
And take your part, in whom they have bin blessed.
And therefore fear not such as shall oppose;
You yet have made them all subdued foes
That have adventured to resist your hand,
And out of question shall do whiles you stand
In the defense of Truth and right, although
The world should join to work your overthrow.
And for that strength you have assigned to me,
Your force thereby shall not enfeebled be,
The heavens herein will make supply no doubt,
Whose case to aid you, send a party out,
For God himself does still assistance lend
To aid all such as in his case contend.
And what brave Joshua, can be judged has bin
The cause that since you did your task begin
You have so prosper'd, and achieved such fame
That Europe wonders, and admires the same?
But only that the active hand of heaven,
By which success and victories are given:
Has still gone with you in each enterprise
In an especial and most powerful wise.
To withstand which in any time of trouble,
The arm of flesh is but like straw, or stubble
To withstand fire; or like a drop of rain
Let fall to still the raging of the main.
To order battles, and give victory
Is the prerogative of the most high,
To show his greatness, who is strength indeed;
That so no flesh should glory in their reed.
Only amongst men where he does affect,
As isntrumental he does some select
To fight his battles, and infuseth skill,
And care, and force to execute his will.
Which in your person does appear at large,
He having granted to your noble charge
The greatest work for latter times, that yet
The heavens did to a humane hand commit:
And in the same has hitherto no less
Renowned you with miraculous success.
I long indeed have sighed for relief,
And filled the air with echoes of my grief,
In hope the winds would on my woes so smile
To bear the sense thereof into your Isle.
But long I looked for what I longed to hear,
A sweet return of what the winds should bear,
A happy answer of my heavy cry,
Before my woeful wants could have supply.
But now I see and to my comfort find
The cause my suits have been so long declined,
Was not for want of pity in the rest,
Nor want of courage in your noble breast,
But want of opportunity to send
Such aid and comfort as you did intend.
Let glory then eternallize your fame,
Whose courage, whiles the cause remains the same,
Does constant hold, and it is not distance, fate,
Nor fear, nor danger, can the same abate.
Proceed and prosper then as you have done;
Here is another conquest to be won,
Which heaven I hope which have the same in birth,
Will add unto the Trophies of your worth.
What though my state has been full bad? you know
The case of God can never be too low
For him to raise it, but the lower cast,
The higher he does raise it at the last.
Besides, the wisdom of our Maker waits
To t^ke a sweet advantage of our States,
And then his help and comforts do explain,
When help and hopes with men are counted vain.
That so the world may see his working hand;
His foes thereat the more amazed stand:
And those whose state so desperate he raises,
May be engaged unto his greater praises.
Thus God proceeds often, as full well
You by experience of the same can tell;
Which is enough for ever to incline
Your dauntles spirit to a just design,
How hard so ere it be to undergo,
If God shall please to call you thereunto.
Now in assurance of the same I stand,
Attending on Gods pleasure in your hand,
And in submission to the same shall rest,
Presenting of my most entire request
Unto the heavens, that they your part may take,
And favor all that sight for ZIONS sake.
To the English Commanders and Soldiers assigned forth relief of Ireland.
VVElcome that will come, noble friends indeed,
That will vouchsafe a visit where is need:
The rich, it is true have many friends, but such
As do want riches, do want friends as much.
But with you, Worthies, it is otherwise,
You seem to grace where others do despise.
Oh that I had but means unto my mind,
To welcome you, and those that are behind,
That you might taste my thankfulness, and they
Might hear thereof, and make no more delay!
But though my hand be empty, I am poor,
Yet there are riches plenty on my shore:
Such as have robbed me, they have riches left
They stole from me, to take which is no theft;
And what is missing, it is but justice shown,
If they make restitution of their own.
Besides this Island is a fruitful field.
Or pleasant Garden which does plenty yield:
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars consenting be;
The Elements do all therein agree.
The fire is not predominating here;
But cold and heat do moderate appear:
The Air so fare an Antidote and pure,
That nothing poisonous can the same endure.
The water sweet and pleasant streams abound,
Where fowls and fishes are in plenty found.
The earth a Garden, from whose fatness springs
A blessed fulness of terrestrial things.
Besides these strong inducements which invite
In the respect of profit, and delight:
You also have some interest here, it is known,
That you, in part, contend but for your own:
Your own by conquest, and should that be lost
Through want of care, which in atchieving cost
Your noble and renowned fathers dear,
The price of blood, the work of many a year?
Should that, I say, then, which bold fathers got
Be lost by children? Oh! it were a blot,
A scar, a shame, a scandal to your deeds,
That Englands Cedars should become such reeds,
The offspring of such active, valiant, strong,
And conquering hands, should put up such a wrong:
Besides the loss; which is so great, that sure,
True English hearts will not the same endure,
They will not have it in records to find,
That English spirits can be so declined.
But valiant Leaders, you whose acts declare
That English hearts are still without compare,
And will not have your reputation stained,
By losing honor your forefathers gained;
If you thus claim an intrest in this Land,
You have a greater prize then here in hand:
And what more deeply does engage your fame
Unto the prosecution of the same?
Gods case is your case, as his instruments:
And he in his especial providence,
Has called you hither, as it does appear,
To fight the battles of Jehova here.
His holy word, his worship, truth, and name,
With all sincere Professors of the same.
Have here a long time persecuted bin
By Antichrist that active man of sin,
And his adherents, who have here of late
Prevailed insulted, seemed predominate.
But now I hope the heavy sighs and groans,
And cries and tears of Gods afflicted ones;
Together with the jealousy and care,
He does unto his word, and worship bear,
Has wrought upon his clemency so far,
That he intends to be at open war
Against his, and my enemies, and yours,
And will r^prove them, and confound their powers.
This God can do, and will do too, although
The times and seasons when we do not know,
But when it is most unlikely in man's eye,
It Is then Gods usual opportunity.
And why not now then, may not we conceit,
When as our foes were got to such a height?
For my part I remain undaunted still,
Because I know God can do what he will,
He now I hope will in his tender love,
His power and wisdom in this Land improve,
In once more sowing it with holy seed,
His sacred truths, and the most saving Creed;
His worship, Sabbaths, Sacraments and Saints,
In purest sense, and without sad restraints;
And make this Kingdom (which has been a cage
Of unclean spirits, and a very stage
For Antichrist to Act upon at pleasure,
Too many years, and in too great a measure)
To become now an holy Land, excelling
In virtue, truth, and righteousness; a dwelling
For God himself, in holiness and grace,
An earthly ZION for his Saints, a place
Where I in peace, may henceforth sit and sing
The holy praises of my heavenly King.
Most glorious work! what heart that is upright,
Can think upon the same without delight?
Or yet what hand can closed up be found
Against a work so pious, and renowned?
Sure you that are admitted to the same,
It will for ever add unto your fame,
And if your hearts do answer this design,
Your works will surely render you divine.
Brave and approved Commanders ther^ proceed,
The case requires your diligence, and speed.
Your hearts did never fail you, and I t^ust,
Your hands, your help will to your hearts be just.
What though your foes be numerous or mad.
And shall prove desperate? yet their case is bad,
And that which God does, out of doubt detest,
Which is enough to warrant you the best;
For where, and only where the heavens oppose
That side proves ever the subdued foes.
You have experience hereof and can tell
Gods wonder working in this kind full well;
Which cannot but your noble breasts inspire
With such a valiant resolute desire
To take his part, who still did succor grant you,
That fear nor force, nor danger now can dant you.
But what need other arguments herein,
Then the suppressing of the man of sin?
Who in this nation, and in other parts,
The truths of God, and souls of men subverts.
What can be more encouragement then this?
No combat half so capable of bliss.
The honor both of this world, and the fame
Of that which is to come attends the same;
Where such as have been soldiers in the wars
For God, and souls, shall shine above the stars,
And wear the crown of conquerours, more worth
Then all the Crowns, and Diadems on earth.
Can you fear danger then in such a strife?
In which to die, admi^^ a better life?
I trust you cannot, nay by trial know it.
Your constant actions do directly show it.
Then, to plead further in this cause I need not,
You so fear God, the face of men you dread not,
That God who can, who has, and sure who will
Whiles you stand for him stand up for you still.
And you the Soldiers under this command,
Who are assigned to redeem this Land,
And that indeed which is by odds most dear,
Profession of the true Religion here:
By rooting out of Popery, that spell
Of Antichrist, that active charm of hell.
Wherewith this Kingdom is become enchanted;
Nay most of Europe by this fury haunted.
You ever have most willingly appeared
And resolutions readily declared
For the defense, and manfully to fight
For true Religion, piety, and right:
Here you may have your element for this,
Of all things here, such noble minds I miss:
For true Religion here has been disdained,
And Popery has domineered and reigned,
And I that have inhabited this Isle,
Have been as banished, driven into exile.
Consider this, and out of care Divine,
And pity to this sad estate of mine;
Together with the garlands you may wear
If you persist; but shame if you forbear.
And rouse your warlike spirits, and be seen
In holy zeal, above malignant spleen,
Or superstitious jealousy, that fire;
And make the world take notice and admire.
That Jesus Christ has better soldiers far
Then Antichrist has any in his war.
Besides, you know that savage beast of Rome
Is sentenced by irrevocable doom,
To be subjected, weaken and decline,
And be a prey unto the Saints in fine,
And Rome shall fall, and sure God is not slack
Concerning this; do you not hear it crack?
Sure if your ears were opened aright,
To heavens predictions in this thing, you might.
Can you be without comfort then, or cold?
Or will you not be resolute and bold?
In such a quarrel as has such a warrant,
As is in holy records so apparent?
Yes, yes, brave Soldiers, these are sure such ti^s
As will constrain you, make your spirits rise,
And stir your veins, and Christian valiant hearts
In this design to show your true deserts.
And stop the mouth of envy, and make known
Those fatal blasts malignant breath has blown
Into your faces, are but out of spite.
And false r^ports, which tell men that you sight
For neither faith, nor truth, nor to def^nd
The true Religion, as you do pretend.
But Christian Soldiers, though these be some scars,
Or sc^ndalls vented to disgrace you^ wars;
Yet I am hopeful, nay, am confident,
That these were never heads of your intent,
Nor ever shall be: and indeed I tremble,
To think you should be thought so to dissemble.
Moreover had Gods case been h^er let fall,
And I left helpless now in hopeless thrall,
I had not only seemed a sad compliance
With Antichrist (whom God has in defiance)
But in the loss of this Land had be shown,
The hazard if not losing of your own.
It Is time then to be stirring, and resolved
To quit this cloud wherein you were involved,
And make it truly to the world appear,
You are in all such accusations clear,
And that your hearts do with your case comply,
And so resolved you will live and die.
It Is time, I say, but not, I hope, too late,
Though time delayed, yet not time out of date,
But that you may recover all this loss,
Yea make advantage of it, and ingrosse
The greater honor by your hotter fires
Of Christian zeal, to show your just desires.
And pious hearts for peace of Church, and State;
And that you do abominate, and hate
All fatal insurrection, mutinizing,
First heavens abuse, of Lucifers devising;
And ever since has been the overthrow
Of all that practice in the same below.
Elisha's servant was afraid, it is true,
When as their foes were only in his view;
But when the heavens had made his eyesight clear,
The strongest part did on their side appear.
That part, indeed, is strongest which is Gods,
Although it seems the weakest part by odds;
Nay, God does mostly multitudes eschew,
To try his case, and chooses but a few;
That so his greatness may the more be known;
And men not challenge what is not their own.
Nay God can make his s^nsles creatures stand
His friends at need, his Army at command,
Too great to be resisted, as is found
In plaguing Pharaoh, and his Army drowned:
The ^lemen^s, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars
Are all his host to prosecute his wars.
That it is, inde^d his clemency and love,
To grace and honor men herein, above
His other creatur^s, that he gives men art,
And call them forth, as friends, to take his part,
When it is known he is sufficient, still,
Without his creatures aid to do his will;
His Word is able in a trice to burst
All earthen vessels, by it made at first.
Oh! then, you men whom this great God has chose
To take his part, as friends, against his foes;
You cannot sure be faint, or fearful where
It Is thus confirmed, you have no cause to fear.
Or may you not be rather seemly proud,
That you are to that dignity allowed,
To help the Lord against the Mighty? when
The Lord indeed is only Mighty: men
Are earth, worms, or his earthen vessels wrought,
Which he can dash in pieces with a thought.
Besides brav^ S^uldiers, if you could be faint,
Or f^lse, or fig^t but upon mere constraint,
Or which is wors^ be disolute, and rude;
To Gods disho^our, and your shame, conclude,
G^^ would not own you, though he might employ you:
B^^ h^d a purpos^ r^ther to destroy you,
T^en to d^fend you or to give you part
Of c^^^^^st with him, who had not your heart:
But wherefore should I presuppose or qu^stion
Such fa^lings in you who have made profession
Of your sincere, and Christian-like intents,
And there to given unanimous consents?
No, noble Warriers, Christian Soldiers, know,
I do you better estimation owe;
I cannot construe your intentions bad,
Who so good Christian discipline have had.
Proceed, proceed, then doubt not of success;
Your case in question promises no less;
God will not fail you, nor your spirits yield,
Which are by God and Conscience clear up held.
As for supplies, you need not fear delay:
As for reward, Gods is the only pay:
His service with the best supplies abound:
His Soldiers with the richest Garlands crowned.
And as for men, I dare presume so far,
That, where their purses to your former war
Were often forced open: they to relief of me,
Now out of zeal and pity will be free;
Their purses, hands, and hearts to this design
Will freely open, and joyfully incline:
In which so fully is to be discerned
Both their own safety, and Gods cause concerned.
Besides, what here you, by your valor shown,
Shall conquer, shall in part become your own;
You shall not beat the air, or the wind;
But booty pray and pay, are yours assigned,
That with the greater courage you maintain
This enterprise, the more shall be your gain.
Do then, oh do then your brave hearts express,
As to your honor you declare no less,
And stop the mouth of malice, and compel
Mere envy on your actions to speak well.
Whiles I, and all the Saints on earth shall pray
That you may prosper, and our foes decay:
That ZIONS side may have the upper hand,
And Romes impostures be expelled this Land.
FINIS

