C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all and sundry Our good Subjects
whom these Presents do or may concern, Greeting:
We having, with the advice and consent of Our Parliaments, past so many Acts
in favor of the Protestant Religion, against Field-Conventicles, whereby our
Subjects were withdrawn from public Ordinances, in such ways as exposed them
to hear Jesuits, or any other Irregular Preachers, and were at last debauched
to meet with Arms in formed Rebellions; We might have expected a most hearty
concurrence from all such as resolved to live Religiously and Peaceably in
suppressing those Disorders: In place whereof, Magistrates having by their
negligence, and Masters by their connivance, hightned those Distempers into a
formed Rebellion, founded upon Extravagancies, inconsistent with the Protestant
Religion and Our Monarchy; Which, We having by the Mercy of God, and the
Affection of Our Subjects, overcome so totally, that Our Clemency cannot be
liable to any mis-construction: We have therefore thought fit, with the Advice
of Our Privy Council, to recommend the vigorous Execution of all Our former
Laws and Proclamations against such Rendezvouzes of Rebellion; Commanding
hereby Our Judges, Magistrates and Officers of all Ranks and Degrees to
apprehend, condemn and punish all such as frequent any Field-conventicles, the
Ministers by Death, and the Hearers by Fining, and otherways according to the
prescript of Our Laws; such as bear Arms there, being to be demained as
Traitors, conform to Our former Proclamation, dated the 13. day of May last,
and ordaining that all Masters shall be liable for presenting such of their
Tennants, and such as live upon their Ground to underly the Law in Our
Justice-airs, conform to the sixth Act, Par. third James the fifth. As also, We
most peremptorily Command all in Office under Us, to prosecute with all legal
Rigor, those Inhumane and Execrable Murderers of the late Archbishop of St.
Andrews, and all such as have had accession thereto, by concealing or
ressetting the Assassinates. But We, being desirous to reclaim all such in that
Our ancient Kingdom, as have been misled by Ignorance, or blind Zeal (the
pretexts of Disorders) and to convince all indifferent Persons, that too great
severity is as far from Our Design, as Our Inclinations, have according to the
Power reserved to Us, by the fifth Act, and second Session of Our second
Parliament, suspended the Execution of all Laws and Acts against such as
frequent House-conventicles in the Low Countries on the South Side of the River
of Tay only: Excepting always the Town of Edinburgh, and two Miles round about
the same, with the Lordships of Musselburgh and Dalkeith, the Cities of St.
Andrews and Glasgow, and Stirling, and a Mile about each of them; being fully
resolved, not to suffer the Seat of Our Government, nor Our Universities to be
pestred with any irregularities whatsoever. And for a further evidence of Our
Protection to all who resolve to live peaceably, We hereby suspend all
Diligences for Fines upon the account of Conventicles, except such Fines as are
imposed by our Privy Council, and such Fines of Inferior Judicatures, as were
uplifted or transacted for, prior to the 29. of May last, and all Letters of
Intercommuning, and other Executions, except in so far as concerns those who
were Our actual Servants, or in Public Trust. But to the end, that none whom
We may justly suspect, shall under the color of this Favor, continue to
Preach Rebellion, Schism and Heresy; We hereby Ordain all such as shall be
suffered to Preach, to have their Names given in, and surety found to Our Privy
Council for their peaceable behavior, only one Preacher being allowed to a
Paroch; and none to be allowed who have appeared against Us in this late
Rebellion, nor none who shall be admitted by the Un-conform Ministers in any
time hereafter. Assuring all those to whom We have extended this Favor, that
if they or any of them, shall for the future frequent any Field-coventicles, or
disturb the Peace of these Our Kingdoms, We will secure Our People, and
maintain Our Authority and Laws by such effectual courses, as in ruining the
Authors, cannot be thought rigid, after so insufferable and unnecessary
Provocations. This Our forbearance being to continue in Force only during our
Royal Pleasure, as We shall see those Dissenters deserve Our Favor. And to the
end, all Our good Subjects mave notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We
do hereby Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, to make Proclamation hereof, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the 29. day of June, 1679. and of our Reign
the thirty one Year. By His MAJESTY'S Command, LAUDERDALE.
GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1679.

Reprinted at LONDON.


