THE Kings Majesty's GRACIOUS LETTER To HIS PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, Conveened
at Edinburgh, the 28. day of July, 1681.

WITH His Royal Highness The Duke of ALBANY, etc. His MAJESTY'S High
Commissioner, His SPEECH to the PARLIAMENT, After Reading of the LETTER.

Published by Authority of Parliament.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

THE Kings Majesty's GRACIOUS LETTER TO HIS PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, Conveened
at Edinburgh, the 28. day of July, 1681.
CHARLES R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
OUR Inclination to embrace all opportunities to Express Our constant care of,
and affection to, Our Ancient Kingdom, has moved Us to call you together at
this time, to advise with Us, what may truly conduce to the security and
interest thereof: And as We have ever judged Our own, and the Interests of Our
Subjects, to be unseparable, and such as would divide them, to be in their
hearts Enemies to both, (Experience having sufficiently evinced, that all
Invasions upon, or Diminutions of the Rights and Prerogatives of Our Crown,
prove Fatal and destructive to the Security and Property of Our People, which
can only thereby be Protected,) so are they then best managed and secured, when
provided for by unanimous Counsels and Joint Resolutions* And, as it is one of
Our greatest satisfactions, that We have been always careful of that Our
Ancient Kingdom, with a tenderness suitable to Our great Interest in it; So
when We remember the firm and dutiful constancy which it has always paid to
the Royal Line and Family, And that now it is your Interest, as well as Duty,
to adhere unto it with unshaken Loyalty as much as ever; We cannot doubt of
your ready and zealous compliance at this time, with what shall be proposed as
fit for Our Service, which can never be divided from the happiness of Our
People.

And since some (corrupted with the Rebellious Principles of the last Age, or
the blind Zeal of this) have at first raised Schisms and Separation in the
Church, and afterward frequent Rebellions against Us; We cannot but expect
from your prudent Consultations, effectual and adequate Remedies, for curing
these violent Distempers at present, and preventing them for the future: And
that you will not despise or connive at the smallest appearances of these
wicked and seditious Principles, which (how plausibly soever they may be
disguised, under the old Pretenses, and fallacious Masks of Liberty and
Religion, which are ever least minded by the most clamorous Pretenders to them)
yet in the Issue lead to such monstrous Effects and Rebellious Extravagancies,
as necessarily tend to the Dissolution of all Government and Order: And of
which you cannot choose but be deeply sensible.

This being once effectually done, We may reasonably hope, that Our Government
in Church and State, as by Law presently established, shall receive its due
Reverence and Obedience; And that all Our good Subjects shall be preserved in
Peace, Tranquillity, and Happiness. For promoting these great Ends so necessary
to the securing the Protestant Religion, Our Authority and Government, and the
common Interest of Our People, by your Joint Advice, who are so much concerned;
And for enacting of such Laws, as experience has discovered to be wanting for
distribution of Justice in several Cases, which have emerged since Our last
Parliament, We have called this: And as an eminent Expression of Our Favor to
you, have named Our most Dear, and most entirely Beloved Brother, James Duke of
Albany and York, etc. to be Our Commissioner therein, whom We have found so
affectionate to you, and to whom you have testified so much Duty during His
long stay amongst ^ou; which have enabled Him so well to understand the Affairs
and Interest of that Our Ancient Kingdom. And since His Interest is so
unseparable from Ours, We shall not doubt of your ready and cheerful
Concurrence, to render His Endeavors amongst you Successful for securing Our
Government, and your own Peace and Happiness. By doing whereof, you will answer
the entire confidence We have in your Prudence and Loyalty. And so We bid you
heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor-Castle, the 12. day of July 1681. and of Our
Reign the 33. year. By His Majesty's Command, MORRAY.


