C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For a THANKSGIVING for the late VICTORY by His Majesty's Naval
Forces, Against the DVTCH.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God in his late Providence toward Us and Our
People, to manifest at once the glory both of his Power and Mercy, in giving Us
a happy Victory over Our Adversaries at Sea, filling the hearts of Us and Our
People as full of joy and thankfulness, as becomes so transcendent a Mercy; We
cannot upon the due consideration hereof, but with all humility admire and
adore the mercy and goodness of God in this his signal manifestation thereof;
and we look upon it as invitation from Heaven to Us and all Our People unto
most entire Thankfulness for the sa(...)d to the end some Solemn time may be
set apart for the Public performance of this Duty, and (...) We and all Our
Subjects in England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, may pay Our
just tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, We do hereby Publish
and Declare, and also strictly Charge and Command, That Tuesday the Fourteenth
day of this instant August be set apart and observed as a day of Public
Thanksgiving in the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and
other places adjacent. And that Thursday the Three and twentieth of this
instant August, the like be kept and duly observed through the rest of this
whole Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales. And for the more orderly
performance thereof, We by the advice of Our Reverend Bishops, have directed to
be Composed, Printed and Published, the Forms of such Prayers and public
Thanksgivings, as We have thought fit to be used in all Churches and places at
their public Meetings; and have given charge to Our Bishops to disperse the
same throughout the whole Kingdom. And We do also direct and appoint, That this
Our Proclamation be publicly read in all Churches and Chapels, on some
Lord's Day precedent to the said days of Thanksgiving hereby appointed, to the
end that notice may be taken thereof, and due Thanks and Praise may upon the
said Days be offered up unto Almighty God; And that humble Supplicaons be
poured out before him for his continual assistance, and improvement of this and
all his Mercies to the Honor of his great Name, and the Peace and benefit of
Us and our People; Willing and strictly Commanding all persons within Our said
Realm and Dominions, with all Sobriety, Reverence, and Thankfulness to observe
this Day, as becomes so solemn an occasion.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Sixth day of August, 1666. In the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1666.


