By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Indicting a PARLIAMENT, to be held at Edinburgh, the 28, day
of July, 1681.
CHARLES R.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sundry Our good Subjects, whom these Presents do, or may concern,
Greeting:
Whereas upon diverse Weighty Considerations, of great Importance to Our
Service, and to the Peace and Tranquillity of Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
We have thought fit to Call a Parliament of that Our Kingdom, to meet at Our
City of Edinburgh, upon the twenty eight day of July, next ensuing the date
hereof; We do therefore Require and Command, all Archbishops, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Lords and Officers of State, of Our
said Kingdom, to be present, and attend that Diet. And We do also require and
Command, all Our Sheriffs, in the several Shires, and their Deputs, that if
there be any new Elections made for this year, of Commissioners to Parliaments
or Conventions, they give timeous Intimation to such Commissioners, to keep
this Meeting; But if there be no Elections already made, that they forthwith
Call and Conveen all the Freeholders in the Respective Shires, to the end,
that according to the Laws and Acts of Parliament, Elections may be made of fit
Persons, to be Commissioners for this Parliament. And We do likewise Require
and Command, Our Royal Buroughs, to make choice of Commissioners accordingly,
and them, and all Persons having Interest, to attend this Our Parliament, under
the pains contained in Our Laws made thereanent. And to the Effect, all Our
good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby
Command Our Lion, King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous Proclamation of these Presents, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head Buroughs in
the several Shires of that Our Kingdom. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the eighth day of June, One thousand six
hundred and eighty one, and of Our Reign, the thretty and third year. By His
Majesty's Command, MORRAY.
GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.


