Prince CHARLES HIS SUMMONS Sent to the Lord Admiral, to take down his
Standard, and come under his Highness Obedience.

And the Earl of Warwicks Answer, and resolution to bear it still for the
Parliament, against all opposition whatsoever.

Also the proceedings of both Navies to an engagement And a List of the names
of the Members of both Houses of Parliament, the Ministers, and others, that
are to go to the Isle of WIGHT, on both sides, about the Treaty with his
Majesty for peace.

depiction of a seventeenth-century warship

London Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner, 1648.

A LETTER FROM The Navy of the proceedings of the Parliaments ships, under the
Lord ADMIRAL, Against the Revolted SHIPS with Prince CHARLES.
Right Honorable,
THe Lord Admiral sent out Orders for those Ships at Portsmouth, to hasten out
to meet his Lordship in the Downs, and then put forth with those in the
Channel with his Lordship: 6 men of War, and 3 additionall Ships, came out
from Portsmouth, his Lordship has 12, that is 21. and (I believe they will be
completed 30. when all are joined. I have sent you (here enclosed) Prince
Charles his Summons to the Lord Admiral, and his Lordships gallant Answer. Our
ships faced the Prince sailing up within one League of them, but then there
rize such a storm, that the Revolted ships sailed Northward. But whether they
will advance back again, or not, I know not; So soon as those from Portsmouth
are joined, his Lordship will clear the Seas for free Trading, so, as either
to engage them, or force them away.

Dated at the Nasse, 1 September, 1648.
Prince Charles his Summons to the Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of the
Parliaments NAVY.
Sent by Mr. Seamor, one of his Bedchamber.
HIs Highness the Prince of Wales having observed a Standard which has been
borne by this Fleet, does require the Admiral, or chief Commander thereof, to
take notice that his Highness is present here, and does command him to take
down his Standard, and to come under his Highness obedience, for the settling
of the peace of his Majesty's Dominions, wherein, if his Highness shall find a
ready compliance, he does engage himself, not only to receive compliance of
all such as shall now return to his Majesty's obedience, but also to receive
them into his favor, And I promise to continue them in employment: As persons
that (out of obedience to his Highness his Summons) do declare their good
affections to his Majesty. And the peace of the Kingdom.

Given in the Downs, August 29. 1648. CHARLES P.

To the Admiral, or chief Commander of the Fleet.
The Lord Admiralls Answer returned to Prince Charles.
May it please your Highness,
I Am appointed by both Houses of the Parliament of England, to be Lord
Admiral of England, by which right I bear this Standard. And (God willing)
shall continue to bear it, during the pleasure of the Parliament,
notwithstanding the opposition of any person whatsoever, and as for the settling
of the Peace of the Kingdom, I must refer it to the wisdom of the two Houses
of Parliament, who (I know) are now in a way to effect it, if they be not
therein disturbed; And this is all that I can return to your Highness, by way
of Answer to your Paper, who am,

Nasse, 29 Aug. 1648. Your Highness Servant, WARWICK.

A List of the Lords, Commoners, and others, that are to go to the Isle of
Wight, about the Treaty with his Majesty.
1. Those to be with the King, desired by His Majesty, are agreed to by both
Houses.
Gentlemen of my Bedchamber,
Duke Richmond, Marq. Hertford, Earl Lindsey, Earl Southampton.
Grooms of my Bedchamber,
George Kirk, James Levenston, Henry Murrey.
My Barber,
Thomas Davis.
Pages of my back-staires.
Hugh Hen, Humphrey Rogers, William Levett.
Yeoman of my Robes.
Rives.
Querries, with four or six of my Footmen, as they find fittest to wait.
Sir Edward Sidenham, Robert Terwin, John Housdon,
My Laundresse,
Mistress Wheeler, with such Maids as she shall choose.
A Groom of my presence,
Parsons.
To wait as they did, or as I shall appoint them
Sir Foulke Grevill, Captain Titus, Captain Boroughs, Mr. Cressett, Halstid,
Fierbrace.
My Chaplains.
Bishop of London, Bishop of Salisbury, Doctor Hamond, Doctor Saunderson,
Doctor Turner, Doctor Haywood.
Lawyers,
Sir Thomas Gardner, Sir Or. Bridgeman, Mr. Ieffery Palmer, Mr. Thomas Cook,
Mr. John Vaughan.
Clerks and Writers.
Sir Edward Walker, Mr. Phil. Walker, Nich. Oudart, Charles Whittacre.
To make ready the House for Treating,
Peter Newton, Clem. Kenersley.

2 A List of those from the Parliament to Treat.
1 The Commissioners of the Lords House,
The Earl of Northumberland, The Earl of Pembrooke and Mountgomery, The Earl
of Salisbury, The Earl of Middlesex. The Viscount Sea and Seal.
2 Commissioners of the House of Commons.
The Lord Waynman Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Sir John Potts, Sir Henry Vain
junior. Mr. William Perepoint Mr. Samuel Brown. Mr. Denzell Hollis, Mr. Crew,
Mr. Bulkley. Mr. Recorder.
3 Ministers of Gods Word to go with the Commissioners
Mr. Herle. Mr, Marshall. Mr. Vines. Mr. Seymer.

FINIS.

