I CHRISTOPHER Duke of ALBEMARLE, (...) (...)cellour of the University of
CAMBRIDGE, having perused these following Orders and Rules, (for the more
effectual securing of the Public Library there) drawn up and agreed upon by
certain Persons chosen by the Senate to deliberate and determine in that
affair; Do approve of them, and think it very reasonable they be strictly
observed by all, and particularly I am of Opinion that no Person be permitted
the use of the said Library until he first take the Oath mentioned amongst
these Orders.

NEW-HALL, June 26. 1684. ALBEMARLE.

Orders and Rules agreed upon by the Syndics for the better securing the
Public Library. June 20. 1684.
I. THat all Persons (except Foreigners) be prohibited the use of the Public
Library unless they first take the following Oath.

Jurabis quod in Bibliothecam publicam admissus nihil quod ad ipsam pertinuerit
sciens volens corrumpes, aut imminues, nullum librum per mutabis, auferesve,
aut ipse per te, aut per alium quemvis, nisi eo modo, iisque conditionibus,
quae per Vniversitatis decreta requiruntur: Quodque sis jure isto tuo sincere,
and bona fide usurus, atque omnino ita ut (quantum in Te est) nihil inde
accrescat Bibliothecae damni, Ita te Deus adjuvet and haec sancta Dei
Evangelia.

II. That no Person (except such as are at present members of the Senate, or
shall be at the next Commencement, or except such as are actually Batchelours
of Law or Physic, or shall be at the next Commencement) be admitted to the
said Oath, unless a Grace first pass the House for his admittance to the
Library.

III. That none under the Degree of Masters of Arts, Batchelours of Law or
Physic be permitted to put up such Grace.

IV. That no Foreigner be permitted the use of the Library without such a
Sponsor as the Vice Chancellor for the time being shall allow of.

V. That no one shall borrow any Book without express le^^^ (...)w
Vice Chancellor for the time being, or his Lawful Deputy, and a note under
his own (...)ing the name of the Book or Books so borrowed. The Books so lent
to be returned within (...)Month; the under Library Keeper or some other Person
to bring the Note to the Vice Chancellor for that purpose.

VI. That the Library-keepers shall have a Book wherein they shall set down the
names of what Books are lent out, and to whom, and for how long.

VII. That the Vice Chancellor, or his Deputy with others that he shall call
to his assistance, do every Year (or oftener if he shall think fit) in the long
Vacation visit and survey all the Books in the Library, by the Classical
Catalogue: And in case they find any to be wanting, to deduct so much out of
the Library-keepers Salary as will be sufficient to purchase the like again for
the Library: according to a Decree of the University made in the Year 1667.

VIII. That every one who in the Opinion of the Library Keeper shall return any
Book considerably soiled, blotted or defaced, stand obliged to buy a new Book
of the same kind, or else to pay double the value of such Book, and if he
refuse to do so, that he be ipso facto deprived of the use of the Library for
ever, by the Vice-Chancellour's declaring him so to be at the next Congregation.

Hen. James, Procan. Jsph Beaumont. Ra. Cudworth. John Copleston. Jo. Spencer.
Humf. Gower. Nath. Coga. S. Blithe. J. Peachell. Joh. Balderston. Rob. Brady.
R. Widdrington. Humf. Babington. Tho. Smoult. J. Gostlin. Jo. Billers. Ben.
Pulleyn. Joan. Ekins. Ja. Johnson. Jo. Richardson. Joh. Wotton. Charles
Beaumont.


June 27. 1684.
Lect. and Publicat. in frequenti Congregatione Regentium and non Regentium,
per Venerab. Virum Johannem Ekins, Sen. P^ocuratorem.

Jta testor Jac. Holman, Not. Publ. ac almae Vniversitatis Cantabr.
Registrarius Principalis.


