CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION To summon the Persons therein named, who sat, gave Judgment,
and assisted in that horrid and detestable Murder of His Majesty's Royal Father
of blessed memory, to appear and render themselves within Fourteen days, under
pain of being excepted from Pardon.
CHARLES R.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Our loving Subjects of England, Scotland,
and Ireland Greeting.
We taking notice by the Information of Our Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament, of the most horrid and execrable Treason and Murder committed upon
the Person, and against the Life, Crown and Dignity of Our late Royal Father
CHARLES the First, of blessed Memory: And that John Lisle, William Say, Esqs
Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, Esqs Sir John Bourchier
Knight, William Heveningham Esquire Isaac Pennington Alderman of London, Henry
Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow, John Hutchinson,
Esqs Sir Michael Livesay Baronet, Robert Tichborne, Owen Roe, Robert Lilburn,
Adrian Scroope, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, John
Carew, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Thomas Wogan, Edmund Harvey, Thomas Scot,
William Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland,
John Dixwel, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel
Blagrave and Thomas Wait, Esquires, being deeply guilty of that most detestable
and bloody Treason, in sitting upon, and giving Judgment against the Life of
Our Royal Father; And also John Cook, who was employed therein as Solicitor,
Andrew Broughton and John Phelps, who were employed under the said persons as
Clerks, and Edward Dendy who attended them as Sergeant at Arms, have out of the
sense of their own Guilt lately fled and obscured themselves, whereby they
cannot be apprehended and brought to a personal and legal Trial for their said
Treasons according to Law. We do therefore by the Advice of Our said Lords and
Commons, command, publish and declare by this Our Proclamation, That all and
every the persons before named shall within fourteen days next after the
publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation, personally appear and render
themselves to the Speaker or Speakers of Our House of Peers or Commons, or unto
the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, or to the Sheriffs of Our respective
Counties of England and Wales, under pain of being excepted from any Pardon or
Indemnity both for their respective Lives and Estates: And that no person or
persons shall presume to harbor or conceal any the persons aforesaid, under
pain of Misprision of High Treason.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the sixth day of June 1660. in the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON* Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1660.


