By His Highness the Prince of Great BRITAIN, Duke of CONWALL and ALBANY,
Highest Captain General of all His Majesty's Forces raised and to be raised
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales and Town of Berwick, etc.
A PROCLAMATION, For all persons within Our Quarters in the County of DEVON
able to bear Arms, not being otherwise employed by His Highness, or dispensed
withal, to attend His Highness now advancing in Person to meet the Rebels.
AS ALSO For a General Supplication to be made in all Churches of DEVON and
EXETER, on Sunday the 4. of January, for Gods blessing on His Highness, and
His Forces.
WHereas, upon the motion of the Enemy on this side Exeter, We have resolved in
Our own Person to repair to Our Army, and to that end We resolve with all
possible expedition to advance with Our Forces, hoping, by the blessing of God,
to expel the Enemy from this County, We have thought fit to publish and
declare this Our resolution, desiring and requiring all Loyal and able men of
what degree or quality soever within Our Quarters in that County as well those
of the Trained-Bands, as all others able to bear Arms, who are not otherwise
employed or dispensed with by Us, to repair to Us very speedily in person, to
Our assistance, with such Arms as they can bring; And We must profess that We
shall impute the absence of any person, not so employed or dispensed with as
aforesaid, to want of Loyalty, or want of Courage, both which at so important a
time, and upon so important an occasion, We hold equally odious. And for the
procuring a blessing from God upon this Our first enterprise, which We
undertake for his Service, and for the procuring a blessed Peace upon this
miserable Kingdom, toward the which Our entreaties and earnest desires of
mediation have been rejected, We desire that on Sunday next a general
Supplication may be made in all the Churches within Our Quarters for Gods
blessing upon Us and Our Forces, intending also to see the like Supplication
solemnly made by the whole Army, when We shall have drawn it into a body. And
the High-Sheriffe of Devon is to cause this Our Declaration and Proclamation to
be speedily published in all Market Towns and Public Meetings in Our Quarters
there, and read in all the Churches and Chapels within the said County, We
having directed the like to be done in Our Duchy of Cornwall, and hereby
likewise directing the like to be done in the City of Exeter.

Given at Our Court at Tavistoke the 29. of December. 1645. CHARLES P. By His
Highness Command in Council Rich: Fanshawe.


Imprinted at Exeter by ROBERT BARKER, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1645.


