THE RESOLUTION OF HIS HIGHNESS, The Prince of Wales, CONCERNING

His coming into England, to assist his Royal Father the KING. And his
Declaration touching a Personal Treaty betwixt the Kings Majesty and both
Houses of Parliament.

LIKEWISE, (...) Declaration, concerning the proceedings of the Right
Honorable the Lord Crav^n, touching his coming into England to assist his
Royal Sovereign.

and the proceedings of the Royalists in Sussex, concerning their seizing upon
several Castles for His Maj and the Resolution of the Trained Bands thereupon.
Also exceeding strange news from the Coun^y of Kent, and Hounsley-Heath.

ICH DIEN printer's or publisher's device

LONDON* Printed for (...) (...)

A Declaration of the Royalists of Kent, touching their present proceedings
against Colonel Rich, and his Forces.
SIR,
THe three Castles yet hold out, but Col. Rich uses his utmost endeavors to
reduce them, and a better account might have been given of the proceedings
here, but that for want of an Ingenier, the Morterp^ece could not be used, but
now an Ingenier is come, and works a^e ra^sed, and all preparations for battery
are in a rea^i^esse, we have but a few men, but those are resolute, and watch
and work courageously; upon the Sout side of Walmor Castle, we have raised a
battery from whence we can do good execution, and very probably the Castle will
be regained before this come to your hands, which being done, a good account
will quickly be given of the other; some light skirmishes have happened between
us and the enemy, but nothing yet remarkable, they are 150. within the Castle,
and we but 200. in the Works, our foot in this County are not above 500. 200 of
which are at Poyer, and another part at Sandwich, where they have employment
enought to keep all quiet there, the people here are extremely disaffected to
us; more then in any other place, neither will they afford us any provision, no
not for our money, except we take it by force or violence, we hear that the
Prince is suddenly expected at Caelice, if not already there, much debate has
been whether Prince Rupert or the Earl of Newcastle, shall be General of the
English Forces, who with the Prince and all the Gallants of Court are to pass
from Callis to Dunkerk, and so to Barwick to join with Langdale, it is not yet
resolved, whether the Duke of York, or the Lord German shall be Admiral, but
for Vic-Admirall, the Lord Willoughby of Parham is appoin^ed. The 11. Revol^ed
Ships are Victualling in Holland for 6. months, and are there to be furnished
with all necessaries, with an addition of 14. Sail of Dutch. Also 4. Regiments
of low Country Soldiers, with some Dutch are to come over in those Revolted
Ships; but to return to our own business, we have finished two batteries
against Walmor Castle, and a running trench ma^e from Sea to Sea, part of it not
being Pistol shot from the Castle, nevertheless, if they continue obstinate,
and will not yea^d upon any conditions, but within 24. hours, we doub^ not but
to have it in our p^ssession, Deal Castle is relie^ed with supply from France,
which makes them so high, that it is thought they will* not accept of quarter
and if supplies be all laid, they will prove the more trouble to reduce.

From the Leagure before Sandwich July 4. 1648.
The Demonstration of the free born people within the County of Sussex,
touching their present proceedings for the Kings Majesty, etc.
SIR.
WE fear we shall be imbroyled in blood in this County which now is the
condition of many parts of England, for a party is risen in diverse parts of
this County, but esp^cially at Hors^^^ and Bul^orou^h they yet are most
Count^^^ men, none of any great quality assists the, some of the Trained Ban^^
take part wi^^ them, and the Country men (...) chosen ^^em leaders of the best
their Company affords, and exrcise continually, at Horsham they began first to
rise, occasioned thus. The Mag^zi^e at Horsham, for the more security was by
some thought good to be removed to Arundell, but the Townsmen and Country
would not consent but by parties watch it day and night; but at the last they
re^olved to Arm themselves and as they said, fight for King Charles, upon
which co^motion, 300. presently Armed themselves, and in 24. hours space, 600.
were gathered together, and increase hourly, and upon notice of this Rising at
Horsham, they likewise rose at Pulborough, and all that part of the County
adjoining to Hampshire, and those about Pulborough, all those parts are drawn
up toward Chichester, with an intent if possible, to seize and make good
either that City or Arundel Castle, parties are likewise coming unto them from
Brighthelmston, Shoram, Steining, and those parts, so that now I b^lieve there
will be never 800 in that part of the County, and if they can possess the
Holds* they intend to make good Bramley Castle, and Beeding Bridge, and so make
good all on that side the water, we understand that those at Horsham are
speedily to join with them, if not prevented, and so to keep together in a
body, the better to make good themselves against opp^sition; But we here that
Forces ^re coming from the Parliament to su^prise them; whi^^ will procure a
good cource, and so to take them of in the Bud or else they, I prove very
troublesome to suppress^, (...) this is a very Malignant County and they will
soon be (...) strong party, and I hear if once they should get the strength
of the County into their hands that the Trained Bands would take part with
them, the Garrison at Shoram and Brighthelmston, sw^ar to assist them what may
be, and that they should want neither Ordinance nor nothing else that they can
supply them with, and they say that if a party come they will assist them in
maintaining good of the Town, the well affected gather together about Jews,
whither is gone Captain Shepherd, Captain Freeman, and others, and I believe
those Eastern parts of the County will be forward to assist against the
Malignant party, and as soon as any forces come, or any action has past
between them, I will give you a full Relation, but for the present this is all
from*

Steining July the 5. 1648. Your loving Friend, S. G.

A Declaration of the Prince of Wales, and the proceedings of the Lord Craven,
touching the KINGS MAJESTY.
Right Honored,
SInce my last dated the 23. of June, new style, we have received intelligence,
that his Highness the Prince of Wales, (for some reasons objected) has
changed his Resolution for England, and is not resolved to engage with the
Ma^qu^sse of Newcastle, to join with Sir Marmaduke Lan^dale, against the Army
of England commanded by the Lord Fairfax, but has declared, That h^ will not
engage for a new Levy, (in Relation to Martial Discipline) against his Native
Country* until such time, that he h^th received full intimation touching the
present proceedings betwixt his Royal Father, and the P^rl^ament of England,
concerning their ag^^ement for a p^rsonall Treaty, And it is further reported,
That upon information of the proceeding^ of Si^ Marmaduke Langdale, touching
his ensuing out of Warrants, in the name of his Highness the P. of Wales, his
Highness has declared, That he never (as yet) countenanced their D^sign for
the levying of another new War within the Bowels of England, but utterly
desisted against the same, saying; that the purple Channel of England had been
too much dyed with the blood of Loyalty, and that he desired a general Act of
Obl^vian, that so the Sword might be sheathed, all differences composed, and
the p^esent Commotions within his Fathers bleeding Kingdoms immediately settled.
Yesterday, there was a great Rumor throughout this City, That the Lord Craven
had a Design for England, to engage for the King, against the Parliament, but
this Rumor were blasted in the bud before it came to ripeness; our maturity
for it does evidently appear that there was no such Design ever incended by his
Lordship; but upon the Treaty and Articles of agreement, between the King of
Spain and the States of Holland, his Lordship did declare at the he^d of his
Reg^ment to the Officers and Soldiery. That if they had a desire to engage
against any En^my whatsoever, that were opposi^e to the true faith of
Christianity, he would sacrifice his life with them; but to engage against
England, he was resolved; to the contrary. As for the Revolted Ships, there is
little news of them; but by the next you shall hear further from

Your most assured friend, William Vandere.
Delph in Holland July 2. 1648. This day there was a great rumor in the City
of London concerning a party of horse rand^vouzing at Hounslow-heath for the
King, as also another party in Kent, the particulars whereof I shall wave for
the present.

July 5. 1648.


FINIS.

