POPISH PLOTS AND TREASONS From the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Illustrated with Emblems and explained in Verse.
First are described the Cursed plots they laid.
And on the side their wretched ends displayed.
depiction of a papal bull, with a medal featuring two fishermen in a boat
pulling in their nets, into which are integrated the first two emblems below
The Popes bull.
IN NOMINE DOMINI incipit Omne Malum



depiction of a triumphal pillar, into which are integrated the remaining
emblems below, and in front of which stands a personification of the true
church, crowned with a church and standing on top of a devil or demon in papal
regalia A THANKFVLL REMEMBRANCE OF GODS MERCY by G.C..
Sanctvs est Dominvs In operIbvs svis

Ecclesia Vera

Malignant Church

Tui Inven: Corn. Danckertsz. sculp
Are to be sold by John Garrett at the Royal Exchang in Cornhill



depiction of two armed soldiers (Thomas Percy, earl of Northumberland, and
Charles Neville, earl of Westmorland) kneeling to receive a blessing from a
seated catholic priest; in the background another group of soldiers kneel as
Pope Pius V is carried on the shoulders of more soldiers; in the distance a
mass of soldiers The Rebellion of Northu: and Westminster:


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Thomas Percy, earl of Northumberland, kneeling blindfolded
with arms bound behind at an execution block, while the executioner stands over
him with axe raised; in the background soldiers flee in all directions Exurgit
Deus dissi pantur Inimici


Figure 1.
THe Pope aloft on Armed Shoulders Rides,
And in vain Hopes the English spoils divides;
His Leaden Bull against good Eliza. roares,
And scatters dire Rebellion round our Shoars.
The Priest Blesses the Villians, Chears them on,
And promises Heavens Crown, when her Crown's won.
But God does blast their Troops, their Counsels mock
And brings bold Traitors to'th' deserved Block.
depiction of Don John of Austria receiving a blessing from Pope Gregory XIII
The treacherous practice of Don Jo: of Aust:
Perpetual Peace



a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Don John of Austria lying in a sickbed inside a tent Mors
peccatorum pessima


Figure 2.
Don John, who under Spain did with proud Hand
The then unsever'd Neitherlands Command,
Contrives for Englands Conquest, and does Hope
To Gain it by Donation from the Pope.
Yet to Amuse our Queen does still pretend
Perpetual peace, and needs will seem a friend;
But Heaven looks through those Juggles and in's prime,
Grief Cuts off Him and's Hopes All at a time.
depiction of Thomas Stukeley or Stukley kneeling to receive a blessing from a
seated Pope Gregory XIII, while Philip II of Spain stands alongside Stucely
encouraged by P: and K: of Sp: rayseth rebel:


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Thomas Stukeley or Stukley lying dead on the battlefield; in
the background a battle Sic Magnis excidit ausis


Figure 3.
Spains King, and Romes Triple-Crown'd Pelate Join,
And with them both bold Stukely does Combine
Ireland to conquer, And the Pope has sent,
For that Blessed work, an Holy Regiment;
But in their way at Barbary they call,
Where at one Blow the Moors destroy them All.
See here, what such Ambitious Traitors Gain,
The shame of Christians is by Pagans Slain.
depiction of two men (Sir John Fitzgerald and Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald)
killing a man in bed in a tent, while a priest gives his blessing Desmonds
bloody practice approved


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Sir John Fitzgerald lying face-down on the ground, while a
soldier holds a spear to his neck; in the background a priest runs toward the
woods Sanguinary non dimidiabunt dies suos


Figure 4.
The Priests, with Crosses Ensigne-like displaid,
Prompt bloody Desmond to those spoils he made
On Irish Protestants, and from afar
Blow Triumphs to Rebellions Holy War;
But against Providence all Arts are vain,
The Crafty, in their Craft are over-tane;
Behold where killed the Stubborn Traitor lies,
Whilst to the Woods his Ghostly Father flies;
depiction of a priest handing a papal bull to another priest outside a
monastery Rebellion the effect of Monastaries


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of a priest hanging from a gallows Raro antecedentem scelestum


Figure 5.
What trusty Janissaries are Monks to Rome,
From their dark Cells the blackest Treasons come.
By the Popes License horrid Crimes they Act,
And Guild with piety each Treacherous Fact.
A seminary Priest, like Comets Blaze,
Does always Bloodshed and Rebellion Raise;
But still the fatal Gibbet's ready fixed
For such, where Treason's with Religion mixed.
depiction of Queen Elizabeth I seated on a throne while outside her window
three men have their swords drawn Someruiles have to Kill the Queen.


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of John Somerville in chains in a prison cell, strangling
himself Qualis vita finis Ita


Figure 6.
Mad Sommervil, by Cruel Priests inspired
To do whatever mischief they required,
Swears that he instantly will be the death
Of good and Gracious Queen Elizabeth.
Assaults her Guards, but Heavens protecting power
Defeats his rage makes him a Prisoner:
Where to avoid a just, though shameful Death,
Self-strangling hands do Stop his loathsome breath.
depiction of Bernardino de Mendoza standing on a beach holding sensitive
documents; in the background he is being escorted to a boat by two men, with
ships in the distance The Spa: Embas: thrust out of England
Popish noblemen

Englands havens



a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Francis Throckmorton being hung from a gallows by another man
Reginam protegit Deus


Figure 7.
Whilst Spains Ambassador here Leiger lies,
Designs are laid the English to surprise;
Two Catalogues his Secretary had Got
The better two effect the Hellish Plot.
One all our Havens Names, where Foes might Land,
To'ther what Papists were to lend an hand.
For this base Trick he is forced to pack to Spain
Whilst Tyburn greets confederates that remain.
depiction of a ship or galleon with papers being blown through the air Torn
Papers blown into the Ship


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of a priest seated at a table with torn pieces of paper Non est
consilium contra Dominuum


Figure 8.
View here a Miracle -- A Priest Conveys,
In Spanish Bottom over the path-less Seas,
Close treacherous Notes, whilst a Dutch Ship comes by
And straight Engaged her well-known Enemy:
The Conscious Priest his Guilty Papers tears,
And overboard the scattered fragments bears;
But the just winds do force them back of the Decks,
And peice-meal all the lurking plot detects.
depiction of William Parry standing behind Queen Elizabeth I holding a dagger
in one hand with a cloak hung over the other arm Parry not able to Kill the
Queen
Popes absolution



a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of William Parry hanging from a gallows Deus Vindex


Figure 9.
The Jesuits vile Doctrines do Convince
Parry, It Is Merit for to kill his Prince,
The fatal Dagger he prepares with Art,
And means to sheath it in her Royal Heart.
(...) he Attemps, and is as often put by,
By the Majestic Terrors of her Eye;
At last his Cursed Intentions he Confessed
And So his welcomed a sit Tvburn Guest;
depiction of Anthony Babington and eight other men Babington with his Accomplices
Hi mihi sunt Comites quos ipsa pericula ducunt



a flag, on which is a representation of one man being hanged from a gallows,
another on a table being quartered with an axe, while five more stand bound in
the background In qua quis peccat In eo punitur


Figure 10.
Here Babington and all his desperate Band,
Ready prepared for Royal Murder stand,
His Motto seems to glory in the Deed,
These my Companions are whom dangers lead.
Cowardly Traitors, so many Combine
To Cut off one poor Ladies vital Twine;
In vain, -- Heaven's her Guard, and as for you;
Behold, the Hangman gives you all your due.
depiction of William Stafford and eight other men including a priest gathered
around a table studying documents Stafford Clearing himself


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of the French ambassador Chateauneuf boarding a boat, with ships
in the distance Malum Consillium consultori pessimu^


Figure 11.
Nor was it with Spain alone, Great Betty's Strife;
Now France attempts upon her precious Life;
The Guises cause the Ambassador to Bribe
Moody, and others, of the Roman Tribe,
To Cut her off. To which they soon Consent,
But watchful Heaven does that Guilt prevent.
Stafford does ^^ the Council All disclose,
And Home w^^^ shame perfidious Mounsieur goes.
depiction of the Spanish Armada, or fleet of ships, in crescent formation
passing along the English Channel between Calais in France and Tilbury in
England, where ranks of armed soldiers await; an English ship, blown by a wind
from heaven, is directed into the heart of the crescent the Invincible Armado
I blow and scatter

Calis

Tilbury

88



a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Noah's Ark Dextra Dei fecit Salutem


Figure 12.
Spain's proud Armado, whom the Pope did Bless,
Attacques our Isle, Confident of success.
But Heavens just Blast does Scatter all their force,
They fly and quite round Scotland take their Course:
So many taken, burnt, and Sunk in the Main,
Scarce one in Ten did e're get home Again;
Thus England like Noah's Ark, amidst the Waves
Indulgent providence from Danger saves.
depiction of Rodrigo Lopez conversing with a priest or cardinal Quid dabitis

Lopas compounding to poison the Queen


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Rodrigo Lopez hanging from a gibbet outside a door Proditorum
finis funis


Figure 13.
But now a private horrid Treason view
Hatched by the Pope, the Devil, and a Jew;
Lopez a Doctor must by Poison do
What all their Plots have failed in hitherto:
What will you give me then, the Judas Cries;
Full fifty thousand Crowns, to other replies.
It Is done -- but hold, the wretch shall miss his hope,
The Treasons known, and his Reward's the Rope.
depiction of Hugh O'Neill kneeling in submission before Charles Blount, Baron
Mountjoy, at his tent; in the background are ranks of armed soldiers Tyrones
false Submission afterward rebelling


a flag with the cross of Saint George in one corner, on which is a
representation of Hugh O'Neill running away with a scourge whip in his hand
Conscientia mill testes


Figure 14.
The Great Tyrone that did so often embrew
Ireland with Blood, and Popish Plots Renew:
Here vanquished Swears, upon his bended Knee,
To the Queens Deputy fidelity.
Yet breaks that vow, and loaded with the Guilt
Of perjuries and Blood which he had spilt.
Being forced at last to fly his Native Land,
Carries in's Breast a sting, a Scourge in's hand
depiction of William Watson standing giving a blessing to ten kneeling men
Watson Seducing Noblemen


a flag, on which is a representation of a man kneeling at the execution block,
with the executioner poised with his axe raised, as a third man inserts a
letter of pardon between them; in the background kneel four other men Vide
Clementiam Regis
Pardon



Figure 15.
No Sooner James had blessed the English Throne,
But Traitorous Priests Conspire to pull him down.
Watson the poisonous Maxims does Instill,
And draws some Nobles to Join in the Ill:
But Princes then appear the most divine,
When they with unexpected Mercy Shine.
Just as the Fatal Ax attempts the Stroke,
Pardon steps in and does the Blow Revoke.
depiction of Guy Fawkes standing outside Parliament with a covered lantern,
but seen by the eye of heaven in a cloud The Powder Plot
I see and smile

November ye 5th



a flag, on which is a representation of a bush or tree on fire Digitus Dei hic
per ignem



Figure 16.
In this Cursed Powder Plot we plainly see
The Quintessence of Romish Cruelty.
King Lords and Commons at one Hellish Blast
Had been destroyed, and half our Land laid wast,
See Faux, with his dark Lanthorn, ready stands
To Light the fatal Train with desperate hands,
But Heavens All-seeing eye defeats their desire,
And saves us as a Brand snatched from the fire;
depiction of two hands holding up a heart to heaven over a table or altar Deo
Liberatori
QVIS SICUT TV DOMINE IN FORTIBVS

Lift up hearts and hands and praise ye. Lord



And now let us, with cheerful Hymns of praise,
And Hearts inflamed with love an Altar raise
Of Gratitude to God, who does advance
His out-streatcht Arm in our Deliverance,
It Is only He, that does protect his Sheep,
It Is he alone does this poor Island keep
From Romish Wolves, which would us soon devour,
If not Defended by his mighty power.
It Is he that does our Church with freedom Crown,
And beats the Popish Superstitions down.
Under her feet, and may they never rise,
Nor in vile Darkness Reinvolve our Eyes;
Since Heaven whose mercies ever are most tender
Has both restored our Faith, and Faiths Defender.
depiction of a ship approaching a shore with people on board and on land
celebrating Deo Reduci


Let us to both a strict Adherence pay,
And for their preservation ever pray.
Since thus Truths happy Bark has reached our shore
O may it never, never Leaves us more.
Sold by John Garret at his Shop, at the Exchange-Staires in Cornhill; where
you may have choice of all Sorts of Large and Small Maps, Drawing Books, Copy
books, and Pictures for Gentlewomens works; and also very good originals of
French and Dutch Prints.


