C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the better Regulating His Majesty's Royal Proceeding from
the Tower of London to His Palace at Whitehall, the 22th day of April next,
being the day before His Majesty's Coronation.
CHARLES R.

IN regard the Tower of London is not of capacity to receive the necessary
Attendants and Horses of all persons designed to ride in that Proceeding; His
Majesty out of His care for preventing of all Disorder, and for the better
convenience of all such of his Nobility and others who are to attend Him that
day in that Royal Proceeding from the Tower of London; Does hereby declare his
express Will and Pleasure to be, That no Person whatever but the Nobility,
Privy Counselors, the Gentlemen of their Horse and their servants in Livery,
presume to come into the Tower that day, nor to bring in any Horses but those
belonging to His Majesty, and to his Highness the Duke of York, and to the
Nobility and Counselors; but that all other persons do (with their servants
and Horses) stay upon Tower Hill, where they are to be by Eight of the clock
that morning; where they shall be placed and disposed by His Majesty's Officers
of Arms in such manner as that they may be most conveniently ranked, and
Proceed according to their Degrees: Nor that any Person of any condition
whatsoever, but such as are in the List of Proceeding, and have order for it,
presume to march or ride therein. And for prevention of disorder, That no
person whatsoever do that day ride upon any unruly or striking Horse. And
because the multitude of persons that are to ride in that Royal Proceeding may
not hinder each other, It is His Majesty's further pleasure and command, That
the Duke of York's Horse Guards, who are to have the Van in that Proceeding, be
drawn up early in the morning in the Crutchet Friars ready to march when they
shall be directed; And that His Majesty's Horse Guards be also drawn up in
Towerstreet, or the Minories; and that the Duke of Albemarles Horse Guards be
drawn up in the Street without Algate; both which are in order to bring up the
Rear. To all which Commands His Majesty expects due obedience to be given, and
that all persons (without dispute) shall ride in that Proceeding according as
they shall be called and ranked by His Majesty's Officers of Arms.

Given at the Court at White Hall the nineteenth day of April, 1661. in the
thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING's most Excellent Majesty,
1661.

At the KING's Printing House in Blackfriars.


