(...) OR THE PLAIN DOCTRINE OF THE JUSTIFICATION OF A Sinner in the sight of
God, Justified by the God of Truth in his Holy Word, and the cloud of Witnesses
in all Ages.

WHEREIN Are handled the Causes of the Sinners Justification. Explained and
Applied in six and twenty Sermons, in a plain, Doctrinal and Familiar way, for
the Capacity, and Understanding of the Weak and Ignorant.

By Charles Chauncy President of Harvard College in Cambridge in New England.

1 Cor. 3.10, 11. According to the Grace of God given unto me -- I have laid
the foundation.

Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

London, Printed by R. I. for Adoniram Byfield, at the sign of the Three Bibles
in Cornhill. 1659.

HONORATISSIMO ET NOBILISSIMO HEROI Amplissimo utique et Piissimo Domino
GVLIELMO Vicecomiti SEY and SEAL;

Nec non Illustrissimo et Dignissimo Viro, Domino NATHANIELI FIENNES, Unie
Dominis Custodibus Magni Sigilli Angliae.

Hoc grati animi et debitae observantiae (...), D. D. D. C. C.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT may perhaps seem strange, that any thing should be further adventured to
the Press about such a common Theme or Argument, as the Doctrine of
Justification is, concerning which, so many Large Volumes have been published
in this last Age of the World, for the clearing of it, with such exactness of
Scripture Truth, with such evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, that it
can hardly be conceived what can be added thereunto: Therefore to remove such
a scruple in the entrance, I shall suggest unto thee a few Considerations.

First, That although much has been published concerning this point, yet
generally, thou shall find, that either it has been, handled Polemically, or
in a Controversal way, for the Confutation of many Errors and Heresies that do
contradict it, and blaspheme it; as especially the Doctrine of the Papists and
of the Socinians does: or else, if Doctrinally, by laying down the positive
Truths concerning it, Yet very briefly and summarily, so that many weak
understandings conceive it only in a confused, but not in a distinct way: which
had need most plainly and clearly to be conceived.

This therefore I have endeavored, according to opportunity, and such help as
the Lord has given me, more distinctly and largely to hold-forth: desiring to
condescend (as God has enabled me) to the meanest capacity. It was piously
and prudently spoken by Reverend Mr. Dod, That too many Ministers deal like
unskilful Archers, that they do shoot over the heads, much more the hearts of
their hearers, and miss their mark, whilst they soar so high, either by
handling deep points, or by using of obscure and dark expressions or phrases,
in their writing or Preaching of these things.

2 Because this Doctrine is fundamental, 1 Cor. 3.11.
and that whereby we build upon the only foundation of eternal salvation, that
is, Jesus Christ. Now it is most dangerous to be mistaken here. Yea, this is
the very center of all Christian Religion, wherein all the lines do meet; all
other Doctrins do either lead to it, or flow from it, and are preserved by it:
Hence it is that Paul in all his writings, especially in the Epistles to the
Romans, and Galatians, treats so largely of this point, In Praefatione in Epis.
ad Gal.
and so Luther professes, that this Article reigned in his heart, this about
faith in the merit of Christ, from whom, and through whom, and into whom, al my
cogitations do flow, and return, Yet I do not find that I have found out or
comprehended of the wisdom of such height, and breadth, and depth, but some
weak, and poor, first fruits and fragments; and a little after, he says, That
we had great need most diligently to be acquainted with this Article, whether
we be young or old, whether we be learned or unlearned; for this rock must
needs be cried up (that is, Christ held forth in the Justification of a sinner)
which, if that men should hold their peace, the stones would speak of, and
extol: And again, This Doctrine can never be sufficiently handled, and
inculcated: for that, it being thrown-down, or sinking, the whole knowledge of
the truth together is cast-down and perished: But when as this Doctrine
flourishes, all good things flourish; as the true worship and glory of God,
the certain knowledge of all states and things. Accordingly Chemnitius says
that Justification is, as if it were the Castle and chief bulwark of the whole
Doctrine of Christian Religion, which being either darkened, or adulterated, or
over-thrown, it is impossible to continue the putiry of the doctrine in other
points: But this doctrine being kept and preserved entire, all Idolatries, and
Superstitions, and whatsoever corruptions are found in other points, do fall to
ruin.

3 Because my place and particular employment (wherein I hope that my desire is
to serve the Lord in truth, and to seek the great benefit of youth, Ephesians. 6.
and Students, who are to be trained up, (...); that is, in the doctrine of the
Lord, that may put a right understanding into them.) I say, that my particular
employment has moved me to represent this doctrine of Justification as a
Standard of truth and salvation to them; which they should hold fast, and as
the Lord shall call them thereunto, hold forth in their generations, for the
benefit of the Churches of Christ, as they shall find it consonant to the
analogy of faith in the Scripture of Truth.

4 In regard of long experience in ministerial work, I have found, not only
profane or civilized persons, but even many ancient Professors extremely
ignorant in this point, and having only some confused notions, and general
implicit understanding and faith, which is much to be lamented, especially in
these days of light and knowledge, and places of precious liberties and
opportunities: and which is worse, it is extremely dangerous to such persons in
regard of their everlasting estate, This being life eternal to know the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, Joh. 17.3. For the removing and
avoiding of which disconvenience, if my poor endeavors in these Sermons shall
be available in any measure to work in thy heart any sound and grounded
consolation, and good hope through grace; Let the grace of God in Christ Jesus
have all the glory of it. To whose instruction, and soul-saving, and
soul-satisfying, and infinite goodness, thou art commended by

Thy Friend in Christ Jesus, C. C.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed or sold by Adoniram
Byfield at the Three Bibles in Cornhill, next door to Popes-Head-Alley.
THE History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont; containing
a most exact Geographical Description of the place, and a faithful account of
the Doctrine, Life, and Persecutions of the Ancient Inhabitants, together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
Ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. By
Samuel Morland, Esquire; Fol.

Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more secret and
undiscerned differences between the Hypocrite, in his best dress of seeming
virtues, and formal duties, and the true Christian, in his real graces and
sincere obedience. By Mr. Samuel Crook. Fol.

An Exposition upon Ezekiel, by Mr. William Grenhill. Fol. 4o

The humble Sinner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation. By Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick. Fol. 4o

The riches of Grace displayed in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners. By the same Author. Fol. 12o

The Fountain opened, and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirsty sinners. By the same Author. Fol. 4o

The Gospels glory, without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in the glory of
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the salvation of sinners. By Mr.
Richard Byfield. Fol. 8o

A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches in England, agreed upon, and consented unto by their Elders and
Messengers in their meeting at the Savoy. Fol. 4o

A short Catechism. By Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick.

Hidden Manna. By Mr. Fenner. Fol. 12o

Safe Conduct, or the Saints guidance to Glory. By Mr. Ralph Robinson. Fol. 4o

The Saints longing after their heavenly Country. By the same Author. Fol. 4o

A Sermon at a Fast. By Nathaniel Ward. Fol. 4o

Moses his Death, a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Edward Bright Minister. By Mr.
Samuel Jacomb. Fol. 4o

A short and plain Catechism, instructing a learner of Christian Religion what
he is to believe, and what he is to practice. By the same Author.

The Hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed, by Mr. Samuel
Jacomb. Fol. 4o

A Sermon of the baptizing of Infants. By Mr. Stephen Marshall. Fol. 4o

The unity of the Saints with Christ the head. By the same Author. Fol. 4o

God only justifies a Sinner.
THE FIRST SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ:

Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God.


AS touching the Context, the Apostle had proved, verse. 23. That all Mankind
lies under the guilt of Sin, and therefore stand in need of Justification that
they may be saved: which Justification he also showed, could not be had
either from any Creature, or from the Law, to verse. 20. from whence he
concludes, that justification must necessarily be sought in that Gospel
Mystery, propounded in the Lord Jesus Christ. The whole dispute of the Apostle
may be reduced to this Reason;

Men are justified either by Nature, or by the Law, or by the Gospel:

But they cannot be justified either by Nature, or by the Law, therefore they
must be justified by the Gospel.

The Proposition is pre-supposed, and understood as manifest by it self. The
Assumption was demonstrated in the former part of this Epistle, to verse. 21. of
this Chapter.

The Conclusion is expounded, and illustrated to the end of this Chapter, and
so forward.

As touching the Text, the words of it contain the Epitome of Evangelical
Justification, which is described,

1 By the efficient, principal and highest cause, which is God, verse. 25.

2 By the inward impulsive cause, the grace of God; these signifying,

1 Exclusively, and that twofold.

1 Excluding Commutative justice, or rendering like for like, or so much for so
much.

2 Excluding Distributive justice, proportionately respecting the dignity of
men.

2 Inclusively, respecting the mere and pure grace of God, observable in that
Emphatical ingemination, freely, or gratis, and by his grace.

3 By the Meritorious cause, which may also in some sort be called the Formal
cause of our justification, that is, the Redemption made by Jesus Christ.

4 By the Instrumental cause apprehending the object, that is, faith in his
blood.

5 The Final cause:

1 In respect of Us [our Salvation and remission of Sins.]

2 In respect of God, the manifestation of his Justice and Mercy [that he might
be just, etc.]

Doct. God the Father is the Fountain of justification.
As God the Father is the Fountain of all Happiness, so is he of the
justification of a sinner. This is grounded upon verse. 25. [Whom God set forth]
And this is the rule of Divines generally received, That wheresoever the Name
of God is put in contra distinction to Christ Jesus, it must not be taken
essentially, but personally for God the Father: so here, God set forth Christ
to be a Propitiation, i. e. God the Father.

For the better understanding whereof, we are to know, That where we say God
the Father is the Fountain of our Justification, it may be conceived in two
respects.

1 In way of opposition to the other persons of the holy and undivided Trinity.

2 In opposition to the Creatures.

Object. 1. In opposition to the Son and Spirit, which will be cleared in
answering this objection; All the works of the Trinity that are without the
Godhead, are undivided, but Creation, Redemption, Justification, and
Sanctification, are works without the Trinity, or are acted and terminated on
the Creature as their object; and all the Persons in the blessed Trinity do
work together in the effecting of them, so that one and the same work is
sometimes attributed to the Father, sometimes to the Son, and sometimes to the
Holy Ghost; yea what things the one does, the other is said to do also, Joh.
5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work; and verse. 19. Whatsoever things
the Father does, these also does the Son likewise; how then can the Father be
the Fountain in Justification?

Answ. The Father is the Fountain of Justification, not excluding the Son, and
Holy Ghost, from being causes in it, (for it is said, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are
sanctified, ye are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God) but showing, that the Father is the original, in the action of
Justification: Or, that the Father is the first in order of working. So Joh.
5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself, etc. So Joh. 16.13, 14. The Spirit
shall not speak of himself, etc. so the Father justifies through the Son by
the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost justifies by himself, from the Father and the
Son, the Son justifies from the Father by the Holy Ghost, and that upon two
grounds,

1 Because the Father is the Fountain of the Trinity, and as the Persons are in
order of subsisting, so they are in order of working; but the Father is first
in order of subsisting, Matthew. 28.19. so also he is in working.

2 The Father was the Person, that most properly and directly, was offended by
sin; hence it is said, that Christ is an Advocate to the Father, 1 John 2.1.
the Father is in this case the Judge, the Son the Advocate.

The Creation, which is especially ascribed to the Father, is wronged by sin.

Secondly, The Father is the Fountain of Justification in opposition to the
Creature, for justification (as it is in man) is merely passive, and therefore
does pre-suppose the action of another justifying us: and of whom but of God?
as Romans 3.30. God is one who shall justify, etc. And again, Gal. 3.8. God
would justify, etc. and that of Romans 8.30. Those whom he called, he justified,
etc. He that justifies is the same with him that calls, and predestinates,
and that is God.

Quest. What are we to understand by the justification of a Sinner in the sight
of God?

Answ. The meaning of Justification.
God is said to justify a Sinner, not because he does infuse righteousness,
or makes him fit to do such things as are just, which is the error of the
Papists: placing justification first in the infusing the habits, and then in
the Acts of Grace, or good works flowing from those habits; wherewithal they
intermingle a kind of remission of sin. But God is said therefore to justify,
because by his judicial proceedings or sentence he absolves, and acquits
Sinners from the guilt of sin, with the punishment thereof; and accepts them as
just persons unto life eternal. This might be many ways proved, but for brevity
sake, rest in this. That justification in the Scripture, is wont to be opposed
to accusation, and condemnation, as Prove. 17.15. Romans 8.33.

Quest. But to what purpose serves Christ then in the Popish Justification?

Ans. He has merited that grace for sinners, that they might merit and
justify themselves; but herein they make Christ the Causa sine qua non (as
Logicians speak) that is, such as has no real influence on the effect; yea
they ascribe more to the good works of sinners, than they do to the merits of
Christ: for Christ's merits (by their Assertion) do but make us justifiable;
which is a woeful delusion, and at the best, implicit blasphemy.

Quest. But does it belong to God only to justify?

Answ. 1. How can it be otherwise, since it belongs to none to justify, but to
him to whom it belongs to judge? now the Lord is the supreme Judge, all power
of judging, in Spiritual regards being taken from the creature, Romans 14.4. Who
art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls. And verse. 10. Why do thou judge thy brother? we shall all stand before
the Judgment Seat of Christ. Mortal man must not be an everlasting Judge; yea
the Apostle goes further, 1 Cor. 4.3. and says, he passes little to be judged
of them, or by man's judgment; yea (says he) I judge not my self: i. e. no
other man had power to judge him, nor himself to judge himself, who then has
power? And verse. 4. to show who was the Judge to pardon or condemn, he says,
He that judges me is the Lord.

2 It appears from the nature of justification, in that the word justification
is taken from Courts of Justice, and juridical proceedings in Scripture use,
and signifies the sentence of absolution, and is opposed to condemnation, Prove.
17.15. To justify the wicked, etc. Psalm. 143.3. Enter not into judgment, etc.
and in the text it signifies remission of sins, and imputation of
righteousness; so that none but God can justify, because none but God can
forgive, Mark 2.7. and God takes it to himself, Isa. 43.25. I have put away thy
transgressions, etc. Romans 4.6. God imputes righteousness without works. God
must do it, or it will never be done. Besides, in justification there is the
Will of God not to punish, or not to impute, Psalm. 32.1, 2. and a discharge
from the Curse and Wrath of God, Romans 8.1, 3, 4.

3 It appears by the Concomitants and fruits of justification, which God only
can bestow; as blessedness, Psalm. 32.1. communion with God, peace of
conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.1.3. and freedom of access to the
Throne of Grace; but who keeps the key of Gods Presence Chamber but himself?
Who can admit us to communion with God but himself? Spiritual blessings and
privileges are far out of the reach of any Creature, and have no Steward but
Gods own Spirit, from whence this joy is called, 1 These. 1.6. The joy of the
Holy Ghost.

Use 1. Let this serve for confutation of such, as either divide justification
between God and man, or else utterly exclude God from being the efficient
cause: of which sort are the Papists, who fancy a double justification: First,
in infusing habits of grace, whereby they are prepared to justify themselves,
the Lord of his grace purging away their sins. Of this they grant God to be in
part the efficient cause, joining man's free will concurring with him, as a
burden too heavy for God alone to bear; which is (in truth) that which
Protestants call Regeneration. Secondly, in improving their gracious habits or
qualities infused, whereby they are every day more and more righteous: and in
this they place their merits for eternal life. And in this justification (which
is in truth that which the Protestants call Sanctification) they deny God to be
the efficient cause. But the Scripture makes but one Justification, whereof one
God is the Author, Romans 3.30. Seeing it is one God that shall justify, etc. i.
e. All the faithful are justified alike. And this admits not of diverse degrees,
but is all at once, though the manifestation, sense, and assurance of it, may
be by diverse degrees.

Use 2. This may serve for unspeakable terror, to all that have lived in enmity
and rebellion against God, and still go on in their grievous provocations.
Whom do they provoke to anger? Is it not the Lord, who alone does and can
justify a sinner in his sight, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, that has
power to save and to destroy: there is none else that has either power or
authority to save a poor Sinner from Death or Hell. God says, Exodus 23.7. I
will not justify the wicked, i. e. that still go on in their wickedness, and
none can do it besides him. Many vile wretches will either deny, or justify
themselves in their wickedness (as it is said of the Pharisees, Self
justifiers in a sad estate.
Luke 16.15. and 10.29.) and with the Harlot in the Proverbs, can carry it out,
with their lies and brazen faces, and purse, and friends, in earthly Courts,
and whatsoever their cause is, will find some like themselves to acquit them:
but these are but inferior Courts, the Cause must be tried again in an higher
Court, before the supreme Judge, from whom there can be no escape, whose
sentence no creature can avoid or abide. He knows all hearts, and men's privy
pranks, who will justly condemn what the world has unjustly commended, and
force them to say with Job 9.20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall
condemn me; yea know, thou justifiest thy self (O vile man) (as Elihu speaks,
Job 32.2.) more than God: and in justifying thy self condemnest the Lord. Yea,
nothing does more hinder thine own justification, than thy self-justification,
for what carest thou for another to justify thee, that can do it thy self?
as the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. went away unjustified, because he justified
himself; while the poor self-condemning Publican was sent away rather
justified, for that remarkable reason, because he abased himself. And thou
disanullest Gods Judgment, and condemnest him that thou may be righteous,
Job 40.8. thou bring the Lord to thy bar, to stand as guilty before thee.

Many please themselves, that they are justified by their companions and
fellows, because their iniquity is secret, and has escaped the view of man;
but alas! the Malefactor shall not speed according to the sentences of
Fellow Prisoners, but according to the sentence of the Judge. Paul cries, 1
Cor. 4.3, 4. What do you tell me of man's judgment? this is the profane man's
day, and the proud man's day, but the Lords Court-day is coming, when he shall
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and then you will be
self-damned, Tit. 3.11. thy conscience shall set thy sins in order before thee,
and thy abetters in sin shall curse thee, as the Shechemites afterward cursed
Abimelech, Judge. 9.27. The Devil shall lay the load of all thy sins upon thee,
to bring thee to despair, (and it may be) to the Halter, as he did Judas; yea,
the senseless creatures shall rise up against thee, the stone out of the wall,
the beam out of the timber shall cry out against thy sins, Hab. 2.11. every
Sermon thou have heard, yea the dust of the Ministers feet shall rise up in
judgment against thee, Luke 9.5. but (that which is worse than all) God
himself will be a swift witness against thee, Malac. 3.5. his mercy,
patience, and long suffering shall condemn thee, and his sentence of
everlasting destruction shall certainly pass against thee, and then thou will
find Jeremiahs words too true, cha. 23. ver. 20. The anger of the Lord shall
not return, until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of
his heart, and though thou will not now consider it, yet in the latter days
thou shall consider it perfectly.

Use 3. It is a ground of strong consolation to poor penitent Sinners, Comfort
to penitent sinners.
that God the Father justifies; against whatsoever the World or Devil can lay
to his charge. The Apostle challenges World and Devil to do their worst, Romans
8.33. Who dares lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? let them bring in
what Bills of Complaint, Accusation, or Indictments they can invent against the
poor soul (and they will invent enough) yet they shall not hurt; Why? because
it is God that justifies, And in 1 Cor. 4.2, 3. I pass not to be judged of
you, or of man's judgment. Men will have their Court-days, to judge the Saints;
there is many such a Court kept in the Chimney corner, over the Pot, thither
they summon and cite Gods servants to be tried; they sit on their persons, or
names, or estates, and give them their doom; but let not the Christian pass
for man's day which way the cause goes; there is another day behind, which is
the Lords Day of Judgment, Acts 17.31. and then he that is holy shall be
happy, and he that makes conscience of his ways shall be acquitted for ever.
This makes Isaiah exceeding confident, chap. 50.8, 9. because he is near that
justifies me, who shall contend with me? Let us stand together, who is mine
adversary? let him come forth, behold the Lord will help me; Who shall condemn
me? Lo they all wax old as does a garment, the moath shall eat them up. It is
a pithy comparison. Many will profess, they will stick as close to such and
such professors as the garments to their backs; many spick and span new
accusations laid to the charge of Gods people, ever and anon: Well (says the
Prophet) all such Accusations will be soon worn out, soon moath-eaten, they
have a worm in them, that will soon consume them, and then God will bring forth
their righteousness, etc. Psalm. 37.6.

This ground of comfort is threefold. Threefold ground of comfort that God
justifies.


1 Because no body has any thing to do with a believers soul but God, and he
will Nonsuit all the Pleas made against him; and if the Lord say, He is
satisfied, and paid, who can take any advantage against him? All the sin is
committed against the Lord only, Psalm. 51.3. and if he say, i will remember thy
sins no more, as he does, Isa. 43.25. Who dares commence a Suit against him?
He is the Creditor, all the Debts we owe are due to him: if he cross the
Book, and cancel the Handwriting, who shall challenge the debt?

2 God does justify Us, therefore we may be sure it shall go well with us,
because his sentence is unchangeable: once justified by God and never
condemned, for whom he justifies he glorifies, Romans 8.30. Isa. 54.10.
Mountains shall depart, and Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart, etc. Jews cried sometimes Hosannah, sometimes Crucify; if the Lord
should deal so by us, woe be to Us. Yet Papists and Arminians hold, a man may
be justified to day and damned to morrow: but the Lord says, My Caunsel shall
stand; Psalm. 33.11.

3 As there is no change on Gods part, so there is no appeal to be made, Gods
Court is the highest Court: no appeal from the Court of Heaven: if the world,
Devil, or our own Consciences be cast here, they can never remove the Suit to
another Court, Eccl. 5.8.

Use 4. Let it serve for Direction, Direction to troubled Consciences.
in case of distress of Conscience: Since it is God the Father that justifies,
Let your afflicted souls take heed of admitting any other Judge to sit upon
your Hearts and Consciences, but be sure to repair to God for sentence, and
whatsoever he speaks, that attend and submit to. Poor souls too often give
way, to many unrighteous Judges, to sit upon their everlasting estate.
Sometimes they admit Satan, and he eclipseth all their comfort, 2 Cor. 2.11.
if Satan get advantage, the Soul will be swallowed up of grief, ver. 7.
Sometimes they set up their Carnal Reason, that is unacquainted with the things
of God: sometimes their Care and Suspicion shall try their Case; which have
infinite cavils to suggest to the heart, to vex and trouble All, and then they
presently conclude they have lost the day. It Is madness to make our Adversary
Judge (as Satan is) in a Cause depending about our whole estate. And folly to
put over thy cause to some ignorant Person (as carnal Reason is.) Look only to
stand or fall by Gods judgment. Mind not what wrangling Proctors or Lawyers
say, who can pick a hole in the best estate, and surest conveyance, but listen
after the Judge of the Court, because his sentence must stand. Thus would David
do, Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, etc. Care not what
Sense and Feeling say, but attend diligently what God shall say, for if he
speak peace; He will certainly make it good. Appeal from any other that
intrudes, as Paul did to Caesar; and as David does, Psalm. 43.1. Judge me O
Lord, and plead my cause etc. so Psalm. 35.23, 24. Stir up thy self, and awake
to my judgment, even to my cause, my God, and my Lord; and listen to his
sentence.

Quest. How shall I know whether God does justify me or not?

Answ. 1 Consider what the Word says, if that acquit thee thou art sure: How
we may know whether God justifies us.
but if that condemn thee, thine estate is dreadful; for Romans 1.17. therein is
Gods righteousness revealed. Joh. 12.48. The Word that I have spoken to you,
that shall judge you. There may thou read the last doom. That Is one of the
books, Rev. 20.12. shall be opened.

2 See whether thou do condemn thy self, and judge thy self unfeignedly, 1
Cor. 11.31. If we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord.

Quest. How should I make my appeal to the Lord?

Ans. In secret and humble Prayer, as Job said chapter 9.15. I will make my
Supplication to my Judge; yea, though the word should cast thee, lying in
impenitency, yet it shall acquit and absolve thee, if thou meet the Lord in a
treaty of peace, with suitable importunity and constancy, as the poor widow
did, Luke 18.7. shall not God avenge his own Elect, that cry day and night
before him? etc. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.

Justification is of free Grace.
THE SECOND SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace. --


HAving spoken of the efficient cause of a sinners Justification, come we now
to the inward impulsive Cause (which Logicians call the Proegumenical Cause)
which is the grace of God, and for the form or manner [freely.] Let us open
the words.

Quest. 1 What is it to be justified freely?

Answ. 1 The Word translated freely; in Scripture signification, is opposed to
the hoped for, and intended end, and signifies in vain, or to no purpose. Gal.
2. ult. If righteousness is by the law then Christ is dead in vain; there the
same word is used.

2 It is opposed to an unjust cause, and so it signifies without a cause, Joh.
15.25. they hated me without a Cause.

3 It is opposed to the payment of a Sum of money, or a full price, as Laban
said unto Jacob, Genesis 29.15. Because thou art my brother, should thou
therefore serve me for naught? tell me what thy wages shall be.

4 It is opposed to desert either good or evil: So 1 Samuel 19.5. Jonathan said
to Saul, wherefore will thou sin against innocent blood? to slay David without
a Cause, or without desert. The word is here taken in the last acceptance: for
the meaning is; That we are justified without any merit on our part; So that
the word [freely] is added, by way of explication of grace, and justification
by it. When therefore it is said we are justified freely understand,

1 That there was no desert of justification in us, Psalm. 49.8. Isai. 43.25.

2 That we deserved the contrary; as being enemies, Romans 6.23.

3 That we could not desire it, Isa. 65.1.

4 That we could do nothing to procure it, Job. 25.4.

5 That we resist it, as the Jews did the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3, 4.
Thus to the first Question: the second follows.

Quest. 2. What is meant by Gods grace, by which we are justified?

Answ. Gods Grace is taken two ways in Scripture, 1 actively for the favor
and mercy of God, Or (...) from (...) grati- (...) osum esse, misereri.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved, not of your selves: and indeed the Hebrew
word for Grace, comes of a Root that signifies to show mercy, or be merciful;
And 2 Passively, so it signifies the gift by grace, as Romans 5.15. where is
mention of the grace of God, and the gift by Grace, that is, inherent gifts and
graces that the Lord bestows upon us; as Ephesians. 4.7. To every one is given
grace, etc. 1 Pet. 4.10. as every one has received the gift. Now that grace is
here meant in the former sense, and not in the latter (as the Papists would
have it) for the habits of grace infused into Us: It may appear,

1 Because otherwise there should be some contradiction in the Text, to say
that we are justified freely, and yet to be justified by inherent grace.

2 In the next foregoing verse, it is said, that all have sinned: how then is
justification possible by inherent grace, where there is none; so that by grace
here is meant the favor of God.

Quest. 3. How can we be said to be freely justified, when the precious blood
of Christ is paid to redeem us?

Answ. 1 It is altogether free on man's behalf, because no price, for our
justification, is exacted at our hands: but on Christ's part it was not free,
because he paid a full price, 1 Pet. 1.18.

2 It was free on Gods part, 1 Because nothing but his free grace, could move
him to ordain such a propitiation for sinners, ver. 25. 2 Nor to make
revelation of it to sinners, for there are multitudes in the world, to whom
this Redemption never was revealed; but are suffered of God to dye in their
sins, and to walk in their own ways. 3 Nor to impute it to particular persons,
and infuse Faith: for though Christ paid the ransom, yet it is free grace that
it is imputed to Us: And that without our help he works faith in Us, to
apprehend the merits of Christ.

Thus it appears by the Explication, That all the world being guilty before
God; though Christ paid a great price to the Father, by way of satisfaction to
his Justice, in redeeming the Elect: Yet in respect of Us, it is altogether
free and undeserved, and that his mere free grace moved him to send his Son, to
take our nature upon him, and to lay down his life to redeem Us. From which
Explication we gather this Doctrine.

Doct. 2 That the Justification of a sinner before God, Justification is of
free grace.
is to be ascribed merely to the free grace of God. Which the Apostle hints
twice in the Text, telling us we are justified freely without deserts; and by
Gods grace, and favor to us likewise; which truth we shall further see, in
the several Acts of God about it, revealed in the Scripture, as

1 In the Decree of it, in the Council of Gods election, which (I conceive) is
meant in ver. 25. whom God fore-appointed; There is the (...), or eternal
purpose of God, which was of his mere grace, Gal. 3.8. Justification of the
heathen through faith, is attributed to the love of God.

2 In the determination of the work to Christ our head, to dye and rise again
from the dead, Romans 4. ult. So it was free grace.

3 In the effectual application of Christ's merits, and in our actual vocation,
when true faith is wrought in the heart, Ephesians. 2.7, 8. so free grace is apparent.

4 In the sealing of it up to the heart, when as the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. all which are employed, or expressed
in the Text.

Proofs for the Confirmation of this point abound; as Tit. 3.4, 5. After that
the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared, etc. kindness and love of
God are asserted, as the moving or impulsive Cause, of our Salvation; but not a
tittle of the works of righteousness in our selves taken notice of: and verse.
7. Justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. To the
praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted, in his
Beloved, in whom we have Redemption, etc. Which grace farther appears,

1 That God prosecutes not his Cause against us, according to the rigor of the
Law, and his vindictive justice: but leaves any place, space, and probability
for Reconciliation.

2 That being the Party offended; he should yet appoint the manner, and means
of our Reconciliation.

3 That he spared not his beloved Son, nor any care to effect this
Reconciliation.

4 That he (without any dignity of ours) ingrafts us into his Son, and makes
us partakers of his righteousness.

Quest: Why is a sinner so freely justified?

Reas. 1 Because it was impossible for the Law, or any legal Righteousness to
justify sinners, Romans 8.3. That which was impossible for the Law, in that it
was weak, through the flesh, the Lord sending his Son, etc. Exact righteousness
free from Spot, the Law required, or it could not justify; But sinful man,
through the flesh, that is, corruption of his heart, and inclination to evil,
could not so observe the Law, as to attain to such perfect righteousness:
because Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon Earth, that does good, and
sins not, much less can any natural man do it.

Reas. 2 To remove two inconveniences, 1 To exclude boasting, 2 Those terrors
of Conscience, which otherwise sinners must needs be subject to, whilst they
live in the world.

1 Boasting is excluded, Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By
what Law? by the Law of Works? No, but by the Law of Faith. Justification by
works, puffs up the proud heart of man, with a Conceit of ability to justify
himself; as the Doctrine of the Pelagians, Papists, Arminians does: They can
answer that question, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who has made thee to differ? I have made my
self to differ; this breeds pride; but justification through free grace, lays
low, having nothing of our own, but all of free gift.

2 Terrors of Conscience are excluded, which Legal righteousness exposes to,
2 Thessalonians. 2.16. God has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation through
Grace: but without grace our Case is desperate, Romans 4.15. The Law works
wrath. Hence intelligent Papists are driven to horrid extremities, even to
desperation it self oftentimes: Hence those large allowances which in their
Cases of Conscience, their Casuists use to give men, about the breach of the
Law. Hence their Doctrine of venial sin. And they use to renounce their
Principles at their death, and fly to free Grace, living in one Religion, dying
in another.

Reas. 3 Because those things that are conferred in justification, cannot be
deserved, but must be granted by free favor; as Remissions of sins, and
imputation of divine righteousness; for so it is called, Romans 3.22. The
Righteousness of GOD without the Law. Now nothing in a finite Creature, can
deserve or procure, that which is of infinite worth, and eternal duration.

Use 1. Of refutation of that Popish Doctrine of Merit, Popish merit of
Congruity and condignity refuted.
and first of their merit of Congruity, as a necessary and acceptable
Preparative to justification, which is a mere Dream.

1 Because without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. but this
merit is before faith is infused.

2 The tree must needs be good before the fruit can be good, Matthew. 7.18. but
yet the man is not sanctified.

3 God accepts not the offerer for the gift, but the gift for the offerer. Genesis
4.4.

4 When the Conscience is defiled, all things are defiled, Tit. 4.15.

Now for their merit of Condignity, wherein their righteous works, done by a
righteous man, make God a Debtor to them, and he in Justice, is bound to
justify them; consider only, Romans 11.6. If by grace, it is no more of works,
otherwise grace is no grace: but if it be of works, it is no more of grace,
otherwise work is no more work, Papists are Martyrs Diaboli.
i. e. grace and works are flatly opposite to each other, Gal. 5.4. Ye are
fallen from grace; that is (says Luther) as he that falls out of a ship is
drowned, etc. and he calls such Martyrs Diaboli that undergo much, and perish
at last, as your Popish Justiciaries.

Use 2. To show the inexcusable condition of all the World before God, that
slight this admirable free grace of God. If Christ holds forth this free grace
daily, to profane wretches, what will become of them? what will they say for
themselves, at the day of judgment? that despise it, or turn it into
wantonness? what Paul pressed upon the Jews at Antioch, Act. 13.38. is at this
day commended to unbeleevers and profane ones of this age. The Ambassadors
cry, Be it known unto you, Men and Brethren, that through this man is preached
unto you, forgiveness of sins. And by him all that believe are justified, from
all things; from which you could not be justified, by the Law of Moses.
Hearken unto this all you that remain unjustified, you that have followed lewd
courses, uncleanness, pride, wantonness, company keeping, despising of the
word; be it known unto you, that through Christ is preached unto you, the free
remission of your sins. If any that lived civilly, could be justified by the
works of the Law, yet your hearts can tell you, you cannot: but behold, here is
free Justification tendered you by Gods rich Grace. How long will you stand out
and despise this Grace? As you love your own souls, accept of the mercy
offered. Say ye, we like our sins and our profits better? then hear what
follows, verse. 40. Beware least that come upon you, which was spoken of, by the
Prophets: Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, etc. that is, as your
rebellion, and contempt is intolerable; so the Lord shall bring his dreadful
and unsupportable destruction upon you; and this shall be your misery, that
you shall not believe it, until it seizes upon you: more than ordinary
judgments, both here and hereafter, follow the neglect of such great
salvation. Beware then, in the fear of God, least this woeful condition come
upon you. Take heed (as it follows there, verse. 46. Seeing that you put away
the Word from you, and Judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life) you that
have a pardon offered to you, being condemned male-factors, and yet will be
profane, unclean, and proud still: you do as good as say, we care not for the
pardon, we scorn the offer of remission of sins, though we be damned for
them: Let such desperate souls know, they judge themselves unworthy, etc.

Object. You will say, why? whatsoever my sins are, though I go on, yet grace
is sufficient to save me at last.

Answ. But does not the Apostle say? shall we continue in sin? etc. far be it
that ever such a thought should enter into any heart, Romans 6.1, 2. Sodomites
themselves, had they had this grace preached, by any Messenger from God, they
would in all likelihood, have believed and repented. What is this but turning
the Grace of God into wantonness? that branded sin of Jud. 4. Ordained of old
to Condemnation; and the very characteristical Note of Reprobation, to turn
Gods grace into Lasciviousness. It Is true, God does not presently reject, where
grace proffered is neglected, Romans 10: ult. All the day long, etc. yet it is
often a sad presage, that grace will depart, from those for ever; that profanely
set it at naught. The day of Grace is short, Luke 19.41. 2 Cor. 6.2. Col. 1.6.
the Gospel brought forth fruit in the Colossians, The first day they heard of
it, and knew the grace of God in truth.

Use 3. Comfort to believers that this grace is free.
It is an unspeakable ground of comfort to poor believers. What better Cordial
can you take than this? what Doctrine should you rather learn? you complain of
sins before Calling, of corruptions yet remaining, of coldness in duty, and you
say, how can such a wretch as I be accepted, or justified? The Doctrine takes
away the ground of your Lamentation, in saying, you are justified and pardoned
freely, not only by Gods Grace, and Mercy, but altogether freely, Romans 5.16.
the free gift is of many offenses to justification. So verse. 18. the free gift
came to justification. Luth. in Epist. ad Gala.
Let Moses (says Luther) be dead, and buried; and his Sepulcher never be
found in point of justification.

This is your security, and makes your justification such as a man may have
peace in, and boldness, and confidence, in the inward Combats of Conscience,
and in the panges of death, for it makes the promises sure, Romans 4.16.
unmortified corruption, would make justification, upon any other terms
uncertain: but Gods free grace is a sure Rock to build on, a foundation that
cannot be undermined. It puts you under the Kingdom of grace, where grace
must as surely reign unto life, as sin did unto death, Romans 5.21.

Further, this Justification gives safety, and perpetuity of happiness; because
this feee grace is unchangeable, Romans 5.2. Being justified by Faith we stand
in Grace, we never fall from it, and verse. 17. They which receive abundance of
Grace and of the gift of Righteousness shall reign in Life, by one Jesus
Christ. Consider seriously, that this grace is given, when we are enemies to
God, lying in our blood, besmeared in our filthiness: Now it is not likely a
poor believer shall ever fall, into a worse estate than this was; So that the
same grace must needs be still continued to him.

Use 4. Exhortation to all sorts, 1 to unjust.
1 Exhortation first to unjustified persons. If justification be of free
grace, then let carnal and profane men see a little chink of light, beaming
into their dungeon of darkness. Here is some possibility of obtaining mercy,
and pardon at the Lords hands. Free Grace is the main motive to the Lord, for
to give Remission of sin. Let it also be a strong Motive to you, to seek out
after it. If free, why may not you have a share in it as well as others? If the
fault be not in your selves, it may be yours as well as others. It Is not sins
hainousness, nor multitude can keep you out; God keeps open house for Grace and
Mercy, and every poor beggar, that will, may come. The Dole is not given
because a man has better Clothes, better Parts or abilities, but to poor souls
that come to fetch it. Avoid discouragement and profaneness, when God is
dispensing his grace to others, as bad as thee. Go then among the crowd of
Prodigals, thrust in among them. Romans 4.5. To him that works not, that never
did a good work, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, i. e. There
are none justified but ungodly, for all are ungodly before justification,
though afterward they are not ungodly, in that they fall to working the work of
God, though not to trust in any work: set their hearts on all the works of the
Covenant, though not on the Covenant of works. Hear what the Spirit says to
thee, Rev. 22.17. Whoever will, let them take of the water of Life freely. Here
is a dram of Aqua vitae for a dead soul, freely offered, if thou will accept of
it, and will thou not accept of it? say not, I have no good work to commend
me, for they that work not, are not shut out, Isa. 55.2. but without money,
though not a penny in thy pocket, not one good work at all. To direct you in it,

1 Know that Justification presupposes Damnation in a way of justice.
Directions to attain justification.
Thou therefore that desire justification must be convinced, and certainly
conclude, thou art a condemned person, in the rigor of Gods Justice; according
to that, Ezekiel. 36.31. You shall remember your own evil ways, and doings, were
not good, and shall loathe your selves (or judge your selves worthy to be
destroyed) so Romans 3.19. that all the World may become guilty. Your souls must
come to the bar of Gods justice, and hold up your hands, and cry, guilty,
guilty, yea, and pass the sentence of condemnation on your own souls.

2 Be zealously diligent, Direct. 2
that you receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Paul in 2 Cor.
5.21. having spoken of free justification before, he adds, we then as
workers together with him, beseech you, that you receive not the grace of God
in vain. You have heard of Gods grace, now we Apostles and Ministers of
Christ, beseech you, that this grace be not lost, or in vain. If our
entreaties may prevail with you, Oh! suffer not this water of life to be spilt
in vain.

3 You must for ever resolve to live in the Kingdom of grace: Romans 5. ult.
Grace ought to reign, Direct. 3
you must not think to subject it to your lusts, for grace must have the
command of all, Tit. 2.12. it denies ungodliness the throne.

2 To justified Persons. Are you justified freely by his grace? To such as are
justified.
first learn to adore free grace; lie low in the dust with Paul, and say with
him, 1 Timothy 1.13. I have been thus and thus vile, but I obtained mercy, and the
grace of God was exceeding abundant, etc. Now to the King immortal, etc. v. 17.
Secondly, remember that, Luke 7.41, 42. there was a certain Creditor, that had
two Debtors, the one ought him five hundred pence, the other fifty; and when
they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them all, tell me which of them
will love him most? So has the Lord truly, freely and frankly forgiven thee,
and that much more than many others? Oh love the Lord, so much the more, count
it a shame to be sparing, or nigardly, in thy love, or the expressions of it,
in thy duty and obedience toward him, as verse. 47. Her sins which are many are
forgiven her, for she loved much. Where [for] is taken not for a Cause of
forgiveness, but for a sign; as thus, surely such a Bankrupt has a great debt
forgiven him, for see how loving and serviceable he is to his Creditor.

3 Freely you have received, freely give, Matthew. 10.8. and freely forgive.

Redemption by Christ, sufficient.
THE THIRD SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Justified through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.


HAving spoken before of the Efficient Cause of the justification of a Sinner,
as also of the inward impulsive Cause, that is the free grace of God; Come we
now to the meritorious cause of Justification (through the redemption that is
in Jesus Christ) which redemption, has the nature of the Meritorious or
impetrating cause or Procatarctical Cause of a sinners justification: 1 Because
it was the means which Gods justice did require, before grace could actually
justify. 2 It has the nature of the formal cause, so far forth as it is
accepted for us, that it being imputed and applied to us, God pronounces the
sentence of our absolution, Now to open the words: first inquire,

Quest. 1 What is meant by Redemption here?

Answ. 1 Redemption is taken in Scripture two ways; first improperly and
generally, and so it signifies any deliverance from evil, or danger, or
enemies, as it is used, Exodus 15.13. Thou in thy mercy have lead forth thy
people, whom thou have redeemed; The deliverance out of Egypt is called a
Redemption. There were of old three ways of redemption: first by Manumission,
when a King does let his vassal voluntarily go out free; thus we could not be
redeemed, for the devil never meant to let us go free; and especially it could
not stand with Gods blessed nature; Holiness, Justice, Truth, Hatred of sin,
thus to set us at liberty. Secondly, by Permutation: thus we could not be
redeemed for recompense could not be made to God, by exchange of any creature,
for that infinite wrong done to him by man's sin, Matthew. 16.26. Thirdly, By
violent oblation or conquest, as Abraham redeemed Lot by rescuing him: but
mankind might not be redeemed by this alone, for though Christ might justly
spoil Satan of his prey, which he by subtle wiles, methods, and falsehoods,
had gotten; yet mankind being guilty of high treason against God, and therefore
locked up under his wrath and curse, no power was strong enough, to redeem us
out of his hands; but these are all improper ways of redemption; and too low,
to reach the thraldom, mankind was fallen into.

2 Properly, in a more special way of Redemption; by giving a price or
ransom, for a poor Captive or Slave; this is plainly signified by the word
used in the Text, which hints redemption by way of Ransom; there is (...) in
it, 1 Timothy (...)
2.6. Christ gave his life a Ransom for all. The ordinary word used for
redemption, is the buying of any thing again, by paying a Price.

Object. Some Heretics object: Sin and Satan to whom sinners are Captive,
receive no price for Ransom.

Sol. We are primarily Gods Captives, who is the Judge, against whom we have
sinned, to whose Wrath, Curse, judgment, and vengeance, we are in bondage;
the ransom therefore, is paid to God as the Judge: Satan is but the Jailer,
sin the bonds and chains, the World and Death, as the Prison, and Torments. We
are indeed (when the ransom is paid to the justice of God) set at liberty,
from those other, in a way of power and lawful conquest: So Christ is said to
lead Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4.8. that is, all those enemies that had lead us
Captive, but the price is paid to God himself; to whom we do therefore pray,
for the forgiveness of our sins: and that in regard of the ransom paid by
Jesus Christ, Heb. 2.14. Luke 11.21. Christ may be (in some sort) called, the
strong man armed; that is stronger than Satan, and spoils him of his goods, etc.

Quest. 2 What is meant by the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus?

Answ. Christ is prefixed with three several Prepositions in the Scripture
phrase. 1 For Christ, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given, for Christ; not only to
believe, but also to suffer. 2 In Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings, in Christ. 3 Through Christ, Romans 7.24. Blessed be
God who has given us victory through Christ; The reason of them is,

1 We have redemption in Christ, because in Christ as a common storehouse,
every blessing is first laid up, and then imparted to his members. As our death
and condemnation was in the first Adam, before it was applied, or actually
received by us.

2 We have redemption through Christ, because Christ does by his obedience
purchase it, which in due time is communited to us; as from the first Adams
desert came condemnation.

3 For Christ; seems to be used, in regard Christ is as well the Mediator of
application as impetration, obtaining grace for us, and working grace in us;
Hence Faith and Patience are said to be wrought in the Elect. The words thus
opened afford two points.

1 That the justification of every sinner, is through the redemption, and
satisfaction wrought by Christ.

2 That there is a singular and plentiful redemption wrought by Christ,
sufficient to make satisfaction to God for the vilest sinners. Of which in the
first place.

Doct. 1 That there is a singular and plentiful redemption, Redemption by
Christ sufficient for the vilest sinners.
wrought by Christ, sufficient to make satisfaction to God, for the vilest
Sinners. The Text is emphatical, it is That redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
such as was never heard of before, nor matched in the worlds voluminous
Histories or Records. It Is described, Matthew. 20.28. Christ came to give his life
a Ransom for many, that must needs be a plentiful redemption, that was
wrought by the death of the Son of God. So 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave his life a
ransom for all. (...), signifies a ransom paid for Captives; and Christ
himself must needs be a great Price: and for the sufficiency of it,

1 It is spiritual, of the soul as well as body, Psalm. 49.15. God will redeem
my soul from the hand, etc.

2 It is an irresistible and mighty redemption, Luke 1.67. He has raised up a
Horn of salvation, that is, a Kingdom, power, Dignity, and strength of
salvation, every way sufficient to succor.

3 Perfect: not only in impretation of a possibility of deliverance, but also
in actual application to call the Elect, to bring their souls to glory, Rev.
5*9. Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood: so also from all our enemies,
Luke 1.71. That we should be saved from our Enemies: from all our iniquities,
Tit. 2.14. from death, Hos. 13.14. I will ransom thee from the power of the
grave: from the power of Satan, Heb. 2.14. By death he destroyed him that had
the power of Death, that is the Devil: from the World, Gal. 1.4. from the wrath
of God, Romans 5.9. not only present but to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. from the whole
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.15. from all that which the
justice of God has pronounced, against transgressors: yea, both of soul and
body to eternity, Ephesians. 4.30. Heb. 9.12.

Reas. 1 Taken from the fitness of Christ's Person (being the word Incarnate) to
accomplish the work of our redemption; for three things are required.

1 Power to redeem us, and to vanquish our Enemies, Hell, Death, World, Devil.
Christ is God over all, Romans 9.5.

2 Right to redeem, not only of propriety, but of propinquity; the next kinsman
only can redeem, Deuteronomy. 25.5. the second Person in the Trinity that took man's
nature, was (...) next of kin, Ephesians. 5.30. flesh and blood.

3 Dignity must be given to the price paid, Act. 20.28. these things suited
none but Christ.

Reas. 2 From things requisite to a sufficient redemption and satisfaction, as

1 Price must be such as will content the person to whom it is due, but the
ransom paid by Christ, was according to the Fathers will, Heb. 10.9. and a
sweet smelling savor to God. Ephesians. 5.2.

2 There must be an equality too; of the debt or wrong in the Price paid; for
therefore satisfaction is required; the sin of man made all things unequal,
between God and man; now Justice requires equality, (...), Arist. Eth. Ezekiel.
18.29. Oh ye house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways
unequal? such is the satisfaction of Christ to all the sins and punishments,
temporal and eternal, of all the Elect: and is a just recompense, for all the
dishonor and wrong, done to God by them, which the glory of the World could
not have reached to, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. you were not redeemed with corruptible
things as silver and gold, etc. It was such a Price, as by one offering
perfected for ever (Heb. 10.14.) those that are sanctified, and what would we
have more than perfection? was the Law broken? Christ is better than the Law,
he is the essential word of God; does sin rob God of his Glory? Christ is the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.3.

3 The Price paid must be voluntary, not forced, for otherwise it would rather
be satispassion than satisfaction. The damned in Hell do not satisfy for sin.
Christ's payment was voluntary, Joh: 10.15. I lay down my Life, and verse. 18. I
have power to lay it down. He gave himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.

4 Satisfaction must be of that which is otherwise undue: such was Christ's,
the Father could in Justice exact no such matter at his hands, being innocent.
He made him to be sin who knew none, 2 Cor. 5.21.

5 It must be clear and evident, to secure Captives or Debtors, and to give
their Souls and Consciences satisfaction: but such was Christ's redemption, Heb.
9.9, 14. The gifts and Sacrifices of the Law, could not make him, that did the
services, perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, etc. but Christ, offered
through the eternal Spirit (that is the Godhead of Christ) purged the
conscience from dead works. Witness also the Resurrection; the full price is
paid, seeing our surety is set at liberty from the grave. Romans 4.25. the Prison
into which he was cast for our sins.

Use 1. To confute sundry errors and Heresies, Confutation of Popish partial
redemption and Socinian blasphemies that deny it.
as of Papists that make Christ a partial Redeemer, and his satisfaction
imperfect, that be satisfyes only for the fault, and leaves us to satisfy for
the punishment, or that he redeemed us from the eternal, but would leave us to
satisfy for the temporal punishment. If Christ's redemption be perfect, there
is nothing left to be done by us, nor suffered, in way of satisfaction, Heb.
7.25. Christ saves to the utmost, and needs not our botching.

For the Socinians, they ascribe no more than Turks to Christ's redemption; Let
us cease to rake in those Dung-hills, their Nomination is a sufficient
confutation.

Use 2. This singular redemption by Christ, Bondage of unregenerate.
necessarily infers a singular bondage and slavery, in which all unregenerate
sinners lie, Jer. 10.14. Egypt was never such an iron Furnace as the sinner is
in. Were we not enthralled, what need a ransom? what need of redemption?
bodily bondage (as in the Turkish slavery) money might redeem; but nothing less
than the blood of God could redeem us. See the estate of the ungenerate.

1 They are in hands of such Lords, as do rule with rigor and severity over
them.

2 They have not freedom of will to do any thing they could do, in their state
of innocence, for God.

3 They are forced to endure most intolerable things, to be born.

1 The Lords over natural men are of two sorts, 1 Principal, 2 Ministerial. The
Principal is the most just and terrible God, whose Justice they have wronged by
sin; therefore we are said to be redeemed from under the curse of the Law,
Gal. 4.4, 7. that is from under the revenging Justice of the Law; As
Malefactors are called the Kings Prisoners properly, not the Goalers that keep
them, So Sinners are Gods Prisoners, and who can deliver them out of his hand?
but Christ, Ministerial Lords are the Devil and his Angels, and the
Conscience, accusing, condemning, and tormenting, for sin. Hence Sinners are
said, before Conversion, to be under the Devils power, Act. 26.18. under the
power of darkness, Col. 1.13. and taken as beasts alive of the Devil at his
will, 2 Timothy 2. ult. Yea, God makes a man's Conscience his keeper, going up and
down constantly with him, haling him to condemnation; Thus the Spirit often
works, through the Law, in the affrighted Conscience; and though some make this
their Keeper Drunk, that they may escape, yet God awakens him, to his former
terror.

2 A natural man has no spiritual liberty to do nor enjoy good, by any
Promise, Ordinance, or Privilege: his heart is weary and burdened by all,
Mal. 1.13. he is led by the nose as a slave, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, Tit. 3.3, led along like brute beasts, with sensuality, and hurried
on by a violent appetite, as 2 Pet. 2.12. and chained fast to his lust, by the
bonds of iniquity, Act. 8.23. his own iniquity shall take the wicked, Prove.
5.22.

3 He suffers innumerable miseries and intolerable. Heb. 2.15. through fear
of death, etc. When a man has spent his wit, youth, strength, state, and worn
out himself in the Devils drudgery, when his body, soul and Credit are all
lost, by the Devils service; what reward for his true and trusty obedience?
Romans 6. ult. The wages of sin is death; and Psalm. 11.6, 7. Fire snares,
brimstone, stormy tempests, of Gods furious indignation, this is the portion of
his Cup.

1 Aggravation of this bondage of sinners.
O the misery of natural man! far surpassing that of a Beast; if a Dog be
chained he howls, if the Swine be bound he cries, but sinful man laughs in
the midst of his bondage; he counts it his liberty to live a slave to the
Devil, and thinks to gratify his fleshly lusts is liberty: yea, and promise
others liberty in this course too, whilst themselves are servants of
corruption. 2 Pet. 2.19. though they have no more liberty, than the Ox that is
lead to the slaughter.

2 They will not believe nor understand their bondage; as when Christ offered
liberty to the Jews, Joh. 8.32. they said, they were never in bondage to any*
Their thraldom entered not into their thoughts, and they disliked that our
Savior should mind them of it. As it fared with those men, that Elisha lead to
Samaria, they were bands of the Syrians, yet followed the Prophet (being blind)
into the City of their enemies, thinking they had gone to Damascus: So it is
with these, while the Devil lead them to Hell, where they must perish, beyond
all hope, and take up a room amongst murdering Spirits, they yet conceive they
are walking toward Heaven, and defy the Devil, as having nothing to do with
him, who are at the very Pits mouth, the very brink of Hell, and by no means
will be stopped. O beloved, Let no man deceive himself, imagining that if the
Laws of men take not hold of him, but he goes where he lists, and does what
he will, then he is the only man that leads a free Life, but rather know,
that every States Freeman, is not Christ's Freeman, or redeemed one: No, no;
there be many that fare daintily, live in all Lieentiousness, have their fill
of Worldly Pleasures, and run at random like the Beasts in the Wilderness;
that are more arrant Slaves, than those that row in the Galleys of Turkey. Let
them turn the inside outward, and they will find Legions of domineering Devils
commanding over them. If thou did never feel this spiritual bondage, it is a
certain sign thou art under it still, Colos. 1.13. Who has delivered us, etc.
See Luke 11.21. its aggravation.

1 In that it is of the Soul. Peter Epist. 1. Chapter. 3. speaks of Spirits in
Prison; a natural man's spirit is one of them, and shuts up in Sin too, which is
the worst Prison.

2 Here the means of escape are far more difficult; another Slave may run away,
or his bolts be removed, or he may buy his liberty; but here is no
possibility of it, Romans 7.24.

3 Here be more bad Masters; they serve diverse Lusts, Tit. 3.3. So many Lusts,
so many Masters. Jacob found it hard to please Laban, one bad Master.

4 Here men love their bondage; so that if liberty be offered they refuse it.
Joh. 8.36. Christ proclaimed liberty to the Jews but they refused it,

Yea, Caution to children of godly Parents not to think they are born free,
by way of Caution, know, That the Children of godly Parents (though they use
to think themselves born free, through their Parents Covenant) are not free
from this bondage. It was the Jews great delusion, Joh. 8.33, 39. that they
stood so much upon their parentage, that they were Abraham's seed. Christ tells
them another story, you are of your Father the Devil: and so said the Baptist,
Matthew. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves, etc. you are a Generation of
Vipers. To speak then a word in mercy to all Church-Children, and to all the
Children of Godly Parents; It Is true you have a great blessing, and precious
privileges, that are born of such Parents; but know, that this spiritual
Freedom comes not by descent, Joh. 1.13. Which are born not of the flesh, etc.
Yea, more godly parentage makes a Childs condemnation much worse, whilst he
lies still in his natural estate: Ezekiel 16.3. your Father was an Amorite,
etc. They were in the sight of God but as the Nations devoted to destruction,
if they do evil, though of the stock of Israel. Manasses the Son of Godly
Hezekiah did worse than the Amorites, 2 King. 21.11. So many Children of Godly
Parents are worse than the Indian Salvages. And it is to be feared, that when
your Parents are gathered to their Fathers, as it follows, verse. 12, 13. The
Lord will stretch over New England the Line of Samaria, and the Plummet of the
house of Ahab, and will wipe New England as a man wipes a dish; wiping and
turning it upside down. You have more to answer for, than the Indians have: you
have public privileges and private instruction, and examples. Remember that
the Lord will one day say to you, if you continue in this estate, as he did to
the Jews, Joh. 8.40. you do thus and thus, so did not Abraham: you are lofty
and proud, so was not your father: you follow loose company, so did not your
Father: you love the pot and revelling, so did not your father: you care not
what mischief you do to others, so did not your Father: you live in unclean
courses, you talk cursedly, etc. as it is v. 39. if you were Abraham's children
in Gods account, you would do the works of Abraham: that is, you would be godly
and humble, and righteous, and sober, as your Parents were. Therefore lay aside
all such foolish conceits, and look to the rock from whence you were hewn,
Isa. 51.1. and tread in the steps of your godly Parents.

Redemption by Christ, sufficient.
THE FOURTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ:


Doct. THat there is a singular and plenteous redemption wrought by Jesus
Christ, sufficient to make satisfaction to God for the vilest sinners. Two uses
have been handled.

Use 3. Comfort to the redeemed.
Comfort to all those that have interest in Christ; for to them belongs this
plenteous redemption. A mercy greater than ever was bestowed upon the Creature,
as appears,

1 In that they are redeemed from the Justice and Wrath of God, and the Curse
of the Law; that the blessing of Abraham may come upon them, Gal. 3.13, 14.
that is, all the blessings of the Covenant of grace. And what can be more than
this?

2 In that they are redeemed from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. so that no sin can
hurt them; and though they complain of the greatness, and multitude of their
sins; yet have they a good and sure hope, through grace, still, Psalm. 130.6. O
Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redemption. From (...) multum esse, and magnum esse, plurimum esse.
The word is (...) signifying great, and multiplied redemption: that though sin
abounds, yet grace shall much more abound.

3 In that they are redeemed, from the perpetuity of all miseries, felt or
feared. Thus did Job comfort his heart, Job 19.25. Oh that my words were
written! oh that they were printed in a book! that they were graven with an
Iron Pen, and in-laid in a Rock for ever. What words were these, that he would
thus eternize? Why these, I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy my
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, etc. that is, he will redeem me from
all my troubles, in life, and death it self: and says at death, Lord into thy
hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O God of truth, Psalm.
31.5.

Quest. How shall we know that we have a part in this Redemption?

Answ. Trial of our redemption by Christ.
1. If we be not in bondage to sin: which appears in the commission, and
practice of sin; according to that rule, Joh. 8.34. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, that whosoever commits sin, is a servant of sin. This rule is universally
true, no man is set at liberty that commits sin: and vehemently asserted,
Verily, verily, without all controversy: and generally inclusive, Whosoever
does it, as 1 John 3.8.10. He that commits sin is of the Devil; yet note, that
committing sin is not intended of every particular individual act, for so all
men commit sin, 1 John 1.8.10. the freemen of Christ, as well as the
bondslaves of the Devil: but of the common practice and work of wicked men; so
it is, 1 Ioh. 3.9. He that is born of God does not work sin; and it is opposed
to verse. 7. where it is said, He that does, or works righteousness, is
righteous. Now to do righteousness is to exercise it, customarily,
voluntarily, deliberately, to choose a righteous course: so to commit sin, is
voluntarily to live in the practice, or allowance, of any course of sin,
whatsoever. So that he which gives common allowance to any one sin, can have no
comfort in this redemption, but is in bondage still: for says Paul, Romans 6.16.
Know you not that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
you are, etc. You lose your own freedom; yea you have sold your selves, Isa.
50.1. Behold, for your iniquities you have sold your selves, you take profit
and pleasure, and sell the Devil the eternal possession of your souls; yea he
holds them by conquest too, 2 Pet. 2.19. Of whom a man is overcome, of the same
is he brought in bondage. Satan fights by tentations, and subdues the soul, so
that it obeys him as a lawful Sovereign; as often as it voluntarily chooses any
sin, ransack therefore an enlightened conscience, and it will soon give an
Account, of liberty or bondage through the observation of thy course of life.

Obj. But may not a child of God live and dye in such a state, as David, 2 Samuel 12.9. or as Paul, Romans 7.14. I am carnal, and sold under sin?

Sol. It is impossible, 1 John 3.9. that he that is born of God should so sin,
because the seed of grace abides in him, and works these four things.

1 A will and resolution in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

2 A resistance and reluctation against every known sin, Gal. 5.17.

3 Watchfulness about every concernment, to prevent sin, 1 Ioh. 5.18.

4 Restlesnesse in case of relapse. As in the Natural body, all is restless,
till every joint be in its place again: so in a gracious heart, it is never
satisfied, till it come back into Gods way. Where therefore this restlesnesse
and reluctance is wanting, the soul is plunged, into the depths of this hellish
bondage.

The heart is hard to be persuaded of this estate, and therefore Christ has
spoken so earnestly. If thou see not this misery, or act unwillingly to try
thy self, or would pass over the matter slightly, thou may infallibly
report thy self a slave to Satan, and subject to this bondage.

2 Consider how Redemption is applied; of which Elihu gives an elegant
description, Job. 33.19. to verse. 25. He is such a one as is pinched with his
bondage, and chastened with strong pain; his soul draws near to the Grace, and
his life to the Buryers: Then if there be a messenger, one of a thousand, to
declare to man his righteousness, God will be gracious unto him, and say,
Deliver him from going down to the pit. I have found a ransom.

1 The Lord opens the Ears to Discipline, How redemption is applied.
which were before quite stopped up.

2 Then he is arrested with the Lords indignation, clapped up in prison, and laid
by the heels.

3 Then he looks for deliverance, and bayl, and some messenger of glad tidings.
How earnestly does his soul long for a ransom?

4 At last the Lord says, I will be gracious. Thus the spirit of bondage
precedes, and the spirit of adoption follows. None set at liberty, but such as
know their bondage.

Obj. But a man may see his bondage, and never be redeemed out of it.

Sol. True, but none miscarry, that are painfully inquisitive, after the means
of redemption, Acts 23.7. and 16.30. For Reprobates see their bondage and sink
under it (as Cain and Judas) seeking either no means, through sluggishnesse,
and deadness of heart, or false means (through folly and blindness.)

3 Consider what resistance has been made against thee; in thy deliverance out
of thy captivity, for none is set at liberty without much opposition. Satan
like Pharaoh, Exodus 3.19. will not let you go, no not with an high hand. He
will never let go, as long as he can hold you, Luke 11.21. The strong man
armed keeps the Palace; holds his Prisoners with all his might, till a stronger
than he comes, and ejects him. Seek after this resistance.

4 See what assistance of God thou have had, against all this resistance by the
Devil. As he stretched out his arm to deliver out of Egypt, Exodus 6.6. so he
puts forth mighty power, to deliver from the powers of darkness, by the spirit
of his grace, Col. 1.12, 13. Acts 26.28. Have thou felt this mighty power?

Use 4. Of instruction and exhortation; to show men whither to go for
Redemption. And,

1 To those that find themselves to be in this bondage. Haste you, for there
is redemption in Christ, none such to be had or heard of all the world over
beside. And what then should you do but seek after this? Zech. 9.12.
Instruction to men in Spiritual bondage.
Turn you to your strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope. As Anna the Prophetess,
Luke 2.38. spoke of Christ to all those that looked for redemption in Israel:
so speak we this day, to all such amongst us, as, look for eternal redemption.
We cannot mention any other means but only Christ, nor any better thing than
liberty. For, Motives to seek redemption.


1 Liberty is the best news to Captives that the world can afford. The Father
calls the time, an acceptable time, and the day of salvation, Isa. 49.8, 9.
when Christ is given for a Covenant of the people; that he may say to the
Prisoners, go forth, and to them that are in darkness; show your selves. So
Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Christ says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the
Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek: to proclaim liberty
to the Captives: the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, etc. The
possibility of liberty is good news to a Gally-slave: but Spiritual liberty is
the best news on earth.

2 This Redemption is most excellent. It is the Spiritual Jubilee; the year of
general release; the acceptable year of the Lord, Isa. 61.1, 2. How solemn was
the Jewish Jubilee observed? Levit. 25.8, 10. yet that lasted but a year, this
is eternal, Heb. 9.12.

3 It is dangerous to refuse this Redemption; yet those Jews, 2 Chro. 36. ult.
when Cyrus by Proclamation gave them all a free discharge, to depart from
Babylon (a place where they had suffered grievous bondage) to their own
Country, accepted not the Kings royal favor; but abode willing Captives and
Slaves still; loving Babylon more than Jerusalem: so after Proclamation of
Redemption wrought, and at this day generally offered, many love Babylon more
than Jerusalem, their bondage under the Devil, more than their liberty through
Christ, Joh. 8.36. The Jews contemned the liberty, that the Son would have
given to them. The people of Nazareth hearing Christ preach deliverance to
captives, liberty to the bruised, etc. Luke 4.18, 24. at first admired the
gracious words that came out of his mouth; yet would have destroyed Christ, and
set at naught his counsel. So some love the general news of Christ a Redeemer,
but care not to apply it, nor earnestly to seek it. The hired Servants might
go free, Levit. 25.40, 41. at the year of Jubilee; but many would not go to
their families and fathers possessions, but said, I love my Master, and like my
condition; so that they had their ears boared with an Awle, to be servants for
ever, Exo. 21.5, 6. Thus it is to be feared, many might be boared for
Spiritual Bondmen, and that Satan has boared many for his Bondmen. Be
exhorted therefore, to consider the present offer, Gospel days are Jubilee
days: the year of release: the acceptable year of the Lord. It concerns all
Bondmen to sue out the general Proclamation, if they would have any benefit
thereby. It was the most prevailing motive amongst the Romans to act, when
their Liberties lay at stake, Estote viri, Libertas. agitur. In this quarrel
they would be prodigal of their blood; but here is no danger, but in not
contending for your liberty. And indeed, Isa. 61.2. The day of vengeance is
joined with the Proclamation of liberty. Oh see then the dreadful danger of
refusal.

Quest. How should I partake of this plenteous Redemption in Christ Jesus?

Ans. Directions to attain Spiritual liberty.
1. Let us bring the matter to an issue, and draw some conclusion; giving the
Verdict, one way or other: that we are in bondage, or at liberty: Satan is
willing that we should leave the matter in suspense, or else draw a false
conclusion. As the Jews, Joh. 8.32. pleaded, that they were not in bondage:
forgetting that, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all under sin, without
exception. And that all that are redeemed, are drawn up from out of the sink of
sin, Tit. 2.14. and that all the redeemed were taken from under all the Curses
of the Law, Gal. 3.13. They like the escaped Beast, have (as it were) a ropes
end about their neck, and fetters at their heels.

2 Let us seek liberty with courage and magnanimity; for we must expect
discouragements. When we but talk of Liberty, the tale of Bricks will be
doubled; and if we are escaping, we shall be pursued with all the forces of
Pharaoh. The Devil will press hard after us, if we set but a foot forward for
Canaan; He will increase our durance, and raise all the Trainbands of Earth
and Hell against us; with all the Militia in the Magazine of our hearts. But
Isa. 57.14. Cast ye up, cast you up; prepare the way: take up the
stumbling block out of the way. See your Leader in the Cloud and Pillar of
Fire, Zech. 9.12. Isa. 4.5. See the door of Hope, the valley of Achor, Hos.
2.14.

3 Let us renounce all Redeemers but Christ. Some think they can redeem
themselves, by leaving their sins, amending their lives, or excusing their
sins, as small, and making God amends for them, by duties, and services:
forgetting that no man can redeem his brother, Psalm. 49.8. nor yet can any
redeem himself.

4 Let us with Israel, cry continually in our bondage, The Lord saw their
affliction, and heard their cry, Exodus 3.7. and sent Moses to them, when they
were at worst, to set them at liberty; give God no rest. Fill Heaven and Earth
with your cries. So did the Church, Lam. 5.16. whose bondage was not comparable
to ours. The Crown is fallen from off our heads, we be to us, for we have
sinned, verse. 21. Turn us O Lord; and we shall, etc.

5 Study the truth of the Gospel: for the promises settled on the heart by
meditation, bring home the Redeemer, and set us at liberty, Joh. 8.32. imprison
it not therefore, Romans 1.18.

6 Attend the motions of Gods Spirit, in and with the Word, for it belongs to
the holy Spirit to apply this Redemption; called therefore the spirit of
liberty, 2 Corinthians. 3.16, 17. slight not the suggestions of it, but follow it
home into the soul. Thus far for instruction of Captives.

2 Exhortation to the Redeemed in diverse particulars from this Doctrine.

1 To labor for a deadly hatred of sin, Return not into Egypt.
and watchfulness against it, that brought us into this bondage. Let us not be
like unthankful Israel, that when our Ransom is paid, and Salvation wrought,
we should desire to return again into Egypt. What is this but to despise the
price paid? God destroyed them, that he had redeemed out of Egypt, because
they believed not, Jud. 5. And will take it very hainously at our hands, that
we should voluntarily accept that slavery, that he paid so great a price to
redeem us from. Not only a vile conversation is now dangerous, but a vain one;
not only to live scandalously, but to live unprofitably. For, 1 Pet. 1.18. We
are redeemed from our vain conversation.

2 To make continual use of Christ our Redeemer: Make continual use of Christ's
redemption.
who though (by his redemption) he freed us from sin, and Satan's power; yet
never does free us from their molestations, till the Resurrection; when
Redemption shall be fully accomplished. For Canaanites are in the Land still,
Tentations, Fears, and Doubts molest the Conscience still. Remainders of
corruption make Paul cry out, O miserable man that I am, Romans 7.24. and to
still his conscience he looks at Christ again, verse. 25. I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. God will have us, continually beholding to his Son: and
therefore has made him Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. to us.

3 To be Servants of God, Be Gods Servants.
that has bought us at so dear a rate. As the redeemed Gally-slave, should
look upon himself as his Servant that redeemed him. Thus Paul argues, 1 Cor.
6.19, 20. Ye are not your own for you are bought with a price, etc. You owe
your Life, and Liberty to the Lord Jesus. You are his by right of purchase: be
therefore wholly at his disposing. Never was a dearer rate paid in the world.
Your utmost service (though vessels fit for your Masters use) will never
recompense the charge laid out upon you. You are his by Creation, and his by
Redemption. He purchased your souls, bodies, and spirits: and justly then may
he challenge all. This was the end of our deliverance, Luke 1.74, 75. delivered
from our enemies to serve him.

4 Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, Stand fast
in Christian liberty.
Gal. 5.1. All sorts of enemies of our salvation, seek to pluck some of our
liberty from us. The Devil would have us abuse it, as an occasion to the flesh,
Gal. 5.13. to turn our liberty into licentiousness; as do the Libertines.
Papists would bring us in bondage to the Law, by looking for righteousness
from thence. Some would bring our Consciences in subjection to men's inventions,
but Paul advises us, 1 Cor. 2.23. that being bought with a price, we should
not be the servants of men; nor subject our consciences to men's traditions.

5 You that are at liberty, remember them that are in bonds, Heb. 13.3. as if
you were bound with them. Remember them that are in Spiritual bonds.
See how many in your Families, Towns, and Neighborhood, go clattering up
and down in the bonds of iniquity, in the fetters and chains of the Devil.
Pity these poor prisoners. Give them a lift to help them out. Admonish the
unruly, pray for them that have not sinned unto death, that they may be set at
liberty. This is eminent charity.

6 Be thankful, and seriously acknowledge the grace of God, for the redemption
that is in Christ, Ezra 9.8. acknowledges a little reviving in their bondage,
Acts 12.5. how much more should we, eternal life? It is an earnest prayer,
Psalm. 107.1, 2. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, etc. who ever is
silent, Let the redeemed say so. So Psalm. 136.24. This is meant by the Song of
Moses, and the Lamb, Revel. 13.3. Moses and Israel praised God, for deliverance
from Egypt, the red Sea, etc. how much more should the Saints break forth into
praises for deliverance from the nethermost Hell? Spiritual bondage is the
worst bondage: And soul-redemption is the greatest redemption, Isa. 44.23.
Senseless creatures rejoice only at the redemption of Gods people from Babylon.
But what is Babylon in comparison of our redemption by Christ? Hear the
Apostle, Col. 1.12, 13. Giving thanks unto God, who has delivered us from the
powers of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in
whom we have redemption, etc. No love like that of Christ: not no love of
Christ like that, manifested in our redemption. Let thankfulness also exceed.

Use last, Of consolation unspeakable to all believers, Comfort against Sin and
Satan.
that Redemption is wrought in Christ. Sin has begun to fall, and must utterly
fall, before him that is the chief Captain of our Salvation. Satan has been
foiled often, yea vanquished, and at last shall be cast bound in chains to
eternal torments: while the Saints shall triumph with their Redeemer for ever
and ever.

The Satisfaction of Christ.
THE FIFTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ.


THe first Doctrine being unfolded and improved, we now come to the second.

Doct. The justification of a Sinner is through the redemption of Christ.
2. That the justification of a Sinner, is through the redemption, and
satisfaction wrought by Christ. This truth the Holy Ghost bears witness to,
Ephesians. 2.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
our sins. Col. 1.14. has the same words expressly. Tit. 2.14. we are said to
be redeemed from all iniquity. That implies, iniquity cannot be taken away (as
it is in the justification of a Sinner) but in a way of redemption and
satisfaction.

Quest. 1. What is the nature of this satisfaction? for the word is rarely
found in Scripture.

Ans. As it referres to men, the word is found, Mark 15.15. Pilate willing to
satisfy the people, released Barrabbas, the Greek is (...); to satisfy, is to
do as much as is surficient, to him that expostulates, or is wronged, or to
fulfill ones desires, either by words or deeds. But as satisfaction has
reference to a debt, so it signifies full pay, or to give a full price. But as
satisfaction has reference to our debt, unto God, the word is not found
expressly in Scripture; but there are equipollent terms, of the same
signification: as redemption here in the text: paying a price, and ransom,
etc. which cannot be interpreted in any other good sense, but as intending
satisfaction. Of which nature are these phrases, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for
our transgressions. And again, verse. 8. For the transgressions of my people was
he smitten. 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins, Heb. 10.12. He offered a
Sacrifice for sins. The word [for] there signifies, the impulsive outward, or
meritorious cause, respecting the punishment due to our sins. Which is manifest.

1 In that sin in Scripture is called a debt, Matthew. 6.12. Forgive us our
debts. Not that we owe sin to God, but that it makes us liable to Gods
justice: as Debts of money make us liable to our Creditors, and to any just
course in Law for their recovery. This debt of sin cannot possibly be
satisfied for by man, for Matthew. 18.24. it is a debt of ten thousand talents.
And the Spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3.21. can for ever suffer, but not at all
satisfy.

2 Seeing all Mankind must otherwise eternally perish; God the Father
appointed, of his rich grace: and God the Son, in infinite compassion,
condescends to be our Surety, and to take the debt upon himself. Isa. 53.10.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him: and verse. 6. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all. Charged all the sins of the elect upon him. And Christ
comes, of his own accord, to undertake the debt, Heb. 10.7. Lo I come to do
thy will, Gal. 2.4. He gave himself for our sins: He becomes Surety, Heb.
7.22. Jesus was made Surety of a better Covenant (for testaments use not to
have Sureties.) Hence Christ is made a Debtor, in man's room, legally, and by
consent, as really, and truly, as sinful man was before. Neither will the
Father follow the Law, upon the poor, beggarly bankrupt, elect of Mankind: but
prosecutes the rich Surety; and Christ must pay all. And though other Creditors
stand bound with their Surety, here the Surety, [Christ] stands bound alone.

3 The matter of this satisfaction, that the Father exacts from his Son, are
all his sufferings upon earth; especially his obedience to the death of the
Cross, Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, etc. The
Father requires, that the Son should bear all that was threatened, to the first
Adam, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye.

4 The form of this satisfaction stands in the manner thereof; which was in
every respect most perfect. 1 Because the Person offering was God. 2 The
dignity of the offering, He gave himself, Ephesians. 5.2. 3 The merit of the
Oblation, which had all perfection by the Hypostatical union. Hence it must
needs be of infinite value. God and man in one Person, voluntarily standing in
the stead of fallen man, that is of the elect; and drinking up the very dreggs of
his Fathers Cup of indignation. So that the Father says, I will be gracious,
for I have found a Ransom, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him; that is, Christ's sufferings are the
means of our reconciliation, and take away the enmity between God and us; the
word is of the plural number, comprehending all peace, external, internal,
external. And the word will more fully suit the matter, if it be translated (as
the Septuagint has done it, Psalm. 69.22. and it will bear) retributions. The
chastisement of our Retributions were upon him: that is, the punishment we
should have paid our selves, has he paid; and made all even between God and
the elect.

Obj. But what need this satisfaction for our justification? Could not God by
his mere grace forgive?

Sol. There is a necessity of satisfaction. And though man could forgive a
wrong, God could not.

Reas. 1. Because of his nature, Jer. 25.26. That he might be just, and to
declare his righteousness, etc.

1 Holiness and righteousness are not of the essence of man, as they are of
God: neither does man hate sin essentially, as God does, Romans 1.32. Who knowing
the Judgment of God, that those which commit such things are worthy of death,
etc. Justice is to give to every one as he deserves, therefore Gods Judgment
is so. His holy nature requires sin, to be punished in the Principal, or in the
Surety.

2 To declare Gods righteousness; God would show it to all the world, how just
he is, in punishing sin, and requiring full satisfaction for sin. He would
make men and Angels know, by an unheard of example, in his own Son, that if he
be but a Surety for sinners. God will not abate him any thing, of the payment
he requires. Zale^cus King of the Locrians, made a Law, that Adulterers should
have both their eyes put out, now his Son being guilty of that sin: that he
might observe the Law, and yet favor his Son, he put out one of his own eyes,
another of his Sons; to declare to all his Subjects, his justice in executing
his Laws: So the Father showed his Justice, in the severe punishment of his Son.

Reas. 2. That Gods unchangeable Decree might stand, Romans 3.25. it is
translated [whom God set forth.] It may better be translated, whom God decreed,
for so the word usually signifies in Scripture; hinting to us that God had past
an irrevocable Decree, that Sin should never be forgiven, nor Man reconciled,
nor his Wrath pacified, or appeased, without satisfaction made. Yea he decreed,
that his Son should give himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, Psalm. 33.11.
Now Gods Decree is not to be reversed; therefore this satisfaction must be
given.

Reas 3. Because of Gods Truth, declaring that there shall not be pardons
granted, without a sufficient price paid. Which was signified, by all those
offerings and sacrifices of old: there being a Typical satisfaction exhibited
in them, accomplished in Christ's death, 1 Cor. 5.7. and Pro. 17.15. To justify
the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, etc. It is so always without due and
legal satisfaction. See also Ezeck. 18.4. Heb. 9.22. But what God has
foretold must come to pass. Act. 1.16. The Scripture must needs be
fulfilled; therefore satisfaction must be given.

Use 1. To show the unjustified estate, of such as have no part in Christ. If
Christ's redemption be necessary, Unjustified without Christ's satisfaction.
for the justification of a sinner, then how miserable must their condition
be, that are destitute of the redemption wrought by Christ's satisfaction. They
go away as the Pharisee, unjustified still. How dreadful then is the condition,

1 Of Christ's enemies, who reject the satisfaction of Christ, Enemies to
Christ's satisfaction.
through wilfulness, carelessness, and Apostasy? Paul speaks of them with
tears in his eyes, full of pity and commiseration, Phil. 3.18. Many walk, of
whom I told you often, and now tell you again weeping, that they are enemies to
the Cross of Christ. Many that little thought they were such; many where
Christ is eminently professed; many, whom I have often warned of it; many, whose
estate I bewail with tears; many, whose end is destruction: described, verse.
19. men that mind only their back and belly, earthly things. Enemies they are
to the Cross of Christ, for that would crucify their lusts, but they uphold
them; they 2 Pet. 2.1. deny the Lord.

2 Of the Contemners of the Word. Contemners of his Word.
For such as slight the Word, slight Christ, and his satisfaction, Joh. 12.48.
they disannul Christ (as to their own salvation) that receive not his word. Now
it is not enough, to testify, we take Physic; because we take it in our
hands, or mouths, unless we swallow it, to purge and cleanse: nor that we
take food, when we only take meat and set it by us, unless we feed on it: so
nor to have the Word in our hands, or in our ears, or heads, unless it
converts us, Psalm. 19.7. and cleanse us, Joh. 15.3. Nor is it enough to admire
and commend Sermons, so did the Pharisees, Mat. 22.22.

3 Of careless men, Careless of their foundation.
who take up either their own good conceits of themselves, Luke 16.15. or a
good testimony from their Neighbors, brethren, and flatterers; or an
approbation by the godly, as Judas by the Apostles; being a little sorry for
their sins, as Ahab was: and confessed them, as Saul, and Pharaoh did: and a
while abstained from them, as Simon Magus from his Sorcery: and making
restitution of their ill gotten goods. In the mean time, not seeking with
diligence, the Pearl of price, but putting off all upon Christ, and his grace,
hoping that they shall find mercy, though they fly not to this satisfaction; as
the Manslayer, with fears, terrors, and restless speed, from the Avenger of
blood, to the City of refuge: forgetting that God will make us know the worth
of a Redeemer, and of satisfaction by Christ, before we shall have it. Psalm.
107.12, 13. He brought down their strength with labor, they fell down, and
there was none to help. Then they cried unto the Lord, etc. Let all such
careless wretches know, That if justification be a state of Blessedness,
Psalm. 32.1, 2. then their state is a state of cursednesse. And though they
sleep in that estate, their damnation slumbereth not, but may come on them in a
night, and stop their breath, while they lie sleeping.

Use 2. Fallen man's misery.
Let us hereby be convinced of the misery of fallen man: whose state is not only
dangerous, but desperate, without this satisfaction. And yet alas! how little
is it considered by wretched Sinners: our days are like those, Matthew. 24.39. We
have many Noah's, preachers of righteousness, to warn us of the evil to come;
but no man takes warning. We are singing and chanting to the sound of the
Viol, while God sounds an alarm, by the trumpet of war. We are dancing in
jollity, while God is marching in Battalia. We are drinking in the Wine, and
strong Drink, while God is letting out our Blood. We are devouring the
Creatures, while we are devoured of the Creator. We are joining Sexes in
Marriage, while God is separating soul from body. Swimming in pleasures till we
are drowned in the flood; and no man takes warning, as if there were no danger
in the matter; wherefore to give you ataste of it,

1 Consider, that all have sinned, Romans 3.23. All without exception have been
in an estate of sin, and in want of that righteousness, that should stand
before God for acceptance. And though education, or a better nature should
stop sin in some from bringing forth so early, or breaking out so foulely as it
does in others, yet there is no difference: there lies a hidden Springhead in
all, both Jews, and Gentiles, circumcised and uncircumcised, binding them over
to the Wrath of God. And least you should therefore say, you shall escape as
well, and your condition is as good as others.

2 Consider, we all are come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. come short
of his grace by the loss of original righteousness; and of his glory, by the
separation which our sins have made. The fruition of God is the Goal of our
race we run to obtain; our sins have cast us behind in this race (as the Greek
word there sounds.) Justification by Christ's satisfaction, is the only way, now
left, to attain the end of our race; which whosoever wants, must never hope to
enjoy God.

3 Nothing in the Creature can justify. Good Works, Duties, Services, Prayers,
Tears, Groans, are all too mean, to make God to account him righteous; no, nor
to give all his estate to the poor, and his body to be burnt for Religion; for
the Law required, that God should be served, with all our might, and all our
power, and ability; but by the works of the law can no flesh be justified,
Romans 3.20. Moreover, by the Law sin is known and manifested; but what makes
known sin, cannot justify from it: for it is madness for a Traitor, when he is
convicted of Treason by some Statute, to expect an acquittance by that Statute,
that condemned his Crime to Death: so it is in man, to expect Absolution by the
Law, which condemns his sin to death. The Law therefore leaves man without all
hope.

4 The grace of God, cannot justify any soul, without Christ's satisfaction. Men
may hope to be saved, by Gods Grace and Mercy, but without Christ's
satisfaction, their hope is merely groundless. Paul names Gods grace in the
Text, but adds, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus: not by grace
without it. The Devil would plead Gods grace, to get out of his misery, if that
would do it, as well as you. Every carnal wretch would plead it, It Is a
precious Plea to fly to Gods grace, yet none is welcome but he that has a
High Priest, Heb. 4.15, 16. Let us come boldly to the throne of Grace: what may
any poor soul come? Surely no, unless he has the Therefore to the Wherefore.
Unless he has a High Priest, that was tempted in all points like unto us:
Else he will find the throne of Grace, to be a Judgment Seat: and may call to
the mountains to fall upon him, Revel. 6.16. to save him from the wrath of him
that sits upon the Throne, when he comes to beg for grace. Nothing but the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, can procure the souls welcome. No gift of
man can appease God, Prove. 6.34, 35. The jealous God will not spare in the day
of vengeance, he will not regard a ransom, neither will he rest contented,
though thou give many gifts.

God-man in one person, is alone the accepted price. The Father would not take
a farthing more than his justice did exact, nor a farthing less than what was
due. As where ten pound is due, the Creditor exacts not twenty; and where
twenty pounds are due, he will not accept often: so the father required Christ
for satisfaction, being the exact return, according to the fathers Justice. For
Job 34.23. God will not lay upon man more than is right. And Paul clears him,
Romans 3.5, 6. what shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. He is no Extortioner to take more, nor could take less than his due.
He does not willingly afflict the children of men, Lam. 3.34, 35. much less
does he exceed in the affliction of his own Son. Now therefore if God required
his Son, as an infinite price for the satisfaction, of his infinite wrongs, to
become a ransom for lost man: surely man was fallen into a most woeful estate.
Beware therefore, O sinful wretch, that sleep in thy security, least God
cause his consuming fire to fall on thee, this moment, as it did on Sodom: O
what a remediless! what a helpless estate is thy soul fallen into! Let thy
tears run down like a river, day and night, give God no rest, cease not to
complain to him. Let thine heart like Noah's Dove, find no place to rest on,
till thou have gotten Christ's satisfaction to be thy souls Ransom.

Use 3. Of Instruction and Exhortation to every man, Instruction to take the
right way to justification.
to take the right way for Justification. The world has been tampering about
it, ever since Adams fall, and the Devil has so much over-clouded it; That the
greatest part of the World have quite mistook it: and where there is any
discovery of it, infinite errors have been broached with it. And the heart of
man turns and winds under it, not being able to close with the way of it. Be
cautelous therefore, and know; That there is no true Justification; but what
Centers in Christ, Act. 4.12. There is no Salvation (not a jot) in any other;
for there is none other Name given under Heaven; God the Father gave no other
way, nor Name; Therefore no other Way nor Name can possibly be found out.
Redemption was alone, by Christ's blood, Ephesians. 1.7. He is made our redemption, 1
Cor. 1.30. He shall give his Life, Matthew. 20.28. This is the great Lesson, to
learn, Christ your satisfaction to the Father. Now then as a poor man asks his
Friends, how he shall pay his debts, fears the Creditor will come to clap him
up in Gaol, and there he must lie and dye because he cannot pay, as that
complaint is, 2 King. 4.1. so ask you, what you shall do to be saved? where
you shall find a Ransom? your souls are deeply indebted, and you have not to
pay, Mat. 18.25. and the Creditor is coming hastily upon you. O be not more
careful to save your bodies out of Prison than your souls out of Hell. Lay hold
on Christ who alone is Current money, and full satisfaction.

Quest. But how shall we compass this satisfaction of Christ? and comfort by it?

Answ. You must do as the poor bankrupt does. First, to get him a surety to
undertake the debt. Secondly, to gain to himself an Acquittance, under hand and
zeal. Get Christ to be thy surety, and an Acquittance written with his blood.
Now an Acquittance is derived by the Lawyers, from the word quietantia, an old
barbarous term, but very significant: which when once it is got, the Debtor is
then at rest. No suits in Law, nor brangling controversies can be maintained
any longer against him; for he has his quietus est, a free and full
discharge: Plead for this from God; and that from the beginning of the world to
this day. For Adam left his posterity in debt. This Acquittance is naught else,
but what Paul speaks of, Romans 5.1. Peace in Conscience, arising from Christ's
satisfaction for our sins. And that you may attain this surety and Acquittance.

1 Consider the necessity and worth of Justification. It is the Justification
of Life, ye are dead without it, Romans 5.18. And having obtained it, you are
fit for any thing: for glory, whom he justified, he glorified, Romans 8.30.
Enoch had this testimony, that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5. then was he fit for
Heaven. Fit to be a teacher of others. Isaiah cries, now send me, when his
sins were pardoned. But without it, you are fit for nothing. If Death arrests
you, how will you scramble for Bail? how will you wish you had pleased God? how
unfit to go off the world? O leave not that to the last gasp, that should be
done first. Thou may be great, and rich, and honorable, and yet not fit to
live, nor to dye: but he that is justified is fit for both.

2 Highly esteem the Ransom. It was no less than the blood of God that
ransomed you. And if things are to be esteemed by what they cost, nothing is
more precious than this Ransom. And accordingly the Apostle valued it, Phil.
3.8, 9. he accounted all the worlds glory, but Dirt, and dung in comparison.
And desired to abandon all knowledge that he might know Christ, and him
crucified. How highly does he prize, 1 Cor. 2.2. Christ not glorified, but
Crucified: mainly intending to preach that. Hence the whole work of the
Ministry is called, Preaching the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.18. In a word, the greatest
love that God ever showed to man; and the greatest blessing man ever attained
to, it is this satisfaction of Christ, Love with an affix, 1 John 4.10.

3 Consider the lenity and difficulty of the satisfaction. God would not have
sent his Son, if all the world could have made satisfaction. Isa. 53.10, 11.
He shall see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied. He saw the pay was
current [the travel of his soul] to wit, all the sufferings of Christ, gave him
satisfaction. What need Christ take such pains, if any else could do it? It
cost not Christ half so much pains to make the world, Psalm. 33.9, 10. He spoke
the word and it was done, etc. This work of satisfaction made him sweat drops
of blood.

4 Receive an unlimited Christ, and entertain him in all his Offices. Receive
his person first, and then his benefits. Joh. 1.12. as many as received him,
etc. Receive him and then his adoption and satisfaction. Let him be King as
well as Priest, Luke 19.27. Take him as a sanctifier, as well as a Savior.
Accept his Majesty as well as his Mercy. Take Holiness, as well as Happiness
from him. Let the water of regeneration be welcome, with the blood of
Justification. And that with speed, for Luke 14.24. if you come not when
invited, you may never be welcome. The Israelites that denied to enter Canaan,
when God offered it, Heb. 4.1. had never after an opportunity. Francis Spira
under dreadful torture, pitifully lamented, that now God would not give him
one motion of his blessed Spirit more, many of which he slighted before. If
therefore you mind eternity, and have any care of your souls, or any respect
to Christ, or fear of God; if heaven be worth having, give Christ
entertainment in all his Offices.

Use 4. Comfort to all that are in Christ: Comfort to sincere Christians.
that your ransom is paid. Lift up your heads with joy for your redemption
draws nigh.

1 Consider your sins are satisfied to the full. Poor bankrupt souls, have all
Bills and bonds, and hand-writings that are against them, cancelled, Col. 2.14.
David's prayer is answered; all his Transgressions are blotted out, Psalm. 51.12.
Oh what joy! what contentation should display its triumph in the heart. The
discharge of sin, is another gates thing than all other discharges. The Debt is
greater, the Creditor more dreadful, the Gaol more horrible, the Jailer more
cruel, and the satisfaction fuller, then men ever felt or found. Your Moralists
say, It is the hardest of all satisfactions, for an Inferior to satisfy a
Superior, in point of honor. If he had injured him in his goods,
satisfaction might have been made; but what will he do here? will he submit
to him? that he ought always to do. Will he do it by his goods? no, a good
name is better than Riches, Prove. 22.1. Sin violated Gods Justice, and
affronted his Godhead. For every sin is a kind of Dei cidium, a murdering of
God. Hence men are called God-haters, Romans 1.30. but he that hates his
brother is a murderer, 1 John 3.15. so is he that hates God. And indeed he
does kill God, as to himself, for as the Sun though it cannot lose its light,
yet is utterly eclipsed, as to the eye of man. So is God to the Sinner. But now
as transcendently evil as Sin is, Christ has satisfied for it; and put an end
to all troubles to thy Conscience about it. By one offering he has perfected
for ever, such as are sanctified, Heb. 10.15. God says, I will bring forth my
Servant the branch: and I will remove the iniquities of the Land in one day,
Zech. 3.8, 9. Ye shall call therefore every man his Neighbor, under his Vine,
and under his Fig Tree; For Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth have met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; that is, all Gods excellencies
gloriously shine forth in Christ's satisfaction. Comfort ye one another with
these words.

2 Consider for your Comfort, Weak believer justified as much as stronger.
That the weakest true believer, is justified as much as the strongest. What
was imputed to Abraham for his Justification, was and is imputed to the weakest
Saint. Romans 4.22, 23, 24 To Us it shall be imputed, if we believe on Christ,
as Abraham did. It Is true, all apprehend not this satisfaction alike; but the
matter and form of our justification is all one. Therefore rejoice O weak
Christian, thy clothing (notwithstanding all thine infirmities) is as bright
shining in the eyes of God, as that of Abraham, or the greatest Saint in the
world.

Quest. How can we come to comfort through the satisfaction of Christ?

Answ. 1 Gain your Acquittance, a writing drawn with Gods own hand, with your
name in it, 1 John 5.13. These things have I writ unto you that believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that ye may know ye have eternal life. So that if you
believe, there is the writing, grounded on a Record, verse. 11. and there is
your Name in it. You see your way to find your Names there, get it sealed to
your hearts by the Spirit.

2 Let there be an humble, active, embracing of Christ, in the Word of
Promise. God requires, besides his own good pleasure, and the Council of his
will, the work of faith, Romans 3.25. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. Thou must exercise thy
humble, obediential Faith, as thy day-labour: even a conflicting faith, Rev.
2.17. and a praying Faith, Ezekiel. 36.32. and a confessing faith. As they did
their sins, laying their hands on the head of the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.21. So
the hand (the type of faith) was put on the head of the burnt offering, Lev.
14. And an humbling Faith: which indeed is the most humble grace of all, Romans
11.20. Thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded. From which grace Christ is
never far, Isa. 57.15. yea they, when pricked at heart, saw Christ presently,
Act. 2.38. and Peter applies the Promise to them, and reveals mercy to such
bleeding souls. Christ and a lamenting soul are never far asunder.

3 Be comforted, That this way of yours by Christ's satisfaction is the true
way to Justification. Men cry up many new ways. It Is a great mercy in such
varieties of errors not to err: The truth of this way of Justification, is not
only true upon the truth of the word, but upon the truth of God himself: If
God be God, this justification must needs be true. For here justice is
satisfied, and so God pardons; which he could as well un God himself as do,
where his justice is not satisfied. So that we may testify to you, 1 Pet.
5.12. That this is the true grace of God in which you stand. Men have a
conceited grace different from this, but here you may safely set up, your
resting place, for ever.

Use 5. Remember to maintain perpetual homage, and observance of Jesus Christ.
Never forget so great a mercy. David cries, Psalm. 116.6. O Lord I am thy
servant, and the Son of thy handmaid; thou have broken my bonds. The way of
Servants, and Slaves engaging themselves to their Lords was, they yielded their
submission with promise and oath, to be Loyal to them as their Lords; and
holding their hands between the hands of their Lords, they said, I become your
Servant from this day forth, for life, for limbs, for worldly honors: and shall
owe you my fidelity, as long as I live. Well might this holy man say, I am thy
Servant, since God had not brought him into, but broken his bonds. Paul argues
much this way, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And he dyed for all, that they that live,
should not live unto themselves. Which falls foul upon that ignoble conceit;
That if Christ gives satisfaction, we are freed from all obedience to the
Commandments. By which this doctrine of Christ's satisfaction is made the
occasion of profaneness; and Christ is become the Minister of sin, which Paul
abhorred, Gal. 2.17. It Is true, that since Christ has paid the price of our
redemption, there is nothing for us to do by way of satisfaction: but as much
as in us lies, in obedience to the will of Christ, both from the nature of
righteousness and holiness which are worth our exercising, and from the Moral
consideration of Christ's yielding obedience to every Commandment, and out of a
study for conformity to the state of glory hereafter. Yea, there is a Causal
connection (such as is between the cause and effect) between Christ's
satisfaction applied to us, and our holiness. For Union with Christ by Faith,
produces this fruit necessarily, 1 John 3.6. He that abides in him sins not.
The Spirit of Christ works it, Ezekiel. 36.27. and true faith purifies the heart,
Act. 13.9. Act. 26.18. So then let every man do the works of God without him,
or suspect the work of God within him: Lest fancy that works folly, rather than
faith that works purification, be found within him. For he that is bought
with a price, will glorify God in soul and body, which are Christ's by
Redemption.

The Exactness of Christ's sufferings.
THE SIXTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. A propitiation through Faith in his blood.


WE have spoken in General of Redemption; Come we now more particularly to
consider, first the manner, and secondly the efficacy of this satisfaction.

The Manner of our redemption is by the blood of Christ: and therefore, it is
phrased here, by Faith in his blood; of which let us inquire.

Quest. What is meant by blood here?

Answ. The manner of Christ's satisfaction is by blood.
Blood is put (by a Synecdoche of the part) for All the sufferings of Christ,
which he underwent for the sins of the Elect: especially his bloody death,
with all its concomitants. So called; First because death, especially when it
is violent, it joined with effusion of blood, as Matthew. 23.30. If we had lived
in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them, in
the blood of the Prophets; and Matthew. 27.24. Pilate said, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person, that is, of his Death. Secondly, Herein respect is
had, to all the sacrifices of the Law; whose blood was poured out when they
were offered up. Heb. 9.22. Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood
and without shedding of blood there is no remission. So that the blood of
Christ is the Antitype, aimed at in the blood of those Sacrifices, that were
slain for sins.

Doct. That Christ by way of Satisfaction for sinners, suffered the full, and
utmost punishment, due to the sins of the Elect. Col. 1.20. To clear which,

1 Consider that he endured bodily infirmities and weaknesses, as hunger,
Matthew. 4.2. thirst, weariness, Joh. 4.6. poverty, 2 Cor. 8.9. wanting the
ordinary provisions and comforts of this life, Mat. 8.20. The Son of man has
not where to lay his head. Isa. 53.3. He was an ab^ect among men, a man of
grief, and acquainted with infirmity.

2 He also underwent ignominy, and extreme disgrace, by unjust accusations,
and vile reproaches; he is charged with blasphemy, and of Leagues with Devils,
yea, with Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Matthew. 12.24. accused of sedition,
Rebellion, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and that he was a friend of Publicans and
Sinners, Matthew. 11.19.

3 He received many other injuries before his death; as binding, buffeting,
Luke 22.63. scourging, spitting, blind-folding, and evil entreating, as if he
had been some fool or madman, Isa. 50.6. He gave his back to the smiters, and
his cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, he hid not his face from shame
and spitting.

4 He suffered Death it self, Ne^at est vincire civem Romanam, scelus
verberare: quid dicam in crucem tollere? Cic.
clothed with all the circumstances of horror and terror; both a shameful and
a painful death, which none but Slaves and bondmen could be put to. Roman
freemen never felt it. It was a lingering and tedious death: his hands and feet
stabbed with nails, his bones put out of joint. Psalm. 22.14. A death accursed
of God, Gal. 3.13. and therefore Paul speaks it out with an Emphasis, Phil.
2.6, Christ suffered only (...).
7. He was obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross. It Is true, some
kind of sufferings called by Divines, dishonorable sufferings, not suitable to
his person, nor consistent with the Prophecies of him, as noisome diseases,
tearing of his body in pieces, breaking his bones, or the corruption, or
rotting of any one part, Act. 2.27. could not be suffered by him. Thus much
the body of Christ suffered. Now for his soul-suffering.

Christ not only suffered bodily death, but also the pains of the second death,
Isa. 53.12. He poured out his soul unto death, yea, unto deaths, (for the
Original word is in the plural number) to show that it stands in two things.

1 In the absence, and withdrawing of God from the soul, and the hiding the
light of Gods countenance from it, leaving it to blackness of darkness. It was
Saul's sad complaint, That God was departed from him, 1 Samuel 28.15. So was it
Christ's misery, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me,
Matthew. 27.46. which departure of God, answers the pain of loss, that the Elect
should have suffered; yet know, that Christ was left but for a time, and that
in regard of sense, and feeling of comfort only; and no farther.

2 The fierce Indignation, and wrath of God, seized upon him, setting open the
floodgates of his anger, to overwhelm him with an unsufferable torture, of
which when Heman had but a small drop, to that full Cup which Christ drunk, he
complains, Psalm. 88.16. Thy fierce wrath goes over me, and thy terrors have
cut me off. At the taste of which Job, Job 6.4. cries, The Arrows of the
Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirits: the terrors
of God set themselves in array against me. And this suffering of Christ
answers to that punishment of sense the Elect should endure.

The second death is expressed, Isa. 30. ult. By Tophet, a^^ a pile of fire,
and much wood. The breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, does kindle
it. The breath of Gods displeasure is the very bellows of Hell, that blows up
that infernal fire; as truly easless, as endless, to these Reprobates that
bear the punishment of their own sins alone; but oh! how heavy, when upon
Christ is laid the iniquity of Us all, Isa. 53.6. so that he is well said,
Rev. 19.15. To tread the Wine Press of the fierceness, and wrath of Almighty
God.

Christ's suffering of the second death, was either in the Garden, or on the
Cross.

1 His Agony in the Garden is described, Mark. 14.33. Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.44.
Mark says, (...).
He began to be amazed, and to be very heavy: or we may more fully express
it thus, He begun to be gastred with wonderful astonishment, and to be
satiated, filled brimfull with heaviness. A very sad condition, Matthew. 26.38.
he said, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. It is beleagured, or
compassed round with sorrow; for so sounds (...). All the sins of the Elect,
like a huge Army, meeting upon him, made a dreadful onset on his soul. Luke
22.43, 44. It Is said, He was in an Agony. That Is a conflict, in which a poor
Creature wrastles, with deadly pangs, with all his might; mustring up all his
faculties, and force, to grapple with them, and withstand them: Thus did Christ
struggle with the indignation of the Lord; praying once and again, with more
intense fervency, Oh that the Cup may pass away, if it be possible! while yet
an Angel, strengthened his outward man, from utter sinking in the conflict. Now
if this weight that Christ bare, had been laid on the shoulders of all the
Angels in heaven, it would have sunk them down to the lowest hell. It would
have cracked the Axel-tree of Heaven and Earth. It made his blood startle out of
his body, in congealed cloddered heaps. The heat of Gods fiery indignation,
made his blood to boil up, till it ran over; yea, affrightened it out of its
wonted chanel. The Creation cost him but a words speaking, and it was done; but
it costs bloody sweats, soul-distraction, to go through the work of redemption.

2 His Agony on the Cross, where he drinks down the very Gall, and dregs of
the Cup, that he but sipped of before. You hear him groaning out, Matthew.
27.46. with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani. Which is not (as Papists
say) a leaving of Christ in the hand of the Jews; for the misery of death of
the Saints, of the meanest rank, does not argue, that God has forsaken them, 2
Cor. 4.9. We are persecuted, but not forsaken. Nor may we think, the Godhead
ever had left the manhood, or that our Savior had forsook his Father, for he
called him still, My God, my God: but the forsaking was, the Fathers
withdrawing the light of his countenance, and then what could follow but
darkness and extreme horror. The words are taken from Psalm. 22.1. where the
blessed God is spoken to, as quite and clean gone out of the hearing of his
crying, and roaring. Now that must needs be much more than forsaking, that
made the Son of God to roar, even the fierce wrath of the Almighty. So that, as
the Greek Church prayed ((...)) It was unknown torment that our Savior
underwent. He encountered both the fathers wrath, kindled by the sins of all
the Elect; and entered the lists with Satan, and all the powers of darkness.
Luke 22.23. This is your hour, and the power of darkness. All the Devils in
Hell were up in Arms, and issued out of their gates, Principalities and Powers
are all let loose against the Redeemer of the World. This is some part of the
second death of Christ; but to clear it further, we will answer a few
objections.

Object. How could Christ suffer the pains of the second death, without
disunion of the Godhead from the manhood? for the Godhead could not dye?

Sol. 1 John 3.16. God laid down his life for us. The person dying was God,
else his person could have done us no good. The person suffering must be God
as well as man, but the Godhead suffered not: As if you shoot off a Cannon in
the bright Air, the air suffers, but the light of it suffers not. Actions and
Passions belong to Persons. Nothing less than that Person who is God man, could
bear the brunt of the day, and overcome for our justification.

Object. How could Christ endure Hell fire without grievous sins, as blasphemy
and despair?

Sol. The perturbations of Christ, were like the shakings of pure water, in a
clean glass; the water remains pure still. When Christ was shaken, there was no
mudd in the bottom, which rises in us, when we suffer extremity. And again,
as the body of Christ dyed without dividing the Godhead from it; So his soul
dyed the second death, without parting of the Godhead from it. Besides,
Blasphemy and Despair, are no parts of the pains of the damned, but the
consequents, and follow the sense of Gods wrath, in a sinful creature, that is
overcome by it, Rev. 16.9. But Christ had no sin of his own, nor was overcome
of wrath, and therefore held fast his integrity.

Object. But when did Christ suffer hell torments? they are inflicted after
death, not before it usually: but Christ's soul went strait after death into
Paradise, how else could he say? This day shall thou be with me in Paradise?

Sol. 1 It Is not impossible that the pains of the second death, should be
suffered in this life. Time and place are but circumstances; the main substance
of the second death, is the bearing Gods fierce wrath. The favor of God in
Hell to a man, would make Hell a Heaven. The place is not a part of the debt
neither, and therefore ought to be no part of the payment. The laying down of
the Price makes the satisfaction. This is all that is spoken and threatened to
Adam, Genesis 2.17. Thou shall dye the death, and this may be suffered here.
Wicked go to Hell as their Prison, because they can never pay their debts;
otherwise the debt may as well be paid in the market, as the Gaol. This Christ
did in the days of his flesh, when he offered up strong cries, and tears, Heb.
5.7. not after death.

Object. But the pains due to man's sins are to be everlasting? how can Christ's
short sufferings countervail them?

Sol. If the measure of a man's punishment were Infinite, the duration needs not
be infinite. Sinful man's measure of punishment is finite, and therefore the
duration of his punishment must be infinite, because the punishment must be
answerable to the infinite evil of sin, committed against an infinite God. But
Christ God-man, suffered punishment in measure infinite, and therefore there is
no ground why he should endure it eternally. Add moreover, that the dignity of
Christ's persons, did excuse him from punishment infinite for duration, for Act.
2.24. It was impossible that he should be holden of death, because he was
both the Father of Life, and the Lords Holy One.

Besides, continual imprisonment in Hell, arises from man's not being able to
pay the price; for could he pay the debt in one year, he needs not lie two
years in Prison. Now the debt is the first and second death; because therefore
sinful man cannot pay it in any time, he must endure it eternally. But Christ
is ready pay, he lays it down upon the nail, to the full, for all Christ's
Elect: therefore it is not required of him, that he should suffer for ever.
Neither can it stand with Gods Justice to hold him under the second death,
having paid the debt.

Now that he has paid, he witnesses, Joh. 19.30. saying, when he had
received the Vinegar, It is finished. So verse. 28. After this Jesus knowing
that all things were accomplished. Many Interpretations are given of the place,
but this alone will hold water; That the heavy wrath of the Lord, which did
pursue Christ, and the second death, that filled him with grievous terrors, is
now over and past. It cannot be construed, of the fulfilling all Types and
figures, for many Types, and Prophecies did pre-figure his death; as that, Dan.
10. that the Messiah must be cut off; and all the Sacrifices must dye; the
Prophecy of his Resurrection, Psalm. 16.10. the prophecy of his intercession,
and sitting at Gods right hand, Psalm. 110.1. Isa. ^3. ult. Therefore the former
sense only is true.

Use 1. Of Terror to Carnal Persons; Conceits removed.
if any argument can shake the heart of a careless wretch, that lives in sin,
this may, to consider Christ's sufferings for sin imputed to him: This will
likewise remove those vain conceits, men have taken up, to secure themselves in
sinning.

1 That sin has no such great evil in it as is imagined; and therefore they
make a mock of sin; blaspheming them, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. that run not to the same
excess of riot with them. Let such know, that besides the judgments recorded
in Scripture against sin, and the tumbling of Angels down from heaven,
reserving them in chains under darkness: besides the casting Adam out of
Paradise for sin: and the drowning the old World; the fire and brimstone of
Sodom; the destruction of Jerusalem; the torments of the damned in Hellfire,
where the worm dies not, and the fire goes not out, Mark 9.44, 46, 48. That
which is ten thousand times more terrible, take thou notice of, that Christ
suffers an agony for man's sin; behold, God dying for the sins of the Elect. See
his misery, who is but a surety, 1 Cor. 2.8. Sins of men, crucify the Lord of
Glory: and put him to so painful, so shameful a death as thou have heard. God
over all, blessed for ever, is cursed in but bearing thy sins. If God so
punished the surety, how will he deal with the principal? Can thou hope* O
impenitent Soul! to speed better in thy own sins, than Christ could, that bare
but the sins of others? 1 Samuel 14.39. As the Lord lives who saves Israel,
though it be in Jonathan my Son, he shall surely dye; said Saul. If the Son
must dye, what will become of the Servant? what will become of the Slave? Laugh
on, but know that Christ wept for sin: rejoice thou, but withal remember that
Christ's soul was heavy to the death about it. And it may be, thou will one
day, hear God laughing at thy misery, as thou do at thy sin, Prove. 1.26. It Is
said of Babylon, Rev. 18.7. So much as she has glorified her self, so much
sorrow and torment give her. Christ smarted for the sins of the Elect: and thou
must one day expect to feel, as much torment for sin, as thou have taken
pleasure in committing of it. The sport and pleasure of sin, is like that play,
2 Samuel 2.14. where they destroyed each other. Young men in merriment and
jollity, make a mirthful pastime of Drunkenness and riotting: till their sports
prove the bloody murderers of each other. Man nor Angel durst not call Christ
accursed, if the Holy Ghost had not said it, Gal. 3.13. and surely then, O vain
man, thy condition must needs be exceeding cursed, if Christ were accursed,
for sin imputed only. Oh the gall of bitterness! that sin will bring wretched
men into. Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2.26.

2 Conceivest thou, Conceit.
that God is merciful, and therefore thou shall do well enough, though thou
do continue in sin. Know, that God spared not his only Son, Romans 8.32. and
why should he spare thee his very enemy? would he not spare a Son? and an
only Son? and will he spare a stranger? an enemy? Shall a Son of Belial speed
better than the Son of God? Did Christ's neerness of relation abate him nothing?
and shall thou be abated? hopest thou to find more mercy at Gods hands, than
Christ could? Luke 23.31. If this be done in the green tree, what will he do
in the dry? Christ was not such dry fuel, for his Fathers wrath to burn up, as
thou art. Rev. 14.10. They shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, poured out
without mixture.

3 But I will pray, Conceit.
and amend my life, and turn over a new leaf, and God will be gracious.

Can thou pray better than Christ? he prayed earnestly, Luke 22.44. with
strong Cries and Tears, Heb. 5.7. he spent whole nights in prayer, Luke 6.12.
yet must he dye the death. Can thou reform and be more holy than Christ? he
fulfilled all righteousness, Matthew. 3.17. He did always what pleased the
Father, Joh. 8.29. and yet all would not be taken for current pay, without his
bearing the extremity of Gods fearful indignation. What hope can thou then
maintain while thou lie in sin?

4 If I go to Hell, I shall have company, Conceit.
and will speed as well as others, and will bear it as well as I can? will thou
bear it O heap of dust? Have thou an Arm like God? Job 40.9. know thou what
thou say? Christ is stronger than all Men and Angels, that created the
Heavens, and bears up its Pillars, that they stagger not, yet blood leaps out
of his veins, when he comes to encounter his Fathers wrath. He cries with
tears, Father, if it be possible, Let this Cup pass from me. And again, he
groans it out. Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of his Anger? that made his Son
thus to cry out? The earth trembled at it. The Sun mourned under an Eclipse at
the sight of it. The graves opened to sigh at his sorrow. The rocks cleft in
sunder. Was the mighty God put to all these perplexities, to bear his Fathers
wrath? And shall such a worm as thou art, be able to wade through such a
bottomless Sea of miseries? All Christ's sufferings were voluntary, and chosen
by himself; and perfectly known before he suffered them, so that he was
prepared for them; nor had he any sin to weaken his strength, or increase his
burden: and fully knew, what infinite good his sufferings would do, to save
thousands, to reconcile God and man, to glorify God, but not one of these
chearing considerations can be found in thy sufferings. Thine will be violent
and sudden, and unknown until thou feel them, and wilt have the burden of
thine own sin, as well as misery; a pitiful gaulded back, to bear so great a
burden; no good can come by all thy torments; and can thou hope to bear so
great a burden as this to eternity? Oh says Spira, That I might endure the
wrath of God, but twenty thousand years! but it must be eternally. Thy soul
must say, after millions of years, The pit is bottomeless, The fire is
unquenchable.

5 But Christ has suffered, Conceit.
therefore surely I never shall suffer these things.

Christ's sufferings cannot prevent, nor ease the torments of Christlesse souls;
Rev. 6.16, 17. 1 Pet. 2.8. None can have the benefit of his death, that have
nor the benefit of his life. His blood justifies none, that continue strangers
to the will of God.

Cavil, But this is Legal Preaching in Gospel times, speak to us of peace in
Christ.

Reply, Surely this is Gospel Preaching, and a principal Doctrine of the Gospel
too. If justification by Christ be legal Doctrine, what is Evangelical? The
Spirit says in the Gospel (though men love not to hear it) Ephesians. 5.6. That the
Unclean, Malicious, Covetous, Drunkards, shall never enter into the Kingdom of
God. And in truth, all the threats of the Law, and torments of the damned,
cannot set out sin in so ugly and dismal a face, as this point does. The Law
shows sin a sword to draw our blood; but this shows it to be a Spear drawing
the heart blood of the Son of God. The Law makes man accursed, the Gospel makes
the Son of God accursed. The sin of all the world on one man, could not bring
him so low, as the least sin of the Elect, can bring the Son of God. Adams sin
threw him out of Paradise, from earth to earth, and his Sons into hell, that
is, but from earth to hell: but Christ is by imputed sin, fallen from the glory
of heaven, to the very sorrows of hell. Whither then will the sinner fly for
succor? Do not think, O impenitent man, that thou can better thy self, by
flying from the Law to the Gospel. If Christ for sin suffered such things,
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.17.

The Extremity and exactness of Christ's Sufferings.
THE SEVENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.


Doct. WE have already proved, and in part applied this Doctrine, That the
Redemption of Sinners was wrought, by Christ's suffering the utmost, and full
punishment du^ to sin. We are now to proceed to the second use

Use 2. This informs, that no punishment (properly so called) belongs to the
Members of Christ, nor are any of their Afflictions to be deemed punishments
for sin. For if Christ has suffered to the full, All the punishment due to his
Members; then there is no punishment left to them to suffer: but Christ has
suffered to the utmost, whatsoever punishment was due to his Members, for their
sin; therefore there is none remaining to be suffered by them. The Proposition
is thus proved: If any of the Members of Christ, should be punished for their
sins, then God the Father should inflict a double punishment for the same sins;
but it cannot stand with the Justice of God, to punish the same sins twice. So
that the bitterest afflictions Gods children suffer in this life, are of a
far differing nature from punishments. Simile.
For as the Sea-waters, though they are in themselves salt, brackish, and
brinish, and very fretful; yet running through the many veins, turnings, and
windings in the earth, lose their saltness, and only retain refreshing,
cooling, and clensing sweetness, and moisture in them: so the afflictions
falling on Gods children, in themselves sharp and brinish, yet running through
the Merits, and Bowels of the Lord Jesus; only retain a cleansing, cooling, and
refreshing nature in them.

Obj. But Gods children suffer as many, and the same material evils with other
men; as poverty, sickness, losses, crosses, and death it self, Eccles. 9.1.
There is one event to all; yea the godly have often the worst of it, Psalm. 73.14.
All the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning: while the
wicked, verse. 5. Are not in trouble like other men. How then does it appear,
that Christ has suffered all the punishment of the elect?

Sol A carnal eye indeed sees things in this estate, but a righteous judgment
sees them far otherwise. Moses could see the Bush all on fire, and yet not
consumed, Exodus 3.2. Daniels companions met with a fiery Furnace, whose flame
burned not those that were in it; but those that stood by, Dan. 3.22, 25. These
were seemingly scorching fiery flames, but were not so in reality. But you will
say, wherein is the difference?

1 In regard of the Principle from whence they come, Difference between
afflictions of godly and the wicked
they much differ. The judgments laid on the wicked come from an angry Judge:
the afflictions of the godly from a loving Father. God punishes the wicked, as
part of their payment, in indignation and wrath, whence they are called
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. And when he is about to fill his belly, God
shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain on him while he is
eating, Job 20.23. All comes to the wicked from a Sin-revenging God: but to the
godly from a careful Father, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives. So God speaks of David, Psalm. 89.30-34.
If his children forsake my Laws, and walk not in my judgments; I will visit
their offenses. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from
him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

2 They differ in their nature. They have not the venom, nor poison in them, 1
Cor. 15.55, 56. that Achitophels had; who being but rejected once in his
counsel, had so much venom of sin in that small affliction, that he hanged
himself.

3 In their suitableness. Miseries are called the Lords cup. An expression
borrowed from Physicians, that have their several Doses of Potions, according
to the several Diseases. Now the wicked has a cup fit for him, Psalm. 11.6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. Where could a man step, when
it rained fire and brimstone in Sodom? This is a killing cup. So Psalm. 75.8. A
cup full of mixture in the hand of the Lord, whose dreggs the wicked of the
earth shall drink. So Jer. 25.28. and Isa. 27.7. The godly have another cup fit
for them: (who also have need of Physic) and this cup sometimes is very
bitter. Joh. 18.11. Shall I not drink of the cup that the Father has given me?
When a Father gives his dear child a potion, how exact will he be? rather
under than over, in the quantities of the ingredients. Christ has drunk
already the poisonous Cup, Matthew. 26.39. Father, if it be possible let this cup
pass from me. None remains but the purging cup. And Gods faithfulness
requires, that this cup be tempered, according to our strength and ability, 1
Cor. 10.13.

4 They differ in their end. Jam. 5.11. You have heard of the patience of Job,
and ye have seen the end of the Lord. What end? That the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy. So did Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph find an happy
issue of all their sorrows, Deuteronomy. 8.16. To do thee good in the latter end.
David said, it was good for him, Psalm. 119. And calls the man blessed who
endures correction, whom God chastises and teaches, Psalm. 94.12. and it is
said, Dan. 11.35. Some of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to
purge them, and make them white. Now the calamities of wicked men do hasten,
and heighten their everlasting destruction; and are at best, but the beginnings
of sorrows, and furtherers of their sins: by making their hearts hard, and
their eyes blind. As it fared with King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that King
Ahaz, that in the time of his distress, trespassed yet more against the Lord.
This also was the event of Jerobeams calamities, for 1 King. 13.4, 33. after
his hand was withered, and again recovered, he returned not from his evil ways.
Look what good the flames of Hell do the damned, as much and no more do
afflictions for the wicked; they curse God, and blaspheme more and more. God
therefore stabs the wicked, as an enemy, with his Sword: but lances the godly,
as a Surgeon his Patient, with the Launcet. Thus chastisements befall the
godly, but punishments the wicked.

Use 3. Of strong Consolation to all the children of God, That Jesus Christ
has suffered all that punishment, Comfort to Gods children.
that their poor souls might have bewailed here, and must have done, for ever
hereafter. Christ has drunk off that cup of trembling to the bottom, he has
left no Curse, no Death eternal, no Hell for you to suffer, your condition can
never be lower, than it is in this world. God bids the Ministers take care to
comfort you, O Elect and precious. Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my
people, etc. they are commissioned from Heaven to speak to your very hearts;
telling you, your iniquities are forgiven. Why? because you have received in
your head money enough to pay your debts to the utmost. As God has given us in
charge to comfort you, so has he given you charge to receive comfort. Let then
the veriest babe in Christ, come and refresh himself with these breasts; suck
at this Nipple; wheresoever is the least spark of true grace, let that soul
rejoice; because Christ suffered, all this perplexity and amazement, that you
might never suffer it. Heb. 2.14. He dyed to deliver those that through fear
of death, etc. he dyed to save you from slavish fear. He wept, that you might
be comforted. He dyed, that you might never dye eternally. He was cursed,
that you might be blessed. He was full of sorrow, that you might always
rejoice, Phil. 3.3. He was accused, that we might be excused: and condemned,
that we might be acquitted: He endured the fierceness of his Fathers wrath
and indignation, that we might never know what belongs to it.

1 Be comforted then in the sharpest brunt of distress, Thou shall be pitied
in sorrows.
whether through terror of heart within, or trouble without; for the Lord will
pity thee in thy worst estate, for Christ's sake, Psalm. 103.13. As a father
pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth all, etc. And Deuteronomy. 8.5. Thou shall
consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his Son, so the Lord thy God
chasteneth thee. And though Christ be in Heaven, yet his bowels and
compassions do yern toward thee. For Heb. 4.15. We have not an High Priest,
that cannot be moved, with the feeling of our infirmities, but he was, in all
points, tempted, etc. Ah how sweet is it to consider, that our High Priest is
no stranger, to soul-troubles, or to body-disquietments; but being tempted as
we are, has a sympathy, and fellow-feeling with us. All our crosses and
trials reach to him, as well as us, Isa. 63.9. He is afflicted in our
afflictions. He escapes not when we are persecuted. Heb. 2.17, 18. He was
made like unto us on purpose, that he might be sensible of our calamities. It
is a lamentable condition a poor soul is in, when it has none to pity, Lam.
1.12. It is their sad complaint, that all past by, and minded not the Church.
She looks for commiseration and finds none, that is a doleful estate. But here
is our rejoicing, that we have a tenderhearted Savior, both able, and willing
to succor his poor servants. And no wonder that he is so willing; for who
would purchase at so dear a rate, and not uphold? Who would beat so much cost,
and at last lose all for a trifle? Has Christ (as Paul speaks of the
Galathians, 3.4, 5.) suffered so many things in vain? Surely, as poor Creatures
are not willing to lose their cost and pains; so Christ will not lose the
travail of his soul; his bitter Death, and bloody Sufferings, for naught. It is
the greatest absurdity in Christian Religion to suppose it. Gal. 2. ult. If
righteousness be by the Law, Christ is dead in vain. But Christ's death is in
vain, and his grace is in vain, if it may not comfort a poor soul in distress.
Turn therefore to thy Beloved in thy distress, and ask him, whether he has
not been in the state of humiliation, a man of sorrows, and one that drunk deep
of the gall and wormwood of Gods indignation; that has felt the wrath of an
angry Judge, and knows what it is to be in a forlorn state; and has paid dear
to undergo the chastisement of our peace: And can he forget his poor Members
in their sorrows, and have no compassion? Can he forget his anointing? how he
was appointed of the Father, to bind up the brokenhearted, to impart the oil
of gladness to his fellows? Has he spent so much blood in vain? try, thus, if
he can turn his back, and leave thee comfort less.

2 Thou shall also be freed from thy sorrows in due season. Thou shall be
freed from sorrows.
God will not only give thee fair words, but thou shall have real help, and
deliverance. Help is promised in due season, 1 Pet. 5.6. and the condition of
the purchase is for seasonable help, or help in the best season, Heb. 4. ult.
What that season is, is dark to us, many times. But who taught the Stork, the
Turtle, and the Crane, in the Heavens, to know their appointed time? Jer. 8.7.
Was it not the Lord our Creator? and shall not he that taught them, know
himself? Shall he not relieve you in your seasons? Now, what is it that gauls?
if we may lay our hands upon the sore, and touch it, it is sin that pricks,
that disquiets: but you know, Heb. 12.18-24. Ye are not come to the mount,
that might not be touched, that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and
darkness, and tempests, etc. but to Jesus the Mediator, and to the blood of
sprinkling, etc. whose blood speaks better things than that of Abel, Genesis
4.9.10. which cried loud for vengeance. All sins speak, but his cried aloud for
vengeance: but Christ's blood must needs cry louder for mercy. For the shedding
of Christ's blood was a greater sin, than the shedding of Abels; for the Jews
sin in Crucifying Christ, was greater than Cains in killing his brother, yet
Christ's blood prevailed to save them, Act. 2.36. Against such as these is no
Law, Gal. 5.22. for they are filled with joy and peace in believing.

Obj. But if Christ has thus perfectly satisfied for my soul, and sin, how is
it that I feel such horror in my soul? Why is it thus with me? the Lord seems
quite to reject me?

Sol. Believers may be deferted, but not utterly forsaken.
Christ's desertion has so qualified all thy desertions, that thou shall not
utterly and finally forsake God: nor he utterly, much less finally forsake
thee. Joh. 119.30. none of Gods children are secured, from being forsaken by
him: Job was, David was, and Asa was, and not without need; For,

1 Else how could they learn to live by Faith, Reasons of desertion.
more than sense? whereas God is much more honored by a life of faith than a
life of sense and feeling.

2 Our condition here is, that of Strangers and sojourners, yea, of Pilgrims;
now if all went well with us, and that we had new supplies of joy daily, we
should take this for our Country, and so displease God.

3 Sometimes Gods people cleave to the Creature, and forsake him; and then no
wonder if he forsakes them. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Jer. 50. ult. They compass
themselves about with sparks, and shall therefore lie down in sorrow.

4 They must in some measure be conformable unto Christ, that they may the
better judge, what Christ has suffered for them. But none of Gods children are
so forsaken as Christ was: for Christ was forsaken in a way of revenge, by God
as a just Judge; but ours comes from another Principle. Again, Christ drunk the
Cup of Gods wrath to the bottom; we do but sip, and taste of the Cup,
sweetened through Christ. This is (in short) the main God intends about it.

1 So to forsake, that he may never totally nor finally forsake thee. He
forsakes for a while, that he may receive thee for ever. And that thou may
love him the more, and seek him with earnestness; and to infer a mutual
increase of love, between God and a Christian. Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment
have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy, etc. In a little wrath have I hid
my face from thee, for a moment, but with eternal kindness will I have mercy on
thee. So was it with the Church, Cant. 3.4. I found him whom my soul loves,
etc.

2 The Lord intends to make us more watchful, for future times: that we may
more rigidly separate, and be divorced from the Creature. Adulterous hearts
have their stolen waters which God hates, and therefore imbitters them, and
shows us thereby, our carelessness about the main. As the Mother hides her self
behind some tree, or wall, to make the Child watchful, and to cry after her,
and search, and hang upon her arms: so does God.

3 The Lord intends by it, to make Christians ransack the right ground of Faith
and Hope: to dive into the Scriptures, and to search the experiences of other
Christians, Psa. 77.56. saying, have you any word of comfort, for such a soul
as mine? It will make him to regard a gracious man, as one of thousand. It will
make him Catechize himself, whether he has any evidence of Gods love; or
whether he lives not in some sin or other; or whether he be willing to part
with all for Christ; or whether he maintains any Communion with God; which are
quickening questions.

Now then if any man be under this calamity to think himself forsaken of God.

1 Let him consider, That the extreme sufferings of Christ, were to reconcile
God and man, to bring God back again to man, and man to his God, 1 Pet. 3.18,
19. which he must wait for.

2 Let him not pass the sentence of reprobation upon himself; or say he is an
Hypocrite, because for the present he is under trouble of Spirit. It had been a
dreadful Conclusion, for Christ to have questioned, whether he was the Son of
God, because of his desertion. Say rather, we may have the presence of his
Grace and Spirit, when we want the presence of his comfort. As a man in a
swoon may have a living soul, though he wants the operation of it; and a man
may enjoy some light of the Sun, in the firmament, though the Sun be eclipsed:
So may a Saint have life, and direction from God, when he finds not its
comfortable actings.

3 Let him take Christ's course, to set faith and praise awork. When Christ was
in his agony, he prayed the more earnestly, Luke 22.41. and used his faith
eminently; crying, My God, my God, etc. Joh. 12.27. Now is my soul troubled;
here is your case: Father save me from this hour: here is your duty: of faith,
crying [Father] of prayer [save me from this hour.]

4 Plead for the Fruit of Christ's desertion; which was, that thou may not
be utterly forsaken, ply him hard, and thou will find him nighter thee, than
thou wast aware of.

3 And be upheld in death it self; Thou shall be upheld in death it self.
for Christ has triumphed over death, Hell and the Devil, in the cross, Col.
2.15. And not only triumphed over them as overcome; but has taken great
spoils, even all their armor: deaths sting is plucked out, the bonds of the
Grave are broken, Death is vanquished by Christ's death, Heb. 2.14. which
resolves Sampsons knotty riddle, Judge. 14.14. Out of the eater comes forth
meat, and out of the strong comes sweetness. Paul keeps the thanksgiving day,
for that happy victory, 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to God, etc. For the whole
Conquest is perfected, Heb. 10.14. and that for ever: And the Testament is for
ever confirmed, Heb. 9.17. by the death of the Testator. Nothing is wanting to
carry us happily to glory, through death it self. There needs no more
sacrifices, nor no second offering for sin; All is finished.

Quest. This is good news, but how shall I know that I have a right to this
comfort?

Answ. Its a weighty Question, and needs a solid resolution, which we shall
hereafter more fully give. At present, take that rule, Heb. 10.14. He has
perfected for ever, them that are sanctified. So Heb. 5.9. He became the
Author of Salvation, unto them that obey him. No Profane, no nor unsanctified
man (however civilized) has any part or portion in this consolation.

Such therefore as think there cannot be a Saint on Earth, or think it too
soon to be holy, or make a mock at a precise Gospel-Conversation, may in no
wise apply this comfort to themselves. It is not enough to be Church Members,
or visible Saints; but we must be sanctified in truth and reallity. Christ
should lose a great part of the effects of his sufferings, if we should not
be sanctified. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Christ gave himself for his Church, that he
might sanctify it, and cleanse it: and can any man think he will lose his end?
and miss his main intent? surely no. There is none but the Church mystical (who
are truly sanctified, and cleansed) that have any fellowship in this
business. Let the upright in heart therefore take this Consolation, as a dish
prepared for none other, but their refreshing, Psalm 32. ult. Deuteronomy. 33.1.

Use 4. Of Refutation of that ignorant discourse of foolish People, who affirm,
That the least drop of Christ's blood is sufficient to save the world. The least
drop of Christ's blood will not save.
Why say they so? because of the dignity of the person of Christ. If this were
true, then the Circumcision of Christ was enough, for there was a drop of blood
shed: or his Crown of thorns was enough, for (it is like) they drew blood. Then
all Christ's sufferings besides were superfluous, and vain. Then God were unjust
to take more than was his due. Then Christ was foolish and imprudent, to pay
more than he needed. But Christ himself says, these many things were
necessary, Mark. 8.3. The Son of man must suffer many things. Luke 24.26. Ought
not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his Glory? There was a
Necessity of suffering; and of suffering these things. There was a necessity in
respect of the end, that the Elect might have the blessing: and therefore
Christ is made a Curse, that he might bear the Curse due to their sin, Gal.
3.13.

The Exactness of Christ's sufferings.
THE EIGHTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.


WE have already in part, applied this Doctrine, That the Redemption of
sinners, was wrought, by Christ's suffering, the utmost and full punishment due
to sin. We are yet farther to proceed in our application.

Use 5. Exhortation and direction. The refuge of greatest sinners.
And first to the vilest sinners. For this Doctrine darts forth a little light,
to those poor souls, in the dark dungeon of their natural, yea, most sinful
estate. It shows a possibility of escape from the wrath to come. It Is true,
none but a sanctified man can have any comfort in Christ's death, or conclude
his salvation by the death and sufferings of Christ: Yet there is hope of
salvation a far off, Psalm. 89.19. There is help laid upon one that is mighty.
Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness dwells. Ephesians. 2.13.
You that were a far off. Psalm. 119.155. Salvation is far from the wicked,
because they seek not thy Statutes. There is corn in Egypt, it is best for the
vile sinner to go thither. Though salvation be so nigh, it is not safe to stand
still. We may safely preach this doctrine, for the Text gives Commission; and
press it, for the Text will bear it. It Is said, ver. 23, 24. All have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God, being justified, etc. This infers not, that
All the sinners in the world, are thus freely justified. This would infer
universal justification: but that is not here intended: The meaning is, That
all sinners, whether Jews or Gentiles, are in themselves, excluded from eternal
life: and all that are justified, are justified by free grace. So that, though
thou know thy self to be a vile sinner, yet some sinners, (you may see) are
justified. In truth, none are justified but sinners, and therefore thou may
see thy self capable of justification: of the same justification that the best
Saints ever partook of. Christ was sent into the World, on purpose to pay the
Ransom for Sinners: and the revealing, and offering this truth, was to save
thee, whatsoever thou art, that hear it. Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son
into the World, to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be
saved.

Quest. How then comes any to be damned?

Answ. He Answers: None is condemned, but they that love darkness rather than
light. Now such exclude themselves from the benefit of Christ's sufferings, Joh.
3.19. Does thy conscience therefore bear witness to thy guilt? Love not thy sin
inseparably, and thy salvation is probable.

Object. True, if I were a sinner as other men, and women, there is
encouragement enough to look out: but my sins exceed for number, weight, and
measure, and therefore my Condition is yet miserable?

Answ. Thou can not name any sin in the World, but final impenitency, but
have many examples of their pardon; and the salvation of some that committed
them, in the word of God. Paul was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and yet found
mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13-17. Manasseh pardoned his murder, witchcraft, Idolatry, and
doing worse than the Amorites, 2 King. 21.1. -- 12. yea, the very murder of
the Son of God was pardonable, Act. 2.37, 38. And what sin can be greater?
Yea, pardon is promised beyond the very thought, and hope of man, Isa. 55.7, 8.
Rebellion against God cannot exclude from pardon, Psalm. 68.18. He received
gifts for the rebellious, that the Lord may dwell among them. God indeed gives
a Caution, to take heed, that there be no root among you that bears gaul and
wormwood, to bless himself in sin, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. It will cost that soul
dear, that harbors such thoughts against God.

There is no mercy in Scripture, nor in Heaven neither, for such a soul as this
is, He must have another word that will maintain this hope, the Scripture will
not bear it. God will not be merciful to any such, as go on in their sinful
courses. Psalm. 68.21. But for the sinner, that is weary of his sins, Romans 5.17.
There is abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness in Christ. Luther
was a man much terrified with his sin, yet he confessed, this was the balsome
of his soul, Romans 11.32. God has shut up all under sin, that he might have
mercy upon all. Therefore let none such despair of Salvation, that are in the
prison of sin. Yea, we may add a word more, but let not the Swine turn about
and rend it: That the more vile thou have been in sin, if thou be the more
vile in thine own eyes, thou art more fit for Mercy, than a Civil man, that
has pleased himself in his own honesty and civility. Matthew. 21.31, 32. says
Christ, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that Publicans and Harlots shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, before you. Christ was a door, by which Publicans
and Harlots, exceeding vile sinners, entered; and this door is open this day to
poor sinners; his sufferings are offered, his blood, even the blood of God, is
provided, and what are thy sins to his blood? what then remains, but that thou
should hasten to thy sanctuary, to that precious ransom? that is paid for
sinners, Isa. 8.14. Christ is a Physician, the whole have no need of him,
Matthew. 9.12, 13. but the sick. And there is no disease incurable to him: and
indeed to look at thy disease as incurable, is to shame thy Physician, and that
will be a worse sin than all the rest.

Quest. How may a sinner come to the benefit of this satisfaction of Christ?

Answ. 1 Rest not till thou have an enlightened, Get an awakned conscience.
and an awakned Conscience. It is certain, a sinner is put in Prison, in hold
(Romans 11.32. God has shut up, or put in hold) before he has deliverance by
Christ. For the Conscience is a lock, which must be opened by Gods key, before
this Jail-deliver can be perfected. Gal. 3.23. Before Faith come, we were
kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith, which should afterward be
revealed. A light goes with the Word, draw not the curtain to keep it out.

2 Take heed, When God arrests thy conscience break not away.
when God arrests thy Conscience, thou make not an escape; As some Malefactors,
that when Law and Justice have taken hold of them, they creep out at some hole,
or break Prison. So some Sinners, when terrified in Conscience, dawb with
untempered Mortar, healing the hurt slightly, by speaking a false peace to
their own hearts: which was Herod's Case, Luke 3.19. who being stoutly reproved
by John Baptist, of his incontinence toward Herodias his brothers wife, and
many other sins; He made his escape, by putting John Baptist in Prison. So did
Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.5, 6. when the man of God reproved him, and the Altar
rent, his hand was withered, and healed, his Conscience was awakened: but when
the Prophet was slain by a Lion, his Conscience fell asleep again. This was
Judas overthrow, he was often terrified by Christ, but he cast himself into a
dead sleep again, by that opinion the Disciples had concerning him, and so lost
all.

3 Let a sinner observe diligently, Observe the working of Christ's death on thy
heart.
and yield to the working of the death of Christ upon his heart, when he comes
to apply his death and satisfaction, to his soul. Let this be minded with
trembling, for there is a drawing power in Christ's blood, that teaches to
sinners, Joh. 12.32, 33. And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw
all men after me. This he speaks, signifying by what death he should dye. 1
He speaks of his death, and lifting up from the earth: 2 He says, then he
would draw all men unto him, and that must needs be meant of them that were out
of Christ: and (the truth is) there was never any brought home to Christ, but
it was by the virtue, and efficacy of his death drawing. Christ lifted up on
the Cross, has purchased the Spirit, for us, Gal. 3.13, 14. and that lays
hold on poor sinners to draw them. Again, Christ was lifted from the Cross to
Heaven, where he intercedes, and applies his satisfaction, as it pleases him,
giving gifts to men, for the gathering of sinners to himself. Gifts given to
the Ministry to gather the rebellious. Be wise, and mind it.

Quest. How shall a Sinner observe this, that he may yield to it?

Answ. 1. See and observe it in the Ministry. Directions to benefit by Gods
drawings.
There are none that attend a faithful Ministry, but have many a pull from
Christ. He lets down his Cords into the deep Dungeon, haling a soul to himself;
sometimes by convincing him of sin, through his Law; commanding by his terror,
Mind Gods drawings by the Ministry.
enticing by sweet invitations, and sweeter promises; so that the sinner has
sometimes thoughts, That all is naught with him, and he resolves amendment. And
sometimes Christ hampers a soul, that he cannot get away, nor rest, whither
soever he goes: Christ tuggs at him, and the man wonders at himself, why it is
thus with him! O Sinners, take notice, that Ministers are but throwing Christ's
Casting-net, and laying his Toyls. Take heed how you carry your selves; say
not, with the Heathen, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break his bonds in sunder, and cast
away his cords from us, for he that sits in Heaven will take cognizance of it,
and vex you in his sore displeasure. Yield rather to Christ, to be drawn by
him.

2 Take heed of with-drawments, and pull-backs: Take heed of pull-backs.
thy heart within, and the world without; thy cursed counsels, and worldly
snares will stave thee off, Heb. 10. ult. the Devil also will have a pluck at
you; yea Christ never draws, but he pulls with all might and main. Now if you
decline by these retractions, you give place to the Devil.

3 Think not to be drawn as stocks and stones, Think not to be drawn as stocks
and stones.
but as reasonable Creatures, that when they fall into a pit, labor to get out
again: and make use of what help they can get from others; and further all that
they have yet received. As those, Jer. 3.22. when the Lord said, Turn ye
backsliding children, they say, Behold we come unto thee, etc. and Psalm. 37.
ult. It is good to draw near unto God; yea, the greatest good in the world. Say
therefore, now Christ's death is bringing me to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. It is the
happiness of the Creature, to enjoy communion with God; and shall not I
receive it, when it is offered? Since God works, let me work out my Salvation.

4 Justify God in all thy bitterness, that he exercises thee under, Justify
God in all thy bitterness.
in bringing thee home to Christ. Jam. 4.10. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, etc. and justify his dealings with thee, when God
approaches with his Word or Rod. God casts down before he raises, Hos. 2.14. I
will bring them into the Wilderness, and there will I speak comfortably to
them. Even to a wildernesse-condition does he bring his people; as he did
Israel, amongst fiery stinging Serpents, and appalling dangers. They must pass
through the valley of Achor, that is, of consternation, which is the door of
hope. For man has never a hopeful sign on him, till he has passed his
perplexed estate. To every true Convert, God gives testimony of that truth,
Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thine own
backslidings shall reprove thee, that thou may know what an evil, and a
bitter thing it is, to forsake the living God. And it is mercy that thy
wickedness does but correct, though with Scorpions: since it has condemned
others, and might have damned thee. It is well that he lays nothing more bitter
and heavy, that has a cup of trembling at his beck, and Hell before him. Nay,
it is not enough neither, that thou should submit, when thou art humbled of
God: for thou ought to humble thy self under Gods hand (as the Apostle
speaks) else the Devils are as humble as thou art. He that fights, and flings,
to shake off the yoke, is a fighter against God; he rather justles with him,
than justifies him. Say with Ephraim, Turn me, and I shall be turned, Jerem.
31.18, 19. For after I was turned, I repented; after I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh: I was ashamed, and even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth. When God humbled Ephraim, he humbled himself; He was
active in his humiliation as well as passive; God threw him low, and he threw
himself lower. Then God says, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he my pleasant
child? such a welcome will thy soul find with God. Therefore when God humbles
thee for sin, go thou, and gage thy heart, as it is in the Prophet, Ezekiel, 8.7.
God showed him a little hole, then he saw a little, but God bid him dig,
till he had found a door; and then he saw worse and viler abominations: So when
God, through some crevise or peeping hole has showed thee some small sins;
dig further into thine heart, and thou shall see more, and greater, to bewail
before the Lord. And justify him in all thy sufferings for those sins.

Thus did David, Psalm. 51.4. God spoke to him, and afflicted him, and he
justified the Lord in doing so: that is, he acknowledged, the Lord dealt
graciously, and mercifully with him, in so afflicting him. He puts his mouth in
the dust, Lam. 3.29. If there may be any hope; he sits alone, and keeps
silence, and bethinks himself, saying, What have I done? It is a good course
for a sinner to take, under his affliction to cry, The Lord is righteous, and I
am wicked: I have reason rather to wonder, the Lord has laid no more upon me,
than to murmr that he has laid so much, knowing that, Ezr. 9.13. God has
punished us less than our iniquities deserve.

5 Take with thee a word of confession, and supplication, Pray for abilities to
come.
and acknowledge thy self a stranger to private Communion, and secret Duties
with thy God; and then set thy self about the performance of them, though thou
be unskilful in them. Thou need but take words, Hos. 14.2. for God will
put them into thy heart and mouth, and thine own necessity will suggest much
unto thee. Solomon says, Prove. 18.23. The poor man speaks supplications. He
that never knew what beging meant, yet when he is pinched with poverty, will
be able to pray: The little child that can but stammer, will tell his Father
where the pain is, and beg some help of him: so it will be with thee. Thus
could Paul do it presently, Acts 9.11. Behold he prays. The word signifies
continuance in prayer, he prays and prays again, three days together. Jacob
meeting with the Lord as an enemy, wrastled with him in prayer, Hos. 12.4. do
thou likewise. It is in vain to stand poring on thine afflicted condition, but
run for help, and as the poor Widow served the unjust Judge, Luke 18.4, 5.
weary God with thy complaints, never let him rest, till he give thee a
yielding answer; according to that promise, Isa. 56.6, 7.

6 Adventure upon the grace of God in Christ, Cast thy self on his mercy.
cast thy self on his mercy, as did the Prodigal, Luke 15.18. saying, I will
arise and go to my Father, etc. what hope could such a Vagabond wretch have,
of his Fathers acceptance? yet he thought it best to adventure upon this
course. Thinks he, if I must perish, I will perish at my Fathers door; you
know how he sped. Just like those Lepers in the gate of Samaria, 2 King. 7.4.
Mind their success.

1 Consider the large extent of the virtue of Christ's death, Motives. Consider
the extent of his death.
unto all sorts, both Jews and Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2, 6. God will have all to be
saved, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out. It is
no matter who, nor what manner of person he be, or has been, so he come at
last, he may assure himself he shall not be cast out; whatsoever villainy he
has lain in, suppose him a Drunkard, Murderer, Persecuter, etc. So 1 John
2.1, 2. and Gal. 3.28. Christ said to the polluted child, lying in his blood,
live, Ezekiel. 16. Christ calls not righteous, but sinners, great and foul
sinners, Matthew. 9.13. yea his bitter enemies, Romans 5.6, 8, 10. When we were
enemies, etc. Christ has opened a door to the vilest sinner.

2 Consider the large offer of Christ by the Ministry, Consider the large offer.
Mat. 22.9. All sorts are invited to the feast, Luke 14.21. He (that is Christ)
shall stand for an Ensign to the people, an erected standard, Isa. 11.10. to
gather whole Armies to him; under Christ their General and Commander. This
standard no opposite rage of the wicked can ever pluck down; but it shall be
rest to them that gather unto it, though sinners have no rest in themselves.
Moses lifted up the Serpent, that all might look unto it for cure of their
stingings: so is Christ lifted on the Cross, that all may see a Redeemer, Joh.
3.14, 15. and so lifted up in the Word, that every wounded soul in the world,
may hear him speaking peace to them that are near, and to them that are afar
off; and if Christ has appointed himself to be lifted up to all poor undone
Sinners, then see that you slight not your remedy, but come, lifting up your
heads with joy, for your redemption draws nigh.

3 Consider how serious an offer the Lord makes of Christ Crucified, Consider
how seriously the offer is made.
to all to whom the Gospel is preached, Isa. 9.6. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts
will perform this. Giving a strict command that it be carefully preached to
every Creature, Mark 16.15. annexing a promise of his presence with it. He
keeps the fountain open, Zach. 13.1. not shut up, nor sealed, but open for all
comers. Say not, God does but mock us, for he knows sinners cannot come, and
receive him: for they rather will not come, nor receive Christ. Joh. 5.40. You
will not come unto me, that you might have life. And you may see God is in good
earnest, for you are like to be damned for not obeying, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
Therefore Christ is serious, and no man perishes but by his own fault, that
hears these truths preached to him.

4 Though it be true, Receive Christ and that witnesses he is sent to thee.
That Jesus Christ did not lay down his life, for every particular man or
woman, to whom this Gospel is preached: yet this is the only sure way, to put
it out of question, that he dyed for thee in particular; that is, to receive
and embrace the Lord Jesus and him crucified, John 1.12. Acts 10.12. Isa. 56.3,
7. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31. He
certainly dyed for all them that do believe.

The Extremity of Christ's Sufferings.
THE NINTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.


Use 2. Of exhortation to the Saints.
TO prosecute this point yet further, take a second use of Exhortation, for the
Members of Christ, that have an interest in this satisfaction, to consider the
several Duties, this truth calls them to.

1 It calls to bitter mourning for sin all our days: Christ's members should
mourn for sin.
It should maintain a constant spring of godly sorrow in our hearts, to
consider what the Lord Jesus has undergone for us, and what wrong and injury
we have done him. For the clearing which, mind that famous place, Zech.
12.10. The Lord says, I will pour out upon the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, and supplication; and they shall
look upon him whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him, etc. This
place concerns properly the Jews, but typically, the whole Church of Christ.
And it imports, that they shall have such a work of God upon their hearts; that
they shall look upon Christ crucified, by faith, and mourn, that themselves
have peirced him; and that he was wounded for their iniquities, and bruised
for their transgressions: and not only for them, but by them, yea by every sin
that has been committed by them. Thus should every Christian do, that has
any interest in Christ's sufferings; even to be in bitterness for every sin, as
a man is in bitterness for his only Son. Which expression hints to us the
manner, measure, and degree of their mourning. You know, Parents mourning for a
Son, and an only Son, and a Son whom themselves have murdered with their own
hands, is very bitter: tongues cannot express it, but tender Parents may
imagine it: and David's mourning for Absolon represents it, with Rachels grief,
that would not be comforted. It is again compared, to the mourning of the
valley of Hadadrimmon, etc. that is, as the mourning of Judah, Jerusalem, and
Jeremiah, for the death of Josiah, slain by Pharaoh Necho, 2 Chro. 35.24, 25.
which was exceeding bitter, as appears, in that the Singing-men, and
Singing-women speak of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day: yea they
composed solemn Lamentations for Josiah, and made it an Ordinance in Israel,
that they should lament for him in after times. Such a mourning should that
be, of the members of Christ, for him whom their sins have peirced, upon these
ensuing grounds.

1 That thou may not say, Grounds of Saints mourning.
the Jews only slew the Lord Jesus, and that thou had no hand in it. Be
assured that Christ was wounded for, and by the sins of all those that shall be
saved, Isa. 53.4, 5. yea, there is never a sin, that any of the Elect ever did,
do, or shall commit, but peirced Christ. If he suffered not for it, it cannot
be forgiven. All the Jews and Gentiles, Devil and all, could not have destroyed
Christ, had not the sins of the elect met on him.

2 The killing Christ is a far fouler bloud-guiltinesse, than ever David
incurred: than to kill an only Son: or to murder a Josiah, a King, a godly
King: for this is the crucifying the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. and may
therefore well be lamented.

3 The love we owe, and bear to Christ, for his unparalled condescentions, to
make us heirs of glory, should engage our hearts, to weep for his death, as he
did for Lazarus's death, Joh. 11.35, 56. which the Jews took notice of, to be
the probate of his love: Behold how he loved him. Thus Christ imputes the
repenting tears, of that sinful woman, Luke 7.47. to love. Christ's great
graciousnesse makes the most stony heart to lament its provocations.

4 The sense of our dreadful, and undone estate, that needed the death of
Christ, to establish a Covenant of Grace with us, should provoke us to be in
bitterness: as God expects. Ezeck. 16.62, 63. And I will establish my Covenant
with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. That thou may remember,
and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee; for all that thou have done, says the Lord.

5 The Spirit of grace and supplication is now poured forth, into the soul; and
that Spirit is a spirit of Lamentation, and works and continues, a broken and
contrite spirit, in all that receive it; as it did in those Converts, Acts
2.37. Pricking them to the heart, for all their wrongs and injuries put upon
Christ, for embruing their hands in his precious blood.

Look back therefore upon thy pleasure that thou have taken in sin; and with
what greediness thou have committed it: and compare them with Christ's
sufferings, and what he deserved at thy hands; that it may break thy heart, as
it did David's, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. when he had long lain in a slumbering
condition, and God told him, how much he had done for him; wondering that after
so much love, he should despise his Commandments, and make so wretched a
requital. How does he cry out upon his sins, verse. 13. and loathes himself?

Obj. But a Christian should rejoice in the Cross of Christ, how then comes it
to be the object of sorrow? Sure Paul thought otherwise, Gal. 6.14.

Sol. How the Cross is a ground of rejoicing as well as of mourning.
It is true, Christ's Cross is a ground of rejoicing as well as a ground of
sorrow: Of sorrow, in respect of that hand we had in his death, the wounds
which our sins gave him, the hard dealing, and unkind requital, he has
received for all his love: Of joy, in respect of the benefits, and good we
receive by his death. Let us therefore maintain a spring of godly sorrow, for
our sins; and streams of joy for the blessings we receive by him: which is the
true eating the Passover, with bitter Herbs, Exodus 12.8. Also making
confession of their sins, Levit. 16.21. The Papists have a seeming practice of
this duty, keeping Good Friday in penance and lamentation, setting up a
Crucifix before them, and zealously hating the Jews for putting Christ to
death; but think not of their own sins, that they had a hand in it. To whom
Christ might justly say, as to the Women weeping at his Cross, Luke 23, 28. O
ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves; for your
sins, whereby you have wounded me: which is the duty of every Christian.

2 Upon the consideration of Christ's extreme sufferings for Sin, the Members of
Christ are pressed hard, Christ's members should hate sin.
to hate every evil way, and to shun all sin for ever.

1 Because it was one end of Christ's crucifying, To hate sin is the end of
Christ's death.
that sin and the flesh should be crucified, Gal. 5.24. that, They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh: (understanding by the flesh, the corruption
of Nature, with the affections, and lusts of it.) Christ's members should pluck
up the very roots of sin, the very inward lusts that grow in the heart, Romans
6.6. Knowing this, that our Old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed; that is, the whole corruption of Nature, may be killed by
the death of Christ; yet not so far as to free us from all sin, but that we
might not serve sin, or obey it in the lusts thereof. For this cause did Christ
bear our sin upon the Cross, That we being dead unto sin, might live unto
righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. That is, that we should behave our selves like
dead men, not to be moved nor enticed to sin. For first, this was the end which
God propounded to himself, in his Sons death, to destroy sin. We must be very
careful, how we frustrate the end of God, in our giving way to sin. Secondly,
Christ has by his death merited the death of sin, and so we are said to dye
with Christ, and so be freed from sin, Romans 6.7. Thirdly, add to this, the
efficacy of Christ's death, which works the ruin of sin in all his members.
Hence Phil. 3.10. we read of a power and force in the death of Christ, to make
us conformable to his death: while his Spirit is killing sin in us. So that
Christ's death has no comfort, for them that hate not sin.

2 Our sin killed Christ; We must hate sin because it killed Christ.
if then we have any love to Christ, we must needs kill sin. Psalm. 97.10. Ye
that l ve the Lord, hate evil. The Love of Christ constrains us to it. 2 Cor.
5.14. The law of Nature makes a man, that he cannot endure the sight of one
that has killed his father, or his dear Friend: but his very heart will rise
against him; and he cannot choose but follow the Law upon him, to the utmost,
to hang him, if all the law in the World will do it. And can we be so
unnatural, that sin should destroy our dearest Savior, and we not be avenged
upon it? How should we be transported with Indignation at sin, that brought
on our Redeemer the pains both of the first and second death? Then let us
pursue our sins with all possible detestations; if we let them go, we are no
Friends to Christ. Let us stab them to the heart, till they bleed their last,
that drew the blood of Christ. Let them never come to any Sanctuary, or City of
refuge; but as Avengers of that precious blood, let us leave sin no shift, no
way to escape. Let us say to them as David to the young man, that told him he
had slain Saul, 2 Samuel 1.14. How wast thou not afraid to stretch out thy hand,
to destroy the Lords anointed? and David commanded him strait to be slain; do
thou likewise. Reason thus also against all temptations: these sins were the
death of my Savior, and why should they be my delight? They pierced his hands
and feet, and wounded his soul, and why should they be contentment to mine? God
forbid.

3 Mind the desert of sin, We must fear sin because it crushed Christ
and the severe proceedings of God against it, in Christ our surety. Luke
23.31. If this be done in the green tree, what will be done in the dry? Christ
was the Green tree full of sap, exceeding fruitful, the true vine, Joh. 15.1.
the very emblem of fruitfulness; yea, the tree of life, Rev. 2.7. yet this
could not exempt him from his sharpest sufferings. Christ was free from all sin
in his nature, the Devil himself could find nothing in him, Joh. 8.46. but we
have a World of wickedness in us. Christ was full of righteousness, Romans 5.17.
and we full of wickedness, yet God spared not his Son: where shall we ungodly
and sinners appear? Christ was the only begotten, and we are in comparison
strangers: if he had no tenderness to his Son, what can his Slaves hope for?
Christ was both God and Man in personal Union, strengthened by Angels, yet what
Agony? what tears? what conflicts did he undergo? we are but stubble, but a
rotten stick, fit fuel for everlasting burnings; how shall we stand in the day
of trial? O it is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of the living God,
Heb. 10.31. Oh that we had hearts to apprehend the evil of sin, before we
come to feel it! Blessed are they that believe, and fear, and tremble, and
never experimentally know, the vileness of sin. God seeing the hardness of our
hearts, has manifested the evil of sin, by the sufferings of Christ; a better
argument, then all the curses, racks, and torments of Hell it self, could
produce, to demonstrate the dreadful nature of it. This may convince the
hardest hearts in the world; and let the very godly themselves see, that sin is
more vile, than ever they imagined it to be.

4 Know that sin will kill us, as well as it killed Christ, if we prevent not
the malignity of it. Death is the proper wages of sin, both the first and
second death.

Object. But a Child of God is in no danger of sinning, nor of eternal
punishment?

Sol. Surely it is true Doctrine, that 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. The time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God. We know how Churches have smarted
for sin, for little sins in the Worlds account. The Jews cast off for unbeleef:
Saints corrected, though not damned, for sin.
the Church of Ephesus for forsaking her first love: Laodicea for lukewarmness,
threatened to be dis-Churched: Add that, Ezekiel. 9.6. the destroying Angel had a
charge, to begin at Gods sanctuary. Yea, many godly men smart for their
boldness in sin, here in this World. Paul writes to Saints, Romans 8.13. and yet
tells them, If you live in the flesh? ye shall dye, and speaks not only of a
temporal, but eternal death. You will say it is not possible for Saints to dye
eternally. I answer, it is as possible for Saints to dye eternally, as to sin
eternally. Let all men look to it, for sin continued in, will certainly destroy
all its practitioners.

Having therefore these considerations. Let us dread to have any thing to do
with sin. This consideration is proposed to this very end, Heb. 12.2, 3. that
the sight of what Christ endured by sin, might make us constant and courageous,
in withstanding all the fiery darts of the Devil, and declining every evil way,
striving against it unto blood, verse. 4. as Christ did to the very death; not
refusing the worst of sorrows, The worst sorrow is better than the best sin.
to eschew the best of sins; to part with your heart blood, as well as your
good names, ease, and profit, if God call you to it. Thus does Peter argue, 1
Pet. 4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered in the flesh for us, let us
arm our selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin, that he no longer should live, the rest of his
life in the flesh, to the lusts of men, etc. The issue of the words is this,
The Faithful have Union and Communion with Christ, and therefore they must be
conformable to Christ in Holiness: but must ceafe from sin, arguing thus.

That if we have lost our head for sin, it is not possible we should live in
sin any longer; but we have lost our head for sin. Or thus, All they dyed in
Christ for sin, for whose sin Christ dyed: and they that dyed once for sin,
cannot sin any more. If therefore thou continuest to sin, how beleevest thou
that Christ dyed for thee? Let thy conscience be the judge.

3 Has Christ loved us so dearly, Christ's death merits our love that merited
heaven for us.
as to suffer such dreadful torments for us, then what shall we do for Christ?
O man, return this day an Answer to the Lord, what course thou will take to
walk suitable to his kindness. When David received a deliverance from God, he
says, Psalm. 18.1. I will love thee dearly, O Lord my strength. God showed him
much love, and he intends to make a retaliation. And indeed love is the
Lodestone of love. Never was such love shown, as that of Christ. Rev. 1.5. Who
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Ephesians. 5.2. Who gave
himself for us, his life and blood, and all. Yea, he parted with his fathers
love, which was a thousand times better than life, for us: He became accursed
that might have been blessed. Let us not be scanty in our love to him, but
give him our heart, both freely and liberally to the death: his death well
merits our love that merits heaven for us. Where Christ has laid such deep
engagements, sleepy, faint, good wishes, will not serve the turn. Love in
Christ was stronger than death, it is pity that any cold velleities of love and
service, should be our sacrifice. All blessings of the World should endear us,
more and more to the Lord; but oh what an Obligation should it be, that Christ
became a Curse for us? The very Masterpiece of all mercies and blessings to
the Elect: yea, it gives a sweet seasoning to all our blessings, which have a
Curse cleaving to them, for all that are out of Christ, turning all their sweet
morsels into the poison of Asps, or into gravel, Prove. 1.32. yea, their
prosperity is destructive. Alas! what are Riches? and Accommodations? and good
fare? when the Lord once charges Sin upon the conscience? what is it to be
rich and reprobate? to be deliciously fed with the rich Glutton, and a damned
creature? The World is a Prison, and Riches are shakels, Creatures are enemies,
all we have is vanity and vexation of spirit; all blessings turned into
cursings, Mercies are curses without Christ's death.
yea, and all Ordinances, gifts, parts, duties, etc. without Christ's blood, are
but carnal things. You say, how does that appear? why, Ephesians. 1.3. those are
alone spiritual blessings, that are given us in Christ. Yea, they are dead, and
deadly things without Christ; for the letter kills. It Is his Divine power
that sets all a work, 2 Pet. 1.3.

Let us then fix our thoughts therefore on Christ's sufferings: not only now
and then, giving them a slight glance or two, as they come in our way. Let us
dwell on the Meditation of his infinite love, till our hearts are warmed, and
enlarged by it; till it kindles heavenly affections in us, till his love
constrains us to every good duty. 2 Cor. 5.14. It Is that the greatest part of
the World never knew: God has not showed his love to all people. Let Christ's
love therefore work love in thee, out-biding all other loves. Matthew. 10.37. to
hate the very best things in nature, in comparison of Christ: yea, our love to
Christ should make us bold to attempt anything commanded by him. So it wrought
in Paul, Act. 21.13. I am ready to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. And if
any man love him not. says Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22. Let him be accursed, till the
Lord come.

4 Let this Argument enforce brotherly love. It Is the Holy Ghosts own
inference, We cannot bestow our love better than on them whom Christ loves.
1 John 4.11. If Christ so loved us, we ought to love one another. For we
ought to love them best that Christ loved best. We cannot bestow our
affections better, than where Christ has bestowed his: Now Christ has
bestowed his dearest bowels on the Saints: so also ought we to be tender of
each other. Far be it from any Christian, to be of the mind of Joseph's
brethren, to hate him the more, because their Father Jacob loved him; or
because: the Saints have more grace, or more infirmities than our selves. They
must be loved for their Fathers sake, though they should give us some cause to
slight them.

Christ's Propitiation.
THE TENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Whom God has set forth a Propitiation.


I Have spoken of the Redemption and Satisfaction of Christ, and the fullness of
that satisfaction.

Now of the efficacy thereof, which is expressed in the word [propitiation]
together with the efficient cause thereof (i.e. God the Father) and his manner
of working, in the word [set forth]

Propitiation signifies the Lords Reconciliation to sinners, by way of
Sacrifice. Heb. 2.17. Propitiation what it means (...) unde (...).
Christ is said to be a merciful High Priest, in things pertaining unto God,
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Where the Verb of which the
word in the Text comes is used. It belonged to the Priest when the people had
sinned, to make reconciliation for them to God by way of sacrifice; as often in
Levit. 5. and 6. for which end God appointed certain expiatory sacrifices in
the time of the Law; the beast must dye instead of the sinner. And this does
singularly set forth and express, both the Priestly Office of Christ, that it
belongs to him, and him only, to make an atonement: and that by way of
Sacrifice, and oblation to God. So Levit. 23.27, 28.

Propitiation is also often used for the Mercy Seat. Heb. 9.5. referring to
Exodus 25.17, 18, 21, 22. which Mercy Seat covered the Ark of the Testimony,
wherein were put the two tables of the Law: and there says God, I will meet
thee. I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two
Cherubims, for all things that I will give thee in commandment unto the
children af Israel. Where we may consider, 1 That as the Mercy Seat covered
the Tables of the Law, from the face of God dwelling between the Cl^^ru^ims
above the Ark: So Christ does cover the transgressions of both the Tables of
the Law, from the face of God, that he should not behold sin so as to impute
it to the faithful. Thus 1 John 2.2. 2 The Mercy Seat was the place where God
used to meet his people, and to show himself reconciled to them. 3 There they
might consult with God in their straights. 4 That over against the Mercy Seat,
the Priest went daily to offer sacrifice, Heb. 9.6. So that in this word is
contained both the means appointed for the atonement, i.e. The Sacrifice of
Christ: and also the Lords reconcilement unto the persons of his people. 5 The
Mercy Seat contained the Law; so does Christ all our righteousness. 6 It was
interposed betwixt the Testimony, and the Lord; so is Christ betwixt God and
our sins.

Doct. Through the sacrifice of Christ's blood, the Father is pacified.
That through the Sacrifice of Christ, God is pacified and appeased with all
those that have fellowship with Christ. 1 John 2.1, 2. Christ is called our
propitiation in the abstract. Signifying, that all which is requisite to pacify
Gods anger against us, is laid up in Christ, and his Death: there needs
nothing more but only the pleading of his merit with the Father, which also
Christ himself does as our Advocate. 1 John 4.10. God sent his Son to be the
propitation for our sins. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Romans 5.9 Being justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath through him. This was typified by all the
Sacrifices, from the beginning of the World. All the virtue in them, was by
virtue of Christ's death. Heb. 10.4. The death of a beast could not suffice by
way of Exchange, for the death of a man. If a subject should be a Traitor to
his Sovereign: would the King take his Cattels life for his? much less then can
the wrath of God be appeased with the blood of beasts. It is only by Christ's
death. Romans 5.1. Matthew. 3.17. Ephesians. 1.6. Luke 2.14. The Mercy Seat was called
the Propitiatory, as here Christ is called the Propitiation. No propitiation
was by the Mercy Seat without blood, Heb. 9.7. thus sweetly prefiguring the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

Quest. Wherein stands this pacifying of Gods anger?

Answ. There be three things employed in it, 1 The wrath of God before to be
kindled against sinners. Romans 3.5. 2 That the effects of his anger in
punishment and judgments, are hanging over the sinners head. 3 It does mainly
import the turning away of those judgments, and the quenching of that wrath,
with the exemption and delivery of the sinner therefrom. All which we find,
Col. 1.21. And you that were sometimes alienated, etc. So Isa. 59.2. compared
with Ephesians. 2.13.

Quest. How God is pacified toward them whom he loved eternally.
How can God be said to be pacified toward them that have fellowship with
Christ, seeing that undoubtedly God loved them, from all eternity?

Answ. 1 Ephesians. 2.3. whatever we are by grace; yet by Nature we are children of
wrath. Or as the Apostle, Romans 11.8. Concerning the Gospel they are enemies,
but as touching Election, they are beloved, for the Fathers-sake. So indeed
Gods chosen being yet in a natural estate, they are enemies to God, and God is
an enemy to them, in regard of their sin: But the same are beloved as touching
Election, even before their Calling. As Absolon was beloved of David as a Son,
but hated as a Rebel and Traitor. 2 Two things must be considered in the love
of God: his benevolence, and his beneficence. Or his affection to the Elect,
and his manifestation thereof: That is eternal, in Election; This is not until
they are brought home to Christ. 1 John 4, 9. Before the Elect do believe the
wrath of God, and all the effects of that wrath are removed from their persons,
by the satisfaction of Christ: and they have interest in the special love of
God. But not in knowledge, sense, and enjoyment thereof, until faith be
wrought, 1 John 4.16.

1 Reas. From the Office of Christ: as being made Mediator betwixt God and
man. Now the Mediators work is to bring both the parties at odds unto peace
and atonement. Thus Christ, Isa. 9.7. Col. 1.20. He makes peace by the blood
of his Cross, i.e. the bloody death upon the Cross. And all those that are in
Christ do partake in their measure, and as they are capable, of all the
benefits of Christ; and are free from the wrath of God.

2 Reas. From their union with Christ. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ.

3 Reas. Because this is all that God requires, that there should be a full
satisfaction made to him, for the injuries done to him, by sinful creatures:
whether the satisfaction be made by themselves, or by their surety, Heb. 7.22.
Now the surety being of Gods own appointment, and the satisfaction such every
way as cannot be excepted against; it must needs follow, that God can have no
further controversy with them that are in Christ.

4 Reas. This was one end of Christ's sending into the world; to pacify his
Fathers wrath. 1 John 4.10. Now then if this should not be accomplished fully,
his incarnation, his grievous sufferings, and his fathers love to the Elect
should all be in vain.

Use 1. The dreadful condition of those that are not in Christ.
This shows their misery, that are not in Christ, in that they are objects of
the displeasure, and wrath of God. What comfort can any poor creature have when
God is angry with him? Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all, etc. God has power enough to punish sin, and justice that he
will do it; and this he has revealed from heaven, in those unknown, and
unknowable sufferings of his Son Jesus Christ.

Let me say to you, as Paul to Agrippa, Do ye believe the Prophets, or
Apostles either? Oh why should I propound such a question in this place; and in
these professing days? Alas, if we did all believe them, why are there so
many half Christians amongst us? Do they know the power of thine anger O Lord?
as Moses, Psalm. 90.11. Thou that did not spare the Angels that sinned, but
castedst them down to Hell, and deliveredst them unto chains of darkness to be
reserved to the judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2.4. what will thy justice
and wrath be to other sinners? Consider the Angels, what glorious creatures
they were? what an innumerable company there was of them? and what chains of
darkness are cast upon them already? and what further terror of eternal
judgment is expected by them, and reserved for them? and that for one sin? How
comes this to pass? why, because they have no Christ, no propitiation, no
Mediator to suffer and satisfy for them. Deuteronomy. 29.24. What then means the
heat of this great anger? Even to show thee, that whilst thou art without
Christ, thou art in the state of the very Devils: thy glory or excellency shall
not deliver thee from wrath: any one of thy sins may make thee eternally
miserable. O remember this, and show your selves men: bring it again to mind, O
ye Transgressors, Isa. 46.8. show your selves to have the understanding of
reasonable creatures, and that in the knowledge of this. Not so much the
motions of the Heavens, or any such curious Arts, had need to be known by you,
but the motions of Hell? what rivers of brimstone are running there, kindled by
the wrath of this angry God.

Quest. Who are those that know not the power of Gods anger? Who they are that
know not Gods anger.


Answ. 1 They that fear it not, but are bold in committing of sin, Jer. 8.6.
that do rush into sin, as the horse in the battle, Jerem. 8.6. Like the horse
of war, Job 39.22, 29. he knows not what hurt the sword or the spear may do
him, therefore he fears them not. So it is with them that are bold to commit
any (though the smallest) sin, that they know to be a sin.

2 They that are hardened in sin, Ephesians 5.6. those unperswadable persons. As
Covetous persons gather gold: so these do add sin to sin, and fuel to fire,
and wrath to wrath against the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
Romans 2.3. hence Romans 9.22. they are called vessels of wrath: and they shall be
filled brimful with it. Zach. 7.11, 12. They refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear; This is
the very description of a hard heart. Oh ye generation of vipers, can ye
escape the damation of hell? said our Savior, Mat. 23.33.

3 There be Lingerers, that as Lot, do delay to depart out of Sodom; after
they are warned of eminent judgments. These know not the dread of Gods anger.
The children of God are sometimes too slack, in preventing particular
judgments. But the case is far worse with them, who lie in a state of sin
untepented of; and are every moment exposed to eternal vengeance. And the best
that they will be brought unto, is but promises and purposes of amendment
hereafter. Ah how quickly is Gods anger kindled. Josh. 22.18. ye have sinned
to day, and to morrow he will be wroth. How immediately and dreadfully did
he destroy Corah, Nadab, and Sapphira, etc. And though he be patient, yet
he has not limited any set time, for his patience to be protracted to.
Sometimes he cuts off men in the very act of sin, and then all their good
purpose sdo perish.

4 Those who when Gods anger has seized on them in part, they take a wrong
course, and fall to shifting off the hand of God, e.gr. They are sick, and they
run to the Physician; they are poor, and they fall to filching and
overreaching, etc. and so in like cases. But Christ is forgotten all this
while, yea, and sin too: and thus they regard not the removal of that. These
are they whom Elihu speaks of, Job 36.21. that choose sin rather than
affliction: and hope to escape affliction by sin: forgetting the true cause,
that is, Gods displeasure, and the certain remedy, that is, the grace of Christ.

5 Stiff unbeleevers, the wrath of God abides on them, that shall never be
removed. John 3. last verse.

Object. But we see wicked men prosper?

Answ. They do sometimes prosper outwardly, but then God sends leanness into
their souls, as, Psalm. 106.15. and spiritual judgments, Psalm. 81.10. Hos.
4.14. To be under wrath and not to feel it, is the worst of conditions. When
God does reserve his wrath for men, and lay it up in store unto the day of the
righteous and dreadful revelation thereof.

Use 2. Comfort to men in Christ.
Here is great consolation to men in Christ. The great thing that we have to
fear is the wrath of God, and that which mainly does trouble the soul, is his
anger. Now we being in Christ, this is done away, Hos. 4.14. Romans 8.1. All
sins are covered. All good shall be bestowed. Every affliction shall be
sanctified and advantageous. We may boldly meet with God, and consult with him
before his Mercy Seat.

Object. But does not Gods anger sometimes smoke against the sheep of his
pasture? Psalm. 74.1. David complains there was no soundness in his flesh,
because of Gods anger, etc.

Answ. It cannot be denied but that his anger may be so far kindled against
such a one that he may hide his face from him, and lay sad afflictions upon
him. But then it is not the vindicative, or destructive wrath of a Cruel Enemy;
or as to sinners unreconciled: But his wrath is medicinal, Jerem. 9.7. Roman.
5.11. the Corrections of a Father: who though he loves, yet will not cocker his
child, but teach him duty, as Psalm. 99.8. Hos. 2.6, 7. Number. 12.14.

Object. Yea, but my affliction is in my soul, and conscience too? therefore it
is his anger and vengeance?

Answ. Why, is he not a God that hides his face sometimes from his own
Israel? Isa. 45.15. therefore do not too rashly conclude by this.

Quest. What shall I then do?

Answ. 1 Enquire into the ground of thy interest in Christ, and that thoroughly.

2 Ransack thy conscience, and see what relapses thou have had, and labor to
recover thy self, and rise again, Rev. 2.4, 5.

3 Betake thy self to Christ's sacrifice, and propitiation afresh, Isa. 8.17.

4 Humble thy soul before the Lord, and be ashamed of thy offense, Numb. 12.14.

Use 3. Of Admonition, Take heed of rash judging of the children of God.
to teach us to take heed of rash judgment concerning the children of God.
However, for the present they are, or may be afflicted by the hand of God. The
fashion of the World in this case is to conclude, that either they are very
Hypocrites, or else greater sinners than other men: and that now the vengeance
of God has found them out. Thus did Jobs friends judge him: and God was
offended with them for it, Job 42.7. So did Shimei curse David, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8.
And the Barbarians Paul, Act. 28.4. That vengeance would not suffer him to
live. This Christ forbids, Luke 13.2, 3: And Psalm. 41.1, 3. sets forth
diverse blessings of a man that judges wisely of the poor, in the time of his
affliction. Its a singular grace of God, and shall never go unrewarded. As the
Moon is nearest to the Sun, when the least light does outwardly appear: So is
God nearest to the Godly, when they have the least outward Light of Comfort.
Psalm 91.15. Above all, beware that the Afflictions of the people of God, be
not a stumbling block to thee: as it often falls out by the just judgment of
God upon uncharitable persons. Thus the death of the young Prophet that spoke
against the Altar, hardened Jeroboam in his Idolatry, and his other sins.

God does afflict many times because he loves: And he will not be traced in
his ways, as ordinarily men may be. Eccles. 7.14. God has set Adversity and
Prosperity the one against the other, to the end that man should find nothing
after him, that is, that none may find out that end which God has in
afflicting of his servants, Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his judgments?
etc.

Christ a Propitiation.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Whom God has set forth a propitiation.


Doct. THat through the Sacrifice and bloodshed of Christ, God the Father is
thoroughly pacified, with all those that have interest in Christ. From whence
now follows.

Use 4. It may put us upon serious enquiry, how the Lord stands affected
toward each of our persons: whether his wrath be appeased toward us, or no?
It is a question requiring the most serious consultation, and full resolution,
Luke 14.31. seeing that God comes with such force and strength against us; It
is time to enquire whether it be peace, or no? And we should not rest until
we could say, as Psalm. 85.2, 3. And of your selves in particular, as 1 Thessalonians.
5.9. God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation. Loc a state
of Wrath, is opposed to a state of Salvation: and some there are that are
appointed to it. Ah, (should every one say) am not I one of those? This is the
first Question that must be resolved for our Salvation, Mat. 3.7. This made the
Pharisees and Sadduces to make some show and semblance of Repentance, and flock
to the Baptism of John. And it is the first work of the Law of God upon a
Sinner, Romans 4.13. The Law works wrath; that is, it discovers the Wrath of
God against the sinner. And it is certain, that till this Work of God be done,
and this Question cleared to thy soul, thou have not taken one step from Wrath
and Hell.

2 This concerns not one or a few actions of sin, but our state in and under
wrath, and all depends on this; if the Lord does hate our persons, what hope of
peace with him can we have? Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh, (whatsoever
they do) they cannot please God. If a man know not his estate, he knows not
what to avoid, or what to do, but he must needs go on in the dark, and
worship he knows not what, nor how.

3 Satan strives to hide this from every soul so long as he can. He blindes
men's eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4, 5. 1 By godless cogitations, Psalm. 14.1. 2 By
presumption, Revel. 3.17. Matthew. 7.21. 3 By over-charging our hearts with
sensual lusts, and the cares of this life, Luke 21.34. 4 By an evil Conscience,
Joh. 3.20. 5 By Idols set up in our hearts, Isa. 44.20. 6 By the practice,
example, and company of evil men of the world, Joh. 7.48. Have any of the
Rulers believed on him?

4 If a man is a stranger to this inquisition, and unwilling to this search, he
is evidently the subject of Gods anger, Psalm. 10.4, 5, 6. and also verse. 11.
and. 13. and it is a manifest token of the Atheism of his heart.

5 There will come times when every sinner shall be forced to enquire into
this, and that when it is near past hope of remedy. As when death approaches,
and the anger of God begins to seize us. Then shall we say, is not this
evil come upon us, because the Lord is not among us? Deuteronomy. 31.17.29.24, 25.
Then will you go to your rules of constructions, and expound the dealings of
God with you. Yea, it is well if a spirit of utter despair, and horror, and
astonishment do not then seize upon thee. As it is said of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.37,
38. Deuteronomy. 28.28.

6 When that we do make inquiry at the hearing of the Word, God will take it
well at our hands: and when troublesome times do come, we shall have the less
to do, and not find them troublesome. So Hab. 2.16. When I heard, my belly
trembled, rottenness entered into my bones, that I might rest in the day of
trouble. Thus Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.21, 22. with the following verses.

7 It is a condition extremely dangerous for a man to continue in sin with a
senseless spirit, as Isa. 42.24, 25. Jer. 23.18, 19, 20. There is no such fire
as the fire of Gods anger kindled against a Nation, or person, Joel 2.3. A fire
devoureth before, and behind a flame burns, the Land is as the Garden of Eden
before them, and behind them a desolate Wilderness, and nothing shall escape.
So Deuteronomy. 32.22, 23.

Obj. But I feel no such thing as this scorching heat, and we hope that though
Ministers preach, and Scriptures threaten, yet I hope God will be better than
his word?

Ans. Yea, then see, Isa. 31.2. He is wise, and will bring evil, and not call
back his word, but will arise against the house of evil doers, and against the
help of them that work iniquity. The Lord has forsaken the generation of his
wrath, Jer. 7.29. What though thou do not yet feel it; yet consider what
Elihu says to Job, Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with
his stroke, then a great ransom cannot deliver thee; will he esteem thy
riches, or all the forces of strength? The greatest calmes do usually go
before the greatest storms, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3, 4. do not thou therefore rest
secure upon vain hopes and thoughts, without full inquiry what thy estate is,
whether this wrath does not burn against thee. The World is at peace with me,
and my Neighbors are at peace with me: but is the living God at peace with me?
Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is a messenger of death, but a wise man will
pacify it. When but Ahasnerosh was angry against Haman, what became of him?
Hest. 7.7. What then would the wrath of the King of Kings be? Who can cast body
and soul into hell? Mat. 12.28. How we may know that we are delivered from the
wrath of God?


Quest. How shall we come to attain to this knowledge of our state?

Ans. 1. Beware of judging love or hatred by all these outward things, Eccles.
9.1, 2. The richness of the lading does not show the goodness of the Vessel;
the more weighty the lading is, the more danger, if it be put into a rotten,
leakie ship. So are this worlds goods, when it is put into a rotten heart.
Prosperity is not a certain argument of Gods love; neither on the other side,
is adversity a sure note thereof.

Thou may understand much by the dictate and verdict of thine own
Conscience, especially being enlightened and awakned, 1 John 3.20, 21. If our
hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. The Lord has
appointed the Conscience, as his Vicegerent in every man's heart, that keeps a
register, yea a diary of all that passes. The Gentiles had this, Romans 2.14, 15.
now the conscience witnesses not alone, but together with God, Romans 9.1. Thus
Shimei was privy to his own wickedness, 1 King. 2.44. And Balshazzar, Dan.
5.5, 6. though that he understood not the writing, yet horror seized upon him,
his Conscience telling him that he was naught, and God was angry with him. You
shall not need to climb unto Heaven to know this, but descend into your own
hearts. The Conscience of man is that candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. This
discovers the works of darkness, as Lying, Swearing, Adultery, Cousenage,
Drunkenness, etc. Jer. 17.1. and to despise this is to despise God, and his
wrath kindled against the soul: and if thou do shuffle over matters now,
there is a day coming when thy Conscience will not be shuffled off. This notary
has taken notice of thy most secret faults, 1 Cor. 2.11. thus the Church
confesses, Isa. 59.12. Our transgressions are with us, and as for our
iniquities we know them. When Conscience does therefore admonish of any sin,
do not say to it as David to Joab, 2 Samuel 11.25. Let not this trouble thee, it
is as the common chance of men. This sin troubled David with a witness
afterward. Now he slighted it, but afterward he did sink under it, and was
troubled, as Psalm. 38.4. to verse. 9. so if thou do not observe its
admonitions now, it will upbraid thee afterward, as Reuben, Genesis 42.21. Did
not I say unto you, sin not?

3 Come to the clearest light of the Word of God, Joh. 3.21. He that does the
truth, comes to the light, etc. Be ye not as Batts and Owls that decline the
light, this will be a lamp to thy feet, and a lauthorn to thy paths, Psalm.
119.105. that will keep thee from falling, and discover thy filthiness to
thee, and show thee the way to purge it, whatever thy estate be, it will do
thee good.

4 Consider it is most certain, that all that are children of men, are children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. This was thy condition from the Womb: and do not stand
to plead that thou art born in faederal holiness: for this does not exempt any
soul from being a child of wrath, Phil. 3.5. Paul had faederal holiness, he
was circumsized the eighth day, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, yet born a child of
wrath. Neither was it his state alone, but every ones that has the nature of
man. And if I be born so, I still am so; unless I can show that I am delivered
from it; yea I have brought more wrath upon my soul, by every sin I have
committed, Numb. 32.14. Romans 2.5. when it was told that there was but one
Traitor among the Disciples: they all enquired, Lord, is it I? Matthew. 26.22.
But we are all under wrath. Those that are disaffected to the word, Romans 8.7.
Jer. 6.10. They that pray not, nor regard God, Jer. 10. ult. Ephesians. 5.6.
Scorners, Prove. 3.24.19.29. therefore let not Satan put it away from us,
neither suffer we our hearts to return and go off this consideration; until
they have brought in a deliberate answer unto this.

5 See whether you have ever had this propitiation or no. You see there is but
one means to appease wrath, it is the Wrath of God, and therefore infinite: and
none but a sacrifice of infinite value can appease it. And this being grounded
in our very nature, it is impossible that any mere creature can turn it away.
It is Christ's peculiar.

Quest. How may we know that Christ has done it?

Ans. See whether Christ's propitiation has changed thy nature yea or not, and
thou art a partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and that by the exceeding
great and precious promises; so that thy lusts are destroyed, and thou art no
longer an enemy, or a stranger unto God, but acquainted and reconciled, Col.
1.21. Lastly, see this by the peace that the blood of Christ has wrought in
thy soul, Heb. 9.14.

Obj. But has every one peace of Conscience, that has interest in the blood
of Christ?

Ans. Every one has peace with God, Romans 5.1. and though it does not always
quiet the conscience, yet it stays the heart with some waiting upon God, and
purges the conscience every day more and more. See whether thou find this in
thee.

Use 5. Exhortation to get this propitiation.
Exhortation to betake our selves to the Sacrifice and bloodshed of Christ,
Heb. 9.26. He is the only Mercyseat. We shall speak, 1 To those that apprehend,
or have cause to apprehend Gods Wrath kindled against them. 2 To the members of
Christ.

1 To those that lie still in a state of enmity, to seek for the appeasing Gods
anger, and to take the right course for this; Consider, 1 The excellency of
this condition. Peace and reconciliation with God is the main business, in the
Kingdom of God, that is first to be sought, Matthew. 6.33. the prayer of the
Saints, Dan. 9.16, 17. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, let all
thine anger and fury be turned away.

2 Consider that the Lord deals with you, as he commanded his people to do,
Deuteronomy. 20.10. he sends forth his servants with inessages of peace, and hangs
forth his white flag of truce before he sends forth his armies of Judgments
to destroy it: or as Matthew. 10.11, 13. Luke 10.6. Enquire in the house or city
who is worthy, and if the son of peace be there, let your peace come upon it,
else shake off the dust, etc. Thus are the offers of peace in the word of
reconciliation sent to you. Is there any child of peace here that will hear it,
and give it entertainment? And know, that though you should not regard it, yet
the Kingdom of God is come nigh to you, and Conscience will one day find it
upon the file for a testimony against you. And hereafter will wisdom say,
Because I have called, etc. Prove. 1.24, 28. Luke 19.42. Verily I persuade my
self, that there are many thousands in these days of the Gospel, that are
wounded deep, and lie bleeding to destruction, under that word of wisdoms
mouth, for refusing stiffely so fair an offer, as we are making this day unto
you.

Quest. What course should a poor soul take to have the benefit of this
propitiation?

Ans. 1. It will be very needful for a Sinner advisedly toset down with
himself, what he has in all the world to support his heart, when the evil day
shall come upon him, Isa. 10.3. What will you do in the day of visitation? Job
31.14. What shall I do when he rises up; when he visits, what shall I answer?
Then your thoughts will be so snarled and perplexed, that you will not know
whether to go, nor how to bear, nor avoid, nor remove the evil that is coming
upon you. As Luther speaks of the Papists, That at the approaches of death they
were so perplexed in spirit, that they were like Birds taken in a Lime-bush;
which the more they flutter, the more they are hampered: so fearfully (says
he) that I have seen many Murderers and Malefectors condemned to death, go to
their execution more courageously than they. So it falls out with poor obdurate
sinners in the evil day: though you out brave it now outwardly, yet what a
black bosom, and Scorpions stings of guilt have thou within thy soul, rankling
and gathering against the evil day: whither will ye then fly? to the
Creatures? they are all Gods Armies, and Subjects, and will fight against you,
as the Stars against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. will you go to your wits and shifts?
but then you shall be at your wits ends, Psalm. 107.27. will ye go to an
angry God, the Judge of all the World? But he says, Hos. 13.7, 8. I will be to
them as a Lion, and as a Leopard by the way to observe them, etc. yea the Lord
will be more terrible than all these. Will thou go to thy Conscience, alas
that is that Hell-worm, the tormentor, and the rack. Ah, it is better to be a
Dog, or a Toad, or any thing, than to be without Christ's propitiation; yet
at such a time does a poor member of Christ know what to do. See Job 13.15.
Hab. 3.17. Psalm. 94.19.49.5. Heb. 13.6.

2 Strive to apprehend as much as possible thou may, the infinite power of
that God, whose anger is kindled against thee, 1 Cor. 10.21. Do you provoke
the Lord? Are you stronger than he? Isa. 27.4. Who will set the briars and
thorns against him, etc? Remember what the very Philistims said, 1. Sam. 6.6.
Wherefore do you harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened
their hearts? etc. Ezekiel. 22.14. How can thy heart endure, or thy hands be
strong? etc. Isa. 45.9. Psalm. 76.7.

3 Consider, that it is possible to appease Gods anger. See Jonah 3.9. though
it be not certain, yet if it be possible, it is enough to set us a seeking
after it.

4 See the large extent of the blessed propitiation of Christ Jesus 1 John 2.1,
2. He is a propitiation not for our sins only, etc. that is, the elect and
believers he wrote to; but to all others over all the world. Not that all or
the greater part shall be saved by the death of Christ, but that by this large
extent of the efficacy of Christ's death, the elect themselves might be the
better encouraged to embrace the sacrifice of Christ's death by faith. He gave
his life a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. that is, some of all sorts of persons
or people, no kind excluded. He keeps a free and open house unto all comers,
Isa. 45.20, 22.

5 God though he be the person injured, yet he is content to lay down the
quarrel, and has eminently showed his willingness thereto, in that he sent
his Son to make reconciliation for sinners, 1 John 4.10. Dan. 9.24. and has
committed to his Ministers the word of reconciliation, that as in Christ's stead
they might pray men to accept of this peace.

Quest. How does the Lord entreat us to be reconciled unto him? Does not the
Lord know, that it is not in our power to be reconciled to him, our nature
being enmity against God?

Ans. Christ's propitiation or expiatory sacrifice has purchased all those
things to be wrought in sinners, that may make them partakers of, and
comforted in this sacrifice of his. As Faith, Phil. 1.29. Repentance, Acts
5.31. change of nature, Isa. 11.6, 7. Heb. 13.21, 22. so that all a poor sinner
has to do, is to fall down at the feet of Christ in the use of his
Ordinances, to wait upon him, and to follow his directions both willingly and
pliably, and plead all this word and work of propitiation before the Lord
continually, Ezekiel. 16. ult. 2 Cor. 5.19. Job 22.21, 22. Isa. 12.1, 2.

Exhor. To the members of Christ.
2. Seeing Gods anger is pacified toward you, see that ye walk answerable to
so great a privilege.

1 Bless God for this propitiation, Luke 1.64. what had our condition been
without this? Psalm. 44.3.

2 Take heed of kindling it again by relapses into your former courses, Psalm.
85.8. He will speak peace unto his people, but let them not return again to
folly. It is the first use the Spirit makes of this grace of Christ, 1 John
2.1. These things I write that you sin not. So 2 Cor. 7.1.5.11. But if you
shall be bold to sin, know, that though God does love your persons, yet he
will be displeased with your actions, as 2 Samuel 11. ult. and take vengeance on
your inventions.

3 Learn to make use of this propitation of Christ continually, as 1 John 2.1,
2. Not only before conversion, but after the same; its ever to be used, more
necessary than fire and water, meat and drink.

Quest. When should we more especially make use of Christ's Propitiation?

Answ. 1 In our daily relapses into sin, which make new defilements, and
therefore we must have fresh recourse to the fountain. Heb. 13.8. thus the
daily Sacrifice, prefigured the daily use of Christ's sacrifice for atonement.
That 22 Psalm setting forth his passion, was daily sung each morning, with the
offering up of the Sacrifice, as is judged from its title.

2 In all our duties and services, whereof the most holy have iniquity in them,
and therefore stand in need of Christ, that they may find acceptance: as was
typified, Exodus 28.38. and their sacrifices were given into the hand of the
Priest, and offered by him, so our spiritual services by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5.

3 In days of humiliation and atonement, as Levit. 16:29. Heb. 10.22. It is
not fasting or weeping God looks to, but a sacrifice, etc.

4 At each Sacrament there should be a solemn remembrance of this propitiatory
sacrifice. Romans 6.3. We are baptized into his death. 1 Cor. 11.26. Its done in
remembrance of Christ.

5 In our ordinary Callings, and the discharge of them. Whatsoever ye do, do it
to the glory of God, Col. 3.17.

6 In afflictions, desertions, and temptations. In desertions Christ's blood
brings us near, in temptations he gives us victory, Col. 2.15. Dan. 9.17. Isa.
53.5, 6. 1 Samuel 26.19. How shall we make use of it.


Quest. How shall we make use of Christ's Sacrifice in these times and cases?

Answ. 1 We are to remember our daily backslidings, with humble
acknowledgement and brokennesse of heart: and to see the necessity of Christ's
propitiation, Jer. 3.12, 13. Return thou backsliding Israel, (says the Lord)
I will not cause mine anger to pass upon thee, nor keep it for ever, only
acknowledge thine iniquity, etc.

2 We are to observe (as we are able) the imperfections and defaults in our
duties, that we may be humbled thereat, and see what great need we have of
Christ's propitiation, as Nehemiah, chap. 13.22. when he had done his best,
then he prays, Remember me O God concerning this, and spare me according to
the greatness of thy Mercy.

3 In regard of the remainder of corruptions that are too strong in us: We are
to look upon the Lord of glory crucified, and meditate upon the Sacrifice of
Christ, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge our
Consciences, etc.

4 We are to apprehend and plead by faith and prayer, the Promises of God as
confirmed to us by the blood of Christ. They are all made and performed by him.
They are branches of the Covenant of Grace: and the blood of Christ, is called
the blood of the everlasting Covenant. Heb. 13.20. As the Priest sprinkled the
people, the book, etc. Heb. 9.19, 20, 23. So now ought Christians set faith on
work to sprinkle all Ordinances, and the word it self, and our selves, and all
our works.

5 When as Gods anger does lie heavy upon the soul by desertion or temptation,
etc. then we are to cast our burden upon Christ in the free Covenant of grace
and peace. Psalm. 55.22. Isa. 54.8 9. This shall be to me as the waters of
Noah, etc.

Christ set forth to be a Propitiation.
THE TWELFTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation.


WE have seen before of the efficient cause of a sinners justification. 1 God
the Father. 2 The inward impulsive, that's the free grace and favor of God. 3
The meritorious cause. 4 The instrument apprehending the object, that is faith
in Christ's blood. 5 The end in respect of us, that is our remission of sins,
and eternal salvation. In respect of God, the manifestation of his Justice and
Mercy.

Now the Meritorious Cause is amplyfied. 1 By the degree and measure and manner
of it: it was by blood. 2 By the efficacy of it: it was a propitiation. 3 By
the ground or manner of it, in the word [set forth] of which next is this Quere.

Quest. What is the meaning of setting forth Christ to be a Propitiation?

Answ. Christ was formerly set forth for a Propitiation in times of the Old
Testament. But very darkly, under Types and shadows, and very restrainedly; in
that 'twas only to the Jews, or the Proselytes that were joined to them. But
now in the New Testament, Christ is clearly and openly set forth in the
Ministry of the Gospel, and without all restraint both to Jews and Gentiles. 1 John 2.2. a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Heb. 9.7. The Mercy
Seat was shut up in the times of the Old Testament, though the benefit was
extended to the whole Church of the Jews, yet to them only, and such as joined
to them: and besides, none but the High Priest might go into it: and that not
commonly, but only once a year. But now in the times of the New Testament,
Christ our Mercy Seat is set forth in the Promises and Preaching of the Gospel,
to all sorts of sinners, that they have free recourse to him for themselves,
and that at any time. This I conceive was intended by the Translators in this
place: and it is pious and precious.

The word here used, does often signify the purpose and decree of God from all
eternity. Romans 8.28. And of men's purposes to do any thing, Romans 1.13. But its
especially applied unto the mystery of Christ, and Gods eternal purpose in
gathering of sinners unto him in one head. Ephesians. 1.9. And this signification
does marvellously suit here, to show unto us how it comes to pass that Christ
is the Propitiatory, or placatory sacrifice for sin: Even because God the
Father purposed, and fore-appointed this way of reconciliation from all
eternity.

In regard of the composition of the word it may signify [hee proposed before]
or [held forth in former times] viz. In former times by the sacrifice of the
Law, the Mercy Seat, and other types, thus was Christ then set forth, Act.
10.36.

All these interpretations are useful, and precious, which I comprehend
therefore in this

Doct. Christ was purposed and proposed our Propitiation.
That God the Father purposed from eternity, and proposed in fullness of time
his Son Jesus Christ, to be the propitiation for sinners.

1 Its much insisted on in Scripture, that the eternal decree and purpose of
God is mentioned as the ground mark of our redemption. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God, and the sanctification of the Spirit,
and obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. Here we have three
works of the divine persons in the salvation of souls. The Fathers election,
the Sons redemption, and the Spirits application. And these two latter are
grounded in the former. As also, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. 1 John 4.10. Act. 4.28.

2 Christ was proposed formerly in the Old Testament, I mean in the promises,
prophecies, and types. Act. 10.36. Luke 1.70. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. The Prophets
prophesied of the grace of God in Christ, and testified before hand of the
sufferings of Christ, etc. Heb. 9.22.

3 Most clearly in the Gospel Times. 1 Pet. 1.20. The Lamb foreordained was
manifested and offered in our times. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Gods purpose and grace was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began; but is now made manifest by
Christ, etc. when he came in flesh; then was the fountain set open, Zach. 13.1.

Quest. How was the decree of God the Father, about the propitiation of Christ?

Answ. There was from all eternity, a gracious Covenant betwixt the persons of
the Holy Trinity: as it is expressed, Isa. 53.10, etc. with Heb. 10.8. The
Father says, If he will make his soul an offering for sin, etc. And the Son
says, Lo I cometo do thy will, my God.

Quest. Why did God the Father purpose from eternity Christ to be our
propitiation?

Answ. No reason can be given, but the good pleasure of the Lord, Isa. 53.10.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him, etc. Its called the love of God, and the
free love of God. 1 John 4.10. that he sent his Son to be our propitiation.
Nothing without God whether faith, or works, or perseverance foreseen, could
move God to purpose any man's salvation. For I may speak it with reverence; God
could not foresee any man's faith and good works, except he had decreed to give
faith, and obedience too, himself.

Quest. Why did God propose in the times of the Old Testament Christ's
propitiation?

Answ. 1. It was necessary for the salvation of all the Elect before the
coming of Christ: there being no salvation to be had in any other but him,
Act. 4.12. and no salvation by Christ, but by his sacrifice, Heb. 9.22. but
this is certain that God appointed their salvation, and therefore appointed the
means thereof; that is, the proposal of the Sacrifice, and propitiation of
Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.

2 It was necessary for after times: for hence it is, that Christ and his
Apostles did Preach still out of the Old Testament. Besides, If they had one
way of salvation, and we another, then there would have been more ways to
heaven than one: and that would have endangered our salvation: for we should
have been left in doubt and suspicion which way to take. But the Scripture
shows us that we must be saved, as the fathers were, Act. 15.11.

Quest. Why was Christ's sacrifice proposed so openly, since the coming of
Christ?

Answ. 1. In respect of the Elect, both Jews and Gentiles, that both might see
their free admittance to him, and acceptance in him, Act. 2. cap. and 3.

2 In respect of the reprobates, that they might be left without excuse, and
Gods justice cleared in their destruction, Ephesians. 2.13.

Use 1. The hainousness of their sin who do neglect Christ.
This may serve to discover the heinousness of their sin, that do either
neglect or despise Christ's Sacrifice or propitiation. For, 1 Consider that that
revelation of Christ in the Old Testament (though but dark and imperfect) yet
was sufficient and effectual unto the salvation of all the Elect then; the
Patriarks and Prophets, etc. John 1.29. Act. 10.43. Could the Ceremonies and
the shadows save? how much more Jesus Christ, the body it self, as he is now
revealed? Could they see the Promises afar off, and embrace them then? And we
when they are near at hand put them away from us? Had they but the predictions
of Christ's death, and were saved by it, and we are not, who have the full
accomplished thereof? God reserved for us these better things: sad and very
sinful is it, if we become never the better, but the worse, Act. 13.32, 33.
The Promise which God made unto the Fathers, he has fulfilled unto us their
children, the neglect of these must needs be a more heinous sin, for which, the
Patriarks and Prophets of old, shall stand up in the judgment, and condemn us.

2 Because Christ is so generally, and freely offered to all that will receive
him. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him come and take of the waters of life
freely. What can men say, but that their destruction is now of themselves
wholly: and that they are self-murtherers. This will make the fire of Hell
furnace, seven times hotter than ordinary, and worse than Sodomes Hell: to
think how ready and open the way to the Mercy Seat was, and nothing hindered
thee from it, but thine own vile heart. To see persons, worse sinners than thy
self saved in Heaven, and thou thrust out. Mat. 8.11, 12. Many shall come from
the East, and West, etc.

3 Its aggravated by this, that Jesus Christ was the only propitiation
determined of God, for sinners, from everlasting; both his person, and the
manner of his redemption. Psalm. 33.11. And hence (unless we could null the
Counsel of God) its impossible to find any other propitiation. No equivalent
price for man's redemption besides this, No Mercy Seat but merely this. By Gods
decree the matter is eternally limited, that there is not any other way than
by Christ's death. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb.
2.2, 3. what recompense of vengeance can be sufficient for this sin: not only
if we despise, or scorn, but if we neglect, or care not for this salvation.

Now he that does take care about this salvation will use all means, roll
every stone, take any pains about it, will as Darius, Dan. 6.14, 18. Set his
heart to the matter, cared for it, labored about it, passed the night without
his accustomed meal, his music, or his sleep? and early, and in haste arose,
and went unto Daniel whom he cared for: thus 2 Cor. 7.11. Now if this be the
true care, then those who have no fixed, settled, serious thoughts about their
salvation; That will not abate one jot of their sinful delights, nor carnal
contentments for it; but let the word they have heard, heedlesly to slip from
them again. How is it possible they should escape? weigh seriously but that one
Scripture, Prove. 1.24. to the end. Comfort to those that have interest in
Christ, thus proposed and purposed for their propitiation.


Use 2. Of comfort unto the Children of God, who have part in Christ, their
comfort lies in these branches; 1 The proposal of Christ in the Promises and
Prophecies of the old Testament. This we are sure is that good old way, in
which the Saints were saved then, as Now. Jer. 18.14. Will a man leave the Snow
of Lebanon that comes from the rock of the field, Or shall the cold flowing
waters be forsaken? That is, Will a man leave the pure fountain water, to come
to dig puddles? as Jerem. 2.13. as many now-adaies do. Our path is the path of
all the Saints of former ages. We follow the cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 12.1.
And may hope to be in Abraham's bosom, that Father of the faithful, while that
we insist in the faith of Abraham.

2 In the proposal of Christ so clearly and largely in the times of the New
Testament, confirmed by the voice of God, and so many signs and wonders
wrought, Heb. 2.3.4. here is great comfort that our souls are in the right way
to bliss, Romans 16.25, 26.

3 In the eternal purpose of God to make Christ our Propitiation: When we
consider the sleights of Satan, and our own weaknesses, we have cause to say
that we shall one day fall. But then Romans 9.11. 2 Timothy 2.19. The purpose of God
according to Election will stand, when heaven and earth shall fall. The
Foundation of God stands sure.

If it were a Foundation of man's laying, it would not be sure; but its the
Lords, that never was, nor will be shaken. Our Salvation is not built upon our
Faith, our Works, or any sufficiency in our selves, or in the Creatures; But on
Gods Eternal Wisdom, and Counsel, and unchangeable Decree: and on his Son
Jesus, as our Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. and 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief Corner stone, Elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall not
be confounded. Let him therefore be exceedingly comforted, and take up Paul's
triumphing Challenge, and say, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? its God that justifies, its Christ that dyed. This is a
sure breast-work against all Satan's batteries and Accusations. So Tit. 1.2. We
have hope of eternal life, promised us by an unalterable purpose, and that from
eternity.

Object. How can that be, seeing before the World began, there was no Creature
to make the Promise to?

Answ. I will not trouble you with other Interpretations, but this is the
truth; That God the Father promised to the second Person of the sacred Trinity,
his own Son, To give eternal life to all those that should believe upon him in
the fullness of time. And its suitable to that, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us with a holy calling, according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given us in Christ before the world began.

Shall we now say, that we are unworthy of any promise or Mercy? Its very
true, we in our selves are altogether unworthy: But Jesus Christ our Redeemer
is worthy to have it made to him, and performed to him. The Lamb that was stain
is worthy. And immediately, only, to the Lord Jesus Christ were the promises
made, not to us; and that before the World began: so that they are in a good
way, and a sure hand; there is nothing succeeding can disanul, Gal. 3.17. nor
should discourage us, from taking hold thereon.

Christ set forth to be a Propitiation.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation.


Doct. THat God the Father purposed from eternity, and proposed in the fullness
of time, his Son Jesus Christ, to be the Propitiation to appease his wrath.

Use 3. Of conviction of errors. etc.
It may serve to discover unto us the danger of diverse erroneous Tenants,
about the satisfaction of Christ. Some denying, some lessening of it, some
adding thereto humane satisfactions and propitiations. Which wicked errors, as
they do overthrow many other Principles of Christian Religion; so especially
this foundation of foundations. So that unless God should reverse his eternal
Decree, verified in all ages hitherto, and should give forth another Scripture,
and lay open another way to heaven; Its impossible these men should be saved:
for they hold not the head, Col. 2.19. nor are at all built upon the only
foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. having missed of Jesus Christ and his Propitiation.

Use 4. This shows the gracious and wonderful concurrence, The concurrence of
the persons in Trinity to our salvation.
of all the persons of the Trinity in the salvation of a sinner. Here is the
Fathers purpose and eternal decree, the Sons propitiation, the holy Spirits
application of it employed in the work of Faith in the blood of Christ.

A great mistake therefore it is, for any to think, that we do owe much more to
Christ for our salvation, than we do to God the Father: as if he did carry it
but justly, nay somewhat severely, toward us: in Christ only was mercy. Why,
Consider 1. That the justice of God is an an essential attribute common to all
the three persons; and that just will to punish sin, or that wrath of God
against it, is alike in them all. Therefore there is no greater enemy to
sinners, than the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 45.7.

2 Though Christ only did take flesh upon him and suffer, yet this was now
brought about by the Fathers Council and decree. Joh. 3.16. He gave his Son.
Romans 8.32. He spared not his Son. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself. God the Father is the fountain of the Godhead in order
of subsisting; And so he is in all the works of grace, that are wrought for
sinners. It was his love that moved him to appoint this way of salvation, 1 John 4.10.

3 Christ's satisfaction and sacrifice was no cause of the fathers love, but an
effect thereof, and a chief means of our salvation. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. The cause of
a sinners salvation, but not the cause why he is elected and chosen of God
unto salvation.

4 It was the wonderful free love of God the Father, to give any of us in
particular to Jesus Christ, and to determine us to be of that small number
that were to be reconciled to him by Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.6. Thine they were,
and thou gave them me.

Therefore its said, Joh. 5.23. That all men should honor the Son, as they do
honor the Father; that is, with like love, but not with greater love. Let us
therefore learn to glorify God in Christ, 1 Pet. 4.11. for though we may
direct our worship unto one person, yet we must take heed of excluding the
other in our secret thoughts, and of setting up, and honoring one person above
the other: for this were to make an Idol of God, and to divide the persons one
from another, Joh. 14.11.

Use 5. Instruction and Exhortation, 1 To them that are yet under wrath, to
show them what they must do to obtain this Propitiation. In general. What it
appears that God purposes, and chooses and proposes; we must, as it may
concern our selves, purpose choose and propose unto our selves; for this is to
be according to Gods own heart. And if the perfection of the reasonable
Creature be to be so, then the more we are conformable unto the will of God,
the more excellent our condition is. Matthew. 5. last verse. And this remember,
that we must choose and receive Christ, as God the Father has purposed and
set forth Christ. The Father proposes Christ only for our Propitiation. And
Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.2. I have determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. God the Father delights in Christ, we should take
him as our beloved. He has set him forth as a Prince, we should submit unto
him, etc. Every grace of God to man, works a like suitable grace in man. And
doubtless we cannot make a better choice, than God the Father has done.

In the Old Testament Christ is set forth as a sure and tried Propitiation:
sure that will never deceive, tried by all the Elect from the beginning of the
world. Isa. 28.16. God the skilfullest and most faithful builder, lays Christ
as a foundation, founded, sure, and of price. As there is no building without a
foundation, so there is no Church without Christ.

In the New Testament Christ's Propitiation is manifested free to all. Luke
4.19. Deuteronomy. 15.12, 13. that which in other ages was not made known, is now most
clear. Ephesians. 3.4, 5.

After the measuring of the Temple, and the clearing up of the Church and
Gospel institutions; there is yet a clearer revelation of the Mercy Seat, the
cover of the Ark, and the Propitiation. Now beloved, the Lord has brought you,
and reserved you for these times: the Temple opened, the Church Ordinances
cleared, the Ark and Propitiation seen, and Christ crucified before your eyes.
Isa. 60.8. Luke 2.10. Joh. 3.19. Rev. 11. last. Oh that we could weep over
many, as Christ over Jerusalem. Many who in this their day of eminent
visitation, will not know the things of their peace. And it is not only a bare
notional knowledge, which no question the Jews then in some measure had: but a
sanctifying, an effectual knowledge. Else though you be children of the
kingdom, you may be with them thrust out. Mat. 8.11, 12.

Object. Though Christ be generally offered in the Gospel, yet Gods purpose
has concluded and determined unchangeably the Propitiation of Christ: And has
set down expressly who the particular persons are, that shall have benefit
thereby. And the general offer of Christ's Propitiation is to small purpose,
seeing that none but the Elect shall have benefit thereby?

1 The general offer of Christ in the Gospel, does effectually prevail to
justify and save all the Elect, though none else besides have benefit by it.
Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, the rest were blinded. Thou were
therefore best to make thy Election sure, by embracing the general offer.

2 Every one is bound to judge charitably of others, much more of himself: that
he is of that number of Gods Elect. Especially considering that God the Father
calls him, by the Ministry of the Word of Reconciliation, with as much free and
earnest compellations as any have, Act. 11.18.

3 Though many have the outward call, who are not chosen: yet sure it is, that
that outward call is uneffectual to none, but those that by their own
infidelity and hardness of heart do reject it: hence they are said to have no
cloak or excuse for their sin; Joh. 15.22.

There is such an efficacy in the Word of God (even on the worst of hearers)
that it searches into the closest corners of their hearts, and convinces them
that they are guilty of their own destruction, in not receiving it. Heb. 4.12.
That which God will do is known to himself in his secret Counsel; But the offer
of Christ in the Gospel, this shows us what he would have us to do: even to
repent and believe. Therefore mind we our own duty. God has ordained the end
with the means. And therefore though it were revealed to thee from Heaven, that
thou should certainly be saved: yet I might truly say to thee, that except
thou believe and repent, thou shall perish.

Use 6. Of Instruction to the godly.
Hence is matter of Instruction and Exhortation to the faithful. In regard that
God the Father has thus purposed Christ for a Propitiation, they may be
stirred up to several duties.

1 To strengthen and confirm their faith in Christ's blood. If we go to
question the salvation of Christ, then do we go to make void the Counsel of
God, which has purposed him and proposed him to us for a Savior. Those
chariots, Zach. 6.1, 2. they are said to go forth betwixt two mountains of
brass; which are nothing but the unchangeable Decree and purpose of God. So is
the purpose of God about Christ's propitiation impregnable: Neither Sin, nor
Satan, nor all the World are able to hinder, alter, or remove it. Is there then
any fear of mis-carriage?

Verily we have great cause to be humbled for our slownesse of heart to
believe, and for the weakness and littleness of our Faith: that have so many
Promises, and the oath of God, and the Covenant, and the Seals; and beside too
the inviolable and absolute Decree of God, and his purpose: which are as sure
as the very being, the eternal being of God. Isa. 46.9, 10. I am God, and there
is none else, I am God, and there is none other like to me, declaring the end
from the beginning, and from the ancient times the things that are not yet
done: saying, My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, verse. 11.
I have spoken it, and I will bring it to pass, I have purposed it, and I will
do it.

Also Gods proposal of Christ, in that sure word of prophecy, in the times of
the Old Testament, is a great confirmation of our Faith. They described his
person, God-man, Isa. 9.6, 7, 14. his Offices, and unction. Isa. 42.1, 2. etc.
the place of his birth, Mic. 5. the manner, of a Virgin, Isa. 7.14. the time of
it, Genesis 49.10. after the finishing of Daniels weeks, when the Scepter was
departed from Judah, and while the second Temple stood, Haggai 2.7, 9.

In the New Testament also where God has showed himself so willing to save us,
and to be reconciled to us. Act. 13.47. He has broken down the partition
wall, he has sent forth his Servants to invite all sorts, even those that are
in the high ways and hedges, he does give the meanest and vilest sinners
entertainment and welcome, if they come in at the Ministry of the Word. It is
not the will of the Father, that one of these little ones should perish, Mat.
18.14. All these do mightily help to confirm our faith.

2 It should teach us highly to prize this propitiation of Jesus Christ. It was
precious to God the Father, and so ought it to be to us. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. God
the Father gave Christ the pre-eminence in all, and above all: He preached him
with his own voice, and bade all men to hear him: He set him forth with mighty
signs and wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the ministration of his
Angels, and acclamations of his Saints, etc. How highly then should he be
prized by us?

3 It should teach men to set a high price upon their own fouls. You see that
when they are in Captivity and slavery to Satan, and in a lost estate, there is
nothing in the World, no not all the World, with all its worth, can redeem
them; but only the propitiation of Jesus Christ. Mat. 16.26. When God gave
Egypt for his peoples ransom, and Aethiopia and Seba for them, he showed that
he prized them at a high rate. Isa. 42.3, 4. But all the Kingdoms of the
world are base and vile, if compared with the foul of man. God set that at the
price of his Sons blood: and Christ did so esteem it that he gave his life for
it. Should it not then be highly valued of us?

4 As God the father set forth this Christ to us, so let us set forth this
Christ as a propitiation to God the father. When we apprehend God to be
displeased and angry with us: we may humbly go to him, and say, Lord, thou
have before all time set a part, and ever since time began, set forth, thy Son
Jesus Christ to be a propitiation for sinners. Now thus thou have imboldened
us to set forth the same Jesus Christ to be our Propitiation to thee. Thou have
sealed him to be such, and now thou can not deny thy own hand and seal. Joh.
6.27. We are fure that Christ is an offering and sacrifice of sweet smelling
savor unto God. Ephesians. 5.2. How unsavory so ere that we are, or have been. And
if we pay God in his own coin, that will be current with him.

Lastly, Set forth Christ's propitiation to others: every one to your respective
relations. As the Spouse, Cant. 5. last. He is altogether lovely, Lo this is
my beloved: and this my Friend, etc. Inform the ignorant, convince the
erroneous, ashame the voluptuous, and contemners of Christ, out of that foolish
choice which they have made, of other lovers instead of him. Draw all that you
may; that they may forsake all other besides, that they may go and seek him
with you, as chap. 6.1.

Justification by Faith.
THE FOURTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25. Through Faith in his blood.


HAving spoken concerning the satisfaction of Christ, and the excellent fruit
and effect thereof, i. e. a propitiation: I shall now proceed to that which is
called the Instrumental cause of Justification; Laid down in those words (faith
in his blood) whence I shall note two observations.

1 That the satisfaction of Christ is effectual to our justification through
faith.

2 That Faith as it justifies does especially apprehend the blood and
sufferings of Jesus Christ.

Doct. 1. That the Satisfaction of Christ is effectual to the Justification of
a Sinner through Faith. Christ's blood justifies through faith.
Or, That it is through the grace of Faith, that the blessing of Justification
is attained and conveyed. This the Text holds forth plainly to us, viz. That
although we are justified freely through Christ's purchase and redemption, yet
Gods constituted way of applying this free grace of God, and Merit of Christ to
Sinners, is through Faith, and this is that which Paul makes his solemn
conclusion, verse. 28. and a mighty ground of Christian Religion, viz. Our
justification by Faith without the works of the Law. Which he proves by the
impossibility of justification by works, by the Testimony of Habakkuk, and by
the Example of Abraham, Romans 4.9, 11. Gal. 2.16. etc. in diverse places
plentifully insisted on.

Now for the better understanding of this truth, it will be needful to Answer
a few questions.

1 In what sense it is that through Faith a Sinner is justified?

2 How Paul and James are reconciled?

3 Why is it rather through faith than any other graces.

Quest. In what sense is it that through Faith a Sinner is justified?

Answ. For Answer, In what sense faith justifies.
I shall show first in what sense it does not justify, then how it does.

1 A Sinner is not justified by Faith, as it is a virtue or work in us: because
the Apostle does exclude all works as such, from Justification, and Faith and
works are opposed: Romans 3.28. Besides, if it has its place in justification as
a work; it cannot stand with the free grace of God, Romans 4.16. for grace and
works are still opposed. Romans 11.5, 6. Further, that righteousness by which a
sinner is justified must be exact and perfect; but our faith is imperfect, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.

2 Faith does not justify as if the very act of believing were the matter of
righteousness, or any part thereof by which we stand righteous before God.
This appears, in that the righteousness by which we are justified is not our
own: Phil. 3.9. but our faith is our own (though wrought in us by the Spirit of
God) Hab. 2.4. and by these two Answers we oppose two errors, viz. of the
Papists and Arminians, who wickedly rob Jesus Christ of his honor, and make an
Idol of faith: whereas we are justified by the blood of Christ, Romans 5.9.
verse. 19. by the obedience of one, etc.

3 Faith does only justify us relatively, or as it has reference to its
object Jesus Christ, and his righteousness. As the hand of a beggar receiving a
bag of Gold bestowed upon him, inriches him. Now its not the hand properly, but
it is the bag of gold freely bestowed that makes a beggar rich: So the hand of
the woman that touched our Savior Christ healed her: not as it was a hand, but
as it conveyed the virtue that came out of Jesus Christ; So a man's faith is
said to justify him; because it receives Christ, or the righteousness of
Christ, and indeed whatsoever is done by faith is done by Christ, and therefore
our being said to be justified by faith, Romans 3.28. Ephesians. 2.8. is our being
justified by Christ.

But here is a great Question, How can it be said, that Faith can justify, so
much as instrumentally; seeing that an Instrument is a cause; how then can we
have any hand as causes in our Justification?

Answ. Justification taken actively and passively.
We are to know that Justification is taken two ways. 1 Actively. 2
Passively. The active Justification is, that whereby God the Father justifies a
sinner, and pronounces him just for the sake of the imputed righteousness of
Christ. In this sense faith is no cause; nor has any influence at all into a
sinners justification; but Justification taken passively, is that whereby
believers by faith (as by an hand) do receive, apprehend, and apply to
themselves the merits of Christ's death: and in this sense faith is an
instrumental cause, viz. A passive Instrument; and cannot be denied its place
in, and influence into a sinners justification. And this distinction you may
see clearly grounded both in the places mentioned, and Romans 8. and in this
chapter, and in Romans 5.1. the word is used in a passive sense.

Quest. 2 How are Paul and James reconciled? for James, Chapter 2.21. says, that
Abraham and Rahab were justified by works, and ver. 22. he sets down this
general conclusion, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith alone.

Answ. Paul and James reconciled.
The conclusion of the Apostle is not (as the Papists say) that good works are
a part of our righteousness: and the cause of our justification before God:
neither as many of our Divines say; That good works do justify, as they declare
us to be just before men (though that be a truth also) but he shows that
justifying faith is such as is effectual by good works; or that it is a working
faith that does justify us; which he proves both by comparing the faith of men
and devils together, as also by the example of Abraham and Rahab; thence he
has a distinction of faith, which is lively and fruitful in good works, and of
a false and dead faith, which is a bare profession of faith, and formal
acknowledgement of the Articles of Religion, destitute of all good fruits; so
that James his discourse comes to this upshot, That we are not justified by a
false or a dead faith; and though James says we are justified by works, he
means by a common Metonymy, a working faith. Infants justifi cation.


Quest. How are Infants justified by Faith?

Answ. 1 Justification by faith belongs to persons grown, and of understanding.
Romans 10.17.

2 Without doubt God has his secret ways of applying the righteousness of
Christ to infants, by his Spirit which he gives to them. Isa. 44.3.

Quest. Why is it rather through Faith than any other grace? Why faith
justifies.


Answ. 1 Because by Faith is our union with Christ, and our ingrafting into
him: and justification is a special privilege and benefit, properly arising
from our union with Christ; And then is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to us, (according to the Gospel dialect) when it is apprehended
by faith; and hence justification is set after vocation, Romans 8.30. and
therefore after faith; because faith is wrought in vocation.

2 The proper nature and office of faith is to rely and rest on Christ, or the
grace of God in Christ, for Righteousness and Salvation; hence the phrases of
resting, believing, leaning on him, as on the Rock, the Corner stone, etc. 1
Pet. 2.6. Isa. 26.3, 4. and other places. Faith makes it, its proper
distinguishing action, to look out for a righteousness, for justification; and
finding it in Christ, wholly rests and relies on it; as the Rock and
Foundation, the poor Sinner must be stayed by and built upon.

3 Faith makes a special use of all the Promises: draws water out of those
wells: receives and embraces all the good things held forth in them: but
especially imbraceth remission of sins, as one of the highest and chiefest
Gospel concernments, which he has to appropriate and improve to his greatest
comfort; and the foundation for to build on and exercise all other graces and
duties, and thence the just is said to live by faith, Hab. 2.4.

4 Because faith is constituted, and ordained of God in the Covenant of grace,
as a necessary and indispensible means for attainment of this end in adult
persons. He did from eternity pitch on the grace of faith above all other; for
the applying the righteousness of Christ unto the soul of a Sinner.

5 Because faith gives more glory to God and Christ, than any other grace:
having free grace for its support, and in a special manner free grace in
Justification; and going out of, and denying it self more than any other grace;
receiving all from, and attributing all to Christ and his fullness, Joh. 1.16.
and most especially whatever it has, or expects for justification. Which
makes the Apostle speak as he does, Ephesians. 2.8. and every true believer with
him, by grace we are saved through faith.

Use 1. This Doctrine does clearly discover the dangerous estate of unbeleevers,
The danger of unbeleevers.
above all others: there being no other way to receive that grace that is
offered unto us in Christ; or to attain unto the comfort of it. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God; and what comfort or support can
that man have who is not pleasing unto God? There is but one Ark in all the
World to save a poor sinner from the deluge of destruction, that is, Christ
Jesus; and no getting into this Ark but by faith. There is death all the World
over but in Christ. As it was in the days of Noah, etc. So shall the coming
of the Son of man be, Matthew. 24.38, 39. how many on the face of the earth,
shall the second deluge, or overwhelming destruction find, out of Christ, the
only Ark for poor sinners to be saved by? When the flood came, the world knew
nothing, i. e. believed nothing, and therefore rejected and despised the Ark
that was preparing: Oh! unbeleef is a souldamning sin, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
especially in those that live under the clear dispensation of the Gospel.
Matthew. 16.15, 16. It was for this sin the Jews were broken off, Romans 11.20.
even the whole body of the Nation; and have been ever since the most accursed
people in all the world. Mark it all ye unbeleevers, your curse is doubled,
and your Condemnation is, The Condemnation, Joh. 3.19. The Law pronounces a
curse for the breaking of it: but the Gospel a far greater, for not receiving
Christ, and your Life, and Salvation, which is offered unto you through him. A
Malefactor dies by the Law, justly, because by his wickedness he has deserved
it: but if he has an offer of a pardon, and refuses it, he is doubly guilty
of his own destruction. And this is the misery of poor unbeleevers, in the
days of the Gospel. Joh. 3.18.36.

Obj. Why do you tell us of the danger of unbeleef, which are not Infidels but
(hristians? Ans. Innumerable multitudes of souls do perish, like the herd of
Swine in the Sea, that are driven headlong to destruction by Saran, upon this
conceit, that they are in the faith, when they are not. Therefore,

Use 2. Let this teach us to examine and try our selves, whether we are in the
faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. seeing we are justified by Faith. Say thus, have I gotten
this precious grace? viz. faith in Christ's blood, yea or not? and be not hasty
in concluding that thou have it. And for the discovery of this, whether thou
art in the faith, consider these trials, 1 more general. 2 more particular.

1 More general, Consider, First, Trials of faith
whether thou have a lower work of faith, which although it does not justify,
yet it is a step unto the other, viz. to believe the truth of all the things
that are written in the Law and the Prophets, Act. 24.14. It thou have not a
dogmatical faith of these, thou art worse than the Devils: and if thou
beleevest them, but as the Devils, thou shall have no more benefit by thy
says, than the Devils have. But if this faith have a tendency to justifying
Faith, it is of precious use to thee, and causes thee, as it did Paul, to
exercise thy self, to have a Conscience void of offense, toward God and man,
ver. 16. This is known very much by your believing the Commandments, as well
as the Promises: but see, do you believe the Commandments? he that believes
them will set upon the obeying of them, Heb. 11.8. yea, he will have respect to
every Commandment: do you believe the threatenings? Sure then you will tremble
at them. So David did, Psalm. 119.120. Isa. 66.2, 5. As when we see a Child
shooting at us; we fear not his arrows, not will stir for him, because we
believe not that he can, or will hurt us. But if we see a skilful archer to
level at us, we will not dare to stand within bow-shot, because we believe
he will hit us. So it is in apprehending Gods threatenings against our sins.
When he shoots his arrows at us, Ps. 45.5. certainly, if a man believes not
Commands and Threatenings, he believes not with justifying faith. Yea, see how
thou likest the faithful application of the word to thy conscience: especially
when it is impartial. A naughty unbeleeving heart will turn from it; 2 Timothy
4.3. at the least he does not love to apply it to himself for his profit, Heb.
4.2. and such a hearer may sit under the means all his life time, and never be
the better.

2 See whether thy faith be a working faith. By this thou shall know whether
it be the work of God; if it act vigorously against the allowance of any sin:
that Faith which lies dead and idle, is like a dead and unsavory carcass in
Gods account, Jam. 2.22, 24. that Faith that works not by repentance, Mark
1.15. that works not by love, Gal. 5.6. that brings not forth good fruits, that
bauks any duty, and imboldens to any Sin, Col. 1.10. Psalm. 119.1, 2. it is not
hard for him that shall descend into his own conscience, to discern what manner
of faith he has attained unto.

3 See whether your faith be any other than what you have by natural power and
abilities attained unto: he that has no other, has not this saving faith
wrought in him: for this is wrought by a divine supernatural power, Matthew.
16.17. flesh and blood has not revealed it, Col. 2.12. Faith of the operation
of God, Ephesians. 1.19. It is true, a carnal man may do many duties required of him
in the moral Law (for the outward performance) because he has the seeds of
the Law left in him; but saving faith must be created and wrought only by the
power of God; which shows that the faith of some is but a mere fancy: seeing
they have no more than mere nature in them, there was never any difficulty in
the attainment of it.

4 It is a grace that is not wrought in the heart, unless soundly humbled:
Neither will ever abide in a proud heart: how can you believe? etc. Joh. 5.44.
Heb. 2.4. See how the Lord brought down Paul and the Jailer, and those Act. 2.
So that until Pride, and Self conceitedness, and Vainglory, and Contempt of
others be removed: yea, all glorying in, and boasting of our own
righteousness; And unless the heart be brought to some constant frame of
humility, it neither will or can believe. And the want of this is the cause why
so many Professors turn to errors and profaneness, and a loose kind of life:
it comes from the unbrokenness and untamedness of their hearts. Now Faith of
all other graces is a heartbreaking and soul-humbling grace.

More particularly, There are diverse degrees and measures of faith. And we
must take heed that we do not lay stumbling blocks before the eyes of weak
believers, by setting down such trials of faith as belong only to strong
believers: Such as Abraham, Moses, Job, etc. When as weak ones cannot find
them in themselves, they disquiet themselves without just cause. For clearing
of which, consider some signs of the weakest faith, out of Mark. 9.24. where
you shall find an example in the poor man that brought his Son to our Savior
Christ to be healed, and made profession of his Faith, in which we may
observe these particulars. Signs of the weakest faith.


1 There is a sound Conviction of his unbeleef: he perceives what an
unbeleeving heart he had; and this is the first work of the Spirit of God,
Joh. 16.8. and a work perceiveable by the weakest believer: now none can
convince the soul of its unbeleef, but the Spirit of God; and this is such a
conviction as causes the sinner not only to see but to mourn for his unbeleef
before the Lord, to pray and strive earnestly against it. He said with Tears --
Lord help my unbeleef; he therefore that is not sensible of this sin on the
like manner, has not so much as a weak faith wrought in his heart.

2 There is a strong desire after faith, and grace, and Christ. So there was in
this poor believer. It is ordinary in the Scripture to express the nature of
the weakest faith by hunger and thirst, as Joh. 7.37, 38. now that signifies a
restless desire after Christ and Grace, accompanied always with strong
endeavors in the use of the means to attain unto the things desired. It is not
a lazy and listless desire, such as the Sluggard has which kills him: but such
as sets the heart and outward man on work to attend diligently on the means of
grace to attain unto faith in Christ, and that in a greater measure. Wherefore
let lubberly and lazy Professors take notice of this, that they have no true
faith in their hearts.

3 In this believer, there was a holy jealousy that he might not be deceived
about his grace, that made him so to complain. A weak believer deals like a
wise man, that is but a young beginner, and newly set up in his trade, he
fears exceedingly lest he should be deceived with counterfeit wares, or
copper money: so it is with a provident Christian: he is very circumspect and
wary lest he should be deceived with Copper and Alchymy faith. Therefore he
loves a faithful and searching Ministry, that will gage his heart, and discover
the unsoundness of it, Joh. 3.21. He comes to the light that his deeds may be
made manifest, etc. whereas a false heart is ever joined with a great deal of
Carnal confidence, will not be beaten off but that all is well and sound with
him; he will not endure the weight of a faithful Ministry, nor abide the light
of it, it dazles his eyes. It breeds much peace to him, to say, That Preaching
is for money, and Gods Ministers are deceivers, and so despises the Ministry
and Word too.

4 The poor believer offers himself to the good will and pleasure of Christ,
inquiring into it, with resolution to do whatsoever the Lord requires of him.
So it was wont to be in young converts, as in Paul, Act. 9.6. who said, Lord
what would thou have me to do? He means, that he would do any thing that
the Lord should appoint him: So it was Act. 12.37. and Act. 16.30. where there
are the like Examples; as they are not afraid to shame themselves for sins
past; so their hearts are fixed for the future, to embrace in judgment and
practice every duty commanded. Let the false heart come to this touchstone, and
he will appear counterfeit. Oh! how will he cavil against any strickt truth?
he will never be persuaded that men are bound to such preciseness; to
sanctify the Sabbath, to daily family duties, and secret prayer, or to
restitution in case of theft or couzenage, and does wittingly, and willingly
reject all the word that agrees not with his own judgment and fancies.

5 The weakest faith purges the heart from the love and allowance of every
known sin, Act. 15.9. and works inward sanctification in the beginnings of it,
Act. 26.18. Indeed there are some common gifts of sanctification in Temporaries
and such as after become Apostates, Heb. 5.7. but their hearts were never
truly broken off from Sin. Comfort.


Use 3. It is comfort to every true believer, that justification is by faith,
and unspeakeable ground of rejoicing to him, that there is so great a
blessedness bestowed upon a poor sinner. Such an one as comes absolutely from
Election, and tendes undoubtedly to Salvation. Romans 4.6. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Romans
18.1, 2, 3. yea, what a removal is there of the great fears and terrors of the
Almighties wrath and displeasure; Know therefore, all you poor believers, that
your persons are justified, and your services accepted in Christ Jesus; and
nothing for condemnation can be ever charged upon you. So that I may say with
the Psalmist, Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye just, and shout for joy all
ye that are upright in heart. Psalm. 32.11.

Object. What need we to comfort believers, cannot they take their comforts
easily enough home to themselves?

Answ. Presumption wants no comfort, it will soon catch at that which does not
belong to it: but believers indeed (especially weakones) have great need of
comfort. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, etc. Isa. 4.01. he means that his
people have great need of consolation in this point. Remember how it was with
Job himself, Job 9.16. though he had called, and God had answered him, yet he
would not believe that God had hearkened to his voice. And David too, though
Nathan had told him, that the Lord had put away his sin, that he should not
dye, yet how earnest was he ( Ps. 51.) for pardon? which state befalls
believers, not only upon their relapses, but even upon their upright walking
before God, and God will make them to know, that not only Faith and
Justification, but also the comfort of a justified estate, is the free gift of
God, 2 Cor. 1.3. and they shall find it true, that although it be easy for
nature to consent to justification by works; yet it is hard to close with mercy
in a way of free grace. The consolation therefore will be very great to them in
these two particulars.

1 It is a Comfort in the poor services they do, Comforts.
and the weakness of their duties. And this is one of Satan's strong
Temptations, whereby he seeks to trouble their peace; he first tempts to set
light by Christ, and his righteousness; and to seek justification by our own
works; and then he will trouble us with the many fallings of our duties and
performances. Thou hear so unprofitably, and prayest so deadly and poorly,
and art so pinching in good works, that thou can not be justified. But
beloved, Beware that you hang not your comforts upon your duties, but on Christ
reneived by faith; as the Publican, Luke 18.14. Romans 9.3. yea the Gentiles that
followed not after righteousness (viz. of their own) have attained unto
righteousness, even that which is of Faith. This therefore is a believers
comfort, in all his imperfect and weak performances, that these are not his
righteousness whereby he expects to be justified: but the righteousness of
Christ most spotless and perfect is that which he builds upon.

Object. But are not good works required of justified persons?

Answ. Yes, as the fruits of faith and justification: but not as the merit of
it, Gal. 3.6. and Tit. 3.7, 8. when he says we are justified by Grace, he
moreover adds: That it is a faithful saying, and these things I will that ye
affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works. Neither is that obedience that is required of Believers, a
strict and exact conformity to the Law, as it does in it self require and
demand: as Legal obedience, but Evangelical obedience, which stands in the
desire, resolution, and endeavor, to obey Gods revealed will.

2 If we were justified by Faith, then it is not the strength of faith that
justifies the Believer, or assurance: but it is simply his faith, if it be
true, though it be weak; that which troubles many a believer, is that he
wants assurance, and some evident feeling of Gods mercy, or sight of it, now
faith is opposed to so a clear a sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. and is the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Excellent is that, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted
up the Serpent, etc. where faith is compared to the Israelites eye, now it was
not the strong sight of the Brass that healed them; but the weakest would do
it. So it is with Faith, and therefore though Christians should labor for
strong Faith. yet let them not be discouraged at the weakness of their faith.

Use 4. Exhortation and Direction to all sorts of persons to attain unto, and
maintain this grace of faith.

1 To unjustifyed persons: those that have not faith to make it their
main-task, and daily business, and to employ the strength of all their
endeavors to obtain Faith and Justification thereby. Reconciliation is of
wonderful worth. It is true, we ought to encourage poor sinners when they
begin to reform their lives, and leave their base courses, Drunkenness,
Scorning, etc. when these become like hot Iron, and scalding Lead in their
fingers, it is some beginning of mercy, to such a soul, and it is a farther
degree when they come to do justly, and to love mercy, and live peaceably; for
God requires these, Mic. 6.8. but it is a grievous delusion to think that by
any such things, we can find acceptance, or be justified before God. No,
no, let a man account all the days of his life that he has spent, and all
the duties that he has performed, spilt and lost without Faith. Christ will
tell you, this is the work of God, that ye believe, etc. Joh. 6.28, 29. it is
called a work, because a work of Gods power and working, and a work that he
delights in, we should be exercised in, to take our farewell of the World,
renounce our selves, and to fly to Christ for refuge from the storm of Gods
wrath and indignation; and to prefer him before all, this is the work of faith,
that takes us off from all our resting on our works; and brings us naked unto
Christ. All other duties are very good in their season and kind, but like
Joseph's brethren, none welcome without a Benjamin. No works welcome, and
pleasing to God, without faith which brings Christ. God says, without Christ
see not my face; he would have us put on all Christian graces: the whole Armor
of God. Ephesians. 6.16. But above all take the shield of Faith. Because this plece
of armor has a singular excellency in it above all other, because it defends
all the rest: the breastplate of Righteousness is excellent to keep the heart,
and the helmet of hope to keep the head: but faith must keep both. As a broad
Shield that quenches Satan's fiery darts at whatever part they be shot; and
the truth is, there is no grace, Satan so much shoots at, Luke 22.32. for
hereby he knows we still prevail against him; therefore this is a weapon not
only by which we are said to overcome, but the victory it self, 1 John 5.4, 5.
it cannot be said so of any other weapon; therefore above all put on this.

Now for the attaining of this grace we must know, and be convinced,

1 That we have it not by nature. In the flesh there dwells no good thing,
Romans 7.18. and this is a work of the Spirit, to convince the World of sin,
because it believes not, Joh. 16.8. 8. and till the heart be convinced thus, a
farther work cannot be expected, Luke 1.53.

2 Be fully convinced that it is the Lord only that must work it, he must
draw us, or else we will not, or can not come to Christ, Joh. 6.44.

3 Be convinced of our great unworthiness that he should bestow it upon us,
because of our frequent sleighting of Christ, and Gadaren-like refusal of him,
preferring our Swinish lusts before him; God gives faith where it may be to the
glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.3, 6.

4 Know, that believing, is receiving of Christ in all his Offices, and giving
up our selves unto his disposal, Joh. 1.12.

5 Know what a dangerous thing it is to be mistaken in this Faith, there be
many things which the Devil and the World call faith, which are not so, Act.
8.13. Joh. 2.22.

6 That there is no Christ to be received by faith, but only in and by the
Promises of the Gospel, Act. 15.7. he says, the Gentiles should hear the Word
of Gods Gospel and believe. So Ephesians. 1.13. Oh make much of Promises, search
them, hide them in your hearts, look for Christ in them, think much on them,
and turn them into Prayers, this it may be will be meant by the hiding the
treasure, Mat. 13.44, 45.

7 Be persuaded that the Promise carries Christ when the Spirit of God
spreads it, and applies it, and works with it in the public Ministry. Romans
10.17. 2 Cor. 3.18. Otherwise it may be said, why may I not be contented with
reading at home? but know that the Ministry is the Ministry of the Spirit, and
the Spirit works in it. Hence Ministers are said to justify their hearers, Dan.
12.3.

Quest. But will any conviction serve to work faith?

Answ. The Spirits conviction goes farther than any humane, Joh. 16.8, 10.
that will reach to the heart, for it is unresistible, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Our Gospel
came not unto you in word only, etc. this Spirit of Illumination is strong, for
it subdues all, and transforms all, 2 Cor. 3.18. Oh then be instant, constant,
and fervent in prayer for this good Spirit of his: for it is promised to them
that ask it, Luke 11.13.

Now to shut up this use, for the attaining this precious grace, I shall
commend to you the consideration of one place; it is of Act. 17.11, 12. where
it is said, The Bereans were more noble (or better disposed) than they of.
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, therefore many of
them believed. Where observe how the Bereans attained unto faith.

1 They attended carefully on the public Ministry.

2 They did this with all readiness of mind, though (they being Jews) Paul's
Doctrine was contrary to them, yet they laid aside all prejudice against it, and
heard with readiness. It is a great matter to have a mind to the Gospel, this
was their better disposition.

3 They were not contented with the public Ministry alone, but in private they
searched the Scriptures daily, they did not only now and then repeat Sermons,
but made it their work daily to search the Scriptures; and that judiciously and
with consideration. Neither was it any disparagement to Paul's Ministry to be
tried by them, but an honor to it, and credit to be found to be exact
according to the Scriptures. And it is not the least part of Christian Wisdom
to be often trying of, and setting home upon his heart a profitable truth, till
he has fixed it there, and driven the nail to the head.

4 It follows [many of them beleeved] not a few, but many, and therefore they
believed; God gave this great blessing to their diligent attention and frequent
search of the Scripture, so that many believed both of men and women. And sure
if any of us do the like, we shall speed as they did.

It is to persuade and exhort believers still to keep on the exercise of faith
to maintain this good estate of Justification. Exhort. 2. To believers.


Faith is of constant use, for their continued Justification, and the comfort
of that estate, Gal. 2.16. Even we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we
might be (still) justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. It is observable that
is spoken of Abraham, Genesis 15.6. that he believed God, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness, though doubtless he believed before upon the calling
out of his own Country, but at this time he is said to be justified by faith:
because the Holy Ghost would give a singular Testimony to his faith at this
time, for his own, and our comfort; When God made him a Promise of seed, when
Abraham and Sarah were both very aged: and so an unlikely thing, had he not
believed God who promised. Faith therefore justifies at all times, it is not
only a boat or bridge to carry us into a state of Justification: but it is as
our legs to walk with God in a justified state at all times, and hence it is
put as the condition of the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17.1. for faith is that
whereby we walk before God, and are perfect in Christ continually.

Object. But what need we trouble our selves any more about our Justification*
seeing that once justified, we are for ever justified?

Answ. It is necessary for diverse weighty reasons.

1 Though a justified estate be a sure estate; yet the sureness of it depends
(under God) upon faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power of God through
Faith -- it is true, God can keep us by his absolute power without faith; but
his ordinate and orderly power, is through a lively and active faith.

2 It is a duty that God requires of us to be careful to continue in a
justified estate. Rev. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be so still. The
word signifies let him be justified still: or let him go on, and continue in a
justified estate, and Heb. 3.6, 14. whose house we are, if we hold fast the
confidence and the rejoicing of our hope, verse. 14. We are partakers of
Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence, the word translated
confidence (...), signifies subsistence, or standing fast to the end, against
all assaults: we cannot plead subsistence for our outward man without faith;
but this is of a higher nature: we cannot subsist to Godward without holding
fast the grace of faith, and use it, and that steadfastly to the end.

3 It is requisite for the increase and farther growth of our faith. Romans 1.16,
17. in the Gospel is revealed the righteousness of God from faith to faith, i.
e. our righteousness for Justification, is revealed that we should proceed
from one degree of faith to another; and this is the way to a full assurance.
Heb. 6.11, 12. we desire that every one of you give the same diligence to the
full assurance of hope. It is much to be lamented, that ancient believers
after a long profession are much to seek in this; and are still questioning
their title to Christ: there are two special reasons of it, 1 Their neglect of
their watch, and their frequent backslidings into their sins. See 1 John 3.3.2
Cor. 7.^.^ The neglect of the improving their faith upon all occasions; they
cannot get assurance without this.

4 It is requisite for Christians safety and comfort in life and death: if we
improve our faith in our Justification, we shall improve our joy and comfort
also; and keep an even current, without so much ebbing and flowing, clouds and
ecclipses, and in storms and dangers, it will keep a Christian on the main,
where he shall have See-room enough; and as they did in their storms, Act.
27.28. once they sounded, and found it twenty fathoms, again they sounded and
found it fifteen, and lest they should fall on the Rocks, they cast out four
Anchors. So should Christians do, I mean not content themselves that they are
lanched forth into the stream of Gods Mercy; but should be often spunding in
the survey of their spiritual comforts. And when they find them to grow
shallow, and to lessen, it is dangerous to go securely on: there be rocks or
sands near, it is good to have your Anchors of faith and hope in a readiness;
yea, to cast them within the veil, to prevent such dangers and desperate evils
as are approaching.

Christ the object of justifying faith.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ.


Doct. FAith as it justifies, The mercy of God in Christ the object of faith.
has especially Jesus Christ, or the mercy of God in Christ, for its object.
It is expressly said, that God is the justifier of him that believes in Jesus;
i. e. to renounce all other things for Justification, and rely only on Jesus
Christ, and his righteousness.

Justifying faith may be considered two ways: 1 According to the general object
and action of it, which is to embrace the whole Word of God, Joh. 2.22. it
receives the Commandments, believes the Threatenings, respects the Promises, it
receives the good things promised, it is a guide to all our actions, the
fountain of all our obedience, it is also exercised about all the Attributes,
and Works of God; about the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the
Body, and the last Judgment. But in none of these senses it does justify.

2 Justifying faith is considered according to the especial. and most eminent
effect of it. Has Jesus Christ for the object. Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Joh. 11.25. I am the resurrection and the life,
he that believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. Joh. 3.16.
Whosoever believes on him shall not perish. Acts 10.43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes on him shall
receive remission of sins. Righteousness is still tied to faith in Christ, who
is said to be the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.4. and this is that which he commands to be preached
throughout all Nations, Luke 24.47. and this is that the faith of all the
Saints has in a special manner respected and embraced. It was Peter's faith,
Matthew. 16.16. and the Eunuchs faith, Act. 8.28. and Martha's faith, Joh. 11.26,
27. Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. This is the faith that
justifies, and by it the righteousness of God is unto all, and upon all them
that believe, Romans 3.22. and hence it is called the faith of Christ, because it
apprehends Christ as its object.

Now I add, the mercy of God in Christ, because faith in this, is all one with
faith in Christ. So that, 1 Pet. 1.21. it is said, by him (i.e. Christ) we
believe in God that raised him from the dead. Christ is not the object of faith
abstractly, and nakedly considered: but Christ with his benefits procured and
purchased by him, and promised by God the Father. The reasons of this duty are.

Reas. 1. Because nothing in the world can make us righteous before God,
further than it does lay hold on such a righteousness, as is perfect and
accepted for us (as such) by God. Nothing will make a poor man rich, further
than it does convey, or impart riches into his possession; and all that we can
do by faith to our justification, is to receive the righteousness bestowed on
us, and there is no such perfect righteousness that is able to cover our
shame, as Christ's is, Revel. 3.17.

2 Because justification of Sinners does mainly imply a freedom, and discharge
from the curse and condemnation of the Law, and a way for the full satisfaction
of it in order to Sinners pardon and discharge, and this is to be found no
where but in Christ, who is the end of the lam for righteousness, in his boing
made a curse for us.

3 Unless faith justifies, as it has a respect and relation unto Christ as
its object, it can have no more to do with satisfaction, than any other grace,
as Charity, Temperance, etc. but we know that they being works of the Law avail
nothing to our justification, Romans 3.20. but the great property of faith above
other graces, is to draw virtue from Christ for justification, and to exercise
it self on the free grace and mercy of God exhibited in him.

Obj. But was not Abraham's faith justifying, as it believed the power of God?
Romans 4.21, 22. He believed in God who quickneth the dead, and God that had
promised was able to perform; therefore it was imputed unto him for
righteousness.

Ans. It is true, he believed the power of God, but that did not justify him:
but his believing on the promised seed, Genesis 22.18. He saw Christ's day by
faith, Joh. 8.56. It is true, the faith of Gods power was a stay to him in
great temptations he was exposed unto: so it may be to us, but we cannot be
justified by that faith which only believes the power of God to save us.

Use 1. It serves to refute those that deny faith to have such a relation unto
Christ in justification as has been spoken of. Such as say, faith does
justify without reference to Christ, whereby the form and life of justifyng
faith is taken away, Christ is robbed of his glory, and the Consciences of
Christians of their comfort and peace.

Use 2. It discovers the unjustified estate of those persons that do not cast
anchor here, i. e. in Christ. A man may have great knowledge, and many gifts,
and believe too to admiration (as they who had the faith of Miracles in the
Primitive times, Matthew. 7.22, 23.) and yet be unjustified; yea he may believe
the Articles of Christian religion, study the Promises, and think he does apply
them to himself, and yet be unjustified. It is the very case of the seed in the
stony ground, that received the word with joy, Math. 13.20. Why consider, what
is the word, that even a carnal heart may rejoice in? it is the word of
promise, and this word a stony heart may receive and apply to himself, and
abide stony still; though Israel had transgressed the Law, and cast off the
thing that was good, yet he would cry, My God we know thee, Hos. 8.1, 2, 3. So
the Jews, Joh. 8.39, 41. and thus many catch at Gods mercy, and seem to build
upon the Promise, and yet perish everlastingly.

Obj. But alas, should I not build my salvation and justification on the
promises of God, what else should I repose my considence in?

Ans. Promises will not justify.
The Promises alone are not sufficient to bear the weight of a sinners
justification and salvation; neither do they do any thing further than they
do direct unto, exhibit, and bestow upon us a sufficient righteousness to
save us; and this must be had in a person, not in a promise, or proposition. As
for example, the Israelites bit with the fiery Serpents, were not healed with
the promise, or the light, but the virtue drawn from the Brazen Serpent, by
looking on him. So the promise alone will not justify, but only as it
discovers and exhibits such a person, i. e. Christ who puts forth, or is
clothed with such a righteousness, which (being seen with the eye of faith)
puts the sinner into a state of justification. Neither do all the Promises
discover or exhibit Christ, though they are all exhibited in Christ, 1 Timothy
4.8.2 Cor. 1.20. In Christ, yea and amen: but without Christ, neither yea, nor
amen, Romans 8.32. God gives his Son first; then other things. Ephesians. 1.3. He
blesses us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, but we can have none, nor
lay claim to any promise in the Book of God without him.

Quest. What comfort is there then for such a man by the promises in Jesus
Christ?

Ans. The comfort truly is, that there is an exhibition, and holding forth of
Christ in them to the vilest sinners: and whilst there is life there is hope to
get into Christ, and get interest in the Promises, 1 John 5.11. This is the
record that God has given us life eternal, and it is in his Son. Hence Christ
is called the Covenant, Isa. 49.8. because not only his person was, and is the
main thing in the Covenant, but also because all the promises in the Covenant
are his, and made to him, and in him, and through him only conveyed to
believers. Thus we see what a dangerous thing it is to pitch our faith first,
on any thing but Christ: and thence to expect a justified estate.

Quest. How is faith in Jesus Christ known?

Ans. 1. By the entrance of it, which is such that it separates the sinner unto
Christ, as Psalm. 45.11. Forget thy fathers house, etc. As it is in persons
marrried, who forget and leave their fathers house, and old friends, and
sequester themselves to marriage communion: so it is with those that are
married to the Lord Jesus; though they have been entangled in their affections
to their old ways, yet by harkening to the word of Christ, they renounce and
forget all for Christ's sake; then the King takes pleasure in them.

2 By the progress of it; as they have received Jesus Christ the Lord, so they
walk in him, Col. 2.6, 7. and are subject to him in every thing, Ephesians. 5.24.
yea they live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.

Use 3. Instruction and exhortation, to show and exhort us whither to go for
justification. It is unto Christ, and the mercy of God in him. Let the main
care and desire of our souls be after the person, natures, works, and merits of
the Lord Jesus: and thereby shall we be possessed of this great benefit of
justification through him. Neither is my meaning that we should seek to come
unto him any other way than by the Word and Promises; for if we do, we can
never come to him, but meet with Satan as an Angel of light in some Enthusiasm.
But we must be acquainted with the Promises, yea such as do carry and
exhibit Christ unto us, and therein close with Christ before we can claim the
promises of pardon, or of the Spirit; or of any grace or glory.

Mot. 1. Consider Christ as he stands in relation to the Father; he is 1 No
other than the Son of his love, Col. 1.13. the Fathers love is infinite to him,
and therefore he has given all things into his hands for our justification and
salvation, Joh. 3.35. whatever fruit, or testimony of the love of God, the soul
stands in need of, he may be sure to have it from Christ.

2 The Father has sealed him, Joh. 6.27. he has not only designed him, but
signed and sealed him a Commission to be a Mediator: has set his stamp upon
him, his express Image: in so much that he has the fathers broad Seal, to be
our propitiation; and it can be had no where else.

3 He is the fathers Anointed, who received the Spirit without measure;
qualifying and furnishing of him, with all such sufficiencies as were requisite
to his Mediators office; and this unction was with the Holy Ghost and Power,
Act. 10.38. i.e. with power to do whatever his office required to be done.

Mot. 2 Consider Christ in his person, as he is Immanuel, God in our nature:
as being man he is fit to be a propitiatory sacrifice; and being God is able
to vanquish all his sufferings, and to give infinite virtue and value to them.
Being man he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone; and has a feeling of
our infirmities: and being God, he is able to apply all his sufferings unto
us: that a poor believer may call him Ithiel and Ucal, Prove. 30.1. God with
me, and the strong one.

2 As he is a middle Person, a Mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
Heb. 8.6. A Mediator of a better Covenant, established on better promises; he
is a daies-man between God and sinful man: and one fit to deal with both
parties at Variance. And therefore we need not complain as Job does, Job 9.32,
33. He is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come
together in Judgment, neither is there any days man (or umpire) between us,
that may lay his hand upon us both. Yea, but Jobs redeemer was a fit redeemer
and umpire that could lay his hand upon God, and take up all matters with him,
and lay his hand upon the sinner, and bring him to God again.

3 Consider Christ in all his fullness and freeness to Communicate that fullness
of his. His fullness, Col. 1.19. it pleased the Father that in him all fullness
should dwell. See also, 1 Cor. 1.30. Heb. 7.25. how free he is to communicate
his fullness. Heb. 2.17. He is a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining unto God to make atonement, etc. Joh. 7.37, 38. he makes solemn
Proclamation of mercy to all comers; and promises the Spirit of grace unto
them.

4 Consider Christ as just and a justified person, and so fitted to purchase
and procure our justification. Truly, if he had not been justified, he could
not have justified us. 1 Timothy 3.16. he is said to be justified in the Spirit,
i. e. justified by his divine nature, whereby he raised up himself from the
dead. As at his death he was condemned by all sorts; so at his resurrection
he was absolved and justified from the sins of his Elect, imputed unto him;
and from all the accusations of the world, who looked upon him as a grievous
malefactor. So that his righteousness, both personal and public appeared
before all the world; and that God the Father, was well pleased with him, and
in him, with all that shall believe on him.

Mot. 3. Consider the precious excellency of the grace of Faith. Which appears,

1 In that it is an uniting grace. It ties and unites the soul to Christ, and
to God in Christ. Other graces make the soul to be like to Christ, but faith
makes the soul to be one with him, Ephesians. 3.17. thy Love, Patience, Humility,
Heavenly-mindedness, make thee very like to Jesus Christ; but faith makes thee
to be one with him: as a member with the head: and that is a greater and
better condition (for ought I can conceive) than the state of the Elect Angels.
Though they are confirmed in glory by Christ, yet they are not so united to
Christ as a Believer is. They are the children of God by Creation, but
Believers by Adoption: being united to the natural Son of God.

2 This is the grace that assures us of our eternal Election, Act. 13.48. Tit.
1.1. we may thence most certainly conclude, that our Names are written in the
book of life. Gods Council concerning our everlasting estate lies hidden in the
bosom of God, till such time as he commends his love to us in his Son Jesus:
by working faith in our hearts; this is the Copy of Gods eternal decree, and
has written upon it [concordat cum originali] it agrees with the Original.
This is the very meaning of this grace, that God has set his heart upon thy
soul.

Now what ever God gives else; as Honor, Riches, or Excellent spiritual gifts,
(without faith) brings but little comfort: and a man may be a reprobate for all
these things which fall alike to the just and unjust.

3 Faith in Christ possesses us of him, and that no other grace will do. Ephesians.
3.17. Heb. 11.1. And hence it is the first quieting-grace to the soul. Isa.
30.15. Thus says the Lord, in returning, and rest, ye shall be saved, in
quietness and confidence shall be your strength. Heb. 4.1, 3. there is a
Promise made of entering into Gods Rest, and we enter into it by Faith, we
who have believed are entered: woe have this true Sabbath, whereof the
unbeleeving Jews had but the type: we have the true Canaan typified by the
other: this is the very Harbor of a tossed and weather-beaten soul, As Mr.
Buroughs well expresses it. Faith is the first grace that descries land, when
the soul is in the tempest and storm of a troubled Conscience.

Oh Beloved! this is the excellency of faith, that it not only discovers Land
(for we may be cast away for all that) but it carries us safe into the
harbor; for that is our entrance into our Rest, the landing of the wearied
soul on Christ, its rest, Mat. 11.28.

Quest. But how should I get faith in Christ?

Direct. 1 Be very careful to study the knowledge of Christ. Ye may be sure,
you cannot believe on him, whom you do not know. This is that which is
commended by Christ himself, as that wherein life eternal does consist, Joh.
17.3. and Paul (who was rapt into the third heavens) prefers this before any
other knowledge, Phil. 3.8. he calls it the over-exceeding and super-excellent
knowledge of Christ. This is that which acquaints the soul with a Physician, a
Redeemer, a Savior, a Propitiation, and whatever God requires for
satisfaction; or man desires, or can desire for perfection.

Tell a wounded spirit, that is full of horror of Conscience, all the most
profound and transcendent notions, in the whole circle of Learning: they will
not a jot refresh him, or bring him the nearer to heavenly joys. Let him be
acquainted with all the motions of heaven, they cannot bring him to heaven:
With all the secrets of nature, they cannot bring him out of the dreggs of
nature; nor make him a Child of Grace. This is sufficiently experienced in the
Heathen Philosophers: who for all their great knowledge were ignorant of God,
witness the learned Athenians, among whom the true God was but an unknown God,
Act. 17.23. and the reason was, because their knowledge was not joined with the
knowledge of Christ; There is no other knowledge will justify but that, and
therefore to seek justification, or quieting to a troubled soul by any other,
is but to spend our money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55. or to go to buy
bread with brass money, such as is not current coin in Heaven. Nay, other
knowledge is so far from bringing peace to a disquieted spirit, that it brings
with it tormenting and vexation of spirit. Eccl. 1.18. He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, other knowledge may, and will puff up. 1 Cor.
8.1, 2. but this will humble: humble us in our own apprehensions, but really
exalt us. Prove. 4, 8. Exalt her, and she will exalt thee. Other Divine
knowledge will build well, but the knowledge of Christ lays the foundation, 1
Cor. 3.11. this must needs have great substance and strength that bears up all
the weight and bulk of the whole Christian edifice: and let me speak from my
heart to all Students that hear this, that unless your main care be to get
this knowledge, you do but build Babels and Castles in the air: And oh that
many would make this their great study, if they did, there would not be so many
new ways to heaven, and false lights as there are, 2 Pet. 3.18, 19.

Direct. 2. Make this thy great heart design in coming to hear the word
Preached, for to get faith: seeing it comes by hearing. Resolve upon that end,
and think with thy self, if thou come with any by-ends, the searcher of
hearts will meet with thee: if thou have an Idol in thy heart, thou shall be
answered according unto it. Ezekiel. 14.7. How many come with their Idols? Some to
get other knowledge, and not of Christ; Some to judge the Minister, and to carp
at the truths delivered: Some to see, and to be seen: and others out of mere
formality and custom. But alas! where are they that stir up themselves, to lay
hold on Christ? Isa. 64.7.

Direct. 3. Remember to follow the example of the Bereans, and in searching the
Scriptures, be much in studying the promises. Act. 10.43. Act. 13 38, 39. Think
it not enough that you are Children of the Covenant, as the Jews were, Act.
3.25. but ye must become also the children of the promise; for they only are
accounted for the seed, Romans 9.8.

Direct. 4. Be very watchful that carnal Objections and Cavils against Christ,
or his heavenly Mysteries or Doctrine, arise not in your hearts without
checking of them, and struggling against them. Thou may as easily empty the
Ocean with a Cockle shell, as measure the mystery of godliness with carnal
Reason. Do not cast off any truth of Christ, because you can see no reason for
it, or cannot understand how this or that should be. Prove. 3.5. Trust in the
Lord, and lean not on thine own understanding. Luther has such a speech, That
man's corrupt reason is a terrible enemy to faith; and this is the reason why
many great Scholars are left of God; And so our Savior says, I thank thee O
Father, etc. Matthew. 11.25. Nicodemus will say, How can these things be? Joh.
13.6. and the Philosophers will say of Paul (when he goes to Preach these
things) what will this Babbler say? Oh! but remember, God will confound the
wisdom of this World: thou should rather say with Agur, when thou hear
the Doctrine of Christ, surely, I am more brutish than any man, when he heard
of Ithiel and Vcal, I have neither Wisdom nor Knowledge of the most holy;
being an humble teachable heart to the word preached. Pro. 8.4, 5. and if any
man among you seem to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise, 1
Cor. 3.18. Prove. 9.4, 5.

Direct. 5. Look at it as an extreme vileness in thine heart, and wily working
of Satan, when Christ is preached, and the grace of God in Christ, if thou
can go away from the word preached, with an unbeleeving, unmoved heart.
Observe for this two or three places, Joh. 8.26.31. Christ had been preaching
of the Father, and of himself, and his own death, his mission, and Commission,
and pleasing of the Father, and verse. 30. the text says, when he spoke those
words, many believed on him; the Spirit takes special notice, what words they
were, that wrought upon the hearers, i.e. Christ's unspeakable conjunction with
the Father, the Sufferings and Cross of Christ, his holy Life and Death; they
stood out long, but now they yielded. So 2 Cor. 4.4-6. If our Gospel be hid,
etc. in whom the God of this World has blinded the eyes of them that believe
not, etc. that is, all the beauty of God the Father, that shines in the face of
Jesus Christ, his Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Truth, etc. are hid from them: Satan
blinds them, and their own naughty hearts, and there is also a dreadful
judgment of God in it.

Direct. 6. Labor for Self-denial, for we must renounce all confidence in the
flesh. Privileges, Duties, righteousness of our own, Phil. 3.3.9.10. the
righteousness of Faith excludes all this; this is our betaking of our selves
to the wings of Christ, Matthew. 23.37. i.e. wholly to be under the covert of
them: as chickens under the wings of a Hen in a storm.

Use 4. It is a great comfort to you that believe in the Lord Jesus; you are in
the right way to the Father, Joh. 14.6. you are in a most blessed estate, Ephesians.
1.16. Jam. 2.5. the world looks at you as poorly provided for, but you have
abundance, you are rich in faith, and rich in Christ, partakers of his
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Cor. 1.5.

Use 5. It serves to teach believers a main duty that most concerns them to
practice, i. e. to go on in a justified estate by faith in the Lord Jesus, or
embracing the mercy of God in Christ; and that because,

1 They have the main principle in them to maintain a justified estate; which
others want, viz. justifying faith. Gal. 2.6. Though the well of living waters
be very deep, believers have wherewithal to draw out of it. They have a price
in their hands to get wisdom, Christ is near, Ephesians. 2.13. he is near who
justifies, Isa. 50.8. Isa. 46.13.

2 The benefit of justification should be maintained constantly in a Christians
heart, and that lively, and (as far as may be) without interruption; and
though our justification be in it self unchangeable, yet it is changeable in
the diverse effects of it; Our peace and comfort is often ebbing and flowing,
and subject to darknings; as with David, when he says, I am cast out of the
sight of God, Psalm. 31.22. and cried, his bones were broken, and that he lay
in the deep: and therefore that we may maintain our peace, its worth our
while, to take pains in preventing our decaies, and declinings. It is easier to
preserve peace and joy, than to recover it out of an afflicted and dark
condition: as its easier to maintain health and strength, than to fetch it at
deaths door, easier to keep the fire burning, than to blow it up out of the
sparks and embers almost extinct: Therefore they are no small difficulties that
they are brought unto, who let their peace and comforts decline, and be almost
extinguished, before they renew them.

3 We must be much in the exercise of our faith on Christ for justification.
Faith is not only the breeder, and bringer forth of our joy and comfort: but
it is the nurse and foster-mother of them; cherishing and feeding of them till
we come to a full and perfect age in Christ, Jud. 20. Col. 2.1, 2. Phil. 1.25.
All fruits the nearer they come to ripeness, the sweeter they be: and so is
the fruit of faith, sweeter in the ear, than in the blade. If a justified
estate be sweet at the first; it must needs be much sweeter, as the strength
of faith, and spiritual acquaintance with God increases. Faith thus exercised,
does these things. 1 It conveies the thing that is desired or sought. Hence in
the Scripture, it is so often made the instrument of Gods conveyance of all his
blessings to us, Heb. 11.11. and Gal. 3.14. the promise of the Spirit is
received through faith. Remarkable is Christ's saying to the Centurion, Go thy
way, and as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee, Mat. 8.13. whatever
faith lays hold on, it make it its own. 2 Though the comfort of things
believed, and of a justified estate in particular, be sometimes delayed; yet
it supports the heart with patience to wait for it; which made Hanna quiet,
that she looked no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.10, 18. and this made Abraham rejoice in
the assured expectation of the promised seed. 3 Faith exercised makes the soul
quick-sighted in apprehending the fullness and satisfaction in the grace
desired, and expected. It sets the soul, as Moses upon mount N^bo to see the
glory of the promised land: It shows, the many mansions, the Crown of glory,
the immortal inheritance, the kingdom that shall not be shaken, a far off,
before we come into possession. So Abraham and Sarah saw the things promised,
Heb. 11.13. and was persuaded of them, embraced and enjoyed them (in a great
measure) as things present.

4 Exercise of faith in Christ, and apprehending Justification thereby, is the
fundamental work of faith, and all other works of faith do depend upon it.

It is very observable in the Old Testament, that when the Lord would
strengthen the faith of his people, to believe any particular blessings, he
gave them a promise of the Messiah. So when he made promises of deliverance of
Ahaz, and his people, he granted this sign, Behold a Virgin shall conceive,
Isa. 7.14. So when he promised the restoration of his people out of
Captivity, he promises Christ, and Justification by him: Behold, I raise up to
the seed of Jacob a righteous branch, and in his days, Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the Name whereby he shall be
called, Jehovah our righteousness; and this is laid for a ground for the
peoples faith to work upon, to cause them to believe their return out of
Captivity. So would we have our faith set on work to act lively in any
particular duty, or occasion? would we exercise it in word, Prayer,
Sacraments? the way is to go to the fountain. Mal. 3.1, 5. Zach. 6.12, 13.
Behold, the man whose name is the branch, he shall grow up out of his place,
and he shall build the Temple of the Lord. Would we set any graces on work,
as love to God or Man? Faith must work with, or rather exercise it self in it,
and set it on work. Gal. 5.6. Would we resist temptation? Faith quenches all
the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. and makes us strong in the Lord, and the
power of his might. In a word, whatever our estate, occasion, or business is;
Faith in Christ, and in Justification by him, must be set on work: and it is
like the pouring waters on the roots, that will make all grow and be fruitful.

Quest. How may we improve our faith in Christ for the continuance of our
Justification?

Answ. Beware of those things that hinder the exercise of faith in Christ: such
as these.

1 Unbrokenness of heart, Mark. 8.17. Act. 19.9. hardness of heart, hinders
faith: often altogether, always in part, as far as it does prevail. It is with
ones faith in this case, as with a benumbed hand or foot, that cannot work, or
walk, for the present; Thence then if you will have your faith to work, get
your heart into a tender and lowly frame, Psalm. 77.2.

2 Immoderate Aggravation of sin is another let, and contrary to the former.
Thus it is sometimes with brokenhearted Sinners: they see their sins, and
their multitude, and heinousness; and then they plead their great
unworthiness, and pore continually upon their corruptions, so much as to put
away Christ, and the promise, and the grace of God from them: and then it is
impossible to believe on Christ, or to get peace or comfort of a justified
estate.

He that rakes in a kennel, does in vain complain of the vile savor: So it is
with those believers, who are too much contemplating on, and aggravating their
corruptions. It is true, there must be Humiliation to make us hunger after
Christ, and receive him on his own terms: but to labor so for Humiliation, as
to knock off our hands from Christ, is a great evil, Isa. 45.22. you must look
on your sins, but withal look on Christ: Look on your wounds, but also on the
brazen Serpent: Complain with Jonah that ye are in the belly of Hell, yet look
toward the Holy Temple, i.e. Christ, Jon. 2.4. Look unto him who came to seek
and to save that which was lost, Matthew. 18.6. That came to bind up the broken
hearted, Isa. 61.1, 2. that inviteth the heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28.

3 The least allowance or hankering after any known sin: this makes it
impossible to believe. How can ye believe, etc? Joh. 5.44. One is Proud, and
another Covetous, another malicious, another has an unruly tongue, etc. yet
they will complain at fits that they cannot believe: truly, no marvail, Gal.
2.17. if while we hope to be justified by faith, we our selves are found
sinners, is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? far be it: why, but such
kind of sinners do make Christ the Minister of Sin.

Beloved, we come to the Sacraments to get our faith strengthened, but what
kind of faith? it is a holy faith, Jude 20. such as purifies the heart, Act.
15.9. and dare we bring a dirty or impure faith to be strengthened, or would
we have that confirmed or sealed, that will not take the impression of
salvation? beware of the impression of condemnation.

4 Another let is, immoderate or disorderly seeking our Peace in our
Sanctification. I say immoderate, 1 When we seek our comfort altogether in our
Mortification, or Sanctification, or make it our main stay and staff. One
builds upon his Love, another in his good works, or duties, and this is the
basis of their peace: but let me tell you, that these fruits are changeable
things, often in the wain, and sometimes invisible, and what will you do then
for peace? besides, you rob Christ by this means of the honor of his
Propitiation, of his Sacrifice and whole office of mediation; and is this any
other than making Christ unprofitable and of none effect? Gal. 5.2, 4.

Besides, it is preposterous and disorderly, to look for the fruit, before the
tree; to look for our graces, before we look for Christ; or look for children,
before marriage with Christ. Seeing they all flow from our union with Christ,
if true, and Evangelical, hence they must needs be but bastard graces that are
found before Christ, and will give but little comfort of our good and justified
estate.

Direct. 2. Set before you in your meditations the name of the Lord Jesus, and
what is meant by that name, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their
trust in thee. The names of Christ are of his Person, Natures, Offices,
Benefits, Attributes; what condition can any poor creature be in, that cannot
find something named in Christ, for to help him out of it? Cant. 1.3. Thy name
is an ointment poured forth: it yields a most precious and comfortable savor
to every one. All the names of Christ have great sweetness in them. I apply it
a little to Justification: Jesus a Savior of sinners, Matthew. 1.21. A Prince of
Peace, Isa. 9.6. Our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. The names of Christ have promises
annexed to them, with the strongest engagements the Lord has sworn, and Psalm.
110.4. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Beloved, it is another matter than is commonly conceived, to be contemplating
on Christ. It is the Angels work; who stretch forth their wings over the Mercy
Seat, and toward the Mercy Seat shall be the faces of the Cherubims, Exodus
25.20. i.e. they look continually toward the Propitiation, and Peter expounds
it, 1 Pet. 1.12. the Angels desire to pry into the mystery of Christ. Yea, what
is the beatifical vision, but this, to see God? Heb. 12.14. It is a grievous
infirmity in us, that this heaven upon earth is no more frequented, or
delighted in by us. Moreover, looking upon Jesus is the best means to revive,
and draw forth our faith, Heb. 12.1. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher
of our faith: where it is employed, that the carrying on of our faith, and
finishing of it, is that viewing of Christ by the eye of faith.

Direct. 3. We must stir up our selves to believe on Christ, with reasons
drawn from the Promises and Names of Christ. Though carnal reason be an enemy
to faith, yet sanctified reason is a mavelous succor to faith: when we set
our reason and discourse to make inferences, and draw heavenly conclusions out
of Gospel promises. This caused Abraham by Faith to offer up Isaac, Heb. 11.17,
19. viz. in that he accounted (or reasoned, (...)) that God was able to raise
him from the dead, verse. 19. he reasoned thus, must I offer up Isaac? how then
shall all the families of the earth be blessed in him? why surely, Gods
Commandment shall not disanull his promises, concerning the Messiah. Thus 1
Pet. 4.1. For as much as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your
selves with the same mind ((...)) or discourse, for he that has suffered in
the flesh, has ceased from sin. See the arguing here, if Christ has suffered
for sin, and killed sin; so ought we to be as ready to destroy and kill sin,
and cease from it, forasmuch as Christ has suffered in the flesh, he has
born our sins, and they were charged upon him, and he has given them their
deaths wound: let us arm our selves by this encouragement, to go on to the same
conflict. Learn we to use our Logic this way, and it will arm us for those
combats we meet withal in dealing with sin or Satan. For although faiths
principles are above reason, yet it discourses, argumentations and conclusions
are guided by reason.

Reason is an ill Mistress, but a good Handmaid unto faith: for faith is much
strengthened (and the wisdom of a Christian is exceedingly seen in it) by such
particular conclusions and consequences, drawn from the doctrine of Christ,
nature of God, and the Promises, which do overthrow particular carnal
reasonings, causing security, presumption, fears, doubts, or despair: and
without doubt this makes greatly for securing the heart, and fortifying our
faith and confidence against any temptation of Satan; only let me add a
Caution or two.

1 That this be not a sudden or transient business, either too soon and
rashly to catch up a Conclusion, that is not in the Premises: Or when we have
a right conclusion, too suddenly to have done with it, but if you will have
good by it, it must be permanent, and abiding on the heart, that it may soak
into it, and strengthen it against any malignant distempers, that it is
disturbed and troubled withal. A good plaster will not benefit that is on and
off immediately; nor a potion work kindly, that is not kept in the stomach:
therefore says David, Psalm. 119.97, 98. O how I love thy Law, it is my
meditation all the day, thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than
mine enemies, for they are ever with me, and Psa. 45.1. My heart is inditing
(or boiling up) i. e. meditating or inventing a good matter, and this requires
time for a good concoction.

2 Take heed of Sophistical reasonings in this case, of Paralogismes, James
1.22. false reasonings: for by these we deceive our souls, and cousen our
selves. If we have the light of Christ by faith, it will discover all the
delusions, and deceipts of darkness, that Satan seeks to involve our reasonings
in. Therefore let us still have an eye to the proposition of Faith; looking up
to the Spirit for assistance in the improvement of it.

Direct. 4. Endeavor to know that you do truly believe on the Lord Jesus. I
know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. There is believing, and knowledge that
we do believe truly on Christ. Now to know that we do believe, is to know,
not so much the strength of faith, as the truth of it, how weak soever, and
true faith is a receiving of whole Christ, with the whole heart; and it is
opposed to a partial or hypocritical receiving of Christ; such as is spoken of,
Jer. 3.10. Psalm. 12.3. therefore its called believing with all the heart, Act.
8.37, 38. and hence its called faith unfeigned. Now to know this, we must view
our own hearts and consciences, to see if they work thus toward Christ.

Now if God has wrought such a Faith in you, you may say with Paul, I know
whom I have believed; and this knowledge is a reflex act, and may be helped by
these two Questions.

1 Is there nothing of Christ my soul excepts against, or cannot actually cloze
withal? as the holiness of Christ, the selling all for him, the cross of
Christ, etc. 2 Have I no reservation within my self, where I would be
dispensed withal, in any courses of life, or any secret lusts or corruptions;
at lest known or allowed in judgment or practice? Has my faith such a
commanding power, that it will not let me alone, in commission of sin, or
Omission of duty? then I may conclude, that the faith of Christ is wrought in
me; and thence undoubtedly conclude, that I am a justified person. Because
that he that believes on Christ is already justified: Now when this is
soundly concluded, the soul may upon daily occasions put forth and exercise his
faith in Christ, for his spiritual and everlasting comfort.

Direct. 5. When thou would exercise thy faith at any time, thou must not go
about it in thine own strength, either of nature, or grace received: but look
up for a fresh influence of the Spirit, and his assistance. For as it is sure,
that no creature can of himself look upon natural things, nor act without a
renewed and fresh concourse of Gods common providence: So Grace, though it be
above nature, and stronger than it, yet its motion is from the Holy Ghost. And
this assistance of the Spirit comes from Christ, as the light from the Sun, by
an efflux, Joh. 8.12. the power is in Christ, though it work on us. Therefore
all things are said to be done through Christ strengthening of us, Phil. 4.13.
Every act of Faith requires a power of Christ in a fresh administration: where
in he fulfils the good pleasure of his will, and the work of faith with power.
2 Thessalonians. 1.11. And this is the meaning of Paul's prayer for the Ephesians, Chap.
3.16, 17. that they might be strengthened with might by the Spirit, and that
Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith. And as the Holy Ghost must assist
the grace of faith before it can act: so he must clear up the objects of
faith, before faith can work upon them: as the light must shine upon the brazen
Serpent, before the Israelite can see it. Wherefore the Apostle prays
earnestly, that God would give the spirit of wisdom and revelation, to know
the things they believed and hoped for, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Wherefore, as in all
other graces, so in faith, God works in us, the deed as well as the will,
Phil. 2.13. and Jud. 20. building us up in faith is by praying in the Holy
Ghost; and we must look up to the Holy Ghost by earnest prayer, to help us, in
the whole progress of our faith, and every act of faith, till we receive the
end of our faith, the Salvation of our souls.

Christ Crucified the special Object of Justifying Faith.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25. Faith in his blood.


HItherto of Faith in General, as the Instrument of our Justification, and
Christ the more special Object of it, as justifying. Now follows the third
thing premised concerning the most special Object, or the most special
consideration of that object, in those words [Faith in his blood] for the
understanding whereof, let me put you in mind of the former Explication of
the word [blood] which has been expounded to be meant Synecdochically; a part
being put for the whole: So that it signifies all the sufferings of Christ, in
the whole state of his abasement; but most especially his sufferings, both in
body and soul at his death: even all the pains of the first and second death,
which our Savior did undergo, upon the Cross: So that by faith in his blood,
we are to understand Faith apprehending Christ crucified, or undergoing the
shameful and accursed death of the cross. Therefore we observe,

Doct. It is the duty of sinners, for their Justification, distinctly to
apprehend and rely upon Christ crucified; Or thus, That it is the Duty, and
should be the care of sinners, to place their confidence on Christ crucified
for Justification. For that is the meaning of the phrase [Faith in his blood]
that is, faith relying on Christ crucified. This notes the subject matter of
redemption, whereon our Faith is principally grounded, in the article of our
Justification. Our faith indeed in the point of Justification does embrace
whole Christ, but most properly, and in a peculiar manner, it is terminated in
the Sacrifice and Propitiation, or Death of Christ: and this the Scriptures
attest, Joh. 6.53, 54, 55. Jesus said unto them, Verily, Verily, I say unto
you, except you eat the body, of the Son of God, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you; and this is by believing on Christ crucified (for Christ does
not speak there immediately of the Lords Supper, though Sacramental eating may
be comprehended under it) and he says peremptorily that there is no life;
and therefore no justification or Salvation without the eating there mentioned,
but he adds on the contrary, verse. 54. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood (by faith) has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day;
There is a direct promise of Life, Justification, and Salvation to them that do
believe on Christ crucified; and verse. 56. He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, i.e. has union and communion
with Christ Jesus, in all his benefits: and therefore must needs be justified,
and this is the same which John preached, Behold the Lamb of God, etc. Joh.
1.29. i.e. the Lamb of God for Sacrifice, that we should behold for
justification with the eye of faith. Yea, so Joh. 3.14, 16. As Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the Wilderness, etc. that lifting up was especially when Christ
was Crucified and lifted up upon the Cross; and looking on the brazen Serpent
signified believing on Christ crucified, that such as did so should not perish,
but have everlasting life And this is the very condition of the Covenant of
grace.

Reas. 1. Taken from the Old Testament, wherein the mystery of Christ and
Justification, was more veiled and dark: yet even then this truth was received,
that their reconciliation was by faith in the Messiah to come, and made a
sacrifice for sin; and hence the Covenant was confirmed with blood shed, Heb.
9.20. neither was the Old Testament dedicated without it, Exodus 24.8. For when
Moses had spoken every precept, he took the blood of Calves and Goats, and
sprinkled both the book, and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the
Testament that God enjoined unto you, and verse. 23. it was necessary that the
heavenly things themselves should be purified with better sacrifices than
these; and it is necessary still that there should be the same way of
cleansing of sin away, by way of Sacrifice and Blood of the New Testament.
Matthew. 26.28. For this is the meaning of the sacrifices: they were oppointed
for atonement, yea, almost all things by the Law were purged with blood, Heb.
9.22. and without shedding of blood there is no remission; and so it was then,
and thereby the people are taught to look for justification by Christ. Hence
there is no other way in the New Testament for atonement, but by the blood of
some sacrifice, and this is of none but Christ.

Reas. 2. That is especially to be apprehended, and rested upon by faith for
Justification, that presents not only to God, (by his own appointment) and his
justice, full satisfaction; but to the troubled soul of a Sinner, peace and
satisfaction. Now this the blood of Christ does, because it has expressly the
satisfaction in it, and carries the pay with it. He made him sin for us, 2
Cor. 5.21. that is, a sacrifice for sin. Christ has delivered us from the
curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. 3.13. Nothing that he did,
besides this, could free us from the curse. So 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suffered for
us, the just for the unjust, to bring us unto God: Now when we are brought
unto God, we are justified. The destruction of death, and Satan, is from
Christ's death, Heb. 2.14. By death, he destroyed him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil, Romans 5.9, 10. When we were sinners, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. So that in Christ crucified, when as
faith apprehends him, there is the essence of justification laid up; and
therein what may satisfy God, and what may satisfy the troubled conscience of a
sinner is contained; and therefore this is the sure way, to attain a justified
estate.

Reas. 3. Because of the contempt that the world does cast upon Christ
crucified, it pleased the Lord therefore to advance and glorify the Cross of
Christ. This reason is expressed, in 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. We preach Christ
crucified, to the Jew a stumbling block, etc. but to them that are called, both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. All the wise
ones in the World, have stumbled at the cross of Christ, and thought it a
matter of disgrace, that the Savior of the World should be hanged on a tree:
but he will have the World to know, that this is the power of God; and the
wisdom of God; and for the honor of Christ; that he crucified, is advanced,
and made the object of our faith, and the author of eternal salvation.
Wherefore God has highly advanced him, and given him a name above every name,
etc. Phil. 2.6.

Reas. 4. We may reason from both the Seals, which are appointed by God for the
confirmation of faith in Christ crucified. Know ye not, that as many as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death, and buried with him
in Baptism, Romans 6.4, 6. and therein we are planted together in the likeness
of his death, and our old man is crucified with him. So that baptism, has its
main respect to Christ's death, and the washing away of our sins by his blood;
and the same is verified of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23 the end of it is to
show forth the Lords death. Now why does he give us such means and helps to
strengthen our faith in Christ's death, but especially to confirm our faith and
assurance of our justification by that death.

Use 1. This discovers unto us, the perniciousnesse of the Socinian Doctrines,
that make Christ's death only for Imitation, and Exemplary; that Christians
should only follow the example of his patience; but they deny the satisfaction
and merit of Christ's death: So that they do leave no foundation or footing for
faith to lean upon; yea, all our Christian Religion is utterly disanulled, and
frustrate by this means, I may say as Paul in the like case, that then our
faith is in vain, and we are still in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. and this is one
of those damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. that brings swift destruction upon the
souls of them that seduce, and are seduced, therefore we should take heed of
them.

Use 2. It shows us the great danger of the ignorance of Christ crucified; The
danger of ignorance of Christ crucified.
which does most certainly conclude the want of Faith in Christ's blood. It is
not possible to believe in any object, without some knowledge of it: and
therefore such are undoubtedly in an unjustified estate, who are thus destitute
of this faith. If any man have so much as a well-grounded hope of
reconciliation with God, it can be built only upon the death and satisfaction
of our Savior. Faith in Christ crucified is called the knowledge of Christ
crucified, Isa. 53.11. by his knowledge, etc. and 1 Cor. 2.2. Surely then, if
we know not Christ crucified, we do not believe on him, Luke 1.77.

Quest. How may it appear that the knowledge of Christ crucified is wanting, or
obtained by us?

Answ. Trials of our knowledge of it.
1 By the relish that we have of Christ crucified, and the preaching of the
Cross: The preaching of the Cross, is, to them that perish, foolishness, 1 Cor.
1.17, 18. Believing is called the eating of the body of Christ, and drinking of
his blood, Joh. 6. Now if we cannot relish the doctrine of it, and it will not
down with us, surely it is, because we know not what Christ crucified means.
Now what little relish it has with multitudes of hearers is evident, because
the ministry of it is so little regarded and accepted; by our drowsy, careless,
dull, formal, and curious hearers, and professors, those glad tidings are no
delight at all to them. Some sleep scandalously, some gaze about, others will
hardly stir out of doors to hear it; were it so, they could have some new
Lights, or Teachers after their own lusts (such preaching as makes the Cross
of none effect) they would flock after them, and prick up their ears to hear
them, but cannot down with such light Manna, and plain doctrine as this is.

Tri. 2. The knowledge of Christ crucified, is an humbling knowledge, Prove.
30.1, 2, 2 Cor. 5.14. it puts a Christian into a mourning frame, that as
long as a man lives, it will keep his soul in a bleeding condition, Zach.
12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn, etc. They
are so sensible of sin, and of the dishonor, and wrong done unto God thereby,
that they are still grieving under the sense of it. And though a Christians
heart is not always in the same frame, but sometimes some deadness, and
hardness is upon it; yet they cannot be at rest in such a condition, and it is
looked at, as an uncomfortable state, till they recover themselves, and a
broken frame again. But where the knowledge of the Cross of Christ is unsound,
it will consist well enough with a proud, unbroken, untamed disposition of
spirit.

Tri. 3. The knowledge of Christ crucified (if sincere) is mortifying, and
killing of the reign of sin, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our Old man is
crucified with him, etc. Phil. 3.8, 10. Yea doubtless, I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ. What knowledge?
verse. 10. That I might know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings: and this was, that he might undoubtedly conclude
his communion with Christ in his death; how should be conclude that? he adds,
being made conformable to his death: and what conformity to Christ's death can
there be without mortification of sin? I might add also those places that
speak of the cleansing virtue of the death of Christ, Heb. 9.14. 1 John 1.7.

Tri. 4. The true knowledge of Christ crucified, does crucify us to the world,
and the world to us, Gal. 6.14. Paul looked at the world as a dead thing, a
carrion which he loathed; so he looked at the honors, riches, delights, and
lusts that the world dotes upon: he looked at it as a dead Carcass, yea a
crucified, i. e. an accursed thing to set his heart upon: and though Paul was
eminent this way, and above the ordinary sort of believers, yet you shall find
all the faithful, even the weakest have some measure of this disposition in
them; as Zacheus, when salvation came to his house, Luke 19. and Phil. 3.18,
19. they that mind earthly things are enemies to the Cross of Christ, but our
conversation is in heaven (he speaks of all the faithful) there is our trading
and dealing. Briefly, the Apostle makes covetousness not only enmity against
God, Jam. 4.4. but intolerable in a Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man
that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, etc. Oh then what
exceeding cause is there to inquire into our knowledge of Christ, to see what
it is, if it cannot stand with a covetous, or worldly frame of heart?

Use 3. Instruction to believers, where to cast anchor in whatever storms, or
tempests, that we meet withal in this present life: that is, that we pitch
our faith, and exercise it in Christ crucified. O beloved in the Lord, I
beseech you, not to content your selves with Spiritual things in the lump, or
the Mystery of Christ in a heap; though they may give some sweet savor, yet
they are in comparison like a bundle of Spices that are whole, or a Box of
Ointment shut up, and not poured out. If the Spices be bruised, and the
Ointment poured out, oh then how sweet and fragrant is the smell! and so let us
break as it were this Mystery of Christ in pieces, and labor for a distinct
understanding and believing in Christ: this will make these things far more
savoury; behold the several beauties of Christ, as the Church did, Cant. 5.10.
see the beauty of every part of Christ. Remember what himself said, Where the
Carcass is, etc. this is the crucified Savior, and who are Eagles but
believers, to whom the Cross of Christ is savoury, and they will sent it a
great way, and flock together from far to feed upon it.

Mot. 1. Consider we what it is to be a Christian: truly it is to sprout and
spring up out of the grave of Christ, Isa. 53.10. When he shall make his soul
an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, i. e. his posterity, and Joh.
12.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a grain of wheat fall to the
ground, and dye, it abides alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit:
fruit which springs forth from Christ's death, Heb. 2.10. who by suffering
death, brought many sons to glory, i. e. the children of God and Christ, the
whole Catholic Church, are but the seeds that sprout out from a Crucified, and
dying Redeemer.

Mot. 2. There is all sufficiency to be had for justification in a crucified
Savior, Luke 14.17. Come, for all things are ready; and such an one that
comes, shall never hunger nor thirst, Joh. 6.35. The soul is complete in
Christ, Col. 2.10. and though there is nothing but emptiness in other things,
and those that feed upon them, feed on ashes, Isa. 44.20. and labor in the
fire, Hab. 2.13. follow the East wind, Hos. 12.1. and spend their labor for
that that is not bread, Isa. 55.1, 2. yet there is fullness enough in Christ
crurified; there is bread eough (as the Prodigal says) in our Fathers house,
Luke 15.17. ^^. Alas (quoth he) I follow after those things that will not
satisfy, and am ready to famish for want of bread amongst the husks, of the
profits and pleasures of this world: but in Christ crucified is bread enough,
full satisfaction, and supply of all my wants: then whither shall I go but
unto him, and believe on him?

Mot. 3. Consider whose blood it is; the blood of himself, i. e. of the person
that is God, that must needs have infinite worth, and value in it.

Mot. 4. The Lord Jesus himself takes contentment, and satisfaction, in
believers betaking themselves to him, and his cross: He is satisfied in
seeing the travel of his soul, Isa. 53.10, 11. The woman that has had sore
travel in Childbearing, when she beholds the fruit of her body, forgets her
pains, and is comforted. So it is with our blessed Savior, who takes great
contentment when such sinful Creatures do fly unto his precious blood for
refuge and sanctuary.

Dir. 1. Above all things take pains to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified,
and that experimentally; this was Paul's settled resolution and determination, 1
Cor. 2.2. and he picks out (above all other) this sweet flower or jewel. The
phrase is not ordinary, but it is used to signify that Paul made it his end,
that he proposed to himself in Christ; let me tell you, there is enough in
Christ crucified: to busy your meditations upon.

Dir. 2. Labor to see the daily necessity of Christ crucified, every day as
long as thou live; consider that every day, not only in regard of sins, but
the best duties, you have need of this blood of sprinkling, Heb. 9.19, 20. He
sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and the people, and the book, and the
vessels of the ministry, almost all things were purged with blood, and when the
destroyers are abroad, Heb. 11.28. there is nothing in the world can keep off
the destroyer, but the blood of the Paschal Lamb, Heb. 13.20, 21.

Dir. 3. O have a singular care to take heed of sinning against the blood of
Christ, how ever held forth to thee. It is held forth in the ministry of the
Gospel, Gal. 3.1, 2. and in the Sacraments; and there is a dreadful wrong done
to the blood of Christ, by unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor.
11.27. such an one is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, i. e. he commits
such a sin as Judas, or the Jews in murdering Christ. Oh! how loud does the
blood of Christ cry against such sinners, that so profane the Lords Table,
either by ignorance, or mean preparation to it? and so Apostasy from the faith,
is called trampling under foot the blood of Christ, etc. Heb. 10.26, 27.

Dir. 4. Do as the faithful of old, in offering up their sacrifices for
propitiation, or sin offerings, for they were all types of our Propitiation,
and Christ's Sacrifice, what they did in the type, we must do in the
substance. 1 Bind the Sacrifice to the Altar, Psalm. 118.27. this is fixing the
heart on Christ crucified in the promise; and we have very slippery hearts in
this case, they had need to be bound to it. 2 They put their hands on the head
of the Burnt-offering, Levit. 1.4. and the Jews tell us, they always did it
with empty hands, and laid on both their hands with all their might: so you
must lay hold on Christ in the Promise, with an empty hand, and do it with all
your might and weight. 3 They confessed over the sacrifice their iniquities,
Lev. 16.21. so must we, confessing that we have justly deserved that, which
Christ has undergone. So God will smell a savor of rest, Levit. 16.21.

Of Remission of Sins.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25. For the remission of sins that are past.


THus far of the Object of Justifying Faith. Now it remains that we speak of
the ends of Justification, which are two in the text. 1 In respect of God [to
declare his righteousness.] 2 In respect of man, [for the remission of sins,]
illustrated and specified in these words [Sins that are past,] together with
the ground of the specification, or the impulsive cause [through the
forbearance of God.] I shall at this time begin with the latter of these, viz.
remission of sins that are past. Two questions are here to be spoken to.

1 Quest. What is meant by remission of sins? 2 Quest. What is meant by
remission of sins that are past?

Quest. 1. What is meant by remission of sins?

Ans. The word here translated Remission, signifies loosing, that is opposed to
binding, by a borrowed speech from Prisoners, that are bound with fetters and
chains, that are very painful and grievous; from which when they are loosed and
set at liberty, they are greatly eased and comforted: so it is with poor
sinners, it is exceeding grievous to the soul to be bound with the cords of
iniquity and sin, Prove. 5.22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself,
and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins. But when sins are forgiven,
then the soul that was captivated by Sin, and Satan, is loosed from its bands;
As a captive redeemed, whose ransom is paid. It is true, the poor Sinner
generally thinks himself most at liberty when he sins most, and is in Satan's
safest custody; when he is in a worse case than the vilest slave in the Gally:
but when once he comes to the sight of them, he sees also his thraldom and
bondage, he longs after a discharge and freedom, which he accounts the greatest
happiness in the world.

Quest. 2. What is meant by remission of sins that are past?

Ans. Some interpreters do take it for the pardon of those sins that are
committed before conversion; that all those sins, through the forbearance of
God, are pardoned; which are mentioned (they say) not as though the pardon of
sins is restrained unto them that are past, but past sins are mentioned, to
warn them that are pardoned, not to take liberty for the future, to embolden
themselves in sin. But it seems to have another sense, and that is, to signify
the forgiveness of sins, that were committed before the coming of Christ:
wherein the Apostle shows the reason why the Lord did not defer the the
revelation of Christ until his incarnation, but did in the days of the Old
Testament, propose and set forth Jesus Christ, in the times of the Patriarks
and Prophets; and this was done to signify unto us, that not only such sins
might be forgiven, that were committed since his coming, but also such as were
committed before. And I incline the rather to this exposition:

First, because he spoke of proposing of Christ in the Old Testament as a
propitiation, as has been showed.

Secondly, Because he said, verse. 21. the righteousness of God, which is by
the faith of Jesus Christ, was testified by the Law, and the Prophets, that
sins might be forgiven to believers, from the foundation of the World.

Thirdly, Because he adds [by the forbearance of God] or his long-suffering,
whereby the Lord stayed in so long expectation, of the coming of his Son into
the World, till the satisfaction was actually made: for God would not have
forgiven the sins of the Fathers committed long before, unless that in his
great patience, he had respected the future propitiation of his dear Son.

Fourthly, Because he also adds [vers. 26. To declare at this time his
rightoousness] i.e. at this time since the coming of Christ, he does declare
and show forth his righteousness, which he did not clearly demonstrate before
his sons incarnation: but now he makes all the world to see how just he is,
that he would not forgive any sins, no not in the days of the fathers,
without full satisfaction by the death of his only begotten Son.

Doctr. The full remission of sins.
That such is the efficacy and virtue of the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, that
it is available to the full remission of all the sins of the faithful, from the
beginning of the world, to the end thereof.

This appears to be plain, and the full meaning of this place, in that the
Apostle insists upon the remission of sins past, how long soever before Christ's
coming in the flesh, and before his death, which might seem all this while,
either not to be forgiven, or if forgiven, yet that it was upon some other
account, than the death of Christ. But now it appears that the sins of the
Patriarks and Prophets were remitted, only upon this ground, of Christ's
satisfaction promised and to come; and therefore much more we may conclude,
that by the virtue of Christ's death, all the sins of believers since the coming
of Christ, are pardoned and forgiven.

Let me clear up these things to you, and show, 1 That this remission is full.
2 That it flows from the satisfaction of Christ. 3 That it was available for
the remission of the sins of the faithful, before the coming of Christ.


1 That this remission of the sins of believers, is full and complete, of all
their sins past, present, and to come; and the Scriptures are clear for it,
Col. 2.13. And you has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you
all sins and trespasses. We could not be quickened to life eternal, without
the forgiveness of all sins: any one sin retained without pardon, would keep us
in a state of death; and this is that which God promises, Jer. 33.8. I will
cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me.
Here then is no exception of any sins, how many, and how great soever they
were, but says, I will pardon all, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be white as snow, and though they be as crimson, yet they shall
be as white as wool. Scarlet and Crimson are double and deep dies, dies in
Grain, yet God will take away these double dies, that they shall be made, as if
they had not been dyed at all. Though our sins by reiterating of them, and long
continuance in them, have doubly and deeply seized on us; yet by Gods
discharging us of them, we become as if we had never committed them. Mic.
7.19. I will cast all your iniquities into the depth of the Sea. As when all
the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, and they sank like a stone, there
was no fear of their reviving again. And mavelous is that promise, Jer. 50.
verse. 20. In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and shall not be found; and the sins of Judah,
and they shall not be: for I will pardon them whom I reserve. None by any
search shall be able to find any sin to charge upon Gods People, Romans 8.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?

2 This full forgiveness flows from the satisfaction of Christ, Heb. 9.22.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission, Ephesians. 1.7. Colos. 1.14. In whom
we have redemption through his blood, etc. 1 John 1.7. Rev. 8.34. He loved
us, and washed us from our sins with his own blood. Heb. 1.3. Christ his own
self purged away our sins. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit, etc.

3 The satisfaction of Christ was available for the remission of the sins of
all the faithful, before his coming in the flesh, Romans 3 22. Rev. 13.8. he
was flain from the foundation of the World, viz. in Types, and in the virtue of
his death, and efficacy thereof. Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and
the same for ever, and Act. 15.11. We believe that by the grace of Jesus
Christ we shall be saved, as the Fathers. Where by the grace of Christ we may
understand (as some do) the inherent grace of sanctification, for that alone
will never save any man, or bring him to heaven: but by the grace of Christ is
to be understood the obedience and satisfaction of Christ, and the fruit
thereof in our reconciliation. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, etc. and this was the meaning of that first promise, Genesis 3.13. The
seed of the woman, etc. ie. Christ, who was therefore manifest, to destroy the
works of the Devil. So Isa. 53.5. the faithful of those times say he was
wounded for their transgressions, etc. and 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which salvation
the Prophets inquired diligently, who prophesyed of the grace that should come
unto you, searching what and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ that was
in them, did signify, when it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow. All the true Prophets from the beginning of
the World, prophesied of the grace and salvation that should come to you by the
sufferings of Christ; yea, the Prophets inquired and searched diligently after
this grace: besides, though there was the same saving grace in the Church from
the beginning of the World, yet we have a great prerogative above them who
prophesied of that grace, not only that came to them, but should come to us, 1
Because of a clearer light, that shined at the shining of the Sun of
righteousness, and has been growing since that time. 2 Because there is a
greater efficacy of the holy Spirit, since Christ is ascended. 3 Because there
is a larger communication of this grace, which is now extended to all nations.
This may further appear to us by the sameness of the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10.1,
2. they were baptized unto Moses, etc. they did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, etc.

Reas. 1. Taken from the eternal surety-ship of our Savior Christ, Heb. 7.22.
Christ has undertaken before the foundation of the World, to be a surety for
the Elect; and given his bond for the debt, and the after payment thereof. Now
when a Surety has undertaken thus, a sufficient surety bound himself, in
behalf of the Debtor, it is no marvail though the Creditor set the Debtor at
liberty, before payment be actually made, as God did the faithful before
Christ's incarnation.

Reas. 2. Taken from the excellency of Christ's person, whose satisfaction must
needs have infinite worth, and dignity in it, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son, etc. if it be the blood of the Son of God, it must needs have a
very cleansing virtue in it, Psalm. 130.7. Romans 5.17. there is abundance of
grace, etc. God forgives not so much as one sin, unless he has accepted of
the blood of Christ for the pardon of it; and when this is accepted, God must
pardon all. Again, to forgive one sin, is an act of Gods free love, and that
cannot stand with any enmity.

Reas. 3. From believers acceptance in Christ, which is the receiving of us
into favor, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. and those who are in Gods favor have their persons
and services pleasing to God, and so has this large forgiveness, Romans 8.1.

Reas. 4. Because it was the Spirit of Christ, that was in the Prophets, that
did reveal the ministry of Christ to them, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. and by them, to all
the faithful in those times, sufficiently, unto salvation.

Reas. 5. From the glory of Gods grace by this means; Ephesians. 1.6, 7. it is
forgiveness according to the riches of Gods grace, that has so provided for
us; that our sins are so fully pardoned: yea of the very chiefest believing
sinners, as of Paul, Manasses, and such as crucified the Lord of glory.

Use 1. To discover to us the unexcusable, and helpless estate of all
unbeleevers, who lie under the guilt of their sins, especially in these times,
and places, and ends of the world, who have the offer and tender of this grace
of Christ, and yet put it away from them: for was the death of Christ
sufficient to save those sinners that lived under the Old Testament, that had
so little light and so much darkness, knowing so little of the Mystery of the
Gospel; and is it not sufficient to save you from your sins, who have this
grace so abundantly preached and pressed upon you? Why then I say, as Matthew.
11.20. Thou Capernaum, that art lifted up to Heaven, etc. it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for thee. It is true, many unbeleevers
perished before Christ's coming, and were left under the Wrath of God, Job 3.
ult. but innumerable persons more in these days. Whose Hell shall be greater
and hotter than theirs, to whom pardon is offered and yet refused? Such cannot
plead the greatness and multitude of their sins; for the satisfaction of
Christ is so full of virtue and efficacy, that it exceeds the greatness of
sins; such shall have nothing to plead before the Lord one day, but their blood
shall be upon their own heads, because they have despised the blood of Christ,
Acts 18.6. And besides, see the helplesnesse of such persons, who though there
be but one way in the world to be saved. Acts. 4.12. yet they set at naught
this way. There is but one Ark to save them from eternal destruction, and that
they make a mock of, as the Old world did, and now it is in vain to look for
salvation any where else, Jer. 3.22. Nay this refusal is your condemnation;
Joh. 3.19. Joh. 10.26. Luke 12.46. Joh. 12.39. and though by common providence,
you are saved from the miseries of your outward man, yet know this, that it is
another business to be saved from your sins: and Christ came not to save us
from our afflictions, but from our sins, Matthew. 1.21. and these are by far
the greatest calamities, and evils, that we are subject to. Briefly, there you
are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, and must bear your
own iniquities your selves; and in your unbelief, are bound to keep the whole
Law, Romans 11.32. and bound to the curse of the Law, Gal. 5.3.

Quest. How shall I know whether the bond of my iniquity be broken or no?

Ans. You may know by what Christ tells you, Joh. 8.34. Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that commits sin, is a servant of sin. Now to commit sin in his
sense, is to practice iniquity, or to live in the commission of any known sin;
be it Pride, Covetousness, Uncleanness, Malice, or whatsoever evil way it is,
thou art still then a slave of sin, and Christ has not set you free from the
bondage of it. Romans 7.5. When we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which
were by the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death; and
so long as these motions are at work, say not, I have Abraham to my father, and
God to my Father, for there is another father whose lusts ye do; and you see
how peremptory the Lord Jesus is in affirming it, because he knows the world
will not easily believe it.

Use. 2. Comfort to believers in regard of this effectual satisfaction of
Christ, and the comfort stands in the blessedness of their estate, which is

1 That they are discharged from all their sins without exception. Be of good
cheer, your sins are forgiven you, Matthew. 9.2. though there be some sins which
ye have committed, are more heinous than the rest, as David and Paul have
done, yet the grace of God is exceedingly abundant, 1 Timothy 1.13. and there is
no sin that can bring, or plead any accusation against you, Romans 8.3. God
sending his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, for sin condemned sin in the
flesh i.e. all our sin is condemned in the flesh of Jesus Christ, he has
undertook to answer, and has answered all the pleas and accusations of sin
that are made against a believer; so that the righteousness of God is
fulfilled in us, and sin being pardoned, God thinks no worse of us, than if we
had never sinned.

2 Consider what manner of discharge from sin this is; it is perfect, and it is
everlasting. It is perfect, and leaves the soul all fait, Cant. 4.10. and he
gave himself for his Church, that he might make it without spot or blemish, to
present it to himself a glorious Church, Ephesians. 6.26, 27. and Ezekiel. 16.9. I
washed thee with water, yea I thoroughly washed away thy blood, etc.

Besides, it is everlasting, Jer. 31.33, 34. I will remember thy sins no more,
Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, etc. as our
of a debt-book; So Heb. 10.16. And though we can remember them to charge them
upon our selves, that were such and such; yet God will not charge them on us,
and if he do not who is the Judge, what has any caviler to do with us?

Quest. But how can this be, that God should be so forgetful of our sins?

Ans. He says, I will not remember your iniquities, that is, as yours, I have
put them upon another account, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Q. Why, but
suppose I should fall again, and again into the same sins, etc. Ans. First look
that your faith and interest in Christ be sound, and if it be sound, this
doctrine will not embolden you to sin, for we write these things that you sin
not, 1 John 2.1. and then your new folly shall not be charged upon you, for you
have the same Advocate with the Father, as ever you had; and God does not play
fast and loose with his servants, but his promises are all Yea, and Amen; and
his Covenant (that shall stand inviolable, maugre the gates of Hell) it is, to
remember thy sins no more. It may be the world judges hardly of thee, and lays
these and those Inditements against thee, but it is no matter, the Judge of all
the world will acquit thee, and will not mention them against thee, either in
the day of Death, or Judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. It is a small thing for me to be
judged of you, he that judges me is the Lord. He that has said it, will stand
to it, he will never remember thine iniquities, though they have been never so
many, never so great, and though corruptions still remain in thee, yet God sees
them not, so as to impute them, but to pardon and heal them; He sees no
iniquity in Jacob, etc. Numb. 23.21. Suppose the rod of God be upon thee, and
thou smartest, and say, Now God calls my sins to remembrance, yet believe
it, God is true, when he speaks of the future time, that he will remember thy
sins no more. It may be when God afflicts you, he would have you call your
sins to remembrance, but he will not do it.

3 Consider, that this was Gods end in giving his Son, and Christ's end in
giving himself, to be a Propitiation; it was for the remission of sins, i. e.
for all the sins of believers: and can we think that God will lose his end?
Paul says, that his grace was not in vain, 1 Cor. 15.10. for if it be, then
it is either because he cannot attain his end, or because he will not; if he
cannot obtain his end, he should not be Omnipotent, or something should hinder
him, and be stronger than he; if he will not, he would derogate from his
wisdom, to be so changeable, and from his truth, that he fails not of his
word and promise; yea that absurdity would follow, that Christ is dead in vain,
Gal. 2.21. which is the greatest absurdity in the world.

4 The blood of Christ alone discharges us from our sins, it needs no addition
to be made to it, Heb. 10.14. By one offering, etc. that now which is perfected
by one offering, is spoiled by any addition whatsoever, if any thing should be
required to be performed by us, in way of addition to it, then we were undone,
and could never be able to attain to this discharge. So that there is nothing
left to trouble our peace, and hinder our comfort. Isa. 35. last. The ransomed
of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion, with Songs and everlasting joies
upon their heads. It is a blessed time, the ransomed of the Lord have, none can
hinder their joy and blessedness. Romans 4.6. Psalm. 32.1. There is nothing can
hinder our blessedness but sin, and that being slain by Christ's death, our
great enemy is overcome. So that the blood of Christ, that is available for the
pardon of our sins past; is also available for the sins that are to come, and
follow his death.

Use 3. Lay claim to pardon.
Instruction to true Believers. Seeing there is such efficacy in the blood of
Christ for the remission of all their sins, let them learn this high part of
spiritual wisdom, to lay claim to this full pardon: and let them not charge
their consciences, with the guilt of their sins, for this is in a sort to
lessen, if not deny the force, and virtue of the death of Christ, which is to
be abhorred by every Christian. Heb. 10.2. They that are once purged, have no
more Conscience of sin, i.e. of the terrors and guilt of sin unsatisfied for:
if God and his word conclude us to be under sin, then we must conclude so
too; but if they discharge us, and set us at liberty, then shall we wrong
Scripture, wrong God, and Christ, and our own Souls, to charge our selves with
the guilt of our Iniquities. One would think Believers need not any advice in
matters of this nature: but it is a sure rule, that the Carnal man and
unbeleever, thinks it the easiest matter in the World, to put over all his sins
upon Christ, and persuade his heart that his sins are pardoned: whereas a
Believer accounts it a difficult business, to remove the mountains of sin, and
as it were by faith to cast them into the midst of the Sea: so as to conclude
the Remission and Forgiveness of all their sins. So that they have great need
of this advice: and the want of this wisdom, is that which breeds so many bad
thoughts, fears, doubts, discouragements, and darkness in the hearts of true
believers. When as sometimes they think upon their sins, they are ready quite
and clean to sink them; thus it was with David, Psalm. 38.4. Our Iniquities are
gone over our heads, etc. with Job, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me possess the sins of my Youth. Job 14.16, 17.
Thou watchest over my sins, thou sealest up my Transgression in a bag, etc. and
with Moses, Psalm 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance; who speaks there in behalf of the Church,
then in distress. This is that which is so grievous to Christians, in case of
temptations, and desertions spiritual, that they look at their sins as
unpardoned, or standing in full force against them: and so the death of Christ
as invalid, and not reaching to the pardon of them. Truly, in such and the
like cases, I know not what to call it, whether Pride, or Weakness, or Folly,
that poor Believers do frame inditements against themselves, and take their
debts upon themselves, which the Lord Jesus has discharged; And it is like, as
if some poor man were cast into Prison for debt, and some rich friend should
lay down a full sum to discharge the debt, and cancel his bonds, and so set
him at liberty, and he refuse the kindness, and say, nay, but this payment is
not sufficient, but I must discharge it my self, or else I will never come out:
What will you call this? Truly, this is your case, that your spirits are
overwhelmed with your sins; you go like malefactors with fetters, and bolts
about their heels; Though your liberty is purchased, and the Prison doors are
set wide open, yet you will not be delivered, and come out. You account not
the pay of Christ current, and go about drooping, discouraged, and
uncomfortable, disabling your selves for any duties; and create needless
miseries to your selves. Well, remember the point and use in hand, that the
blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed us, i. e. [all true beleevers] from all
iniquities, 1 John 1.7. Dan. 9.24. Romans 5.11. Isa. 38.17. Thou have cast all my
sins behind thy back: It is a borrowed speech from men, when they regard not a
thing, they cast it behind their backs, and thus God does with the guilt of
believers sins.

Object. But is not this a ground of looseness, profaneness, and encouragement
to Libertines, Drunkards, and Unclean persons? for they will say, why should
we be troubled for our sins, how many soever we have committed; seeing
Christ by his death, has purchased the full remission of our sins? therefore
they think they may revel, carouse, swagger, drink, whore, cozen, what not? and
need never be troubled for their sins.

Answ. This is just the conceit of the Familists and Antinomians, that
maintain, we need not to be troubled for our sins, and that justified
persons have nothing to do with repentance any more; or if they do repent, they
do undervalue Christ, and his Death, as if he had not sufficiently satisfied
for our sins. Now to prevent the cavils of ungratious hearts, and to give Gods
people that portion of Instruction, that belongs to them, I answer in these
particulars.

Answ. 1. There is no unbeleever has any ground in the Word, to conclude the
pardon of his sins, in the state of his unbeleef: or that he has any real
benefit by the death of Christ. If they conceive otherwise, they cousen their
own souls. Heb. 10.38. If any man withdraw himself, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, that is, he will not pardon him; Joh. 3.18. He that believes
not is condemned already; The sentence is already passed upon every unbeleever
in the Word of God: yea, and in the Counsel of God upon him, that shall
continue obstinately and finally in the sin of unbeleef; whereby such great
indignity is offered to Gods Grace and Word; and especially, such horrid
rebellion and unthankfulness to the Lord Jesus Christ; For so it follows,
because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.
Surely he that is condemned for sin, has not the remission of sin, but is
going to execution for sin.

2 There is no unregenerate, unsanctified, or disobedient person, but is an
unbeleever: and therefore destitute of any comfort in Christ's death. This the
Scriptures do clearly hold forth: for Regeneration and Faith go together, 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Psalm.
32.1, 2. Joh. 1.12, 13. They that believe are sanctified. Heb. 10.11. By one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Without
obedience there is no faith, Heb. 5.9. and dreadful is that place (spoken of
Christ) Exodus 23.21. Provoke him not, obey his voice, for he will not bear
your transgressions(so it may be rendered) he will not carry your load; or be
it; he will not pardon, etc. this is spoke of Jesus Christ by God the Father,
and the Israelites that rebelled against him found that the Lord made it good,
whereas so many thousands perished in the Wilderness; and so shall all the like
persons find in these days, and to the end of the world; for certainly to a
wicked man, nothing is pure, To him that is defiled and unbeleeving, Tit. 1.15.
but grace teaches to deny ungodliness, etc. Tit. 2.12. Heb. 10.22. therefore
ungodly, unrenegerate, unsanctified, disobedient persons, have no portion or
lot in this business.

3 There is no greater sign of an unsanctified, unregenerate, and wicked heart,
than to make an unsanctified use of the grace of God, and to abuse the doctrine
of it, to wantonness, and licentiousness. There can be no greater character
of an ungracious heart, and a swinish spirit, that has nothing to do to
challenge these Gospel pearls, neither knows the nature, property, and worth of
them.

Remission of Sins through Christ's blood.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25. Through Faith in his blood.


4 LET every true believer know his duty, and the bounds of their comfort in
this case, and this will be opened by two sorts of conclusions.

Quest. 1 How far a true believer that has interest in Christ, and his sins
forgiven him, may charge his soul with sin? This must be cleared, that we may
avoid the Rocks that some Sectaries do clash against, and I shall clear it in
these Conclusions.

1 Every believer is bound impartially to find out, by strict examination of
himself, the secret corruptions that are in his heart, or any ungodly practices
that are in his Life and Conversation: yea, so as to judge himself for them,
that the very least of them, is sufficient to bring Gods curse on him, and the
guilt of eternal condemnation; should not the Lord of his free grace in Christ
prevent it.

Every sin in its own nature and power, does and will procure guilt and
condemnation to the soul, unless that Christ by the merit of his death does
free us from it. God called for this searching formerly, in times of the
Churches calamities: Lam. 3.40. Hag. 1.5, 7. Thus says the Lord, set your
hearts upon your ways. Yea, this is commanded to every one that receives the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.28, 31. Let a man examine himself, not only concerning
his Faith, but also concerning his sins. Yea, he adds, that we should
discern and judge our selves, which self-judging is to proceed to self
condemnation. Ezekiel. 36.31. When God has given his a new heart and spirit, then
they shall remember their own evil ways and doings that were not good, and
loathe themselves in their sight, or judge themselves worthy to be destroyed.

I say not that believers should judge that they shall be condemned, but only
that they are worthy to be condemned.

2 Believers, notwithstanding this forgiveness, ought to mourn for their sins.
Ezekiel. 7.16. They that escape shall every one mourn for their iniquities, like
the doves in the valleys. Isa. 59.11. We roar like Bears, and mourn like doves,
-- for our transgressions are multiplied. So Peter having denied his Lord,
remembered the words of Jesus, and went out and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75.
yea, this the Lord commands us, Jam. 4.8, 9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, and let your laughter be turned into mourning. Sin pardoned is sin, and
calls for sorrow; and sorrow according to God, 2 Cor. 7.10.

3 Believers are bound (for all the forgiveness of sin) to confess and
acknowledge their iniquities; it is notable to this purpose, that was practiced
by Paul, even in his last days, 1 Timothy 1.13. -- 15. where he lays open his
sins of persecution, and blasphemy, he calls himself the chiefest of sinners,
and thereby he arises to say, that the grace of God was exceeding abundant
toward him, etc. This also the Lord requires of us, Jer. 3.13. Only
acknowledge thine iniquities, and 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, etc.
as if he should say, that otherwise we cannot lay claim to the promise of
forgiveness. It is woeful divinity of some in these times, that a Christian
should not confess sin.

4 Repentance, and that often renewed, for sins frequently committed, is still
required, of the best believers, Ezekiel. 8.30. Thus says the Lord, Repent, and
turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin; and Christ said to the Disciples, Matthew. 18.3. Except you be converted
and become as little Children, etc. The Disciples themselves have need to be
converted still: So that Repentance is necessary to believers, by necessity of
Precept, as it is also by necessity of Means to dispose and quality, at least,
for the comfort of remission: yea, no child of God can have the comfort of
pardon, before he has repented.

Object. But you will say, a true believer has pardon of his sin, though he
has not the comfort of it, without repentance: yea it is possible that a
believer sinning may dye without repentance, and go to heaven, as David, lying
so long in his great sins, might have been taken away without repentance.

Ans. It is possible, yet God usually gives space to repent to all believers,
and Christ has purchased repentance for those that he has purchased
remission for, and gives them together. Repentance and Remission go hand in
hand together; hence arises another necessity of repentance, viz. a necessity
of intent and constitution, as an inseparable evidence of faith and
forgiveness, and a determined means or condition of escaping death and
damnation. Luke 13.1, 3. Mark. 1.15. Rev. 2.5. and 3.19. Ephesians. 6.7. Isa. 1.16,
18. Jer. 36 3. Act. 26.18. Jer. 31.20. Heb. 10.22.

Oh! let us be persuaded, to maintain and increase repentance in our hearts,
as long as we live, not as though thereby we can make God amends, or satisfy
the justice of God by it, that is an ignorant and Popish conceit, nothing can
satisfy, but the death of his Son, and his blood; but consider that,

1 Christ has commanded, that repentance and remission of sins should in his
Name be preached to all nations, Luke 24.47. Those things that are to be
preached together, are to be received together. It is the (...), the bitter
sweet of the Ministry, and must be joined, yea, mixed together as a most
wholesome confection. So the Passover was to be eaten with bitter herbs.
Christ also gives them together, Act. 5.31. and God has exalted him for this
end, Act. 5.31.

2 By our continued and unfeigned repentance we shall have many, and singular
benefits, as,

1 Hereby we shall come to know experimentally the bitterness of sin, as well
as the sweetness of it. It is good to look upon sin, as full of gall and
wormwood, Jer. 2.19. See and know what evil and bitter thing it is, etc. Zach.
12.10. They shall be in bitterness, as for a first born.

2 Thy repentance will cause thee to prize the pardon more, and to esteem the
grace of God in Christ much more. He that is thoroughly pained with sickness
will highly esteem the Physician; when David's bones were broken, he prays for
multitude of tender mercies, Psalm. 51.1, 7, 8. and so it was with Paul, Rom
7.24.25. Our spiritual conflicts in the trouble of our Consciences for sin,
make us to judge the better of the grace of Christ toward us; in his grievous
agonies, when he cries out, My God, my God, etc. and say with Paul, The grace
of God was exceeding abundant, 1 Timothy 1.14.18.

3 Repentance is a grace, that plows up, and stirs the heart, fitting of it for
the seed of the Word to take better root in it. Plow up the fallow ground, Jer.
4.3. and when this is plowed, and plowed deep, the seed is not so likely to be
choked with thorns. Repentance will make a thriving and fruitful Christian,
under the means of grace; and one that shall have a plentiful and joyful
harvest. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy he that goes forth with
weeping, bearing precious seed, shall come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him, Psalm. 126.5, 6.

4 Repentance breeds a patient frame of heart under Gods afflicting hand*
Whereas otherwise at such a time, the heart will be very unruly and outrageous.
Take David in his saddest time that he under passed after his great sins, when
his heart was kindly broken, he would justify God, Psalm. 51.4. and this is
because it makes us humble, and lays the heart low in consideration of our
great unworthiness of the least mercy, and desert of the greatest judgments
from Gods hands: and then what ever God threatens, yea, whatever he inflicts,
the heart is quiet, silent, and patient, not in the least repining against, but
justifying of God in all his ways.

5 Repentance makes the heart charitable, and pitiful to others that fall into
sin; and will keep us from rigor and pride, in censuring of them too severely
from the remembrance of our sinful failings and frame of spirit, as Tit. 3.2,
3. Show meekness toward all men, for we our selves were sometimes foolish,
etc.

6 This repenting frame, is a Sin-mortifying frame of spirit. No grace carries
on the work of mortification more in the heart than repentance, seeing it is
continually weeding out, and plucking up the remainders of corruption in the
heart. Sin no sooner shows it self, but a broken heart is repenting of it, and
mourning for it; God has placed this grace in a believers heart, to be
continually cleansing out and throwing forth, the filth and dreggs of
corruption, still adhearing to the heart in this life; and hence it is that we
read after all the faylings of the most precious Servants of God, the wheel of
repentance was still turned over their sins, though they were fully certified
of pardon and forgiveness.

Concl. 2. A believer (whatsoever his faith is) had need be fervent and instant
in prayer for the pardon of his sin. This our Savior taught his Disciples in
the rule of prayer, Matthew. 6.12. and we are still to do it in these respects.

1 Because our sins are daily renewed, and we had need have pardon renewed,
and remission afresh applied unto us, as our sins are renewed: therefore we had
need continually be praying for this, that our sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come, Act. 3.19.

2 That we may get faith and assurance of pardon, and forgiveness. Worldly men
would not only have outward Estates, Lands, and Possessions, but they seek to
have assurance thereof. Now this assurance of pardon is not gotten ordinarily
without much contention in prayer, Hab. 6.11. We desire that every one of you
do show the same diligence, to the full assurance, etc. It is much to be
lamented, that any Christian should content himself, with an opinion, or
conjecture of forgiveness, and so become no other than James calls them, chap.
1.3. Double-minded, men, unstable in all their ways. A double-minded man is
such a one as is always questioning Gods grace in Christ unto him, and his
interest in the Promises, whereby he is very unstable, and here he contents
himself, without endeavoring a stability of faith and assurance, to say with
Job, I know my Redeemer lives. We have need of a great increase of faith, and
measure of assurance that our sins are pardoned, that we may be able to
undergo great trials, and strong temptations, and to lay up like the rich man,
riches for many years; and (with Joseph) store of provision against the years
of famine. For so the Thessalonians when they had much-assurance, received the
Word in great affliction, with joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. Oh then
a daily course of prayer is needful, that we may get the sense and feeling of
the mercy of God to our souls, in the pardon of our sins. Yea this is more than
naked assurance, when a man can feel the love of God shed abroad in his heart
by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. when a man is sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1.13. and has the earnest of his heavenly inheritance in his
heart. Many by the strength of their faith, have trusted in Gods mercy, even
then when the Lord has hid his face from them, or showed them an angry
countenance, but the feeling of the grace of God is more: this is for the heart
to find the warmth of his love, and behold the gracious smiles of his
countenance in the lowest condition, and it is a very heaven upon earth, or a
lively fore-taste of the joys of heaven.

3 This is needful, that the soul may have the pardon of fr^ in all the fruits
and effects thereof, in their further accomplishments and perfection; though
we are freed from the damnation and dominion of sin, yet we are not freed
from the remainders of it. We know how Paul groaned under his unmortified
corruptions, Romans 7.23, 24. and the Church is taught to pray, Take away all
iniquity, and Hos. 14.2. we must look sometimes to meet with terrors of
Conscience, and to be in darkness without any light, we must look for
desertions and temptations by reason of the remainders of sin, and therefore we
are to pray for full redemption from sin, in all the fruits and effects of it.

4 It is needful to pray, that we may make a right use of the pardon of sin,
having once obtained it. For the heart is apt under such a favor to wax proud,
and wanton, and careless; as it is with many an ungodly child, when a father
has made over a great estate into his hands, he will care no more for his
father, nor do any duty belonging to a child: so the children of God would
do being left to themselves, when God has made known to them this blessed
estate of the pardon of their sins, they are ready in their prosperity to say,
they shall not be moved, Psalm. 30.6. and there is no state so prosperous as a
pardoned estate. And this right use of pardon stands in deep humility, and
abasement of our selves, Ezekiel. 16.63. That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more; because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord. 2 Another
use of it is in vigilance and watchfulness at all times, and in all places
against sin, Psalm. 85.8. 3 In a resolved care and conscience of obedience for
the time to come, Jerem. 31.33, 38. 4 To love God so much the more; as the poor
woman, Luke 7.47.

Now I come to show you how far a Christian ought to go, in comforting his
soul about the forgiveness of his sin.

1 A believer holding his integrity should never conceive, How far a believer
ought not to charge his soul with sin.
or let his heart be persuaded, that any of all his sins shall ever bring guilt
upon him, so as to cause Gods revenging justice to bind him over to wrath. If
any one shall do so, he sins and bears false witness against God, and his
own Soul. It is one thing to say we are worthy to be condemned, and another
thing to say, or think, we shall be condemned indeed. For, there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8.1. because Christ
has condemned their sin; sins guilt is on them, as the Viper on Paul's hand,
which he soon shook off without any hurt. Or like the Lions in the Den where
Daniel was cast, who though they were hungry, God shut their mouths, and they
had no power on Daniel, Dan. 6.22, 25. but when they who caused Darius to make
the Decree were cast in, the Lions tare them suddenly in pieces, before they
came to the ground. Just so it is with the sins of the faithful, and the sins
of wicked men and unbeleevers: the sins of the faithful, though they are of a
killing and Lion-like nature, (for the wages of every sin (in it self) is
death) yet the Lord Jesus in the behalf of believers, stops the Lions mouths,
and takes away the guilt, and the condemning power of it, so that it cannot
hurt them. But when it meets with an unbeleever, it soon slayes him, Psalm.
34.21. Evil shall slay the wicked, yea sin shall lie at his door, Genesis 4.7. the
filthiness of the unclean person shall devour him; the disobedience of the
stubborn shall plague him; the pride of the haughty and scorner shall rend the
very caul of his heart one day, etc. but so it is not with poor believers,
though their sin has teeth, and jaws, and power to make them worthy of
condemnation, yet it shall never be able to fasten condemnation on them.

2 Every faithful soul is bound to persuade his heart, that God does not, nor
ever will charge any one sin upon him. He will never follow the Law upon him
here for his hurt, curse, or mischief in this life. God may indeed hide his
face from him, and write bitter things against him, and deal with him as an
angry Father with a disobedient Child; but will never prosecute him at his
Law, as an enemy, or Judge; but a believer may say with holy Job, chap. 13.15.
Though he stay me, I will put my trust in him, because he sees no iniquity in
Jacob, Numb. 23.22. What is that? Not to trouble you with the delusions of the
Familists, the meaning is, that the Lord takes no notice of the sins of his
Israel, to impute them, or to punish them, but only to pardon, cover, and cure
them, Isa. 53.6. all the sins of believers meet in Christ as in the center,
like so many Diameters of a Circle; or as all the Rivers meet in the Sea, so
all the Sins of believers on Christ in the full punishment and curse of them.
Therefore let every believer make conscience to consider what God has revealed
in the Promise, and take heed that you make not God a Liar, and be sure that
you are discharged from all your sins by Christ; but let not any unbeleever, or
profane person, meddle with this privilege, for he has no part or fellowship
with it, they shall bear their own drunkenness, scorning, Sabbath-breaking*
and all manner of profaneness; the Devil is let loose, iniquity is upon them,
and the flying roll of Curses, and Divine vengeance is gone forth against them.
They have sinned, and be sure their sin will find them out, Number. 32.23. as a
Bloud-hound finds out a Thief. But you that are believers, glorify the name
of Christ, and his Death, and I charge you take heed, what you say or think in
this case, as though God would avenge himself on you, or deal with you as an
enemy.

3 Every true believer should exempt his soul from any fear, of the charge of
any sin upon it, by any accuser in this world, so as to break off the love of
God in Christ from him. Famous is that bold challenge of Paul, Romans 8.33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? be it Devil, or World or
Conscience, there is nothing can be of such force and power as to affright us,
as though we might fall from the love of God, whereby he has loved us in
Christ, Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, etc.

4 A believer should take heed of speaking, or thinking that God is so
displeased with him, as to neglect him, reject him, or forget him for his sins,
Isa. 40.27, 28. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid
from the Lord etc. Isa. 49.14. Sion said, God has forsaken me, etc. yea
though he should fall into some foul sin, yet he should not conceive his
condition hopeless, and helpless, 1 John 2.1, 2. Psalm. 130.3. though he must
see that he repent, and be suitably humbled for such falls; but this is his
comfort, when he falls he shall arise, not perish-through hardness and
impenitency, but be raised by true remorse, hearty sorrow and humiliation for
his sins, or any one in particular, that he has fallen by.

Use 4. It is exhortation, to the performance of several duties, about or
concerning the pardon of our sins.

1 We should learn from hence highly to esteem the pardon and forgiveness of
our sins, for these grounds,

1 Because it is a peculiar property of God, A property of God to forgive sin.
belonging to the Lord alone, to forgive sin; that is expressed in the text in
these words [through the forbearance of God] forbearance and remission belong
only to the Lord, as his Prerogatives royal, Exodus 34.7. Forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, Isa. 47.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions, etc. Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
Iniquity, etc. Oh! there is an infinite evil in sin, and therefore requires an
infinite power to remove it. Hence it is made an argument of the Godhead of
Christ, to forgive sin, Matthew. 9.5. and this is a greater argument than the
working any miracle; true, in a sense it is attributed also to the Apostles:
whose sins ye remit, etc. but this is but ministerially, in the Court of the
World, or Church: but in the Court of heaven, none but God can forgive sin.

Now this shows the transcendent excellency of this grace, The worth of Christ's
blood.
that it is the only remedy in the World, for the disease of sin, it is God
only can cure us with the blood of Christ, and this is the greatest miracle
that ever was wrought for us, that we read of in the Gospel.

2 The great force of forgiveness appears, by the price that was paid for the
purchase of it. It was (...), the worthy precious blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. and it is expressed in the text in the word ((...)) his own blood as
Beza notes, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son. 1 John 1.17. Assuredly Gods love
was so great to his only begotten Son, that if any creature could have laid
down a sufficient price, he would not have sent his Son, out of his own bosom,
to make satisfaction. Or if any other excellency in Christ, as the integrity of
his nature, or his active obedience could have procured the pardon of sin for
his Elect, Christ should not have dyed for that end: but Christ must be
offered to take away the sins of many, Heb. 9.27, 28. It is as if a subject
have a disease, that can be cured no other way, than with the heart blood of
the Prince, for no other potion than such an one will heal sins diseases, and
wounds, for the Lord himself (who is the only wise God) would not lay down
more than was necessary, and hence he spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up, etc. Romans 8.32.

3 The worth of it appears, because this is a leading grace in the new
Covenant. And though there be many other blessings, in the Covenant of Gods
grace purchased by Christ's blood: (for it purges our consciences, Heb. 9.14.
nourishes all grace, and works the growth and increase of it, Joh. 6.55. and
gives us an entrance into the holy of holies. Heb. 10.19) I say, though all
other spiritual blessings do flow from Christ, yet remission of sins is the
chiefest of them, the first grace in communion, and the first in (...) soul
that is united unto Christ. Romans 5.1. When we are justified by Faith, then
follows peace, and joy, and access to God, etc. As a King first receiving a
Rebel into favor, forgives him his treason and disloyalty, then he (...) or
privilege upon him. So the Lord (...) in this case, we are all rebels
against God, and we can expect nothing at the hands of God, till our guilt,
curse, horror, and expectation of vengeance be removed.

Now this cannot be removed till Faith. All unbeleevers being under
condemnation ^. So that pardon belongs only to believers, Isa. 33. last; and
such an one David pronounces blessed, Psalm. 32.12. for forgiveness brings a
man into favor with God; and our salvation stands in it, Luke 1.77. Oh let
these, and many other considerations, stir up men highly to prize forgiveness
of sins. Remarkable is the reproof by the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 55.2.
Wherefore do you spead your silver, etc. why are you so eager about baser,
inferior things? you do but lose your money, and labor, after them.

Moreover, consider that Remission is equally bestowed on all believers: Though
some have more sins forgiven them than others; yet all believers have their
sins equally forgiven them, the weaker ones, as well as Abraham, Romans 4.22, 23.
and therefore being attainable by the weakest believer, all should look after
it, as a matter of greatest importance. If we felt but the weight of guilt
once, we should know what forgiveness is, Psalm. 38.4. Let the conscience be
once arrested by God, and persued by Divine Justice, it would be then like the
entangled surety, Prove. 6.4. He would give no sleep to his eyes, etc. but
would deliver himself, as a Roe from the hands of the Hunter, and as a bird
from the hands of the Fowler. Now I beseech you brethren, get and maintain this
experience of a wounded spirit; get a clearer understanding and sense of your
own guiltiness, together with the loathsomenesse of sin: and then we shall
know how to value the mercy of forgiveness. None can prize health, but a sick
and languishing person; nor food, but the hungry. So that when your soul is
truly pained with the horror of sin, then you will know better what the
remission of sin is: as David, Psalm. 32.

Exh. ^. The second branch of this Exhortation is, to testify your true prizing
of Remission, by unwearied diligence in the use of means to obtain it; as,

First, Leave not your heart and Conscience till they are shiftless, and past
all carnal evasions, in regard of the charge of sin. It is most sure, that
every soul naturally is at emnity with Christ; he is one of the Citizens that
hated him, and will not come at him, as long as we can shift without him. So
it was with the Prodigal, Luke 15.14, 17. that would not come to his Father,
till he had spent all, and was driven to feed Swine, yea, to feed with them,
and no man gave to him: So that he was put beyond all his shifts before he
would return. So God deals with sinners, as Romans 11.32. God has shut up all in
unbeleef, that he might have mercy upon all. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
shut up all in sin, etc. Gods shutting up in both places seems to be by putting
them beyond their shifts, by the full convictions of his word, that they have
never a starting hole to escape by. Oh beloved! there is never a soul
enlightened, living under the means, but is in a maze, and runs from hole to
hole, from mountain to hill, and being ferreted out of one hole runs into
another. There is no remission in this case, whilst you are running (like Adam)
to shift into a wood, far away from God, as you think, but all your strong
holds must be pulled down, 2 Cor. 10.4.

2 Take a thorough survey of the free offers of Christ, and him crucified, to
every soul, that hears the Gospel preached, and this is both by God the father,
and Christ himself, Joh. 6.40. Romans 5.8. Joh. 3.^7. Isa. 11.10. Act. 10.43.
Rev. 3.20. Now in this case consider two things, 1 What end the Lord has, or
can have, in offering himself thus to a vile sinner; who shall be the gainer
if we do receive him? or the looser if we receive him not? what said John the
Baptist to our Savior, though he were more than a Prophet? Mat. 3.14. I have
need of being baptized of thee, and come thou to me? to be sure we have
need of Christ, but he has no need of us. Yea, what need has Christ of a
filthy beast, a Drunkard, Scorner, Murderer, Atheist? as Achish said of David
in a matter of lesser moment, 1 Samuel 21. last, ye see the man is mad, have I
need of mad men? consider what objection or exception thou have, or can make
against the offer of Christ; do thou think he gets any thing by thee? If
thou be righteous, what give thou him? Or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him? Job 35.6, 7. thou art but a lost man at
the best, Luke 19.10. See then ye refuse not him that speaks, Heb. 12.25.
lest the King be wrath, and send his Armies against you, Math. 22.7.

3 Observe the sweet Invitations of Christ, and the persons, whom he does
invite to come to him, with their qualifications. His offers are more general
than his Invitations, which are of particular persons, so and so qualified, The
weary and heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. The thirsty, Joh. 7.37. The poor, the
meek, the brokenhearted, the blind, the captives, etc. Such who groan under
these infirmities, Luke 4.18, 19. he calls and invites these, to Riches,
Liberty, Eyesight, to a Jubilee, an acceptable year of the Lord. Hear
therefore and fear, all ye stubborn, stiff-necked, Impenitent, hard-hearted
sinners, whose Consciences can evidence your unbrokennesse for sin, and that it
is your greatest content, that you have elbow-room enough for the Commission of
it: and your greatest trouble is, when Commands or Threatenings cross you in it;
expect not a good look from Christ in this condition. Psalm. 138.6. Jam. 4.6.
he resists the proud, etc. but on the contrary, the poor, brokenhearted,
humble sinner shall be welcome to Christ; for a contrite and bruised spirit,
he will not despise or cast off.

4 You must look at it as absolutely necessary to get Christ, and to stir up
earnest and restless desires after him. This is the thirst that Christ calls
for: and it is wrought by a knowledge of his worth. Joh. 4.10. If thou knew
the gift of God, etc. for the desire is answerable to that certain and clear
judgment, that we have of the necessity, worth, and dignity of the great gift
of God. The Merchant sees the Pearl to be of unspeakable price, and therefore
meditates the attaining of it. Matthew. 13.44, 46. Desires are not to be dead and
sluggish, but eager and careful for the getting and possessing satiating
blessings. Isa. 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with
my spirit with a me will I seek thee early, etc. This is the taking the
Kingdom of heaven by force. Now such an one will not only cry, God have mercy
on me, etc. or use some formal Prayers for pardon, but will cry earnestly, and
wrestle for it, as David did, Psalm. 51.1, 2. Sin is soon committed, but pardon
is not so soon obtained; a sickness or wound is soon got, but a cure is a long
and busy work Psa. 69.3. God will have us have pardon in his order, and for
right ends; It is Gods order that we should have Christ crucified before
remission of sins, Romans 8.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.19. So that he that is not in Christ,
must not think to get a pardon.

Object. But should not a man out of Christ pray for pardon? Or is it in vain
so to do?

Answ. No, for if thy case were as bad as Simon Magus his case, thou should
pray for it, Act. 8.22. but you must not think to have it without Christ; but
first Christ, and then pardon, and so God is ready to forgive, Psalm. 86.5.
Besides, seek pardon for a right end: it may be thou would only be eased
of thy horror, but that alone is a sinister end, Psalm. 13^.4.

5 Hence we should learn, by all means to get the pardon of sin cleared to our
hearts: this does necessarily flow from the transcendent excellency of
forgiveness. A wise man in a case of this nature, would not contentedly be in
the dark; a condemned malefactor is not satisfied by knowing a pardon may be
had, but he would fain have it in hand, and read his own name in it; and such
must be our care in this, which is a greater matter.

Quest. How should a sinner get the pardon of his sins cleared unto him?

Answ. It must be thy main care to clear up thine interest in Christ, and then
it will be clear. Many think it enough to say, that Christ dyed for sinners,
and that Justification is by Christ's blood: why beloved, the Devils are
persuaded of this. What is a poor man the better, to be persuaded there is
Gold at the Indies? or the hungry man, that there is meat at the Cooks shop? or
the Prodigal, that there is bread in his fathers house? he may perish for
hunger for all that. Beloved we should be of Paul's mind, Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea
doubtless I account all things loss, etc. Mark the words, 1 That there is an
excellency in the knowledge of Christ, above other knowledge, 2 He suffered the
loss of all other things for it. 3 He did this not out of a rash zeal, but
advisedly, he said, I account, etc. 4 Consider what kind of knowledge this
was, that Paul made so great account of, it was the super-excellency of the
knowledge of Christ; and again, I account all things but dross and dung that I
may win Christ, and be found in him. To know Christ to be my Lord and Savior,
to win him, and wear him as mine own. Then a man is safe. As a poor Woman
married to a rich Husband, if she be arrested for Debt, she will plead that
she is under Covert baron, and the Law takes no hold of her, but of her
Husband; so it is with a poor believer, that is married to Christ; but they
that are single persons (as unbeleevers are) must answer their own debts, and
lie in prison for them.

2 Labor to clear up the efficacy of Christ's blood unto thy Conscience; that
is the Fountain set open for sin, and for uncleanenesse, Zach. 13.1. Heb.
10.22. for the sprinkling of us from an evil Conscience, and the healing of all
our Spiritual maladies, as well as for the pardon of our sins, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Psa. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thy sins, and heals all thy diseases. Yea, this
is certain, that that sin that is not healed in some measure, is not pardoned,
and if one sin be unpardoned, on sin at all is pardoned. Now what is the
healing all diseases? but the killing lusts and corruptions in the heart: when
the soul does not only forsake the practice of sin, but it hates it, and will
not let it get power, Romans 6.6. and many things may conduce to the killing of
it, but nothing does it like grace. Education may do something, the Law
something, Civil honesty something, and Afflictions something, but Grace
conquers all. Romans 8.34, 38. See then what the blood of Christ has done,
toward the shealing thy sins, and killing thy corruptions.

3 Endeavor to clear up to faith in Christ's blood; and it may be cleared from
the Spiritual business it ever puts the soul upon, it is active like the
vestuous woman, which puts her hand to every ^^rk, ^rov. 31.^4, 17. 2 Thessalonians.
1.11. Hence it is that the (...) by his faith. Heb ^. ^ believers do all i.e
says (...) the faithful of old were enabled to do so great works, old were
enabled to do so great works, Heb. 11.33. Subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, etc. but it is most especially busy in the use of Ordinances:
as the Word, Prayer, Seals; though it will not be (...) from (...) callings it
works by love, and is our victory over the (...), 1 Jo^. 5.4. So that a true
faith is employing it self on all hands, for a believers good. Now alas, when
(...) faith is but a dead drugge in us, or is but an underling in the heart,
and is at the command of every lust, profit, or pleasure, truly it is not
lively, much less shall you live eternally by it.

4 Clear up the way and fruits of forgiveness of sins: the way of bringing it
home unto the soul, is the Word. Acts 26.18. the Word was preached to open men's
eyes. If ever we come to the right knowledge of the pardon of our sins, it
must be by the Word preached, working these particulars, 1. Illumination,
discovering effectual your sin and misery to us, with a through sense and
feeling of it. 2 The conversion of the soul, and turning of it from darkness
to light. Now when the league with Hell is disa^ulled, then we come to receive
forgiveness of sin. Besides, (...) the fruit of forgiveness, there be many
(...) of this sappy root, let me name some. First, the (...) heart to love
Christ with fervency, Luke 7.47. (...) were many were forgiven her, for she
loved much: her love was the effect, not the cause of her pardon. So Psalm.
116.1, 3, 4, etc.

Quest. What kind of love is this to God?

Ans. Such a love as inlargeth the heart in duties to God, as it did that poor
woman, and David, and Peter. Hence is in them a love to the Word and
Ordinances, and the Children of God; it is not possible for a man to have great
debts forgiven him, and that out of pity and bounty, when he has nothing to
pay, but that his love should be kindled, and his heart in a light fire in
zeal for God.

2 A forgiving disposition in case of personal wrongs, Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye
kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us; and this note is given by our blessed Savior
with great earnestness and asseveration, affirmatively and negatively. If ye
forgive men their trespasses, then your heavenly Father will forgive you,
Matthew. 6.12.14, 15. and if ye from the heart forgive not every one his brother
their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you. He speaks
indefinitely every one, not excepting any: it is a sad sentence for a malicious
heart: But a merciful heart that can forgive private wrongs, and strive against
motions of malice and revenge, and be humbled for them, and that from the
heart, how great soever the injuries are, it is a sure fruit of Gods pardoning
him, and his freedom from guile and reigning Hypocrisy, Psalm. 32.1, 2. 1 John
3.19.

6 Maintain and improve the forgiveness of sin cleared up unto thee, and this
will be by daily and diligent observation of our ways: by often reckonings
with God, and getting the Book still crossed; by suing out a pardon of course:
and therefore Christ teaches us to pray daily, Forgive us our debts: This was
David's practice, as appears by Psalm. 119.58, 59. and other places, and this
must be joined with a resolution and care to shun future sins and failings;
and hereby we shall know we are of the truth (i. e. sincere) and shall assure
our hearts before him, 1 John 3.19. Now this improvement is,

First, by holy, humble, and thankful abasement of our selves before God
continually, Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel. 16. ult. so Ezekiel. 36.29. I will save you from all
your uncleanness, then shall ye remember your own evil ways, etc. Beware of
pride, covetousness, carnal rejoicing, shaking off sorrow for sin: it is a bad
symptom when a man does so.

2 Be careful to improve your interest in the favor of God for others; not
only near relations, but even for strangers, especially for the public; as
Noah, Daniel, Job, Moses, Samuel, etc. they were still standing in the gap.

3 Be ready to comfort other? with the same comfort wherewith God has
comforted us, 2 Cor. 1.4.

4 Know and bear in mind your engagement to the Lord. The Princes pardon is the
condemned Malefactors life, as Mephibosheth said, 2 Samuel 19.28. All my fathers
house were dead men before thee. Pardon of sin, is the eternal life of the
sinner, and he is passed from Death to Life by it. Yea as the offending God by
Sin is an infinite evil; so the forgiveness of the offense is an infinite
good; and we may say, What shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward us? Surely as Psalm 116.8, 9. He has delivered our souls from death,
our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling, that we should walk before the
Lord in the land of the living.

Of the Righteousness of Christ.
THE NINETEENTH SERMON
ON Romans 3.21. But now the righteousness of Christ, etc.


IN the handling of the point of Justification, I have spoken of the several
causes thereof, and the end thereof in regard of men, viz. Remission of sins,
and thereupon immediately follows, the accounting of the believing Sinner
righteous unto Salvation; that is, by the imputation of the righteousness of
Jesus Christ unto the Sinner; and that being described in the context, and same
portion of Scripture, I shall proceed unto it now, where the handling of it may
come in at the due place, for our better understanding thereof.

In the two verses, 19, 20. the Apostle showed before Negatively, that
Justification is not by the works of the Law; now he shows Affirmatively how
we are justified, and that is expressed. 1 By the matter of it [The
righteousness of God] amplified by way of opposition to the Law [without the
Law, i. e. without the works of the Law] any way Co-working, or meriting our
justification. 2 This is set forth by the Adjunct, of the approbation, and
testimony of the Law and the Prophets. 3 By the instrument, that is, faith of
Jesus Christ, understand it not actively, for the faith whereby Christ
believed; but passively, the faith whereby Christ is believed on. 4 The
subject, believers, and those universally and emphatically set down [unto all,
and upon all that believe.]

Quest. What is meant by the righteousness of God?

Ans. It is not to be understood of that whereby God himself is righteous (as
Osiander said) for that is essential to God, and cannot be communicated to the
Creature; but this righteousness is elsewhere called the righteousness of
Christ, and the righteousness of faith; this may appear clearly by the
opposition, Romans 10.3, 4. The Jews went about to establish their own
righteousness, and would not submit to Gods righteousness, and there Gods
righteousness (in contra-distinction to that which is our own righteousness)
is yet explained to be our righteousness for these reasons.

1 Because God appointed this righteousness, for the justification of a
sinner, The righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. i. e. of Gods
institution and appointment, and 2 Cor. 5.21.

2 It is called Gods righteousness, because Christ who is the subject of it,
is God-man, Phil. 2.6-8.

3 It is so, because it is God who is the giver of it, and not only so (for he
gives inherent righteousness also) but that God only imputes it out of the
free riches of his Grace; whence the Apostle calls it, Phil. 3.9. The
righteousness which is of God by faith, i. e. ordained and imputed by God, and
made ours by faith apprehending of it.

4 It is called Gods righteousness, because it is such as pleases God, and
which he in his strict justice does approve of; for this will make the man
blessed, to whom it is applied, Romans 4.6.

There are here two Points I desire to insist on.

Doct. 1. It is the righteousness of God, Gods righteousness.
which the Scripture holds forth for the Sinners justification, and this
righteousness of God is made the sinners, by way of imputation; this I take to
be the meaning of that phrase [Vnto all, and upon all them that do beleeve]
i.e. Gods righteousness is bestowed on them for justification.

For the opening of this, it will be inquired, What is the righteousness of
God that is here spoken of?

Ans. Of Christ's active and passive obedience.
1. It is the whole obedience of Christ, both Active and Passive, that is, such
a righteousness as every man ought to yield and perform unto God, and that is,
first passive, in a way of suffering penalty for his transgression; this every
sinner does owe to God by the sentence of the just Law, which requires that the
sinner should suffer Death and Curse for his sin, Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10. 2 The
sinner owes obedience unto God, besides satisfaction for his former breaches;
for the Law says, Gal. 3.12. the man that does these things shall live in
them; not the hearers, etc. but the doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans
2.13. Romans 11.5. It stands not with reason, that laying or inflicting the
penalty threatened for transgressions, should make man thereby become lawless,
or not bound to the possitive duties of obedience. Therefore seeing the sinner
owes all this righteousness, Christ our Suerty must needs fulfill all this
righteousness for sinners, that is, both dying, and doing as it is said,
Matthew. 3.15. and all is comprchended in Phil. 2.8. That he was obedient unto
the death, which implies that there is an obedience that falls short of death;
as also a further obedience in suffering death: in which respect it is also
said, that Christ is the end of the Law, etc. Romans 10.4. now the end of the
Law, is perfect righteousness, both in doing what is commanded, and suffering
the due punishments: therefore Christ was to perform both.

2 The righteousness of Christ was most perfect, that nothing could be added
to it; but that righteousness that is both active, and passive, is more
perfect than his passive righteousness alone. For suppose that a Malefactor
has suffered the whole punishment of the Law for his offense, it is required
to his future righteousness, that he should do that which the Law requires;
so it is required of us; but we cannot fulfill the Law our selves, therefore
Christ must fulfill it for us, Romans 8.3.

3 That which Christ did as a Mediator, he did not for himself but for us; but
all that Christ did after his Incarnation, were Actions of a Mediator; for as
soon as ever he was God-man, he was our Mediator, and if his active obedience
were the obedience of a Mediator, then it was performed for us, as such; for it
is certain that every action of a Mediator tends to reconciliation. Now to say
that his active obedience did fit him to be a Mediator, cannot consist, for how
could that fit him to be God-man, that was done after the word was made flesh?
Gal. 4.4.

Quest. Why is the righteousness of God requisite for our Justification?

Reas. 1. Man's insufficiency in his righteousness.
From the insufficiency of the righteousness of man, to reach to such an end,
or to answer the righteousness of the law, Romans 8.3. That which was impossible
for the Law, in that it was weak through the flesh, etc. for this consider
these three particulars.

1 That no man in this life has perfection of grace and holiness in him, by
reason of the remaining flesh and corruption, Romans 7.14. The Law is spiritual,
I am carnal, verse. 23. I see a Law in my members, etc. so that a man can
neither do the good that he would, nor avoid the evil that he hates, unless he
be holier, and perfecter than Paul.

2 No man in this life can perfectly observe all those good works that the Law
requires; every man's experience might prove this. Yet add, 1 King. 8.46. There
is no man that sins not, Eccles. 7.20. there is not a just man upon the
earth that does good and sins not, Paul himself professes that he was not
perfect, Phil. 3.12. who ever loved the Lord in the Law sense? Deuteronomy. 6.5.

3 No man can perform any one particular duty, or in every point work so
exactly, that he shall in full answer the rigor of the Law, Job 9.3. If he
will contend with a man, none can answer him one for a thousand. So Psalm.
130.3. Psalm. 43.2. I dare appeal to any man alive, even the holiest (for I
speak not of Heretics, and Atheists, etc.) dare thou appear before the Lord,
with any prayer that ever thou did make? or any other duty? and say, Lord
proceed against me, according to any sin or weakness that was in this prayer,
or that duty? alas says Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I
not hereby justified, etc. though I my self could discern no defect in my
righteousness, yet I would not plead it before God, for he can espy evils
enough in my best righteousness, Job 9.30, 31. If I wash my self with snow
water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the
ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.

Reas. Perfect righteousness required for justification.
2. Taken from the perfection of that righteousness that is required for the
justification of a believer. Perfect and Meritorious righteousness must have
these conditions in it.

1 In regard of the thing, that is to be obeyed: it must be all the revealed
will of God, both for the substance, and every circumstance thereof. Jam. 2.10.
Deuteronomy. 6. ult. it must be all Gods Commandments, and as he has commanded.

2 In regard of the person obeying: it must be with the whole man, outward and
inward, Deuteronomy. 6.5.

3 In regard of the time of this obedience; it must be with perseverance to
the end, Jam. 1, 23. Gal. 3.10. One sin committed in man's whole life makes a
man accursed, whatsoever his righteousness has been in the rest.

4 That his righteousness may be meritorious, it must have infinite worth in
it, Romans 5.17. there is an infinite evil in sin, and that requires an infinite
righteousness to cover and remove it. Now these conditions cannot be found any
where but in Jesus Christ God-man; who first knows no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. 2 He
kept the Law with his whole man, Luke 1.35. Psalm. 40.8. 3 He persisted to the
end, Joh. 17.4. Joh. 4.38. 4 There was an infinite value and worth in his
righteousness, he being God-man in one person, Psalm. 71.19. there is none like
unto God, and so no righteousness like unto his, verse. 15. My mouth shall show
forth thy righteousness, all the day, for I know not the number of it. It can
neither be numbered, nor measured by any Creature; it holds by the same rule for
Christ's righteousness as for Gods.

Reas. Gods righteousness is witnessed to.
3. Take that in the text for another ground, that this righteousness of God is
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, and that sundry ways.

1 By evidence and clear Testimony, and that is most famous in Jer. 23.6. this
is the name wherewith he shall be called, Jehovah our righteousness, and Isa.
53.11. by his knowledge, shall my righteous Servant justify many.

2 By Types and figures, which went before in the Old Testament; as the Brazen
Serpent, Paschal Lamb, the Cloud, the Rock, the Mercy Seat, the Garment of the
High Priest, with an Inscription of Holiness to the Lord, the Urim and the
Thummim; all these pre-figured this, as also all the sacrifices, Offerings, and
Ceremonies, of the Law; the blood of the Lambs and Goats, did signify the
righteousness of Christ.

3 The Sacraments, as Circumcision, and the Passover, do bear witness that its
the righteousness of God, by which we must be justified. Romans 4.11. Rev. 3.17.

Use 1. To convince us of the greatness of the sin, To despisers of grace.
and of the justness of the Condemnation, of those that neglect, or despise,
the proclamation of the Grace of God in Christ, and his great salvation. The
righteousness offered, is Gods righteousness, every way perfect and complete,
and it is not possible any thing should be added to it; and can any soul be
content now to be destitute of this righteousness? or dare to slight or
refuse the offer of it? or when its offered to be indifferent about the
receiving of it? this is sure a high contempt of God, and affront put upon his
grace in Christ; this very sin undid the Jews, Romans 10.3, 4. They would not
submit to Gods righteousness; what is that? They would not receive it being
offered, but stubbornly refused it, and cast it from them, as a superfluous
thing, and this is called. Act. 13.16. The judging of our selves unworthy of
everlasting life; and the Lord casts off poor creatures for it, and their blood
shall be upon their own heads, Act. 18. See Romans 1.17, 18. in the Gospel is
revealed the righteousness of God; But what if a man cares not for it? Truly,
then the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, etc.
Gods vengeance is poured forth upon them, though it may be they feel it not,
for it is spiritual vengeance that takes away all sense.

Quest. Who are they that set this righteousness at naught?

Answ. 1 Such as withold the truth in unrighteousness, such as shut up the
known truth, by their lusts: they live wickedly in and under the Gospel.

2 They that are careless in seeking it, and be content to be without it,
Romans 10.3. Who are ignorant of Gods righteousness, etc.

3 They that put off the seeking of it, and seek it not first, and chiefly,
Matthew. 6.33.

4 They that rest contented in a doubting condition, about their Salvation and
condemnation.

Use 2. The misery of, an unjustified estate.
To show unto every soul the misery of an unjustified estate, upon this
consideration, that it is Gods righteousness only that can justify; and in
this I dare to appeal to the Consciences of many that hear this truth, can ye
dare to say, that you have gotten Gods righteousness to appear before God in?
have it you in, and of your selves? if there be any such blinded, hardened,
presumptuous wretch that dares belly God, and his own conscience, and say that
he has this righteousness of God, I might say as in another case was said of
Ananias, Act. 5. Why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie to the Holy Ghost? It
is a mavelous and mighty work of Satan to persuade a poor creature, that he
has such a blessing of God as this is, when he has nothing like it.

Object. But you shall never drive me from this, that I have part in the
righteousness of Christ?

Answ. Why, but if thou have Christ's righteousness, thou have Gods
righteousness, and have thou gotten Gods righteousness? then thou speak of
great and costly matters, do thou know what thou say? what was Laodicea
the better, for saying she was rich, and increased in goods? Rev. 3.17. they
were very beggars for all this; or if thou have Gods righteousness, how long
have thou had it? wast thou born with this Garment? no man is, nor with any
other; or if thou have it, how came thou by it? is it by purchase, or free
gift? Rev. 3.18. It is there gotten by buying. Buy white raiment, etc. did
thou buy it? what did it cost thee? what did thou ever part with to make this
purchase with? true it is, that Christ needs nothing of thine, but thou can
not have this righteousness without parting with something for it, with much
that this righteousness cannot consist withal.

Object. But it is a free gift?

Answ. Whatsoever a man parts with for it, it is so, and must be so; yea, it
is a mighty gift, and of infinite value; and do thou think that the most high
God, has bestowed this infinite gift upon thee? suspect thine own heart,
whether thou art not ignorant of this righteousness, as the Jews were, Romans
10. though otherwise a knowing people; let me tell thee, that none can know
what this righteousness of God is, but he that knows the infinite malignity
of sin, Joh. 16.8, 9. and he that knows that, will not easily run into it, and
commit sin with greediness. Yea, none knows this righteousness, but he that
loves the Gospel and ministry thereof dearly: for therein is the righteousness
of God revealed, Romans 1.17. and the Gospel preached is the ministration of
righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. Moreover, if thou do not first seek it, Matthew.
6.33. a kingdom is worth the first and chiefest seeking, especially such a
Kingdom, as is founded in Gods righteousness. Oh! that poor deluded sinners,
would take heed of Couzening their own souls, in a matter of this great
importance; for beloved, know it, that Gods righteousness is the wedding
garment, Matthew. 22.11. and there be many will thrust in themselves, amongst
those that have it; whom the Lord will find to be without it one day, to their
utter expulsion out of his presence.

Use 3. Comfort.
It lerves for the strongest ground of comfort to poor discouraged believers,
that is in all the World; that it is no other than Gods righteousness, upon
which their justification and salvation is grounded; the comfort is
inestimable, and cannot possibly be reached by our weak understandings; see the
particulars.

1 A Believer has a righteousness that can satisfy the Law fully; the Law
requires perfect obedience, and the Gospel returns perfect obedience, Romans 3.
last. Do we then make void the Law? etc. i.e. the very doctrine of faith does
establish the Law.

1 Because whatever the Law requires, we perform it in Christ by faith.

2 By faith we glorify God his justice, and make a full payment thereof by God
in Christ.

3 If we had stood in innocence, or had had as much righteousness as Adam
before the fall, or the Elect Angels, yet all this had been but the
righteousness of a poor creature; but this is Gods righteousness.

4 This righteousness can make a sinner righteous; but so the Law could never
do.

2 This is everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. i.e. first continual; though
we commit new sins continually, yet this righteousness is like a fountain
opened, Zach. 13.1, 2. it can never be lost, as Adams righteousness was, and
the Angels too. It was a great miracle that the Lord wrought for his people in
the Wilderness, that forty years together their clothes waxed nor old upon
them, Deuteronomy. 29.5. than is nothing in comparison of this everlasting
righteousness, which is a Garment of Salvation, that will never wax old, Psalm
119.142.

3 This Righteousness is the righteousness of the Judge himself, its Christ's
own righteousness, and who is there may not tremble to remember that fearful
day, of most strict and exact account? But Jesus Christ himself, cannot find
any spot in his own righteousness, or any fault with it, and therefore the great
comfort of the faithful is in this, against the great day. If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1.^.

4 This is the Marrow of the whole book of God, on which the salvation of all
that shall be saved, depends. To such as fear my Name the Sun of
righteousness shall arise, etc. Mal. 4.2. and this is witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets, as the text has it; but is far more gloriously revealed in the
New Testament, Romans 1.17. and if this righteousness of God should fail us,
then were preaching in vain, faith in vain, (as the Apostle says in another
case) yea, the Scriptures should be in vain. Moses, and the Prophets, and the
Apostles should not only be liars, but false witnesses; and that in open
Court. and upon record. Now can we think that the God of truth would deceive
us, by sending such a company of false witnesses to us? far be it from him.
Mark, Rev. 19.8, 9. To her (i.e. to the Lambs wife) was granted that she should
be arrayed in fine linen, which is the righteousness of Christ, the Fleece of
the Immaculate Lamb. But is there no question of this? v. 9. we are assured of
the truth of it: these are the true sayings of God, viz. the certain and
undoubted sayings of God, who will not lie, and his hand, and seal for it.
Therefore it is said in the days of the Gospel, (...) shall say, surely in the
Lord I have righteousness and strength. Isa. 45.24. Oh! what a foundation is
here of faith and stedfastness to rest our selves on; So that we may say, we
are arrived at the fair Havens, the fairest port in all the World.

Consider we, but what we are in our selves, it may make us prize it, we are
but shameful, naked creatures, Rev. 3.18. but this righteousness will cover
our nakedness; nay, but this is but a small matter in comparison, to what the
Prophet says. Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, etc. for he
has clothed me with garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe
of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and a bride
adorneth her self with her jewels.

It is the joy of a true Believer, that God is his God in Christ, and that he
has in Christ, such a Princely and Priestly robe as is called the robe of
righteousness, and the garment of Salvation ( i.e. the righteousness of God) a
Garment of Gods own making; and it is as the bride-groomes robe, and he will
at his marriage not only cover our shame, but appear with his Ornaments too,
and if this be too little, he adds also the Brides Ornaments and Deckings
also, wherewith she is attired on her wedding day; thus Psalm. 45.13, 14, 15.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, etc. she shall be brought to the
King in ralment of needle work, etc. these are such things as we are wont to
admire for beauty and excellency, but there are far greater things than those
in the Lord, and his righteousness.

Use. 3. Exhortation to every soul to seek after this righteousness: Seek after
Gods righteousness.
Surely the name that is here given it is a sufficient motive.

1. It is Gods righteousness, efficiently, not only in a General sense, as the
earth is the Lords, and every good gift comes down from him as the Father of
lights: but subjectively, that inherent righteousness that is in the Saints,
may be called Gods righteousness, as an effect of Gods grace; but man is the
subject of that; but that person who is God, is the subject of this
righteousness.

2 This puts a sinner not only into a safe estate, but into a state of abso
lute perfection. Understand it, not as the deluded Familists and Quakers
imagine, as though there were no sin in him, or done by him: but that, though
considered in himself he has many corruptions, wants and weaknesses; yet in
Justification he has none at all, but is complete in Christ, 2 Pet. 1.4. Col.
2.10. there are many that do boast of outward excellencies, and seek them only
to have profit, pleasure, and credit, but account basely of the children of God
that want such low things; but alas these outward things are not our
compleatness, but many times do hinder it, and you that do content your selves
with your Philosophy and knowledge of arts, consider that it will not make you
complete, yea, if you rest in it, it is vain deceit, and will spoil you in the
main. Col. 2.8.10. And what though you add to it an outward profession,
frequent ordinances, verse. 11, 12. yet neither will these make you perfect.

3 This will be your security in the day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. Riches profit
not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death.

Quest. How may a sinful man or woman get he righteousness of God? There being
a wide distance betwixtt God and man, yea, that which is infinite.

Answ. To let pass the things before pressed and insisted on, there be these
things in this place and context observable.

1 Let us be settled in the certainty, not only that there is such a
righteousness of God, but also that the same is attainable by poor sinners.
This is here witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, such as God has sent,
whose Testimony he has approved of, and sealed to, yea, such who many of them
have sealed this, and the like truths, with their bloods, and such as Christ
himself has appointed witnesses to him, Act. 1.8. and all concurring in this
Testimony. So that the witnesses are beyond exception.

2 See the evidence thereof in the Gospel, where it is revealed, Romans 1.17. See
it there shining with its own light; it was more implicit and veiled
heretofore, it was but darkly proposed in the Law and the Prophets formerly,
but in the Gospel it appears as the Sun in the firmament, in all its luster and
brightness.

3 Labor for a deep apprehension and sense of this righteousness of God, it is
a proved truth, that both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, Romans 3.9. -- 21. and
he adds, that it is written, there is none righteous, no not one, and verse.
19. all the world is guilty before God, and nothing but the righteousness of
God will remove this guilt.

4 Consider the nearness of Gods righteousness, Isa 46.13. I will bring near
my righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry.
Isa. 50.8. He is near that justifies me, etc. 1 In that this righteousness
is the righteousness of God-man, Romans 5.15, 17. By the obedience of one man,
etc. 2 It is the righteousness of Faith, Romans 9.30. it is made ours by faith. 3
This is wrought and applied in the Ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.10.

Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
THE TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.21, 22. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Even the righteousness
of God which is by the faith of Jesus Christ.


REmission of sins and Imputation of righteousness go always together, Romans
4.6, 7. There are not two parts of Justification, but distinguished by the
terms from which, and to which; as all by one act darkness is expelled, and
light brought in.

Doct. 2. That the righteousness of God is Imputed to believers, or is
conveyed to believers by way of Imputation. 1 Imputation is not expressed in
the Text, but its necessarily employed and understood: for the righteousness of
God cannot be conceived any way to be man's, but only by way of Imputation.
Because it is not righteousness, that is, or can be wrought by a mere man.

2 Though inherent righteousness in Believers may be called Gods righteousness,
as some take Matthew. 6.33. yet the Apostle cannot mean that here: because he
speaks of righteousness without the Law, and the works of the Law: besides, the
Apostle treats here of Justification, as it is plain; but inherent
righteousness belongs to sanctification.

3 It is said, that the righteousness of God [is to all, and upon all that
beleeve] that is, it is appointed unto them, upon them, i.e. accounted theirs,
or put upon them by way of Imputation.

4 It is the righteousness of God by faith, i.e. apprehended by faith; Other
Scriptures do consent to this truth. Romans 4.6, 11. as David describes the
righteousness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness, without works,
viz. of his own, verse. 11. righteousness imputed to all believers, verse. 24. It
was not written for Abraham only, but for us to whom it shall be imputed; if
we believe in him who raised up Jesus from the dead. So 2 Cor. 5 21. we are
made the righteousness of God in him, not in our selves; 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is
made to us of God, righteousness: and that is no other way than by Imputation.
The same is proved by those places, where it is said, Faith is imputed for
righteousness, Romans 4.5. for faith considered as a quality inherent in us, can
be no more imputed for righteousness than other graces, that are infused by
the same Spirit of God: therefore this must needs be understood in regard of
the object of faith, which is Christ, and his saving righteousness, which faith
does apprehend; hence Rom 4.5, To him that works not, but believes, etc.

For the opening of this, something had need be said concerning Imputation of
the righteousness of Christ, because it is a term that the Papists do Cavil at,
taking the Scripture word (...) to signify Thinking, or doubtful opinion; for
how can that be ascribed to God, as this is? Romans 4.6. but the word signifies
to Reckon, or Account, taken by a borrowed speech from Merchants reckonings and
accounts, who have their debt-books wherein they set down, how their reckonings
stand in the particulars they deal upon. Now in such debt-books, Merchants use
to set down whatever payments are only made, either by the debtors themselves,
or by others in the behalf of them, an example whereof we have in the Epistle
to Philemon, verse. 18. where Paul undertakes to Philemon for Onesimus, If he
has wronged thee, or owes thee any thing, put that on my account: i.e.
Account Onesimus his debt to Paul, and Paul's satisfaction, or payment to
Onesimus. Which Answers the double Imputation in Point of justification, i.e.
of our sin to Christ, and of Christ's satisfaction to us, both which are
employed, 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us (i.e. our sin was imputed
to him) that we might be the righteousness of God in him (i.e. his
righteousness might be imputed to us.) Now the Imputing Christ's righteousness
unto us is,

A Gracious act of God the Father, Definition of Imputation.
according to his good will and pleasure, whereby as a judge he accounts the
Believers sins unto the surety, as if he had committed the same; and the
righteousness of Christ unto the beleeever, as if he had performed the same
obedience that Christ did, in his own person. So that Christ's imputed
righteousness is as effectual to the full, for the acceptance of the believing
sinner, as if he had yielded such obedience to the Lord himself: hence his
righteousness, is called our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. It is true, there is
mention of a double imputation, Romans 4.4, 5. now to him that works, is the
reward reckoned, not of grace, but of debt; but to him that works not, etc.
Here be two Imputations, the one has the ground in him to whom the Imputation
is made; the other is founded on the will of him that imputes. If any man does
perfectly perform those things that the Law commands, the reward of
righteousness is imputed to him according to debt; for this has the foundation
in himself, and his perfect performance; but if a man works not, but having
transgressed the Law, believes, to him the reward of righteousness is
accounted according to grace: for it has a foundation out of himself, in
another performance, viz. in Christ. Which the Apostle proves, verse. 5. To him
that works not, etc. If the imputation should be made, according to the
foundation that is in himself, sin should be imputed to condemnation, for he
is ungodly; but now faith is accounted to the ungodly for righteousness;
therefore this must be founded on the grace of him that imputes. The former
kind of imputation is only by way of supposition, and no man was ever
justified by it in the sight of God: but the latter is the common way, whereby
Abraham and all believers are justified in Gods sight.

Object. It seems to be an unrighteous act, and implies falsehood, to impute
righteousness to a sinner; as it is to impute sin to a righeeous person, Prove.
17.15. To justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, are both an
abomination to the Lord, and the contrary is reputed an act of Gods justice, 1
King. 8.32. Exodus 34.7.

Answ. It is against Law and justice to justify the wicked without cause, when
there is no satisfaction made by the offender himself, or by any other on his
behalf, suitable to the will of the persons offended, and persons concerned do
consent: but now when God justifies, and imputes righteousness to the ungodly,
having received a full and sufficient satisfaction by his sons obedience; this
is no unjustice at all, but every way most just: the Lord Jesus and the father
being content, and consenting to it.

2 There is no falsehood in this imputation of righteousness; because God can
call things that are not, as though they were, Romans 4.17. and he does truly
make those righteous, whom he justifies by his imputed righteousness, Romans
8.4. that the righteousness of God might be fulfilled in us, which if it be
meant of imputed righteousness (as it is commonly taken) the phrase shows it
to be as really ours, as if we had done it our selves: if it be taken of
inherent righteousness (as some of the learned take it) it shows, that where
this imputed righteousness is, there is also inherent, as an effect thereof:
though it be but imperfect, begun, and an effect of the former.

Object. But this imputed righteousness is but a work of the thought, and
Cogitation only, and is not a real matter, therefore is not to be rested in.

Answ. This Righteousness that is imputed, is really given to believers, it is
called the gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. that which is given, is really our
own, to all such purposes wherein it may concern us.

Object. But if Christ's righteousness be Imputed to us, then it seems to
follow, that the believer is as righteous as Christ, and therefore every
believer is a redeemer, and a Savior of others: for Christ was so?

Answ. This will not follow; because 1 The believer is still a sinner in
himself, so was not Jesus Christ the righteous. 2 Because the virtue that is in
the head, is communicated to all the members, it does not therefore follow that
every member is thereby made a head, to have such an influence into all the
other members as the head has. 3 Redeemer, Savior, Surety, etc. are
denominations, proper to him as he is a paymaster, and satisfier of the Law in
the behalf of others; and not as any thing is due from himself; and although
his righteousness by a Legal Imputation to us, and acceptance on our behalf,
is called ours, and we may be properly said to be righteous in his
righteousness: yet his surety-ship (as such) cannot be imputed ours: hence
none of those denominations, as of Savior, Redeemer, etc. So that though we be
pay-masters and satisfiers of the Law, under this imputation, and by Gods
account, yet we are not therefore sureties or redeemers. For it is proper to us
only to be redeemed, not to be redeemers.

So that the righteousness of Christ, whereby he satisfies the Law, is applied
by imputation to the believer: not his Surety-ship, Redeemer-ship, because
proper only to the Redeemer, and not communicable to the redeemed, so much as
by imputation, for Redeemer and Redeemed are Relata ergo opposita: neither does
the Law in demanding Satisfaction, look at Surety-ship, but payment: whether it
be in the person of the offender, or of the surety. Therefore this objection
falls to the ground as vain and frivolous: for though the Law calls a sinner
perfectly righteous in his justification, yet it calls him not a surety, or a
Redeemer, for the Law calls not for a Surety, etc. but accounts the sinner as
righteous touching the demands of the Law, as one that never brake the Law,
yea, as the Surety himself made under the Law, for satisfaction to the Law, by
Active or Passive Obedience, do equally dismiss, or acquit the person that is
under it, from the Guilt, Curse, or Condemnation of it.

Reas. 1. Taken from the union of the believer with Christ; for being once made
one with Christ, all his benefits become his; so that the righteousness of the
head is communicated to all his members. The ointment on the head of Aaron, ran
down on his skirts and members. Thus Paul desired to be found in Christ, not
having his own righteousness, Phil. 3.9. he desired the righteousness which
is through faith, i. e. imputed righteousness, apprehended by faith: and he
shows the reason why it is made the believers, because we are found in him:
that is, ingrafted into his Mystical body, and are made one Mystical person
with him: and this will serve to answer Popish objections.

Obj. How can a man be made righteous by another man's righteousness, more
than rich by another man's riches?

Ans. Though the righteousness be compared to a Garment in Scripture, yet the
Person of Christ is really united to the believer, which cannot be spoken of a
garment. Besides also, Christ's imputed righteousness, there is also imparted
righteousness.

Reas. 2. From the compar son between the first and second Adam: for as Adams
transgression of the Law of God, is imputed to all his posterity, and that in
respect thereof they are reputed sinners, and accursed, and liable to eternal
death; so also Christ's obedience, whereby he fulfilled the Law, is so imputed
to the members of his Mystical body, that in regard of God they stand as
innocent, justified, and accepted to eternal life. The Argument is Paul's, Romans
5.19. As by one man's disobedience, many are made sinners, so by the obedience
of one, shall many be made righteous. Verse. 17. As by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. As Adam was
the common root of all Mankind, and so his sin is imputed to all his posterity;
so Jesus Christ is the common root of all the faithful, and his obedience is
imputed to them all. For it were absurd to say, that Adams sin had more power
to condemn, than Christ's righteousness has to save: or that God should not
impute Christ's righteousness, as well as Adams sin.

Reas. 3. Because we are justified by another righteousness, and that only;
and therefore by imputed righteousness; for another righteousness can no
other way be made ours, but only by imputation. Now that is in the text, that
it is Gods righteousness that the believer has, yea that is more, that there
is but that only righteousness for all believers. So Romans 5.18. By the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men for justification of
life. Were it any other than imputed righteousness, it would be manifold; as
many as there are justified persons; but it is said to be the righteousness of
one, that comes upon all men.

Reas. 4. From the imputation of our sins to Christ; for therein is a
sufficient ground of the imputatatio of his righteousness to us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
How was Christ made Sin for us? Not sin inherent, for he had no sin: but by
imputation. So likewise the believer is made Gods righteousness; not by
inherent righteousness, but by righteousness imputed.

Use 1. To men that trust in inherent righteousness.
To show us the unjustified estate of those that trust in some inherent
righteousness, as looking to be justified thereby. Which is not only the
cursed Doctrine of the Papists (for then I should not trouble you, or my self,
now with it) but it is deeply in every carnal heart: that we are naturally
justifiers of our selves (such as the Pharisees were) which is so dangerous a
gulf, that there is this double inevitable danger following thereupon.

1 That confidence in our own righteousness, does utterly exclude us from the
righteousness of God, and imputed righteousness. Christ is made of none effect
to them that seek to be justified by the works of the Law, Romans 10.3, 4. Gal.
5.4. It is in this case with the soul of a man, as it is with his body. Though
a deadly disease does possess most of the parts, yet it may be curable; but
where the throat swells, or the vital passages are stopped up, that a man can
receive neither food nor physic, every man will say, that such a Patient is
but a dead man. So it is in the souls case. True it is, that every sin is of a
deadly nature, and some more than others; Drunkenness, and Adultery, and
Murder are foul sins; yet there is an Hysop in Christ's Blood that cleansed
David from them: but if a man trust in his own righteousness, this stops the
Windpipe and the throat, yea obstructs all the passages of the spirits from
the head: so that it strangles the soul, that it can receive no help from
Christ; As the case was with the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12.

2 This maks a man unprofitable under all the means of grace, be they never so
precious: that a proud Professor in many a year shall be never the better for
them. Jer. 17.5, 6. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, for he shall be like the
heath in the Desert, and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the
parched places in the Wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited. Mark, in
the place are these particulars.

1 The text reaches to trusting in our selves, as well as trusting in others:
it is trusting in man, and flesh.

2 It extends to all false confidence, that is, in a departure of the heart
from God.

3 That whatsoever good comes to others, be it Spiritual or Temporal, such
shall not see it, or enjoy it; the parched Heath is not the better for Sun or
Rain; i. e. for any means of grace; all the preaching in the world shall never
pluck a man into a state of Salvation, whilst he continues in such a
condition, or be made to bring forth any fruit unto God; for all our fruit
proceeds from Jesus Christ; neither will there ever be any saving grace
wrought in the heart, unless he be the root and bottom of it; from whose
righteousnesle all sap, nourishment, motion, yea all vital spirits are to be
drawn.

Qu. But suppose a man does not altogether trust in his own righteousness, but
only in part, and in some lower degree, is there such danger in this? so that
Christ's righteousness be our foundation, and our own righteousness in
trusted in an inferior degree, is there likely to be so much hazard of our
salvation in this.

Ans. It is but just thus with the Papists, that divide their confidence
between Christ's righteousness, and their own, in the point of Justification.
But Paul was not of their mind, who would have none of his own works, Phil.
3.9. and David, who says, Psalm. 71.16. I will make mention of thy
righteousness, and thine only. Mark the Emphasis doubled, thine, and thine
only. It is a great policy of Satan in this case to tell us, that it is good to
have two strings to our bow: that if one break, another may hold, and so two
are better than one. It is true, such policy is many times lawful in humane
affairs, and some Spiritual, but stark naught in the point of justification.
There must be but one only righteousness, and that must be Gods too. It is
observable among Naturalists, that for the generality, the parts of the body
are doubled, two hands, two eyes, two Tongues (the Palate being Lingula, a
little Tongue) the Liver double (the Spleen being a little Liver) the Lungs
also (having two Lobbes or parts) two Legs, etc. but there is but one Heart,
and but one Head. So there are many graces required in a Christian, but there
is but one Lord, one Faith, one Righteousness, but if there be more it is
monstrous, yea dangerous too, as it was with the vessel in Acts 27.41. Whose
fore part ran a ground, and stuck fast; and the hinder part was broken with the
violence of the sea. So he that trusts partly on Christ's Righteousness, and
partly on his own, will hazard the wracking and undoing of his whole soul, in
resting any part on the ground of his own own righteousness.

But here are two Cavils to be removed.

Obj. 1. Carnal persons will say, Is it so, that all our own righteousness,
our praying, hearing, receiving, reading, etc. cannot justify us? and all our
holy duties cannot make us righteous before God? let us then cast away all care
about these things; let us riot, and be drunk, and profane the Sabbath, and
live as we list, for all our righteousness and holiness will not justify or
save us.

Ans. This Objection smells of Popery too, but take these three particulars for
answer.

1 Why duties are to be done, though they do not justify.
That howsoever thy good works are not enough to justify and save thee, thy
evil works are enough to damn thee, Romans 2.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. That they might
all be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness; let all profane wretches consider it, that take pleasure in
drunkenness, and loose conversation, that gibe and jeer at all holiness, and
means of grace. There is room enough in Hell for every one that does evil, and
especially, who living under the Gospel, yet delight in wicked courses. It is
sure thy evil works are perfectly evil, and will condemn thee; but thy good
works are not perfectly good, therefore cannot justify thee: nay, thy prayers
are abominable, Prove. 13.8. As the best diet is not able to make a man
immortal, yet poison has strength enough quickly to dispatch him.

2 They that do thus abuse Gods grace in Christ, let them know, that as any
sin allowed is enough to condemn them, so this is a sin of unconceiveable
hainousness, and out of measure sinful, to encourage themselves to sin by the
grace of God in Christ; That whereas Christ came into the world, to destroy the
works of the Devil, they make Christ the means to maintain the works of the
Devil, and say, We will therefore sin, because grace abounds, Romans 6.1. but
the Apostle says with detestation, far be it; Oh despisest thou the riches
of Christ, Romans 2.4. thou who live within the bounds of the Gospel preached,
where the Angels descended from Heaven, to hear and rejoice in the free grace
of God, and his righteousness, do thou despise it? then thy profaneness is
not bare profaneness, but there is a treasure of vengeance in it, and thou
that wilt neglect public, private, and secret duties, because they cannot
justify thee; art not only wickedly profane, but treasurest up the greatest
wrath and indignation, that Law and Gospel can provide for a sinner. Therefore
pray, that if it be possible the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

3 Let all such Objectors, and Cavillers at grace, know, that it is carnal
confi ence in our own righteousness, or in the means of grace, that is a sin
that touches Gods Crown, that turns all our righteousness into filthiness, and
withdraws the blessing from the means, and hinders the benefit and comfort of
them; The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, how much more when he
brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21.27. The Jews followed after the Law
of righteousness, yet attained not unto it; the reason is, because they
followed after a false righteousness, and so brought all their sacrifices with
wicked hearts. But those things which were gain to Paul, he accounted loss for
Christ, Phil. 3.7. that is, when ever he put any confidence in them, he
counted that he lost by them, and so assuredly will thou.

Obj. 2. Again, some men will say, Why should we hear, and pray, and sanctify
the Sabbath? continue in sin we may not, and it seems the doing of duties will
do us no good? what good shall we have by all our righteous courses, and what
profit is it to walk mournfully and holily before the Lord, and what use is
there of all other services, if we cannot be juslified by them?

Ans. Yea, there is a great use of them, and much good to had by them. I will
not enlarge this now, but take a few things for your present satisfaction. See
Tit. 3.4, 5. where the Apostle tells us, of the appearing of the kindness and
love of God toward us, for justification by Free Grace, and then a man might
say, to what purpose is good works enjoined, if not for justification? He
adds, verse. 14. Let ours learn to maintain good works for necessary uses. So
there are uses, and necessary uses for our good works, though they are useless
as to justification. So that it is as if a man should say, What shall I do
with my money, seeing I cannot eat it? and my house, seeing I cannot carry it
about? etc. but no reasonable man will argue so, but will say, I can buy meat
with my money, and dwell in my house, etc. So there are other necessary uses for
which Gods works are to be maintained, though they justify not.

1 God will meet thee in the way of good works, Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him
that rejoices; and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy
ways. Is it nothing to meet with God, and to have fellowship with him in his
ways, worship, and ordinances?

2 God shall have a great deal of glory by it. Be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God,
Phil. 1.11.

3 You your selves shall have much benefit thereby. Thy righteousness may
profit the Sons of men, Job 35.8. though it cannot profit God.

Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
THE ONE AND TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.21, 22. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Even the righteousness
of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ.


Use 2. IT is for trial of our Justification be fore God, which is of the
greatest concernment in the world to be cleared to our Consciences, and it was
the greatest question in Jobs time, Job 25.4. How shall a man be justified
with God? How shall it be? truly it is only by imputed Righteousness: and if
we can prove this imputation upon good grounds, we are justified, and shall be
glorified.

Q. How may we groundedly conclude, that Gods righteousness it imputed to us?

Tri. Trials of imputed righteousness.
1. It appears by our pulling down of man's righteousness. It is the nature of
it to throw down all other righteousness, as to the business of
Justification. It is an undoubted effect, of the ignorance of Christ's
righteousness, to go about to establish our own righteousness, Romans 10.3.
now the phrase is taken from the setting up of a King, 1 Samuel 15.11. or the
setting up of a God, as a Chron. 25.24. besides, submitting our selves to the
righteousness of God, implies as much, viz. the sovereignty or rule that Gods
righteousness requires of Sinners; and the Apostle says, Gods Kingdom stands
in it. Now this pulling down of man's righteousness, it is as the pulling down
of one Magistrate, and setting up another in his stead, as Isa. 22.19. and when
he is down from his place and dignity, no man will respect him, or expect any
Government or Power from him; so in this case, the believer gives no respect
to, or makes any account of his own righteousness; he looks at it as dross
and dung, as Paul did: he expects no acquittance or discharge by it from his
sin, or any healing virtue in it. But on the contrary, whatever sins a
Justitiary commits or lives in, he thinks with himself he can heal himself
again at pleasure, by some services he can perform. He will fast, and pray,
and hear, and be sorry, and amend, and then all will be well. It was the guise
of the people, Jer. 7.4 that cried, the Temple of the Lord; to whom the Lord
said, Verse. 10, 11. Will ye steal, and murder, and commit adultery, etc. See
the like, Ezekiel. 23.37-40. It is so with a false heart that lives in any vile
course, when his Conscience is awakened, he has his God immediately to give him
a pardon, it is but humbling my self a little the more, and praying a little
the more, and so he will make God amends: this is setting up our own
righteousness, and Mountebanklike, who can wound himself, and drink poison,
and heal himself with his Balsoms and Antidotes at his pleasure. See Ezekiel.
33.13. If the righteous trust to his righteousness, and commit iniquity, all
his righteousness shall not be remembered; trusting in righteousness, and
committing iniquity go together, so that there is always a slighting of some
sin, wheresoever there is confidence in our own righteousness.

2 Imputed Righteousness is always accompanied with Inherent, 1 John 3.7. He
that does righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous, and Romans 8.4.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Now this is the righteousness of regeneration
and sanctification: which although it be Legal for the matter of it, yet it is
of Grace, and flows from imputed righteousness, as from its spring. Now the
doing of righteousness is not the bare performing of duties, but the doing of
them from the heart, out of conscience toward God, and constantly for Gods
ends. It is our yielding up our members unto God, Romans 6.13. Such an one will
endeavor to give God and man his due, in his whole conversation. Let no man
deceive you, says John, etc. as if he should say, every unjust person will be
laying claim to the righteousness of Christ in the midst of his allowed
wickedness: but know, that imputed righteousness brings forth righteous fruits
in the heart.

3 Imputed righteousness is always joined with poverty of spirit, habitual
humility, and self abasement: that is a mavelous low apprehension of a man's
self, or whatever he has, or does, ever did, or can do, so as to expect by
virtue thereof any acceptance with the Lord. Paul is an eminent example of
this, Phil. 3.6, 7. Paul a Pharisee was very strict, touching the
righteousness of the Law, blameless, and had many other privileges which he
before accounted gain to him; but now thinks them loss. How can that be? can a
man be a loser by his righteousness? zeal, strictness? yea, the greatest loser
in the world, when he exchangeth Christ's righteousness for them: so that when
a man thinks he is rich enough in his privileges and duties (as Laodicea) and
therefore will not look out after the riches of Christ, he is an undone man,
but now Paul looks at Christ as his only gain. As if he should say, I am a very
loser by my righteousness, it had been better for me never to have had it,
than that it should hinder me from Christ. (Beloved) this will be the frame of
heart in him that has imputed righteousness; but he that is full with his
Duties, and Parts, and Gifts, will be ready to slight Christ. Why, he has
such gains coming in this way, that though he profess Christ and his
righteousness, yet he makes little account of him. And so will prove at last
like the proud Pharisee, Luke 18. to despise and slight the parts and duties
of sincere-hearted justified Publicans, and go away himself at last unjustified.

Use 3. Comfort.
Comfort unto believers in regard of this imputed Righteousness of God unto
them. It is truly the very well of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. whence flow all other
streams of Comfort, and the faithful may with joy continually draw waters of
life from it. Yea, that which David speaks of the Church, That all his springs
were in her, is grounded upon this, that the righteousness of Christ is held
forth in the Church of Christ, Zach. 13.1.

The grounds of Comfort are many. In want of inherent righteousness.


1 It serves in the want of inherent righteousness, whereby the soul may stand
as accepted before God. It was the complaint of the Church, Isa. 64.6. We are
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy rags. This is
sometime a great sinking to the soul, that he has no sufficient righteousness
to make him accepted before God. The Church her self could see abundance of
filthiness in her righteousness, how much more can the Lord? But the comfort
of a believer is, that although he has no righteousness of his own, wherein
he can stand before God; yet he has Gods righteousness, which is far better
than his own, and such as in Gods account goes for his, as if he had done it
himself. As the poor unrighteous Gentiles find, they have attained to
righteousness, that which is of faith. Romans 9.30, 33. They have attained, i. e.
they have reached to it. And this is no less than the name of God, that
transcendent, excellent name, that poor sinners attain unto. For the branch
Christ Jesus is called by the name of Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.6.
where mark, 1 To be called by this name is to be so really, for Christ is
never called what he is not, and so he is to the same purpose called
Immanuel, Mat. 1.23 i.e. he shall be so indeed, God with us; so here, he
shall be called our Righteousness, and he is so indeed. 2 This is one of his
glorious names, that is one of his attributes, which he accounts his
excellency, and the attributes of Christ are unchangeable; So that he can as
easily change his nature as his name.

3 In his days Judah shall be saved, i.e. By this righteousness the Church
is become truly righteous.
In his days the Church of God in all ages successively shall be saved; and
herein stands the salvation of the Church, i.e. in the Messiah, who is Jehovah
our Righteousness. Now compare this fore-quoted place, with Jerem. 33.16.
where this name is also given to the Church, In those days Judah shall be
saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the Name wherewith she
shall be called, Jehovah our Righteousness. That which was spoken before of
Christ, in the latter place is spoken of a woman, that is the Church: She is
called in the days of the Messiah, The Lord our Righteousness.

It is wonderful that this should be spoken of poor sinners: but the Church is
so called, as being one with Christ, and having Christ's righteousness imputed
unto her. Go too now, ye poor brokenhearted sinners, ye dismayed souls, that
are affrighted at the report of the Judgment to come; which indeed must needs
be dreadful to every sinner; your Name, which is the name of Christ, is enough
to comfort and support you. Gods righteousness is become yours. You may plead
it now, and it will plead for you, and stand by you in the evil day, when you
cannot be without such a perfect righteousness: and though then all others
that are not righteous in this righteousness shall be deserted of their
righteousness and Gods too: yet you shall have this righteousness about you;
and Christ deeming himself so highly concerned in your case, that he will be
known to poor believers by that Name of Jehovah our Righteousness. Yea, they
themselves shall be called by that Name; and is there any fear that Jehovah
our Righteousness should be condemned?

1 Because this Righteousness is of infinite value and worth.

2 It cannot be lost, Dan. 9.24.

3 It is unchangeable; the Sun of Righteousness has no shadow of change in
him, though the Moon be subject to it.

4 It is unspotted and without blemish, therefore God cannot mislike it.

5 It is in a sure hand, and cannot be lost.

2. All our inherent righteousness accepted.
Comf. This imputed righteousness has procured acceptance for our inherent
righteousness. The faithful do many times complain of their inability to do
good duties; the weaknesses of their Prayers, and the imperfections of them,
and the many infirmities in all other services and performances; but this
imputed righteousness shall bring forth these infirm, weak, sinful,
performances, perfect, spotless, and sinless, and approved according to the
Tenor of the Gospel; so that they become spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5. For
as there is an imputation of righteousness to the persons of believers: so
there is also an imputation to their services and actions. As the fact of
Phineas was imputed to him for righteousness, Psalm. 106.31. So the imperfect
good works that are done by the faithful, are accounted righteousness; Or (as
Mr. Calvin says) are accounted for righteousness; they being dipped in the
blood of Christ (tincta sanguine Christi) i.e. they are accounted righteous
actions; and so the faithful shall be judged according to their good works,
though not saved for them: and in that famous process of the last judgment,
Matthew. 25.34, 35. the supreme Judge makes mention of the bounty and liberality
of the faithful: and so bestows the eternal inheritance upon them; so that
though we have great cause to be troubled for the weaknesses of our best
duties, as they are in themselves; yet we have wonderful cause of comfort,
that they are made perfect through Jesus Christ. Heb. 13.20, 21. and that the
Lord looks at them, (through the righteousness of Christ) as fruits of his own
Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.11. The Son of Righteousness has healing enough in his wings
for all our spiritual maladies. Mal. 4.2. And shall bring forth all our
righteousness as the light: and here believers have exceeding strong
consolation, and good hope through grace, that both persons and services do
find acceptance with the Lord: as having no spot nor blemish at all in them.
So that, This is our blessedness, to have righteousness Imputed, Romans 4.5, 6.

Use 4. Let it be the care of every soul to labor for, and seek earnestly
after this imputed righteousness. Oh be convinced of this, that we must have
a perfect righteousness to stand before Gods judgment Seat with. Therefore
the ungodly shall not stand (but be cast) in Judgment, nor Sinners in the
(general) assembly of the righteous. Psalm. 1.5, 6.

The ungodly shall stand to be judged, but they shall not stand accepted and
approved. It will be our happiness one day (as Paul) to be found in Christ.
Oh! woe be to that soul, that the Lord finds, or death finds, or sickness
finds, or judgment finds, without imputed righteousness. To move you.

Mativ. 1. This is the first righteousness, and there cannot be inherent
righteousness before imputed, Romans 5.19. And without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. It is a great mistake, to help our selves on our own
reformations, and good duties. Till Faith, we cannot please God with any
performance.

Motiv. 2. This is the end of all the book of God, to bring a poor sinner to
this imputed righteousness. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness. etc. that is, the end of the Law, was not that a sinner should
seek to be justified thereby, seeing that when it is broken, (...) can only
condemn a man: But this is the main end of the Law, that it is directed unto
Christ, where the sinner may find imputed righteousness. But now this end
does not pertain to the Law as such, as it contains the Covenant of Works; for
so it consists in man only, and exacts perfect obedience at his hands, upon
pain of the curse, and eternal condemnation: neither has any reference unto
Christ, but as the law is turned into another way, into the Channel of the
Gospel; to be a promoter and help to the Covenant of Grace, and as an handmaid
to the Grace of Jesus Christ. Therefore Christ's righteousness is so imputed to
believers, that in it, they have the end of the Law, and the law it self does
acknowledge, that in Christ's righteousness it has attained its end. Hence
well might the Apostle say, the Jews followed after righteousness, yet
attained not to the Law of Righteousness, Romans 9.31. because they missed
Christ; and therefore the Law must thus needs miss its end. But by imputed
righteousness we do fully attain to the end of the law, and the end is more
excellent still than the means. It gives perfection, measure, and amiableness,
to the means. Now this end should make us love and highly esteem the Law it
self. But how much more the Gospel, seeing it is not only the end of it, but
the main drift, subject, and scope of it, properly as such; Romans 1, 16, 17. I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of God, for therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, etc. This then is the main end, and proper work,
and scope of the Gospel, to reveal effectually the righteousness of God to a
sinner. So that we are aiming here at the right mark, and very intent and
scope of the whole book of God: Where we have an eye to this righteness, and
press after it. But if we miss it, and slight it we slight and miss all the
benefit of the Scripture, and whole book of God; and all the work of the
ministry is in vain, our praying, hearing, reforming, and all in vain. Oh (then
beloved) as we love either Law, or Gospel, or both; yea, as we love our own
souls, let this righteousness be in our eye, and in our hearts, by all means
and endeavors.

Mot. 3. Herein lies all the strength of a Christian, Psalm. 7.16. I will go
forth in the strength of the Lord God, and make mention of thy righteousness,
even thine only.

Quest. By what means may we attain to this imputed righteousness?

Answ. There be many helps, and diverse directions, given or hinted in the
Scripture to this purpose. 1 That a man must close with the righteousness of
Christ, he must renounce his own righteousness.

Quest. How should a man come to renounce his own righteousness?

Answ. There are two sorts of Actions required to this end, 1 In the
Understanding. 2 In the Will.


1 Something must be wrought in the understanding, as appears, Rev. 3.17, 18.
Laodicea knew not that she was wretched, and miserable, and blind, etc. I
Counsel thee to anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see, i.e.
her self to be blind and miserable, etc. The soul must be convinced of the
inconceivable misery of its natural estate, that every Child of Adam has lost
all righteousness, being dead in sin, a Child of wrath, and under the power
of the Devil. Romans 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there
dwells no good thing. Mat. 7.18. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit. Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God. This eye salve,
to bring this discovery by opening our eyes, must be had of, and derived from
the Lord Jesus; and it is called the Spirits conviction, Joh. 16.8. The
Spirit's convincing the world of sin.

2 The second thing is Conviction of the righteousness of God, Joh. 16.9. For
it is the ignorance of Gods righteousness that makes us trust in our own. It is
exceeding requisite, to have a discovery of the righteousness of Christ made
unto us, this white raiment, that we may buy it to cover our nakedness, and
that we may see this raiment, we have need of Christ's eye salve, and this is
not a general discovery only, that Christ's righteousness is provided for
sinners, and that it is to be attained, but it is particular and respecting
our selves. It is for a man to be wise for himself, and to be convinced of
the nature, worth, and excellency of the righteousness of Christ, in relation
to the naked and needy condition that he himself is in; And this will make a
man desire, as Paul, that he may be found in him. It also breeds deliberate
thoughts, and serious projects for the supplying our wants. Besides, it is so
strong and effectual, that it will not suffer the soul to rest without it, and
concludes thus, I must go unto Christ for his righteousness, or else I perish.
This being backed with infallible, and undeniable arguments, taking such
impressure in the knowledge and judgment, must needs set the will and
affections on work, to go to choosing this so great bonum apparens, or rather
real good, now appearing, presented unto them.

2 The next main duty concerns the will, and its subjection to this
righteousness, and it is spoken of by Paul, Romans 10.3. That the Jews would not
submit to it. Now this submission is especially of the heart and will, and
stands,

1 In a serious renouncing of all confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. it is the
resolving to say no more to the works of our hands, that they are our Gods,
Hos. 14.3. It is a kind of habitual despair of all help, by any thing in us,
or done by us; and that not only in our first conversion, but afterward when
the soul is more acquainted with God, and with its own self.

2 In the subjecting our selves to Gods righteousness, the bowing and abasing
the soul before the Lord, in a through sight of our misery and unworthiness,
and this is called the receiving the sentence of death in our selves, 2 Cor.
1.10. to become an afflicted and poor people, that will trust in the name of
the Lord; for it is nothing but pride that keeps up the heart above God and his
righteousness.

3 In the hastening of the soul unto Christ and his righteousness, a laboring
constantly to go beyond the means, though a man shall use the means never so
diligently. As it is with the Mariner, though his hand be upon the Oar and
Helm, yet his heart is ever toward the Haven: So it is with the Sinner, that
longs after the satisfaction of Christ; though his hand be on the means, yet
his heart is on the righteousness of Christ, 1 To make the means powerful on
the soul, to bring it to Christ, to be as wind to his Sails. For if a ship
have never so good tackling, and have no wind, and be becalmed, it makes no
speed toward its haven. 2 He sees the need of Christ to cover the weaknesses
of his services; and for this his heart is on Christ's righteousness: seeing
that no sacrifice will be accepted, but what comes through the hands of this
High Priest; who is also the only Altar, Heb. 13.10. 3 As the substantial
enjoyment in all means and ordinances. These he looks at but as dishes, to
bring to him the bread of life in: and dishes are only for the meats sake. He
looks at them but as boats to bring him to Christ; and therefore intends to
dwell in them, no longer than he is on his journey; and therefore he often
stirs up himself to lay hold on Christ.

4 In a considerate, serious, deliberate choice of Christ, or the passing over
the spiritual and everlasting estate to the Lord Jesus; and this is the
frequent casting the soul upon the righteousness of Christ, Psalm. 91.16. and
it is a work of faith and prayer, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times
ye people, etc. Pour out your hearts before him, or roll your hearts upon
him; and all this is the Lords working, and he must be mightily entreated, to
do this great work for us.

Use 5. It is a ground of everlasting Thank fullness unto God, for all believing
sinners, That the God of all grace has thus provided for their eternal peace.
What an Incomparable mercy is it, that the Lord when he finds his poor Church
and People in their blood, polluted, and cast forth; That he should love them,
and spread his skirt over them, Ezekiel. 16.8, etc. That he should cover their
nakedness, anoint them with oil, cloth them with broidered work, fine
linen, etc. the very description of the justification of a sinner. What a
wonderful love is it, that makes a Great Monarch take a beggar in rags and
nastinesse, and marry her to himself? yet it is the King of Glory does so with
us. Oh let us magnify the Lord for this great mercy, and think often upon his
love, and take heed of the Sin of the Church of the Jews: verse. 15. They
trusted in their own beauty, and so went a whoring away from Christ. But take
heed of so much as speaking in thy heart, for my righteousness the Lord has
done this, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. understand, that it is not for thy righteousness, for
thou art a stiff-necked people. It is spoken of bringing of the people into
the land of Canaan, but apply it to the present point. Ezekiel. 36.32. when the
Lord had spoken of Justification, etc. he adds, not for your sakes do I do
this says the Lord God, be it known unto you, be ashamed, and confounded,
etc. still the Lord beats upon this in all the mercies he bestows, that it is
not for our sakes, or for our righteousness: we must all know and understand
this. So Tit. 3.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.8. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. He is made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, etc. That he that glories might glory in the Lord.
Let not the dunghill boast it self of the Sun, because it shines upon it:
neither let us boast of our selves because the Sun of righteousness shines
upon us. But let us glory in this, that the Lord of his rich grace (not for the
least worth in our selves) has clothed us with the Fleece, and washed us in
the blood of the Immaculate Lamb of God.

Of Gods Righteousness Imputed to Believers.
THE TWO AND TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.21. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe: for there is no difference.


I Have treated of the chief Points here intended, that is the righteousness
of God, and that conveyed by way of Imputation; and there is one particular
more that belongs to the principal Scope of the Apostle; which is of Passive
Justification by Faith: and the Apostle seems to dwell upon this, that he may
point out the persons to whom Justification belongs; i. e. Believers; and he
expresses it,

First, The righteousness of God which is through the Faith of Jesus Christ.
That sets forth the Instrument, apprehending and laying hold upon Gods
righteousness, that is Faith, illustrated by the Object of it, Jesus Christ.

2 It is said to be unto all,

3 Upon all that believe.

For the understanding whereof, we are to know, that which also was said
before, That the Faith of Jesus Christ is not to be conceived Actively, to
signify the faith whereby Christ believed, but Passively, the faith whereby
Christ is believed on. So it holds forth, that Faith as it justifies, has
Christ especially for the object of it; that is, That it is faith in the Lord
Jesus, that especially justifies a sinner in the sight of God. There be many
other things, though believed and apprehended by faith, yet do not justify a
sinner. But it is faith in Christ Jesus, that especially justifies. Act. 16.31.
But because this latter has been handled in part before, I shall not now
insist upon it.

Quest. What is meant by that phrase, or those phrases, unto all, and upon all
that believe?

Answ. Some understand the former [unto all] to belong to the Jews, that did or
shall believe: and the latter [upon all that beleeve] to belong to the
believing Gentiles: but this Exposition, does not show us the reason of the
change of the Prepositions: Therefore I prefer another sense, viz. that [unto
all] signifies Gods decree of the justification of all believers. 2 That [upon
all] signifies the execution of the decree, in the fullness of time to all
believers, and only to them. God in his eternal Counsel appointed this grace
to all believers, and only to them: and God in his good providence imputes it,
and applies it only to believers, as such. And that this is the scope,
appears, by what is added by way of Interpretation (for there is no difference)
the meaning whereof is, that all true believers have the same like spiritual
benefits, and though some have a stronger faith, some a weaker, yet they are
all believers, and there is no difference in regard of their estate, and the
main privileges thereof.

Doct. 3. That the righteousness of God is both appointed before time, and
Imputed in the fullness of time, indifferently to all believers, and only to
them; Or thus, That all, and only true believers, have attained unto, and are
partakers of Gods imputed righteousness.

Although there be difference amongst believers, in regard of the fruits of
faith, as Love, Repentance, Holiness, Obedience, bedience, etc. and in the
degrees of faith, Some have a stronger, some a weaker. Yet in regard of Imputed
Righteousness there is no difference at all, they are all elected alike, to
the enjoyment of imputed righteousness, and it is accomplished for them
equally, and they are equally partakers thereof; So that both the decree of
God, and the actual imputation of Gods righteousness, reaches unto all
believers without exception. Yea, This is the true Believers particular
portion, it belongs only unto them; and it is necessarily employed in
mentioning believers so restrictively, all believers, and none else. There are
two branches of the Point.

1 The Righteousness of God is appointed before time unto all believers; this
may be cleared by these particulars.

1 Whomsoever God chooses, he chooses unto Faith, Act. 13.48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed. All believers then were formerly
ordained unto life, and the state of Justification is a state of Life, Romans
5.18. Hence it is that true faith is called, The Faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1.
Gods Elect have a peculiar kind of faith that none others have, but they.

Besides, all Gods Elect (Capable of it) must needs have it; for if any of Gods
Elect did want it, it could not rightly be so called, Joh. 6.37. All that my
Father gives me shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out, and he expounds coming by believing, verse. 35. and the giving
any unto Christ is their Election from Eternity. Now mark that he says, All
that the Father gives me, etc.

2 Justification, or Gods Righteousness, is appointed only to Believers. It is
of mighty consideration which our Savior says, Joh. 10.26, 27. Ye believe
not, because ye are not of my sheep. Our Savior had Preached most powerfully,
and done many Miracles among the people, yet they believed not, and he shows
the reason of it, because they were not of his sheep, i. e. such as were
elected, verse. 14, 15. Such as are known of Christ in a peculiar manner, and
he had laid down his life for. What then, has not Israel obtained what he
sought for? Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, the rest were hardened.
When persons are hardened, and believe not, they are the rest that are not of
the Election.

The reasons of this branch are,

Reas. 1. From the nature of Election, which is the Lords choosing to the mean,
as well as to the end of eternal salvation. Now the imputation of the
satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, apprehended by faith, is the
necessary means of salvation. It is the order in all reasonable Agents, that
first they intend the end, then the means to that end. But the Lord does with
one single act intend both, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. He has chosen you to Salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. Tit. 3.7. That
being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Romans 8.30. Whom he justifies, them he glorifies. No
justification without faith, no faith without imputed righteousness, no
glorification without justification.

Quest. How are Infants justified, who have no faith?

Ans. I will not trouble you with that Controversy, leaving things unrevealed,
to the Lord; without doubt he has his ways of applying righteousness unto
them, though we know it not, neither does it so much concern us: the Lord in
the Scriptures speaks to them that are of age, and among them none shall be
saved, but such as lay hold upon imputed righteousness by faith. As when he
says, He that will not labor shall not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. who will apply
this to Infants? So that, Luke 13.3, 5, 10. Except ye repent, ye shall perish.

Reas. 2. From our election in Christ, Ephesians. 3.4. the meaning whereof is.

1 That God the Father has chosen us in Christ as the Head, that he may be the
head of all the Elect, and the Fountain of those good things, which are made
over to them in their election. That is the meaning of 1 Pet. 1.20. when as
Christ Jesus is said to be the Head of those that shall be saved.

2 In as much as Christ made manifest in the flesh, shed his blood for the sins
of the elect, and fulfilled all righteousness for them, and made the way to
eternal glory open to them, Heb. 10.19, 20. Joh. 10.11.

3 In as much as the Elect do apprehend him, and his righteousness and
satisfaction by faith, and by it are ingrafted into him, as branches into a
true vine, Ephesians. 3.17. and brought to the possession of all those good things,
which he has purchased for them.

But the meaning of the place is not, that we are chosen for Christ, or that
Christ Jesus was the cause of the Fathers electing of us, but rather, that we
are chosen to be in Christ; and being in Christ are made partakers of his
satisfaction, and righteousness, which are made ours by faith.

2 Branch. That Gods righteousness is imputed and bestowed, on all true
believers, without difference, and none others, Romans 4.11. Abraham is the
Father of Believers, or all them that believe; that righteousness might be
imputed to them also; That look as Abraham believed God, Romans 4.3. and it was
imputed to him for righteousness: so it is with all the children of Abraham,
that they are justified by the same means, and have righteousness imputed to
them. Hence it is called the Righteousness of faith, Romans 4.13. Phil. 3.9.
that is, the righteousness apprehended, and appropriated to believers by
faith, Romans 4.10. Christ is the end of the law, etc. to every one that
believes, i. e. to every one without exception, or distinction, Acts 13.39. By
him all that believe, etc. i. e. by Christ, through whom is preached the
forgiveness of sins; and so, Joh. 3.16. whosoever believes on him, has the
righteousness of Christ imputed; and for the contrary, see Mar. 16.16. Joh.
3.18, 36.

Reas. 1. From the equality of the estate of believers, there is no difference
in regard of sin, in their Natural estate, and this reason is given, verse. 23.
All have sinned, etc. therefore where they are justified they stand alike in
need of imputed righteousness, the same being imputed to all; neither is there
any difference in regard of the truth of apprehending the righteousness of
Christ by faith: all true believers having the like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
now the old rule is, that where equal things are added to equal, all are equal
still. Their misery is equal, their faith is equal, their imputed
righteousness is equal, therefore there is no difference.

Reas. 2. Because that God is one, Romans 3.30. there is one God that justifies
the Circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith. He proves, that
whether Jews or Gentiles, they are equally justified, because there is but one
God justifies both; he means, not only one God in regard of essence, but one in
regard of his will and promise. So God is one and the same from the beginning
to the end of the world, and if he should deal in a differing way with them,
in point of Justification, he should not be free from partiality, and
accepting of men's persons; but that is far from God, for an equal price is
paid for all, and equal satisfaction to Gods Justice.

Reas. 3. Because all unbeleevers, or mis-beleevers, are excluded from this
grace, Joh. 3.18. because they have not believed on the Name of the only
begotten Son of God, therefore they are condemned, and left destitute of this
imputed righteousness. The dignity of the person, and all sufficiency of his
satisfaction, and righteousness, the preciousnesse of the Name of the Son of
God, and also the Promises made in him, do all concur to the aggravation of
the Sin of unbelief, and hold unbeleevers in the state of Condemnation.

Use 1. Righteousness being thus appointed and imputed to all true believers,
and to them only, we may then here see a refutation of two errors.

1 Of those that affirm a man to be justified before faith, and from eternity,
which is an opinion contended for in these days; and appears to be false for
these reasons. 1 Because no man can be said to believe from eternity, and no
man is justified before he believes. No man believes before his calling,
wherein faith is wrought, after which his justification follows, Romans 8.30, 32.
as Glorification, and election unto glory do differ, so justification, and
election to justification differ, so that although the elect are appointed to
justification before faith, yet they are not justified, Romans 8.29. A Sinner
cannot be glorified from eternity, unless we will take up the error of
Himeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. that said the Resurrection was already
past. 3 Justification from eternity denies the Scripture, that says in diverse
places, that a state of sin, wrath, and guilt go before the state of
justification and forgiveness, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Romans 9.25,
26. Many other things might be urged to this purpose, but my design now is not
to enter on the handling of Controversies.

2 The other error is, that faith foreseen, is the moving cause of the
election of Believers, whereas imputation of righteousness and faith, are
fruits of election, Jam. 2.8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Use 2. A ground of unspeakable terror to all unbeleevers, and such as are
destitute of justifying faith; only [by unbeleevers] I mean those that live
under the Gospel preached, and faithfully dispensed, and continue still in
unbelief. Many there be that think it a matter of bravery to stand out under a
faithful Ministry, against the offers of Christ, in their pride, covetousness,
and unbelief, and slight the satisfaction and righteousness of Christ, as if
they were not worth a taking up, or looking after. What shall I say to such?
truly this I will say, that they are Gospel unbeleevers. And though I would not
enter into Gods secrets, yet undoubted it is, that God's purpose of election,
Romans 11.7. can never be frustrate, but must take effect in Gods time, and
those that are chosen to faith and justification, shall believe, and be
justified under the means; but what shall become of the rest? Why they are the
more blinded, and hardened by the means, and grow worse and worse, and never
believe, and never are justified, and therefore were never elected. For the
love of God remember this, that obdurate, and continued unbelief under the
means of Grace, is a very Brand-mark of a Reprobate, Dreadful is that place, 2
Co. 4.4, 5. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that be lost, in whom the
god of this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not. And remember,
Joh. 10.26.

Obj. 1. But such as these have many good parts, good knowledge, judgment,
memory, skill in Arts and Tongues, Orthodox in Religion, yea it may be just in
their dealings, live peaceably with their neighbors, repair to Ordinances
diligently, full of good works of mercy, courteous, and loving in their
behavior, etc. will you not say that such as these are elected?

Ans. This I will say, that these things will not prove to our hearts, that we
are gone beyond the state of Reprobates. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. Righteousness is unto all, and upon all that believe,
but upon none else: though Parts, Gifts, outward conformity, and many other
natural and moral Excellencies, may be in whom Christ's righteousness is not,
witness Judas, the Pharisees, and others.

Object. 2. But God can do much, and save me at last?

Answ. But thou must look to the ordinary and ordinate power of God, which
works suitably to his will, yea his revealed will: and that is not to save but
by faith. 1 Pet. 1.5. True, the absolute power of God can do much, but it does
not cross his secret determination, or revealed purpose for end or means; and
God has sworn, that an unbeleever shall not enter into his rest, Heb. 3.11,
18. and is it possible God should be forsworn?

Object. But many gracious Promises are made by God?

Answ. See for that, Heb. 4.1, 2. And fear lest a Promise being made, etc. you
come short of it, etc.

Object. But I may believe hereafter, and so have Gods righteousness imputed to
me, and this will be an evidence of Gods Election in me?

Answ. I will not deny that: for otherwise it were clear that thou art a
reprobate, and the Gospel should no more be preached to thee, than to the
Devils: But let me tell thee thus much, it is a very sad condition for any one
long to stand out under powerful means in unbeleef, and a deadly Symptom. As
it is in a disease wherein the strongest medicines have been applied, yet work
no cure, but the disease grows worse and worse; It is a strong presumption,
that such a disease will never be healed. Jerem. 51.9. We would have healed
Babylon, but she is not healed, forsake her, etc. Prove. 29.1. He then being
often reproved, etc. The Jews among whom our Savior had Preached, and wrought
many miracles, believed not, because Isaiah had said, He has blinded their
eyes, etc. Joh. 12.37, 39. So it is with some that stand out long under the
means, that they are blinded, and hardened to their destruction: However it is
a grievous condition, for any poor soul to live in the want of the comfort of
Gods eternal election, as every unbeleever does.

Use 3. It is unspeakable comfort to a true Believer. He may hence undoubtedly
conclude these things.

1 That Christ's righteousness is imputed to him.

2 That he is eternally elected.

3 That he shall never lose his faith, or the righteousness received.

4 That he is no less justified or righteous than any of the faithful from the
beginning.

It is true, a weaker measure of faith, does less firmly apprehend this
benefit: but it does as truly belong to one believer, as another; and there is
a double certainty, one of the Object, and as in the particulars named, 2 Timothy
2.19. The foundation of God stands sure; And there is a certainty of the
Subject, that is, the Mind and Heart of the Believer, this is often shaken in
the Faithful with Doubts and Fears, and Carnal Cavils; but it is to be striven
against; and every one that believes in Truth, and knows it, ought as certainly
to conclude with himself that his sins are forgiven him, and righteousness is
imputed unto him, as he ought certainly, to believe the Gospel, or God in the
Gospel. John 3.33. 1 John 5.10. Rev. 2.17. And as it is certain, so it is
unchangeable, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Christ has
prayed that it fail not. Luke 20.22, 23.

Lastly, There is no difference, all have righteousness alike, that is the one
robe, that serves to cover one, and all the rest of the members of Christ. By
the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all, etc. Romans 5.18. The
weakest Believer is as Righteous before God, as Paul, Peter, Abraham, etc. This
Righteousness is not imputed to some more, and to some less; but as the Sun
shines alike to all, that have eyes to see it, or to all upon whom it is risen:
So also the Sun of righteousness.

Use 4. Exhort. To every one then to thrust in amongst the crowd of true
Believers, and to labor to be in the number of them, to give diligence to make
your calling and election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10. Make first your calling sure,
which is done when says is wrought, and then you need not climb into Heaven
to know whether you are appointed to Justification and Salvation. Do but look
into your own hearts, whither you have faith without Hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.5. that is faith without reigning hypocrisy; but here you had need of
some Cautions.

Caut. 1. Cozen not your selves with presumption instead of faith, as the most
Professors do.

Caut. 2 Look not at all true faith, as that which is justifying, there is a
true faith, a man may make Shipwreck of, 1 Timothy 1.19. but that cannot be said
of Justifying Faith.

Caut. 3. See that we do not make an Idol of Faith, as though it had any
inward virtue in it self to justify a sinner before God; For this were to make
the Righteousness of God in vain: for to be justified by faith, is no more
than to be justified by Christ, and they are spoken promiscuously, Gal. 2.16,
17.

Caut. 4. That we do not bring a faith of our own making; true faith is of the
operation of God. Col. 2.12. and it is not in the Creatures power to make it:
but see thy insufficiency to believe, and unworthiness too, that God should
ever work it in thee, especially in regard of thy sleighting Christ, and grace,
many a time, when it has been offered to thee.

Caut. 5. Look not at that as true faith, wherewith we can be content to stand
at a distance from Christ. Believing on Christ is coming to him. Joh. 6.35.
Ephesians. 2.13. A believer will get as near Christ as possibly he can; that Christ
may dwell in his heart, Ephesians. 3.17. but on the contrary, it is very dreadful,
when as the soul runs away from Christ, and his People, and Ordinances, and can
rejoice when he is furthest from Communion with him, or can be content with
beholding Christ afar off, or conceit he has enough of Christ already, this is
to be far from Christ and from believing.

Caut. 6. Take heed that we bar not our selves out from Imputed Righteousness,
by inventing or pleading some pretense, distinction or difference, to exclude
us, as to say, that it is the greatness and multitude of our sins, shall hinder
us, or the imperfection of our duties and services, or the littleness of our
humiliation, or the fewness of our good works, (...) declaration of his
righteousness, which is mentioned and repeated as a principal matter, that the
Spirit of God would have us take notice of, the which is amplified,

First, by an Exegosis, or Explication.

Secondly, By the adjunct of time; to declare at this time, etc. This latter
remains to be spoken to.

Quest. What is meant by the Righteousness of God here?

Answ. This is needful to be opened, because it is certain that Righteousness
is ascribed to God in several respects, and significations; Righteousness of
God the father taken four ways.
Divines do usually reduce them to four significations.

First, That the Justice or Righteousness of God, does signify his Rectitude,
and Integrity, and Purity, as it is opposed to sin, Psalm 11. verse. the last,
the Righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the just.
It was said before, verse. 5. The Lord tries the Righteous, but the wicked his
soul hates, etc. This is usually called universal Justice, and comprehends all
virtues, or moral perfections in it.

Secondly, It is taken for the Mercy, Goodness, bounty of God, whereby he
bestows many benefits on his Creatures, 1 Samuel 12.7. Samuel says to Israel,
Let me reason with you of the Righteous Acts of the Lord, which the Lord did
in Egypt, sending Moses and Aaron to them, and bringing them out of Egypt: and
in the 45. of Isa. 13. The Lord raises up Cyrus in Righteousness, that he
should build up Jerusalem, and let go the Captives; and his thus sending of
Moses and Aaron, and raising up of Cyrus, were signal Acts of his Mercy.

Thirdly, The Righteousness of God signifies his Truth and constancy, in
keeping his Word, and fulfilling his Promises: 1 John 1.19. If we confess our
sins, he is just and faithful to forgive, etc. Not that he will forgive
merely for our confession of them, as if there were any thing in the Act of
confession to deserve forgiveness, but it is because he is faithful, he has
promised to forgive them, and so will be as good as his word: Isa. 45.19. I
said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, I the Lord speak
Righteousness, that is, this I have promised, and I will do it.

Fourthly, Gods Righteousness signifies that perfection of God, whereby he
distributes to every one according to their works, rewarding the godly, and
punishing the wicked, Psalm. 9.7, 8. The Lord has prepared his Throne for
Judgment, and he shall judge the world in righteousness; The Lord is there
described as the Judge of all the World, and so judging righteously every
person: So also the Word is taken, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the righteous
judgment of God, that they that do such things are worthy of death, and the
word is rendered (...), which signifies righteous Judgment: and that is to
punish with death them that are worthy of it. Nahum 1.2-6. So Jerem. 51.56. The
Lord God of recompense shall surely requite you.

I will not further enlarge this, but still the Question remains, which of
these ways the righteousness of God is taken in this place? for it is
manifest, that the righteousness of God, is in all these respects evidenced in
the Justification of a sinner; for,

First, There is the Truth and Faithfulness of God: Luke 1.69, 70. He has
visited us, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, etc. So Act. 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, etc.

Secondly, His Mercy and Goodness does appear in our Justification; This David
has recourse unto in Psalm. 51.1, 2. Be merciful unto me, and according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out mine iniquities: But I conceive
the Apostle does intend only the first and last sense, for they are not
contrary (I mean Gods rectitude, and his distributive, or his relative, and
vindictive justice) but are coordinate, and the one does infer the other, but
especially his vindictive justice is meant in the Text; and this appears,
first, because the Apostle had mentioned before, both his Grace, and Free grace
in the forgiveness of our sins, and also the imputation of righteousness, verse.
24. and his Truth too, verse. the 21. This was testified in the Law, and the
Prophets; therefore now he speaks of another distinct Attribute of God, namely
his Justice.

Secondly, The Apostle adds several Expressions to signify this, as first, he
says, that he might be just, and the Justifier, they are Conjugates, and
relate to the proper meaning of the word, Justice, which is, suum cuique
tribuere; [The Justifier of him, that is, of man, who is unjust.] So that the
Apostles meaning is, the Lord justifies a sinner in a way of Justice. Secondly,
He says that God would declare his Justice in the way that he proposes, for
the sinners Justification. Thirdly, He doubles, the words (to declare his
Righteousness) implying this, that God would have us to take special notice of
it: for it is as much as if the Apostle should have said, there is not only
Mercy and Truth in a sinners justification; but there is also Justice in it;
The Lord declares his justice in this thing; and therefore it is that the
Father set forth Christ to be a Propitiation, that he might declare his
Righteousness: If the Lord had said, Well, ye are great and grievous sinners, I
am content to forgive you all your sins, this would have declared the grace of
God: But when he says also, that this is through the redemption that is in
Christ, and that he has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation, and that the
blood of Christ was shed for thy sins, this does declare his Justice, as much
as his Truth and Grace. Fourthly, There is another expression to this purpose
(To declare I say at this time) what is that? but in the times of the Gospel,
since that Jesus Christ has shed his blood; for though the Justice of God, was
but darkly signified in the Old Testament; by the Types of the Sacrifices, and
punishments inflicted; yet it was far more clearly held forth by the Death of
Christ, and that the chastisement of our peace was on him. Fifthly, Add to all
these the like phrase used in other Scriptures, declaring the justice of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God,
etc. and verse. 6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you: here we have the same phrase used and
applied to Gods distributive, and revenging justice, and more plainly the same
word is used, Phil. 1.28. And in nothing terrified by our adversaries, and
there the word is translated a manifest token, and so it is here, a manifest
token of demonstration, and sure proof of the righteousness of God, that he
justifies a sinner in such a way, by the sacrifice and satisfaction of his Son.
The Points of doctrine then arising from hence, are these following.

Doctr. 1. Not only the exact truth of God, or the abundance of his Grace, but
also his strict Justice does concur to the Justification of a sinner in the
sight of God.

Doct. 2. That the glory of Gods Justice, and the manifest proof thereof to the
World in the death of Christ, is the great end of the grace, that the Lord
shows forth in the Justification of Believers.

Doct. 1. Concerning the first of these, The strict justice of God does concur
to the justification of a sinner.
That not only the exact truth of God, or the abundance of his Grace, but also
his strict Justice does concur to the Justification of a sinner in Gods sight.
Or thus, God is not only true, and merciful, but also just in the
justification of a finner. I need not now insist upon that, that the Truth and
Mercy of God do shine, and appear in this thing, I have spoken to that
formerly; only I shall lay before your confideration some Scriptures, and in a
few words pass it over, Mic. 7.18. to 20. Who is a God like to thee, that
pardonest their Iniquity? etc. There he speaks of justification, in which work
God is exalted above all the world; But why does God forgive sin? because
(says the Prophet) he delights in mercy, it is his blessed will and pleasure
to show mercy, but he adds also, thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and
thy mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our Fathers in the days of old.
In which place we have mention made both of Gods truth, in keeping his promse,
and his Oath which he engaged himself in, to Abraham from the days of old,
and also his mercy in making and keeping such a weighty promise; so Zachary
praising God for the Incarnation of Christ, Luke 1.72. has these words, viz.
To perform his mercy promised, and to remember his holy Covenant, there is his
mercy in sending his Son to purchase forgiveness, and his truth in performing
the Mercy promised; and these are generally granted, and acknowledged on all
sides; but the Text adds, Moreover, that he may be just, and show his
righteousness therein; and this is also cleared in several places besides; and
the truth hereof appears,

Reas. First, By all the Sacrifices of the Law, which were offered up for the
pacifying of Gods Anger, and they all signified this, that without shedding of
blood there is no remission; Heb. 9.22. and how comes it to pass that there was
no pardon of sin in the Old Testament, without shedding of blood in a
Ceremonial way? Surely, this was to show that Gods justice required some
expiation of sin; to be made, in a way of satisfaction for sin, even in those
times, and to turn the eyes of Gods people to Christ's death, whereby justice
might be fully satisfied, and it is observable what is added, ver. 23, 24 It
was therefore necessary that the patterns of the things in the heavens should
be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better
sacrifices than these. Where by the patterns of the heavenly things, are to be
understood the sacrifices of the Law, which typified Gospel Mysteries, and by
the heavenly things, the Spiritual graces, more plentifully poured forth in the
days of the New Testament. Now all are purified with Sacrifices, and our
sacrifice under the Gospel is far better than theirs; and mark how he says,
that it was necessary that all purification should be thus wrought, he does
not only say that it was comely to be so, or convenient for orders sake, or
mercies sake, but it was necessary, not only by reason of Gods Decree to
justify and save some, but sin being pre-supposed, and God purposing to
justify and save a small remnant, it was necessary, and that because of the
Justice of God, that there should be such a sacrifice for sin, and so
especially I conceive those words, Luke 24.26. are to be understood, Ought not
Christ to suffer such things? And in verse. 28. The Son of Man must be
delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, etc. there was a
necessity of it, or else all the world of Mankind must perish, and be
condemned, and that because of the justice of God: and if we do but consider
the way and manner of Justification and forgiveness, we shall see that it
must needs be in a way of justice. For,

1 It was by the not sparing of his own Son, Romans 8.32. Christ was Gods own
natural and eternal Son, and though innocent, yet now being make undertaker for
sin, he could not be spared, the meaning is, God would not spare this Son of
his, nor remit the least stroke of the punishment. For the better illustration
of this, let us suppose some Malefactor be convicted of a Capital crime before
an earthly Judge, if the Judge shall Sentence him to death, this is according
to Justice; but if the Judges own Son should be charged with such a Crime, and
the Judge should condemn him in the gate, this is exact justice indeed; but the
severity and exactness of Justice appears much more in the sufferings of
Christ, for there was never such an own Son as Christ; yea consider the degree
and kind of punishment required to be inflicted upon this only Son, it was,
that he was made an expiation for sin, A Curse for us, that he endured the
pains of the Second Death, and this was as much as Justice in its exactness
required, Genesis 2.19. Gal. 3.10. Besides this, consider that place, Mat. 26.39.
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass, etc. But if not, thy will be
done, etc. and it is said, He fell on his face and prayed, etc. that is, he
prayed with great earnestness, and reverence, and although Christ was heard in
what he feared, yet the text, and the event shows, the cup did not pass, yea
that it was not possible; because supposing Christ to be the Surety, by the
Fathers, and Christ his own appointment, and Christ undertaking the
Justification of the Elect, it was not possible the Cup should pass away, and
that because of the Justice of God.

Obj. 1. But you will say, Why may not the Lord freely forgive whatsoever sin
he pleases, and that of his free mercy and grace, as a man may do, though
there be no satisfaction to Justice at all, can a sinful man do it, and cannot
the Lord do it much more?

Ans. 1. Because Justice is one of Gods Essential Attributes, so that he is
denied to be God, if he be denied to be just; hence Paul reasons, Romans 3.5.
Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? God forbid, for then how should God
judge the world? this is to thrust God out of his Judgment Seat. Hence it is,
that there is no work of God that he does to Mankind at any time, but there
must needs be an act of Justice in it, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in
all his ways, therefore if he pardon sin, he must do it in a way of
righteousness, and if he punish sin, he must do it in a way of
righteousness, this he does by the necessity of his nature; It is most
certain, this righteousness of Gods nature is eternal, and sin is committed in
time, but this being supposed that sin is committed, it must necessarily
follow, that a just God must punish it.

Obj. 2. But with what punishment must he punish it?

For Answer, look into Romans 1.32. who knowing the Judgment of God, etc. the
word is (...), which signifies the righteousness of God: In this answer of the
Apostle, there are three things to be noted; First, That this is universally
known, even by the very Heathens that he speaks of, and whose wickedness he
describes before; even they by the light of nature, and the workings of their
own Consciences, do acknowledge the justice of God. Secondly, That this
righteousness of God is the cause, fountain, and rule of all punishments that
are inflicted, for thus it is described, that they that commit such things, are
worthy of death, and that the wages of sin is death, yea, even eternal death.
Thirdly, this is natural and essential to God; for though, in respect of the
exercise of it, it is occasioned by men, or devils, yet in respect of the
foundation and root of it, the Divine perfection, or Gods blessed nature
requires it. Now for the Objection.

Object. If a man can forgive a trespass committed against him, then God can
without satisfaction.

Answ. It follows not: for, first a man forgives wrong done unto him; but to
forgive sin without satisfaction, is another matter; for sin hurts an universal
good. Secondly, It is one thing for a private person to forgive the offense,
and another thing for a public person, as a Judge; if a Judge forgives without
satisfaction, he sins against his office, and calling; now shall not the Judge
of all the world do right? Thirdly, a man's justice is not essential, he may
be a man, though unjust, but Gods justice is himself. Fourthly, a man is
subject to a Law, but God is a Law to himself.

Object. If God punish sin naturally, and necessarily, then he must punish sin
to the utmost of his power, as fire burns: but God does not so.

Answ. This follows not: for that necessity whereby God punishes sin, requires
not that he should punish sin as much as he can, but as much as is just; for
God does not act as senseless creatures, but with understanding and will, with
liberty accompanying his actions, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things after the
counsel of his own will: thus you see how the justice of God, being the very
nature of God, it must needs act in the justification of a sinner.

Reas. 2. The same may be cleared by the infinite holiness and purity of God,
which is likewise one of his divine perfections. Thou art a God of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity.

So 1 Samuel 2.2. God cannot behold sin with an eye of approbation, but when he
looks upon it, it is with an angry and revenging eye, Psalm. 5.4, 5. Thou art
not a God that have pleasure in wickedness; God hates sin naturally and
necessarily, therefore he must punish it either in the Sinner or the Surety,
according to the demerit of it. Exodus 31.7. He will by no means acquit the
guilty, though he be most merciful to those that are in Christ, in whom his
justice is satisfied, yet he irreconcilably hates, and abhors all such as are
guilty, Jer. 44.4. Do not this abominable thing that I hate, he cannot acquit
them, or free them from punishment, but he must violate his own nature,
therefore he must needs condemn and punish them, and whomsoever he justifies,
it is upon the ground of the satisfaction of his justice, in and by Christ on
their behalf; and thus you see there must needs be justice in the pardon of
them, because he is unchangeably holy.

Reas. 3. A third Reason or Ground is taken from the supreme providence of God,
and his Government of the world, considered with the nature of sin. Psalm. 9.4,
5. Thou sit in thy throne judging right, and verse. 5. Thou have rebuked the
heathen, thou have destroyed the wicked, thou have put out their name for ever;
This Supreme government of God, is universal, and extended to all the World.
He does necessarily impose, and exact obedience at the hands of reasonable
creatures, and in case of disobedience, he must needs reduce the creature into
order, as being Judge and Lawgiver. Hence are these places, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It
is righteous with God to recompense vengeance to those that trouble you. Heb.
2.2. Every transgression of the Law received a just recompense of reward. Jude
7. The Sodomites suffer the vengeance of the justice of eternal fire. Now let
sin be considered, and it overthrows the supreme government of God. Romans 1.31.
Its rebellion against him, it pulls him out of his Throne, and deposes him from
it, therefore by some act of Government and Authority, which is exercised in a
way of justice, the sinner must be brought into order: and though Gods wise
and gracious dispensation, has laid upon Christ the punishment of our sins (I
mean the sins of the elect) yet punished they must be, in the sinner or
surety, and there can be no dispensation for that, without denial of the
judiciary power, and justice of Almighty God.

Use 1. First use for Conviction and Terror to vile sinners that are out of
Christ. It is a terrible thing to be out of Christ.
That seeing pardon of sin, is not only in a way of mercy and truth, but also
in a way of righteousness, it shows us what a groundless delusion they please
themselves withal, that live in their unbeleef and impenitency, and yet hope
to be saved by the Mercy of God; In vain such do hope for the mercy of God,
yea, there is none so desperately wicked, living near the means, but that upon
this very ground, they sleep securely in sin, and commit it with greediness,
because God is so merciful.

Now to discover the grosseness of this deceit, consider first, that though God
be infinitely merciful, yet his mercy always goes together with his truth.
Psalm. 86.15. He is plenteous in Mercy and Truth, i. e. as God has abundance
of mercy, so he is plenteous in truth; his truth is in fulfilling both his
promises and threatenings; thou can not expect mercy of God, in such a way as
to overthrow his truth, his truth of his promises, Tit. 1.4. Grace, Mercy, and
Peace are from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. There is no
Mercy to be expected from God, but through Jesus Christ; Luke 1.50. His mercy
is on them that fear him, they that do not fear God, have no title to his
mercy; so there is the truth of his threatenings, that he will not be merciful
to any wicked transgressour, Psalm. 59.5. to any one that loves his sin, and
lives in it, and refuses to be reformed. Gods mercy is as it were the bridge
over the pit, to carry the soul to heaven; but a man that has his eyes, will
be careful that he tread not beside, as upon the shadow of the bridge, instead
of the bridge. Yea, it is railed (as it were) with his truth, beware of going
without the rail, lest you drop into the pit; now those that we speak of go
with out the rail, and the promises, and threatenings are against them: so they
do evidently trust in a lie, saying, They shall have Peace, and Mercy, walking
in the stubbornness of their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. but the Lord says,
he will not be merciful to such: but besides, the great delusion is, that
they do look for pardon of sin by mere mercy, with the wrong or denial of the
justice of God.

3 There cannot possibly be any remission of sin, unless that God can pardon
in Justice as well as Mercy: There can be no dispensation for this: If God
could have pardoned sin without the price of redemption, then certainly Christ
dyed altogether in vain. For what? did the father send forth Christ to be the
Propitiation for sin, to show his justice? how can they believe that? if Gods
justice did not exact the price? If the price might have been omitted without
any prejudice to his justice? could God be eternally just, if he had not
punished sin at all? Prove. 17.15. To justify the wicked (without satisfaction
to justice) is an abomination to the Lord, and will the Lord do that which is
abominable to him? will any King put his own Son to death to save a traitors
life? when he can freely pardon the traitor if he will? surely that were an
unnatural and a cruel part: and can we think that God the Father will give up
his only begotten Son to death to save sinners, when he may out of mere grace
and mercy pardon them without such a sacrifice? certainly, God would never do
it.

Briefly, the sinner must necessarily satisfy justice, either by himself or by
his surety: or else it is utterly impossible that his sin should be forgiven.
Heb. 10.26, 27. Without a sacrifice for sin, there remains nothing, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, that shall
devour the adversaries. Does any soul expect pardon without Christ? then he
expects peace without any sacrifice for him, but the Text says, that without
this, there remains nothing but a fearful expectation, etc.

Briefly, such a hope of pardon, is interpretatively, no better than Atheism
and denial of God. For it denies the justice of God, it denies his purity and
holiness, it denies his Sovereignty, yea, it denies Christ, if the Lord be
God, he is just and holy, and Judge of all the World; and if he be just, he
cannot pardon sin but in a way of justice, and that sealed by Christ's blood. I
pray consider, that Psalm. 89.13, 14. Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thy
hand, and high is thy right hand; consider, what a God you have to deal
withal, he is a mighty strong God, no creature is able to withstand him, if
he be displeased.

Object. I, but he is merciful too?

Answ. 1. Psalm 89.14. Justice and judgment are the habitation of his Throne,
mercy and truth shall go before his face, justice and judgment are the basis
and supporter of his Throne, take away justice, and you pull down his royal
Throne, you make him no longer King or Judge: mercy and truth are his
harbingers.

2 They are offered first, and when refused, Justice does execution. So a like
place, Psalm. 36.5, 6. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy
faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds, that is, there is a vastness and
immensity in both, they are very great: but whence is his Justice so great? his
righteousness is like the strong mountains, etc. as if he had said, the
righteousness of God is as unsupportable and unmovable as the strong
mountains; and his judgments they do not swim aloft, but they are an infinite
and unsearchable depth: You cannot bear them, nor remove Gods righteousness,
nor measure or fathom his judgments; and thou that art a sinner, have these
mountains ready to fall upon thee, and art sinking into this great deep; What
is it that makes the Devils eternally miserable? but that they have no Christ
to satisfy the justice of God; and if a sinner on earth live and dye without
Christ, he is as incapable of salvation, as those in the 2 of the Ephesians. 12.

Object. 2. The Justice of God is answered in Christ for me?

Answ. True indeed, there is no other Name under heaven given amongst men,
whereby we shall be saved: and happy is that soul that can groundedly plead
this: and most miserable is he or she that is deceived herein: it is an error
in the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay. Beloved, let
us take heed of an error in this, which is very common, 1 John 3.6, 7.
Consider, whether there be not Gods Writ, sent out against you frequently,
signed in an open Court, as Micaiah said to Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.2^. has not the
Lord pronounced against thee in the threatenings in his Word? yea, has not the
Arrest been served upon thee in the secret accusation of thy conscience? when
thou have shifted it off, as Felix did Paul's Sermon, Act. 24.25. Consider, how
thy heart is affected with the doctrine of Gods justice, and the judgments to
come. Is it not with thee, as it was with that unhappy Felix? does not thy
heart, I say not only, tremble, but swell against the truth of God? does it
not secretly wish there were no Assizes? yea, art thou not still in the
Jailours custody as a malefactor? Beware of that which Elihu speaks, Job 36.17,
18. thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, judgment and justice take
hold on thee (that is) they are seizing upon thee, Because there is wrath,
beware lest he take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot
deliver thee, will he esteem thy riches? no not gold, nor all the forces of
strength.

Gods Justice in a Sinners Justification.
THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25, 26. That he might be just, and the Justifier, etc.


NOT only the exact Truth of God, or the abundance of his Grace, but also his
strict justice, do concur and act in the justification of a sinner in the sight
of God.

Use 2. The vile nature of sin discovered.
That we should hereby learn to know the vile nature of sin, and to judge
aright of it, which very few are acquainted withal. Which evidently appears,
both by their security when they have committed it, their cloaks and colors to
hide it, and their boldness in committing of it, none of which would ever be,
if they did understand what it is. Now a sure way to discover it, and to remove
and scatter all mistakes about it, and to digest well this principle, that no
sin can ever be pardoned, but the course of Divine justice must certainly and
necessarily pass upon it, as surely as God is God, that is, as surely as God is
just and righteous: which if he should cease to be, or but abate of it in any
one act, he should cease to be God, Romans 3.5, 6. If God be unrighteous, how
then shall he judge the World? that is, he cannot possibly be Judge of it,
if he should pass by any one sin unpunished. The day of judgment is called,
Romans 2.5. The day of the Revelation of the righteous judgments of God;
Therefore no unrighteous sentence can pass from him. But its unrighteous to
suffer any sin to go unpunished, though in respect of temporal punishments, God
deals variously, as his wisdom disposes, yet he is ever just, which then he
will clear to all the world, Romans 2.2. We know, that the judgment of God is
according unto truth, that is, as he cannot be deceived by any color or
pretense to hide any sin; so neither will he pass any false sentence upon any
action, that is to be judged, not according to appearance, but according unto
truth: nor will he deal partially about it, for then he should not be the
God of truth; and verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. He shall render unto every man according
to his works; that is, the nature of distributive justice: if any thing be
abated of this, or lessened, or if there should be any exception, the nature
and essence of justice should be violated, and so also the very being of God
should cease: besides, God being a holy God, does hate sin, according to his
infinite holiness, infinitely. God hates nothing in the world, but sin,
therefore all the infinite hatred of God is spent upon sin alone. Now what a
thing is that, that an infinite divine hatred, like a mighty undivided stream,
should with all its united forces and inundations, and detestation, run
forceably and irresistably upon every sin, how small soever? as vain thoughts,
Prove. 15.26. and foolish talking, wanton glances of the eyes, and the very
secret lusts of the heart. Mince and extenuate your sins as much as you will,
yet the Lord hates every sin as sin, and therefore cannot choose but punish
every sin, little or great, according to the desert of it, and if God should
hate sin less than he does, he should cease to be God.

Quest. How may that be cleared?

Answ. Why, if God did not hate sin infinitely, he should not be infinitely
holy, and we say truly, that a thing cannot be more or less infinite:
whatsoever is infinite, it remains so to eternity; if it should be a degree
under that, it must be finite, for infinite holiness, must needs be
accompanied with an infinite hatred of sin. So if Gods holiness or hatred of
sin, should be less than it is, it should be finite, and if infinite holiness
be denied to God, then his Godhead is denied also. Let vile sinners ponder
this, that think and say many times, that Gods Ministers speak too harshly of
sin, and hope that God is not so much offended, as they would make us believe,
neither does he hate it so exceedingly.

Oh poor Creatures! beware of all such thoughts, if God should hate sin less
than he does, he should cease to be God. Oh consider the certainty of these
things. I beseech you, be convinced of this, that it is a gross and dangerous
error, to conceive that Gods mercy is greater than his justice; and it
proceeds from the ignorance of the divine nature; for whatsoever is in God is
God, and all his attributes are infinite, and one infinite cannot be greater
than another; neither can one attribute be contrary to another, nor exclude
another, nor abate and overcome another; for how can God be divided in
himself? Gods mercy indeed has a larger extent as being upon all his works,
Psalm. 145.9. but his distributive justice reaches only to men and Angels, but
in themselves they are both infinite and equal.

Further, for more clear demonstration of this, that Christ is set forth to be
a Propitiation for the remission of the sins of the Elect, consider a place,
Gal. 3.13. Christ was made a Curse for us, there be two things especially
observable; First, That Christ is called a Curse, not only that he that is God
over all was accursed for the sins of the Elect imputed; but a Curse, that
(being the abstract) comprehends the confluence and collection of all the
Curses due to their sins, none excepted: there is a curse due to every sin of
every Elect soul, and they all meet upon Christ; But secondly, it was said, he
was made a Curse; by whom was he made? but by God the Father? by the most
loving Father, though the most loving and beloved Son, though he did always
those things that pleased him. Joh 8.29. Yet such a Father made such a Son to
be accursed: that is, not only forsook him, so that for the time he had no
sense of the presence of Gods grace and favor toward him: but filled him
brim-full (as it were) with the sense of his fierce indignation due to his
peoples sins. What manner of Justice is this in God the Father (beloved in the
Lord) that dealt thus with a holy Son, and such a Son? whatsoever might stay
the hand of Justice from proceeding against him, was found in Christ, yet
nothing could prevail. I may add that, Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured
such contradiction, etc. mark the words how emphatical, him, standing in such
relation unto God, (...), the Sufferer, the greatest Sufferer; what did he
suffer? such a contradiction, etc. such an one as never was, there was never
any parallel to it, and their contradiction was a counterfaction, and take this
of God too, Luke 22.53. the contradiction of men, and the malediction of God.
Oh consider him that suffered these things, reason with your selves about him,
and say, Wherefore has the Lord done this? as was spoken in the like case,
Exodus 12.26. What means this service, etc. we must tell our children the
meaning of the Sufferings of Christ, as the Jews were to tell their children,
the meaning of the Passover.

Quest. What evil is there in sin that Divine Justice should so pursue it, and
that God cannot pass it by, except that Gods Justice do proceed against it?

Ans. Sin is extremely opposite to the nature of God, Sin is opposite to Gods
nature which is proved diverse ways.
and so is nothing in the world but sin; of other things it is most true that
is said. Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, but
it cannot be said so of sin, for he is no cause of it, neither has he any
influence into it, Gal. 5.17. the Flesh and Spirit in a Child of God are
contrary one to another, that is, the regenerate and unregenerate part, but
these are contraries remiss; but contraries in the highest degrees can never
be reconciled together, therefore the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What
fellowship has righteousness? what communion has light with darkness, or
what concord has Christ with Belial? God is perfect righteousness and light,
and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 5. Sin is unrighteousness, and
darkness that has no light in it, therefore what fellowship or communion can
there be betwixt these? he means none at all, it is against the nature and
being of all things; now if there can be no communion, then no justification;
for justification is part of a sinners communion with God, therefore
justification does necessarily require punishment and satisfaction; for without
this the Law remains in force, and the Law is the strength of sin, 1 Cor.
15.56. and sin in the full strength of it, is strongly opposite to God. And
mark these places, Jam. 1.13. Job 34.10-13. Deuteronomy. 32.3.4. Moses there calls for
audience, and so do I, and as he begins his speech, so may I also say upon
this occasion, Give ear O heavens, and I will speak; and hear O earth the words
of my mouth, etc. He summons the unreasonable Creatures to give attention to
what he was about to speak, and what was it? I will publish the name of the
Lord, ascribe ye greatness to our God. He is the rock, his work is perfect,
all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and
right is he: he proves God to be the Rock, and God of truth, or the true God,
because he is without iniquity, and all his works are without sin; whence it
follows, that if there were the least sin in God, or done by God, he could not
then be the Rock, his ways would not be perfect, nor could he be styled
just and right, or the God of truth. Hence it may be thus reasoned, That must
needs be extremely evil, which if it were in the least degree in God, would
instantly take away his being. But such an evil is sin, etc. If there should be
such a poison (says a godly Divine) that if one drop of it should fall into
the Ocean, Mr. Buroughs.
all the whole Ocean should be in one moment poisoned, or if one drop of it
should get into Heaven, that then presently the Sun Moon, and Stars should
fall down, and be annihilated, you would say that this were a strong, venomous
poison; certainly if one drop of sin should get into God, the infinite being of
God would instantly cease to be: the Sea, though large, is not infinite, the
Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, are not infinite, but sin would disanul the
infinite being of God.

Obj. But why then does not Sin destroy the being of the Creature in which it
is?

Ans. One sin did destroy the Angels that sinned, one sin destroyed all
Mankind, and though they are not quite annihilated, yet they are worse than
nothing, having lost their first estate; yea Psalm. 39. every man in his best
estate is altogether vanity, or rather all vanity; sin destroys the life of God
in men, and the Image of God, Hos. 13.9. Prove. 6.32. Sin destroys the soul,
etc. and it separates from God; if you separate a branch from the root, it
dies, or if a Beam were separated from the Sun, it would suddenly dis-appear
and dye, or come to nothing.

Quest. How may it appear that sin is opposite to the nature of God? This is a
great matter to be cleared, and if we believe that there is a God, and such a
God as the Scripture describes, then we may know him by the contrary,
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

Ans. 1. Sin is wholly evil, and God is wholly good. God is light, in whom is
no darkness, 1 John 1.5, 6. Genesis 6.7. Sin is darkness without any light,
Ephesians. 5.8. the same Apostle says, Romans 7.18. That in his flesh there dwells
no good thing; that is, in his corrupt nature. If we do consider other
things, such as affliction, death, and the like, these have some good in them,
and are the works of God; the Devil himself has some good in him, for the
Angelical nature is the good Creature of God; that therefore must needs be
extremely bad, that is worse than the Devil; so for Hell, we think it to be
very bad, but that is kindled by the breath of God, Isa. 30. last; but we
cannot speak so of sin.

2 The workings of sin do prove it to be opposite to God. Romans 8.7. The
wisdom of the flesh, i. e. The best thing that is in an unregenerate man, etc.
it is not only an enemy, but enmity; whatsoever is in the nature of enmity is
found in fleshly wisdom: the fleshly wise ones are the greatest enemies to
God; and though such have goodly pretenses oftentimes of the greatest love of
God, yet God accounts them to be such as hate him: he looks upon sinners
under no other notion but as his desperate enemies, that bear a deadly hatred
against him. Thus you have it expressed in the second Commandment, I will visit
the sins of them that hate me; you would account it a fearful accusation to
charge you with hatred of God, and yet it is so indeed, if you are in your
natural estate, for the Lord terms you Haters of him, and he calls things by
their right names: And the Apostle Paul speaking of the Gentiles, Romans 1.30.
amongst other vile things which he charge them with, He says they were
haters of God; and hence it is that the Scripture frequently ascribes that to
wicked men, which argues the greatest hatred, Isa. 3.8. Their tongue and their
doings are against the Lord to provoke the eyes of his glory: all that a sinner
speaks or does, is against the Lord: He strives against God, Isa. 45.8. Woe
be to him that striveth against his Maker; he fights against God, Job 15.25.
he stretches out his hand, and strengthens himself against the Almighty. 1 Samuel 15.23. One would think it had been a very small sin that Saul committed in
sparing Agag, when he had gone so far in putting so many of the Amalekits to
death, yet Samuel brands him to be a Rebel in so doing, Rebellion is as the
sin of Witchcraft, etc. yea, there is never a sinner but seeks to take away
the being of God, or at least to pull him out of his throne, Psalm. 14.1. The
fool has said in his heart, there is no God; the fool there, is every
unregenerate man, his saying there is no God, is his thought, that is, to take
away his very being as far as he is able; a wicked man is not only content
that there should be no God, or wishes that there were no God (which is a
monstrous and horrid villainy) but he concludes it peremptorily in himself there
is no God, and walks accordingly: yea, and whereas Gods Throne should be in the
heart, he thrusts him out from thence, by such godless principles as this is.
I might enlarge this, and clearly demonstrate unto you, how that sin overthrows
all the Divine properties; his Mercy which it abuses, his Justice which it
denies, his Truth which it belyeth, his Holiness which it makes like it self,
etc. and the Lord may well complain of it, that he is pressed under it, as a
Cart that is full of sheaves; yea, that he is broken with our whorish hearts
departing from him, etc. Now let every soul that hears this, Judge impartially,
how it can be possible that the Lord of Hosts, the King of glory, should
pardon them, that do willingly harbor such evident opposition against him;
and all that you have heard, and much more may be said to be in every sin,
wherefore it cannot be without violation of Gods Nature, that sin should pass
unpunished, or that no satisfaction at all should be required by this Divine
Justice for it: can Justice cease to be just? then truth may be turned into a
lie, and holiness into wickedness, and God may cease to be God.

Briefly, though sin be not infinite as God is, for then God could not overcome
it; yet it is in some sort infinite, in the malignity of it, the Apostle says,
Romans 7.13. that it is (...), that sin by the Commandment might be exceeding
sinful; sin can have no worse name than it self, if it could, the Apostle would
have hit on it, but (says he) that sin by the Commandment might be
Hyperbollically sinful, and that by the Commandment which should redress it.
Sin (I say) is in some sort infinite, Sin in some sort infinite.
and that because

1 It is committed against an infinite Majesty; and as it is a greater evil to
strike a King, than to strike a private person, so it must needs be a high
degree of villainy to strike at God.

2 It is boundless, in causing sin in the sinner, and others also, Romans 6.19.
Ye have yielded up your members to iniquity, there is no stop in sin. It is
said of Jeroboam, that he sinned, and made Israel to sin.

3 It is boundless in regard of the Sinners will, for it is contrary to the
Will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2. and if the sinner should live ever, he would sin ever.

4 It is in some sort infinite, in regard of the mischief which it does, for it
deprives us of an infinite good, of the love of God, and the sense and comfort
thereof, of communion with him, of the joys of Heaven; and instead thereof
brings infinite miseries, The worm that dies not, the fire that is not
quenched, Mar. 9.44, 46, 48.

Obj. Though God in the Scripture speaks thus, yet this is but to skare us, we
hope that God will be better than his word?

Ans. If thou have as much Religion or honesty as Balaam the false Prophet,
thou would say with him, Numb. 23.19. God is not as man that he should lie,
and can the God of truth ever speak lies? This is a flat denial of God, and a
transforming of him into the likeness of sinful man. Romans 3.4. Let God be
true, and every man a liar, etc. Now what a sad consideration is this, that a
poor Creature must be eternally miserable, unless that God cease to be God,
and the Scripture cease to be true? would you not judge him to be in a
miserable condition, who is never likely to be freed from tormenting pains,
unless the Sun falls from Heaven, and the frame of Heaven and Earth be
dissolved; yet Luke 16.17. It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away,
etc. than God to speak untruth. The Heavens and the Earth shall one day be
burnt up, but the Word of God is settled for ever in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89.

Obj. 2. But though Gods Word be sure, yet happily he may change his mind in
respect of some men and women in the world, and so we may speed well enough.

Ans. No, Job 23.13. he is of one mind, and who can turn him? and what his
soul desires, even that he does, Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord stands
for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations: to make God
mutable, is to make him no God, and is to charge him either with ignorance or
error, which are the causes why men are changeable in their ways: but these
things are Atheistical, and inconsistent with the Nature of God; besides, if
the Lord should deal otherwise with one sinner than he does with another, then
Gods ways were not equal; contrary to that, Ezekiel. 18.29.

Obj. 3. Though God be not changed, yet I will be changed, I will leave my
sins, and change my course, and then I hope I need fear nothing.

Ans. It is true of some of Gods threatenings denounced in the Scripture, Jer.
18.6. that upon our repentance they shall not be accomplished, and it were
happy for thee indeed, if thou were changed both in heart and life; but let me
say as the Prophet does, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may they who are accustomed to do evil, learn to do
well. Thou go on in a course of sin, and a custom thereof, and hardnest thy
heart in it, and this makes thy change unlikely; but grant thou could change,
yet it is not any change of thy course for the future, that can satisfy
Justice for sins past; as for example, Suppose a Bankrupt-Tenant should be for
many years behind with his Landlord, but at length turns a good husband, and
pays his rent duly ever after, the Landlord may take it for part of payment,
but he will also exact the old scores; so suppose thou should reform for the
future (yet thou can not do that perfectly neither) yet who shall pay thy
old Scores, thy old Whoredoms and Thefts, thy old Lies, Sabbath-breaking,
Ale-house-haunting, Night-walking, etc. I say, who shall pay for these? So
suppose a man has long robbed his Neighbor, and now he robbs no more; this is
something; but he must satisfy the Law for old robbings, and so it is in the
case we have in hand: Briefly, if thou had committed but one small sin all
thy life time, yet all possible reformation cannot satisfy justice for that,
there being infinite evil in the least sin, and God requiring an infinite
satisfaction.

Obj. 4. But how can God deny to show mercy to his Creatures, and how can he
pour out his anger for ever upon the work of his own hands?

Ans. Isa. 27.11. It is a people that have no understanding ^ therefore he that
made them will have no mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor. [Yee have no understanding] as if he should have said, Ye have unmade,
and undone your selves by your folly, wherefore I will not pity you, as my
Creatures; but if there were any validity in what this Objector says, then the
Devils might comfort themselves, which are the Creatures of God as well as men,
but of them, and all the wicked of the world is that verified, Prove. 16.4. God
made all things for himself, and the wicked for the evil day.

Obj. 5. If I must be the everlasting Object of Divine justice and vengeance
for my sin, I will bear it as well as I can.

Answ. Now wretched creature, is it come to that pass? do thou know what thou
say? know the Lion by his paw? Cain said, Genesis 4.13. My punishment is
greater than I can bear. Proverbs 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear?
Remember how it was with Job, chapter 6.12. Is my strength the strength of
stones? Again, Job 7.14, 15. My soul chooses strangling, etc. And Hezekiah,
Isa. 38.13. I reckoned till morning, That as a Lion, so will he break all my
bones, Psalm. 88.15. Heman said, whilst he suffered the terrors of God, he was
distracted. Job. 31.23. Destruction from the Almighty was a terror unto me, and
by reason of his highness I could not endure. Now these men that are last
mentioned were precious Saints, and Servants of the Lord, that had a singular
support of divine grace, and yet they upon some lesser manifestations of the
terrors of God in this life, did thus express themselves. But what is this in
comparison of the Sinners of Sion Isa. 33.14, 15. what is this in comparison of
everlasting burnings, everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. and the last verse.
streamings of brimstone, chains of darkness, everlasting fire, etc. Matthew.
25.41. the bottomeless pit, an everlasting death, immortal mortality, according
to that expression, Rev. 9.6. they shall seek death, and shall not find it,
they shall desire to dye, and death shall flee from them: consider but that
expression of everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew.
25.41. the words are these, Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand,
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Mark that word [prepared] it is spoken, as if the Almighty Wisdom did
deliberate, and as it were set down and devise all stinging and terrible
ingredients, for a temper of greatest torture to make up that dreadful fire
wherein he meant to torment eternally his enemies: do but cast an eye upon the
sufferings of the Lord Jesus, and his agony, and prayer under the sense of his
Fathers wrath, and judge how well thou art like to bear the wrath of a
sin-revenging God.

In a word, let me shut up this discourse with that of the Prophet Ezekiel,
Chap. 13. verse. 11. Ye speak peace (false peace) to your own hearts, build the
Wall, and dawb it ever with untempered mortar, thus says the Lord, say unto
them, you dawb it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall, and there shall
be an overflowing shower, and ye O great hailstones, shall fall, and the
stormy wind shall rent it. The great God commands the great hailstones to
throw down the walls, and daubings, that ye shall say where is the daubing
wherewith we have daubed it? All the vain Cavils of impenitent sinners shall
be scattered, and do them no good.

I shall finish this use with a few conclusions following thence.

Conclusi. 1. It is a horrible depth of Satan's subtilty to hold an unbeleeving,
or impenitent sinner in a senseless security, without feeling, or fear of
divine vengeance, seeing such a soul is continually subject to be seized on by
the justice of God, and that notwithstanding this, sinners should be so
desperate that they turn to their course, as the horse to the battle, Jerem.
8.6. This is suitable to those expressions, 2 These. 2.9, 10. where the Apostle
tells us of the efficacy of Satan with all power, and with all deceivablenesse
of unrighteousness in them that perish. Now these are Satan's plots by which he
deceives souls. 1 To procure them secrecy, and success in their wicked
enterprises; for secrecy, you have a place in Esaias, chapter 29.15. Their works
are in the dark, and they say who sees me, or who knows us? they dig deep
to hide their counsel from the Lord, much more from me (says the Prophet)
surely your turnings of things up and down shall be as the Potters clay: for
shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? Psalm. 64.5. They
encourage themselves in an evil matter, they commune of laying snares privily,
and say, who shall see them? but God shall shoot at them, etc. Now for their
success in their wickedness, and attempts, the Devil makes fair promises of
that too, and for a while it may be they may prosper; Thus Haman, Doeg, the
Scribes and Pharisees for some time prospered; so did Julian the Apostate. We
read of this delusion of prospering in sin, in Dan. 8.24. Hereupon the poor
deluded wretches strengthen themselves in their wickedness, Psalm. 52.1. 2 He
draws them by all the Baits he can to engage them to their lusts, to
Alehouses, drinking, revelling, gaming, feasting, all manner of
good-fellow-meetings, and Bedlam-fooleries, where the Devil himself is present
in his Pontificalibus, Prove. 1.11. Come (say they) let us lay wait for blood.
etc. we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
spoil, cast in thy lot, etc.

3 He fills their heads with a multitude of worldly occasions, with hope of
gathering wealth; so he dealt with Cain in his building; and as the Idolaters
used (when they sacrificed their Children to Moloc) to drown the cries of their
children, with the noise of Drumms, so these drown all the noise of Conscience,
with the louder noise of the cumber and clutter of those worldly affairs.

4 The Devil like a crafty juggler casts mists before the eyes of his slaves,
or else (as the Philistims dealt with Sampson) puts out their eyes, that they
shall not see the ugly face of sin; They call evil good, and good evil, and so
draw on iniquity, and Isa. 5.19, 20. there they challenge God, and say, Let him
make speed, and hasten his work, etc. Let the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel
draw nigh and come, etc. Oh how miserable is that soul that is thus deluded by
the Devil, and led captive at his pleasure? and what a fearful thing is it, to
abide one moment in such a condition?

Conclusi. We are to justify God in all his severity.
2. Then let us justify God in all the severity of his Commands, Threatenings,
Judgments; this was the frame of David's heart, when he was kindly humbled,
Psalm. 51.4. That thou may be justified when thou speak, and clear when
thou judge; David was now, all for justifying of God in whatsoever he said,
and did, and so should we; Let us take heed of entertaining such thoughts as
do rise up against the justice of God; it is a great sin to fly out against the
Justice of civil Courts, as is the practice of some; The Prophet Isaiah speaks
of a sad time wherein he lived, Chap. 59.4. None calls for justice, nor any
pleads for the truth. Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebukes in the Gate, this
is a horrid crime, to be against the Justice of the Magistrate, but we speak
now of a higher matter, which is the justice of God himself, and to be against
this, is to be against God himself; for Gods Justice is his very Name, and
being: It were well if they would consider this, who do so vehemently decry the
preaching of the Law, whereas every wise and sober Christian knows it is his
duty, to love the strictest commands of God, and that they are very useful to
keep him from sinning against God. Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy word in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee, and so in another place, By the words
of thy mouth (says David) I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. And
as some are against the strictness of the Commands, so others are offended at
the severity of Gods threatenings. Amos 7.10. The Prophet there denounced the
judgments of God against Jeroboam, and Amaziah said, The Land was not able to
bear his words, and he must be gone from Bethel, verse. 12.13. How harshly did
the chief Priests and Pharisees resent those threanings of Christ. Luke 20.16.
when Christ there told them that the Lord of the vineyard should destroy the
cruel Husbandmen, and give the vineyard to others, they said, God forbid, and
as it was with them, so it is with the people with whom we have to do in our
ministry. God forbid (say they) that there should be so much severity in God
as Ministers speak of; but (beloved) is not preventing justice, precious
justice, and preventing Physic the best? does it not argue much tenderness in
a father to threaten the Rod to his Child, if he shall adventure to come near
to a pit, where he may be drowned? So I say of the judgments of God, as they
are all righteous and just when they are executed upon Gods Enemies, so they
are for the prevention of sin in his Children; wherefore instead of slandering
the Justice of God, or repining at it, let us justify his ways: Lam. 3.39, 40.
Why does the living man complain, a man that suffers for his sin. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

The drowning of the Old World, the burning of Sodom with fire and brimstone,
the destruction of Jerusalem, seems harsh to flesh and blood, and some there
are that quarrel against, and (are not afraid to deny) the eternity of Hell
torments, and yet we are not displeased with a man that kills a brood of
Serpents, or a kennel of wolves, and why? Because there is an antipathy in our
natures against such harmeful Creatures. Now thus it is in Case of sinning
against God; sin is contrary to Gods nature, and Gods nature is contrary to
sin: if fire burns fuel, who blames it, or wonders at it: and why? it is the
nature of fire so to do, and it is the nature of the holy God to hate sin.
Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright in thy judgments.

Conclusi. 3. If there be so much evil in sin, Wonder at Gods patience in
forbearing sin.
then wonder at the patience of God in forbearing of thee thus long; and grow
to a self-abhorring: and see what an indispensible necessity lies upon every
soul, for to be deeply humbled for sin, and turned universally from it, even
whilst it is called to day; take notice of that, Jerem. 8.8. No man repents
of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? and let that place be verified in
us, Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn.
Mr. Calvin interprets that place of God the Father, and there may be a truth in
it, that each person is pierced by our sins.

Oh! Therefore Mourn, as for an only Son; and let us be ashamed that we
can mourn for every petty loss or cross, (Yea, suppose it were the loss of an
only Son) but cannot mourn at our peircing of Jehovah. If a man had brought
confusion or destruction upon the whole Creation, yet this were infinitely
short of the evil of sin, that is a weariness to God himself. Isaiah 1.14.
The Lord there complains of the sins of his people though they did so many
costly duties, that he was weary to bear them: what, cannot the infinite God
bear them, and can a sinful heart bear them? Yea, how dare a poor wretch live
wilfully one hour in sin, when as he knows that God will not pardon it,
without great Repentance: But here perhaps he will shift or pervert some
Scripture or another, to palliat his Conscience. But now if we thoroughly
understand and consider the Argument I am upon, we can find out no way to
escape punishment for our sins.

If this be true, that God cannot in justice pardon sin without punishment,
God will punish all our sins, either in our own Persons, or in our Surety.
When I say God cannot let sin pass unpunished, the Reason is, because God
cannot do that which is contrary to his Nature, nor change his Nature, it were
a contradiction to conceit this. It is said in the second of Timothy, 2.13. God
cannot deny himself, etc. And shall a Sinner then dare to live one hour in such
an estate, that (if God do not, or cannot deny himself) if he dye in it, he
shall infallibly be damned? Do not go away now and say, as the people did of
Ezekiel, Chapt. 20. verse the last, Do they not say of me, O Lord God, does
not this man speak Parables?

But Friends, this is no parable that I Preach, but a plain Truth, and
undeniable, and therefore if you are rational, you must needs yield to the
strength of these things.

4 If there be so much evil in sin, then let us set our strength against it,
and all the temptations of Satan, whereby by he labors to draw us into it. I
might here tell you of the danger of sin, how that death is the wages thereof,
and that eternal fire shall be the portion of all impenitent sinners.

But Brethren, it is a stronger Argument, when I tell you that it is contrary
to God; and this is true, not only of great sins, but also of small, as it is
sin, those little sins (as we term them) even vain thoughts, Jer. 4.14. and
Idle words, Matthew. 12.36. do expose you to Eternal Wrath, not only a profane
Conversation, but also a vain Conversation will prove thy destruction, without
a Redeemer, and therefore Christ dyed for this end, to redeem us from (the
danger of) our vain Conversation, 1 Peter 1.19. from the wasting or
mis-spending of our time.

It was a precious Resolution of Joseph, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against my God? he speaks, it is true, of
Adultery, which is a great wickedness, but his Argument to resist will as well
hold, to resist even the least sin; How shall I sin against God? yea,
conclude certainly, that though all sins are not equal, yet they agree all in
this, that God hates them, and cannot but in his justice punish them, and there
is abundance of evil in every sin, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounds grace does
super-abound, he speaks there of all the sins of the Elect. Every sin abounds
with wickedness. Oh Beloved, suffer the word of Exhortation, Heb. 12.5. Resist
sin unto blood, much more to shame, or disgrace, or poverty, etc. 2 Hate that
which hates God, Psa. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them that hate thee? 3 Get the
love of God into your hearts, then ye will hate sin indeed. Psalm. 97.10. All
ye that love the Lord, hate evil. 4 Labor to know God to be your God, and
then you will know what it is to sin against him. Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do
thy will, for thou art my God; if ye look upon God as a stranger, as one in
whom you have no interest, then you will not be careful how to avoid sinning
against him.

Justice concurres to a Sinner Justification.
THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25.26. That he might be just, and to declare at this time his
righteousness.


Doct. NOt only the exact Truth of God, or the abundance of his Grace, but also
his strict Justice does concur to the justification of a Sinner.

Use 3. Satisfied justice the strongest comfort to believers.
It may serve for an invincible ground of comfort to every true believer, every
soul that is in Christ Jesus, that he is justified by the strictest justice of
God. And as for those that are not in Christ, let them stand by, and behold
with lamentation their estrangement from these consolations; yet let them
admire and long for, and desire these heavenly enjoyments, that belong unto the
Saints: though for the present (poor souls) they are in the condition of such
as have no part or fellowship in this business. It was a sad speech that was
spoken by the Prophet Elisha to the unbeleeving Lord, 2 King. 7.2. about the
great plenty in Samaria, Thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not
eat thereof. I will not dare to speak this concerning any that hears this word;
but this is sure, that for the present, whilst men abide in the state of
unbelief and impenitency, it will be extreme presumption and delusion, for
such an one to conceit any interest in this consolation.

The Comfort stands in these particulars.

Comf. 1. In the blessedness of that estate, and the surenesse of the ground
thereof; the blessedness of this estate stands in the pardon of sins, Psalm.
32.1. Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, etc. It is commonly
accounted an easy matter to obtain forgiveness of sins, and there is none so
vile but he will presently conceit, that he can get it, when he is giving up
the ghost; but such persons know not what such a mercy costs, nor what is
requisite on their parts to the enjoying of it, nor what a mighty power of God
is exercised in forgiving sin. See how Moses prayed, when the people had
sinned, Number. 14.16, 19. Now let the power of my Lord be great, as thou have
said; the Lord is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, etc. Pardon I beseech thee
the iniquity of this people, according to the greatness of thy mercy. Gods
omnipotent power in all his Attributes, is put forth in forgiving of sin, and
in special the greatness of his mercy and justice; surely this must needs be
of great use and worth to believers, in so much that it is so strongly built,
and that on a rock of eternity; for it is built on the justice, truth, and
mercy of God. Righteousness and peace kiss each other, mercy and truth meet
together in the believers justification, Psa. 85.9.

Comf. 2. That which is the greatest terror in the world to unbeleevers, is
the strongest ground of comfort to believers, that is, the Justice and the
Wrath of God against sin. Look how it was, Matthew. 28.4, 5. when the Angel
appeared at the Resurrection of our Savior Christ, The keepers were affrighted
and became as dead men; but it was said to the women, Fear not ye, for ye
seek for Jesus of Nazareth that was crucified. So it is much more in this case,
when Gods Justice is powerfully manifested, the sinners of Sion and of the
world are afraid and terrified; but ye poor believers seek for Christ who was
crucified, ye need not fear any thing, yea you may be wonderfully cheared at
this, and it is your greatest comfort that you have to deal with this just God,
who has already received satisfaction for your sins; for Revel. 15.3, 4. it is
the substance of the Song of Moses and the Lamb, wherein the Saints triumph in
the justice and judgments of God, that are most terrible to Gods enemies. Luke
21.26, 28. where the Day of Judgment is described, and that in it there shall
be distress of Nations, and men's hearts failing them for fear, viz. (of the
Justice and Wrath of God) Why so? it is for looking after those things that are
to come upon the earth, for the powers of the earth shall be shaken, etc. but
when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads,
for your redemption draws near. This day is the most dreadful day that ever
was in the world to all the ungodly, but the just, and the faithful then shall
be able to lift up their heads, to see all the world on a light fire about
them, and all the Elements in terrible confusion. But how dare a poor Creature
lift up his head in such a case as this? They shall see the Son of Man coming
in a cloud with power and great glory; here is enough to comfort the poor
members of Christ, to see Christ on whom they have believed, and who has
satisfied Gods justice for them, to appear to Judgment, Isa. 40.1. Comfort
ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
and say unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is
pardoned, for she has received at the Lords hands double for her sins, i. e.
this conflict with the wrath of God is at an end; the punishment of their
iniquity is accepted, they have received in their Head and Surety Christ Jesus,
double for their sins, i. e. Justice has past upon them in their Head Christ
Jesus, and they be sure the Judge of all the world will do right, and will not
punish sins twice. So that although they are not exempted altogether from Gods
fatherly Chastisements, and afflicting hand in this life, yet there shall be
no condemnation unto them: the exactness of Gods Justice cannot do this. Job
38.10, 11, 12. Far be is from the Almighty, that he should do wickedness,
etc. It would be rightly accounted great injustice in a Magistrate to punish
the same offense twice, therefore much less can God be guilty of it.

Comf. 3. This serves to answer all cavills and objections, (though there were
Millions of them) that can be made against the good estate of a believer. That
is a precious truth, that alone overthrows all contrary errors. Such is this,
that our sins are pardoned, not only in a way of truth and mercy, but in a way
of justice. Satan and our own Consciences will object many things against our
comfort, if we plead only the mercy and the truth of God, and will say, but
where is then the Justice of God? Can Mercy pardon without the consent of his
Justice? but now whilst we believe in Christ's satisfaction, justice and peace
kiss each other; yea justice says, I am pleased. Many things will be cast in
our dish in the day of temptation, about the multitude and greatness of our
sins, and our manifold grievous relapses; but Tit. 2.14. Christ has redeemed
us from all iniquity; he has paid the full price that justice could exact or
require, and we may say, as it is in Jam. 2.13. Mercy (coming through says)
rejoices against judgment.

Comf. 4. This is the special favor of the Spouse of Christ, that they can
plead the righteousness of God in Christ, as the Lord says, Hos. 2.19. I will
betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in
rightteousnesse, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, i. e. in free grace
pitying our miserable condition, and in faithfulness and truth performing his
promises that he has made; but is that all? No, but he will do it in
righteousness too, that is, in a way whereby he will declare his justice, as
well as his mercy and truth. This is the sure match that the Lord has made
with a poor soul, which will stand good, not only in the Court of Chancery, but
in the Court of Justice, or Common Pleas too. Such an inviolable match has the
Lord made with a poor believer, and how then can he break off from it, to leave
the soul in a state of Widdowhood? Isa. 62.4. Thou shall be no more termed
forsaken, but thou shall be called Hephsibah, for the Lord delights in thee.

Use 4. For instruction and exhortation, and there might be several branches of
it.

1 If pardon of sin is given, and must be received in a way of justice as well
as in a way of mercy and truth; then let every soul seek pardon of God in such
a way as may stand with Divine justice. There is many a condemned Malefactor
standing at the bar, that cries for mercy in vain at the hands of the Judge,
not considering the place of the Judge, which is to do justice. So it fares
with many convicted and awakened sinners, they go to God in such a natural
way, as Benhadad went to Ahab, saying, The Kings of Israel we have heard are
merciful Kings, so they say, we have heard the God of Israel is a merciful God,
I will go to him with sackcloath about my loins, and ropes about my neck, i.e.
with Humiliation and Self-judging, and I hope that he will pardon me. Beloved
in the Lord, this is needful, and commendable, and I would not discourage any
one from it; but the distressed sinner is forced to it by the sense of his
misery and some natural instinct, and indeed alone it is insufficient to
prevail with God, unless he can plead his justice too as well as his mercy.
Thence you find that God is described so, Isa. 45.21. There is no God else
besides me, a just God, and a Savior, i. e. none besides me that is a just God
in saving of sinners; he so saves as that he may be just still, and none can
save so besides this just God, as Jer. 3.22, 23. Truly in vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills, and the multitude of the mountains; in the Lord our
God is the salvation of Israel, for shame has devoured the labors of our
fathers, and we lie down in their shame, for we have sinned against the Lord
our God. It is but a vain thing for you to take pains, to go to any other for
salvation, besides this just God, and if ever he save you, it will be in a way
of justice.

Quest. What is that way of justice, that we must expect justification in?

Ans. There is or can be but one way (that was ever heard of) to satisfy the
justice of God, that sinners might be justified, i.e. by the Father's making
his own Son a propitiation for them, that is the mystery in the text, that God
forgiveth sins through the blood of his Son; and beloved, consider that Luther
took a great deal of pains to understand this, and prayed much and earnestly to
the Lord for it, before he could get the right meaning of it. The mystery is
this, That the Son of God manifested in the flesh, must make his soul an
offering for sin, to satisfy Divine justice, or else all Mankind must perish
eternally. Then if this be so, let every one see the great necessity of
getting into Christ, and accordingly fly without delay to the Lord Jesus. Let
me say to thee, as it was said to Lot, Escape for thy life, neither stay, etc.
lest thou be consumed; deliver thy self as a Roe from the hands of the Hunter,
or as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler. My thinks, this Argument should fire
every sinful man out of his miserable estate, and make him fill Heaven and
Earth with cries, that he may gain Christ; yea my thinks, the Lord seems to
take the Lingerers by the hand, as he did Lot, Genesis 19.16. The Lord being
merciful to them, to bring them to Christ. The Arguments whereby I would press
this upon poor sinners are, The urgent and extreme necessity of a Redeemer for
a sinner, not only because the Scripture cannot be broken, Joh. 10.35. which
says, Without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb: 9.22. Besides,
there is no pardon of sin, but in the New Testament, and where a Testament is,
there must needs be the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.16. or else the Testament
is of no force; Nor only the necessity of Gods unchangeable Decree, who chooses
every soul that shall be saved in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. and these are inviolable
things: but this is the extreme necessity that now I must needs put you in mind
of, i.e. the necessity of Gods nature, that he is so just, that he can by no
means acquit or clear the guilty. Look how impossible it is that the God of
truth should lie, or the holy God should sin, or Almighty God should be weak;
so it is that the most just God should pardon sin, to them that are without
Christ, yea know, how impossible it is that any thing should act contrary to
its nature, as our Savior reasons, Do men gather grapes of thorns? etc. yet
the Lord of Nature can, and has changed the nature of inferior Agents,
because his is above them; but it cannot be conceived (without blasphemy)
concerning the unchangeable Nature of God, he says, I am Jehovah, I change
not, Mal. 3.6. He is that eternal being that is ever the same; and if so, then
thou must be a member of Christ, and so answer justice, even the justice of
God by the Surety, or else thou must certainly be the everlasting object of
Divine vengeance; and observe examples and expressions of Scripture to this
purpose, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5. If God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them
down to Hell, and delivered them unto chains of darkness, etc. Mark the words,
the Angels before their fall were most glorious Creatures, and had God pardoned
and restored one of them, he might have done God more service than many
millions of men, but them he spared not, he abated nothing at all, but cast
them down to Hell, and put them into everlasting chains. But why did not God
spare them? why? because they had no Christ to answer Gods justice for them.
Heb. 2.16. Christ took not on him the nature of Angels. Again, Romans 11.21. If
God spared not the natural branches (the Jews) take heed lest he spare not
also thee. Suppose thou art in the number of them that profess the name of God,
as the Jews did; suppose thou art a member of the visible Church, yet God will
not spare thee, no more than the Jews. Why should he not spare his own people,
that had so many privileges? Romans 9.1, 5. Oh beloved, the reason is, because
they received not Christ, they were broken off, and though you think of your
selves as well, as of the greatest that ever sinned, the just God (except you
get Christ) will not, cannot spare you. Add that, Romans 8.32. He spared not his
own Son, being a Surety for sin. What? was God without natural affection, or
was he cruel? No, but Christ was now bound by an engagement to his Fathers
Justice, and therefore God spared him not, shall any close sinner hope then to
be spared? Now let me bring these things to the result of them, and it is this,
That in some cases all deliberation is excluded; as 1 Where there is but one
possible means or way of safety, deliberation is used when there are many ways
or means, which is the best that we may take. 2 In case of imminent danger,
where without this means there is absolute impossibility of escaping
destruction. 3 In case of extreme present necessity: as in case of violent
storms, the Mariner does not deliberate whether he should throw out his
Treasure, or cut down his Masts for the saving of his life, and the lives of
all that are in the Vessel with him; in these cases all deliberation is vain,
by the very light of nature and reason. Now in the business in hand all these
do meet together to exclude all deliberation. For,

1 There is but one way to appease wrath, and satisfy the Justice of God for
sin, Acts 4.12. and there had not been this way, except that God of his grace
had given it. Besides, it is utterly impossible for any to be saved without
Christ, Heb. 10.26, 27. Without a sacrifice for sin, there remains nothing but
a certain fearful expectation of judgment. And lastly, it is a matter of
extreme present necessity. It is eternally necessary that God should be just,
and it is necessary the sinner should justify the righteous God, the Lord
brought Pharaoh to it at last, Exodus 9.27. when he had poured forth all his
Plagues upon his heart, he confessed and said, The Lord is righteous; and there
is no such profane wretch but shall be brought to confess as much at last,
though he be never a whit the better for it; but how much better is it to
justify God, by flying to the only sanctuary, even to Christ? as the Publicans
justified God, Luke 7.29. by flying to Christ in the use of the means; but the
Pharisees rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, rejected Christ and
his Ordinances against themselves, i.e. to their own destruction. When Paul
preached Christ, it is said, that he declared all the counsel of God, Acts
20.27. so it is necessary we should receive all the Counsel of God, which is
revealed in the offer of Christ to us, it is extremely necessary that every
soul should fly from the wrath to come; when Lot has the rain of fire and
brimstone about his ears, shall he linger? Shall he not escape for his life?
and this is not Lots case only, but the common case of all the wicked, Psalm.
11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, and this is the portion of their cup. Me thinks upon this
consideration troops of sinners should flock to Christ, as the very Sadduces
did to John, Matthew. 3.7. who says to them, Who has warned you to flee from
the wrath to come? how comes it to pass that ye come in now, that have stood
out so long? Why, you will say, we have been warned, and warned many a time,
and we would take no warning, till now at last we see it necessary to flee from
the wrath to come; and who is it can deliver us from it? The Apostle tells you,
1 Thessalonians. 1.10. that it is Jesus that delivers us from the wrath to come.

Instruc. Love Christ for his satisfaction.
3. This may teach all the faithful, to love the Lord Jesus most ardently; see
what an Argument you have for it, that he stopped the hand of Divine justice
from seizing on poor miserable Creatures, putting his life in his hands, Job.
10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life for my
Sheep; and sure his sheep should love him very much for this; Christ laid down
his life, partly in love to the justice of God, lest that the stream thereof
should be stopped, and partly in love to our poor souls, as Ephesians. 5.2. Who
loved us, and gave himself for us an offering, etc. But some will say, What
need that, could not God have forgiven us without an Offering, at least such an
offering? A. No, it must be presupposed that the justice of God necessarily
required it, otherwise we cannot think such blood should ever have been shed.
Now to him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood -- to
him be glory and honor for ever, Rev. 1.5, 6. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. the fountain of
our salvation is in the love of Christ, and the wonder of that love, and the
freeness of it is, that he loved us (such sinners) together with the
intensnesse and strength of it, that it was stronger than death, and all this
to wash us from our sins, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God,
because he laid down his life, etc. sustaining the pains of death. Of what
death? the First and Second Death; He washed us in his blood from all the
filthiness of Hell and Death. All the dunghills in the world cannot defile us
as sin does, and it was the filth of sin that Christ's blood washed us from.
Sin defiles the soul, yea the whole man, Matthew. 15.19. You then that are
beloved ones, and washed, can ye content your selves with a slight
consideration of this? What manner of love is this, Qualis, Quantus? 1 John
3.1. Ephesians. 3.18. That ye may comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, etc. Mark, here is a thing that concerns all Saints, and we should
labor for such might and strength, as not only to apprehend in our minds, but
comprehend and lay hold upon all the measures of this love in our hearts, and
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, i. e. either all other
knowledge, or else all the knowledge of carnal persons, or all the knowledge of
the Saints, in the perfection of it; (that is) it is the most desirable
blessing in the world, to understand the love of Christ aright. We can never
know too much of this love. What should this love work upon our hearts? truly
we should be rooted and grounded in love; not only have some leaves of
profession, but be rooted and grounded in it, and it may lie deep in our
hearts, as roots and foundations use to do; yea this love of the Lord Jesus
must bear up all the bulk, and wait of our Christian trials, yea as a root,
feed and nourish other graces and holy endeavors in us. Oh it is much to be
lamented, that so many have left their first love. They are but few sure that
have ever had any rooted or grounded love to Christ at all, that is suitable to
Gospel measure, or rule, Luke 7.47. What is the Gospel measure of love? A.
Matthew. 10.37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; i. e. our love to Christ should exceed all other loves and affections in
our hearts, yea in comparison of Christ, we should hate father and mother, etc.
Luke 14.26.33. we should hate all, forsake all, so far as they stand in
competition with Christ, or the things of Christ; else we cannot be the
Disciples of Christ.

Instr. 4. Redeemed ones have great boldness toward God.
This may work in all redeemed ones a mavelous boldness toward God; that
which the Scripture often expresses, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness of
access with confidence, Heb. 10.19. Having boldness to enter into the Holiest
by the blood of Jesus. It is sweet and precious that we have, Heb. 4.16. Let us
go with boldness to the Throne of grace, etc. i. e. to Christ our High
Priest, he has set up a Mercy-seat for us. And is that all? Nay, but says
the Apostle, Heb. 12.23. We are come to God the Judge of all, and we are come
to the Seat of Justice, and we may in an humble boldness plead the justice of
God, and say, Lord, who art the Judge of all, do me justice, thou art just,
and therefore the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Oh ponder and take
again upon thy heart the meaning of this, it is not only that he may be
merciful, and gracious, and the Justifier of believers (though that be a sweet
and precious truth too to be believed, and rejoiced in) but it is, that he may
be just. Oh beloved, this is the very quintessence of faith, when as the
believer by faith shall present unto God the Father the righteousness of Jesus
Christ for satisfaction for sins; and go to him with a full price in his hand,
and current pay, and to say (as they do in dealing) here is one, and there is
the other; and this is not bare distributive, but commutative justice between God
and man, where there is not only Geometrical, but Arithmetical proportion, that
is, weight for weight, and measure for measure is observed. Oh then, tender all
the pay together, all the obedience of Christ, active and passive; tender we to
the righteousness of God the righteousness of Christ, it is such a jewel as
exceeds our sins infinitely, though they have been very many and great, Gods
justice shall be no loser by us at all, and let poor believers encourage and
embolden their hearts with this; Luther was bold when he prayed thus, not only
Fiat voluntas tua, but Fiat voluntas mea; not only let thy will be done, but
let my will be done, and it was but the confidence of faith upon this ground we
are speaking of. Oh beloved, the world will account this malepertnesse to come
thus before God, that they are more bold than welcome, but they are strangers
to these things, and to all that liberty we have in Christ, Gal. 2.4. It would
be sauciness indeed for those that are out of Christ, to approach at any time
on this manner to God, but let the Children take this as the daily portion of
the Childrens bread, and it is no wrong to that text, 1 John 1.9. to take it in
this sense, If we confess our sins, he is just (for Christ's sake) to forgive us
our sins, nor to that, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness.

Inst. Adore the righteousness of God in all his ways.
5. If God be thus just, exactly just in the justification of a Sinner, let us
learn to acknowledge and adore the righteousness of God in all his ways, Psalm.
145.17. If his mercy does not pardon one sin, but in a course of justice
through the death of Christ, then doubtless the Justice of God will not be
bafled, or turned aside in the managing other matters in the world. The light
of Nature sees nothing but mercy in this case, but the light of Grace sees Gods
justice also. So that though God deals otherwise many times, in many things,
than we could have expected, or can see a reason of; yet he is always just and
holy in his proceedings, and it is not enough for us to acknowledge the
righteousness and holiness of God in some of his ways and works, or in his
ways toward others, and not toward our selves, and in his dealing with some
persons, and not with all; but we must justify the Lord in our hearts and
words always, in all things, toward all, in all the ways of his providence, in
his afflicting the godly, as well as punishing the wicked, Ezra 9.13. yea in
the prosperity of the wicked; In his great Counsels of Election and
Reprobation, in the rejection of the Jews, etc. of which when Paul had spoken,
Romans 11. he concludes, verse. 36. and cries out, Oh the depth of the wisdom of
God, etc. So let us always do when we cannot trace God in his ways, Eccl.
7.14. God has set prosperity and adversity the one over against the other, to
the end that no man should find any thing after him; i. e. that none should
see the print of his steps. When God deals thus, and his ways are over-clouded
by us, never let us quarrel or cavil at any passage of his providence, but let
us fall down and adore the righteousness of the Lord, and judge him, not
according to outward appearance, but say, How unsearchable are thy judgments,
etc. and Psalm. 17.19. Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, etc. and truly
beyond the reach of men and Angels, thou have done great things, oh God, who is
like unto thee? thou have showed me great and sore troubles, and shall quicken
me again, and raise me up from the depths of the earth. So when God visits
the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, acknowledge Gods righteousness in
it, for Children are part of their Parents, and it is just with God to punish
such as hate him, when and where he pleases. Besides, many times children
approve of the sins of their Parents, and imitate them, and do worse than
they, as Belshazzar, Dan. 8.22. So when God gives grace to some, and denies it
to others, that are alike sinful, this seems harsh to Arminians, and carnal
persons, but God says, Shall I not do what I will with mine own? Mat. 20.13.

The Glory of Gods Righteousness is the end of Redemption.
THE SIX AND TWENTIETH SERMON
ON Romans 3.25, 26. To declare I say at this time his righteousness.


WE have heard, how that not only the mercy and truth of God, but also his
justice does concur and act in the justification of a sinner; but there is yet
more in the words, when it is said, that this is done for the declaration of
the righteousness of God; and that with a repetition of it, to signify that
God would have us to take special notice of this. And there is employed an
answer to a secret objection; for it might be said: why did not the Lord
freely forgive the sins of his Elect, without the redemption wrought by Christ?
to satisfy such a question, the Lord says, because this way of forgiveness by
Christ's redemption, makes most for the declaration of the justice of God, in
the pardoning of sin.

The word ((...), translated declaration, or to declare) is rendered, Phil.
1.28. a manifest token, so I conceive the meaning is here, and it should be
rendered, for a manifest token, or for the demonstration of the righteousness
of God. God would have his people to know, that there was great necessity of
this way of justification, because that God is essentially just, and cannot
otherwise forgive sin, except his justice be satisfied.

Doctr. The main end of the redemption wrought by Christ, The main end of
redemption.
and that he was made a Propitiatory sacrifice for sin, was the demonstration
of the glory of the justice of God, to the world.

This point lies clear in the Text, and it is that which is signified by that
speech, that is so often used in all the great works of God, especially his
Mercies to his people, and his Judgments upon his Enemies, this is still
mentioned, as the end that God aims at, in Exodus, and Ezekiel, That ye may
know, that I am the Lord; that is, Just, Holy, Merciful, and Faithful, etc. and
such a one as I have revealed my self to be: it is expressed excellently,
Jerem. 9.23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, etc. but let him
that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am
Jehovah, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the
earth, for in these things I delight. The true knowledge of God, is a matter of
wonderful worth, and it is not only to know him to be a God that exercises
loving kindness, but also Judgment and Righteousness, in the earth, and the
reason is, because in these things the Lord delights. These things are
according to the nature and heart of God. Now mark, that the Lord would have us
to know him to be such a God, and to glory in this: for this is the happiness
of a poor creature. Now that you may know how pertinent this is to the matter
in hand, ye may compare with it, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. where it is said, That
Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that according as it is written, Let him that glories, glory in
the Lord. Whence there is evidently a reference to that place of the Prophet
Jeremy. So that to put both places together, there will be this collection
from them; That God the Father has appointed and sent the Lord Jesus Christ to
be the Head and Fountain of all spiritual blessings, and especially of
righteousness to the faithful, that they may know him to be Jehovah that
exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth, to strip
all the Children of Men of all glorying in themselves, and to cause them to
ascribe all the glory to the Lord,

For the handling of this, I shall open two things.

1 How the shedding of Christ's blood for a Propitiatory Sacrifice, makes for
the glory of Gods justice.

2 Why the demonstration of this glory, was the end of the shedding of Christ's
blood. How the shedding of Christ's blood glorifieth Gods justice.


Quest. 1. How does the shedding of Christ's blood to be a Propitiatory
sacrifice, make for the glory of Gods justice?

Answ. Not in an ordinary manner only, as all other judgments of God do show
forth the Justice of God; but in a most transcendent and eminent way, such as
never was before, and that in two respects especially.

1 In regard of the person whose blood is shed, his relation to the Father, as
being his only begotten Son; his dignity, as having a Name above every Name,
and he that is appointed Heir of all things, by whom he made the World, the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person. Heb.
1.2, 3 There was never Justice executed upon such a person as Christ was. So
ye may consider the love of the Father to him, Matthew. 12.18. He was the
Fathers beloved, in whom his soul delighted; and his love to the Father, and
his doing always that which was pleasing to the Father, Joh. 14.31. and ye
may add to these the fervent prayers to his Father, with strong cries and
tears, Heb. 5.7. together with the extremity of his sufferings, that is an Hell
upon Earth, and the pains of the second death, before the first death, and in
the days of his flesh; So that neither the Cup, nor any drop of the Cup did
pass away from him, Matthew. 26. This was a new, an admirable, and transcendent
justice, such as never was besides, since the foundation of the world.

2 In respect of the severity and universality of the execution of justice, Sea
Joseph. de bello Jud.
upon all sin and sinners, that receive not, but reject Christ crucified. There
was never such justice executed upon any people, as there was upon the Jews for
this sin, Mark. 13.19. So I may say in regard of others, that now set at naught
the grace of God in Christ, their judgment sleeps not. Mat. 11.20, etc.
It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of judgment,
than for such, and dreadful is that, Mal. 4.1, 2. Behold, the day comes that
shall burn as an oven, and all the Proud, and all that do wickedly shall be
stubble, and the day comes that shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts,
and leave them neither root nor branch: but to you that fear my name, shall the
Sun of righteousness appear which healing in his wings: these days of Christ,
to them that fear God, are refreshing, Sunshining days, but for the rest, the
oven, the fiery furnace, is heating for them, yea, seven times hotter than
ordinarily it uses; what shall now become of proud, ruffian-like Professors,
and carnal Gospellers? there will be bundles of such stubble thrown into the
Oven, now in the days of the Gospel.

Quest. 2. Why was the demonstration of the glory of Gods justice, the main end
of the shedding of Christ's blood? Romans 9.22, 23. We have indeed in the
general, that the glory of Gods mercy is aimed at in the decree of Election of
the vessels of mercy, and the glory of Gods justice in the vessels of wrath:
but how can this concern our Savior Christ?

Answ. All the light of the knowledge of the glory of God shines in the face of
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. but the glory of God is divided in some sort in
respect of men and women, Elect and Reprobate: but all the glory of God is
united together in Christ: so to give you the reasons of the point.

Reas. 1. (...). Arist. Ethic.
It is taken from the exceeding glorious excellency of the justice of God, that
as it is said of true justice, though but humane, that neither the morning nor
the evening star is so admirable as justice is. It may be much more said of
the justice of God, which is infinitely brighter than the Sun in the firmament;
that dazles the eyes of the brightest Angels in Heaven, that they are fain to
cover their faces, from the beholding of it. When the Spirit of God describes
the Lord in his glorious Majesty. it sets him forth with the clothing of
righteousness. See Isa. 59.17. He put on righteousness as a breast plate,
and the helmet of salvation upon his head, he put on the garments of vengeance
for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a Cloak, etc. Psalm. 94.1, 2. O Lord
God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self. Lift up thy self, thou judge of
the earth, render a reward to the proud.

Gods lifts up himself exceedingly, when he sits on his judgment Seat, and
exercises justice in exactness; in those famous Visions of Dan. 7.9, 10. Rev.
4.2.3. the Lord is described as sitting upon his Throne of Majesty and Justice,
in a glorious manner, and in his Royalty.

Yea moreover, for the necessity and usefulness of Gods justice, the World
cannot be without it; hence the Lord is described with his plumb-line in his
hand. Amos 7.7, 8. So Isa. 28.17. the plumb-line is the emblem of Divine
Justice; look how necessary the plumb-line is to the rearing of a building, and
the repairing of it: such is the use and necessity of Divine Justice: he takes
away the unevenness and inequality of persons and things by reason of sin, he
tries them by this level: were it not for this, the whole frame of the world
would totter and tumble down: so that the demonstration of the glory of Gods
Justice is a glorious end.

Reas. 2. It was necessary that the Justice of Gods proceedings should be
cleared above all things, in the death of Christ. It was liable in the
judgment of flesh and blood to grievous exceptions and cavils, as appears both
by Scripture and experience. Isa. 53.3, 4, The Jews say, We thought him
smitten of God and afflicted. So 1 Cor. 1.23. Christ crucified was to the Jews
a stumbling block, and to the (Learned) Greeks foolishness: the Jews thought
it enough excuse for them to reject Christ, because he was hanged on a tree,
and the Greeks thought it folly to look for salvation from him, that could not
save himself from such an ignominious death; yea, it was a cunning plot of the
Devil to suggest this to the Heathen of old.

Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem.

It is rank folly to hope for salvation by another death.

And it is the hellish reasoning of blasphemers in these times, how can it
stand with the Justice of God, that the just should suffer for the unjust?
should not the righteous rather be delivered, and the unrighteous be punished.
Therefore the Lord here would stop every mouth, and cut off all objections, when
he says, that the death of Christ was to that end, to demonstrate to all the
World the glory of his Justice; there cannot any thing in the World be
mentioned like unto this, to clear up the Justice of God, when as the Lord
would not spare his only Son, having no more, but sin imputed. Thus of the
second Reason.

Reas. 3. Is taken from the glory of other attributes, God has the glory of
other Attributes with the Glory of his Justice.
that redounds to God, together with the glory of his justice, as especially of
his Wisdom, Grace, Holiness, and providential Government.

First, The Glory of the Wisdom of God appears herein, that he has devised a
way, in that desperate extremity, that sin has cast all mankind into, that a
remnant might be saved. I will not say, as some do weakly, if not dangerously,
to reconcile Justice and Mercy together (for they are not to be opposed, or
dis-agree in God, but are one and the same, pure, and simple being in him) but
to glorify his infinite excellencies The Scripture speaks (...) in the language
of men.
in the reconciliation of his chosen ones, that sin might be punished and
condemned, and the sinner escape, the Law might be made up and accomplished,
Justice might have its course, and the Supreme Majesty offended might be
reconciled; Hence it is said, Col. 2.3. That in Christ Jesus all the treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge are hidden; The meaning whereof is, not only, that
Jesus Christ has all Wisdom and Knowledge in him, but that also the Wisdom
of the Father, in all the abundance thereof, shines most clearly in the
sending, and whole mystery of Christ. And more plainly, Ephesians. 1.7. In Christ we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, according to
the riches of his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom
and prudence. It was such abundance of wisdom, that no creature could reach
unto, or comprehend, that this strange way should be found out for a sinners
atonement.

2 The Glory and Riches of Gods grace are singularly manifested hereby; it had
been glorious grace, if that God should, or could of his good will alone
toward men have pardoned their iniquities, as Saul said to David, 1 Samuel 24.19.
If a man find his enemy will he let him go well away? but sinful men and
women (which of themselves are Gods enemies, and cannot hide themselves any
where, but God will find them) he not only lets them go well away, and freely
pardons them, but freely forgives them in such a way that cost him so exceeding
dear, as the blood of his only Son. When there was no other sufficient remedy
for the misery of man, but this; when as the pardon and redemption of souls is
so exceeding costly and precious; this above measure exalts the riches of Gods
grace; as David said, 2 Samuel 24.24. I will not offer of that that cost me
nothing; This was David's royal spirit. So this is Gods royal love, that he
saved not his people in a way that cost him nothing. 1 John 4.9, 10. Herein is
the love of God manifest to us, that he sent his Son into the World (to dye)
that we might live by him. And again, Herein is love, -- that he sent his Son
to be a Propitition for our sins: they that do not understand this, have too
low and mean conceits of the love and grace of God.

3 Here is a demonstration of the glory of the Holiness of the Lord, in his so
hating and punishing of sin, even to the uttermost, though but imputed, and
that to such a Son; he that breaks a pitcher because deadly poison was in it,
or burieth a beggars coat because infected with the plague, shows his hatred to
them; but he that throws away a vessel of gold because poisoned, or burns or
burieth some royal and rich robes for the leprosy cleaving to them, he is
carried with greatest indignation against the corruptions of them: now this is
the case of Gods hatred of the sins of the Elect, imputed to the Son of God,
here is the pearl of great price, even the richest treasure, so and so dealt
withal, this is mighty holiness and hatred of sin.

Psalm. 99.8, 9 It is said, Thou art a God that forgavest them, though thou
tookest vengeance of their inventions. Whence he inferres, Exalt the Lord our
God, for he is holy: he speaks of the Lords manner of forgiving of the sins
of his people; it was with vengeance for their inventions: surely, this is an
holy God: but this is incomparably more, to pardon the sins of his Elect in
such a way, by laying the chastisement of their peace on his only Son. Oh what
an holy God is this!

4 Add to the rest, the glory of Gods Kingdom, Providence, and Government:
This is that which the Saints do bless the Lord for, Psalm. 145.10, 11. They
speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power: now the glory of
Gods kingdom appears in this, that he rectifies all the disorders that are in
the world by sin, there is no confusion in the World, but that which is in sin,
or brought in by it, which has made the world like that woeful land, Job 10.21,
22. A land of darkness, and of the shadow of death, without order: now to
bring all into order again, was a busy work, and this is a glorious work of the
government and providence of the Lord. There are strange examples of Gods glory
in holy Writ concerning this, in the sin of Joseph's brethren selling Joseph
into Egypt, to be a bond-servant, accused, imprisoned, and in great abasement
many years, what strange disorder was: here? how strangely did the Lord rectify
and amend this, by setting him at liberty, making him Ruler over all the land
of Egypt, and making his brethren to stoop to him, and be beholding to him for
their sustenance afterward? Another Example I might tell you of, of the great
confusion among the Jews by Hamans sin in the days of Ahasuerus: yet how
gloriously did the Lord work for his Church in the confusion of Haman, and the
deliverance of the Church, and the destruction of their enemies: Here was a
great deal of disorder by sin, but Gods providence set all in right order
again, yea, and brought great good out of all this disorder: that we may say,
according to Sampsons riddle, out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the
strong, sweetness; but the matter in hand is a greater and deeper riddle.
Adams sin had brought a woeful Ataxy, and confusion into all the world, and
grievous dishonor to God: then Providence finds out a way by the death and
blood shed of the second Adam, to bring all into a better order, than ever they
were before in, the Lord makes a better, and a surer covenant, and ordered in
all things, 2 Samuel 23.5. and Christ is set up in his Kingdom, to order and to
establish it with justice and judgment for ever. Isay 9.7. Ye may see by all
this, what abundance of glory redounds unto God by the death of Christ, and the
sinners justification thereby.

Use 1. Refutation of Socinians.
Refutation of that damnable blasphemy of the Socinians, in making the death of
Christ only exemplary, and no wise satisfactory, whereby they do rob God of
his glory, and would disappoint him of his principal end of the incarnation of
his only begotten Son, yea, and rob him of his glory, which he has sworn
that he would not give unto another. The Devil has formerly done great
mischief to Christian Religion by Heresies of Monstrous shapes, but this is a
blasphemy of a more bloody dye, whereby he induces downright Paganism, or as
bad as Turcism again. Oh, that such a Godless, Christlesse-villany, should be
ever tolerated to harbor amongst Christians! This is a lamentation, and shall
surely be the saddest lamentation of these last perilous times.

Use 2. The Doctrine of Gods justice is suitable to the Gospel.
It may serve to discover and confute the general mistake and error about the
Doctrine of the Gospel: Truly, the Lord has dealt graciously with us in the
times of the New Testament, and especially with his people in these latter
times, wherein the Grace of God, and the Riches thereof, are more abundantly
sounded forth; and magnified above former ages: and most blessed is the estate
of those vessels of Grace, the persons that receive it in truth, and are made
partakers thereof; but beloved, I do very much fear, lest that Satan get
advantage by this means to make innumerable persons to miss their mark, and
Gods mark too, causing them utterly to pervert the doctrine of the Gospel, and
the grace of God, and his principal plot and purpose therein, so as to cause
many to forget and disanul in their thoughts and apprehensions, the Justice of
God, as though it were altogether Heterogeneal, Heterodox, and impertinent to
the mystery of the Gospel.

Now I beseech you, that ye would be convinced of this, whatsoever ye
forget, that there is more of the justice of God declared and demonstrated in
the Gospel, and Gospel mysteries thereof, than there is in the Law. I might
tell you of those dreadful Threatenings against them that sin against the
Gospel. See Heb. 2.2, 3. Heb. 10.26, 27. Heb. 12.25. where there is a far
heavier punishment denounced against the Gospel sins and sinners, than there
ever was against the transgressions or transgressors of the Law; and if we
look into Examples, it is true, that there were heavy punishments inflicted in
the times of the Old Testament, as the drowning of the whole World, the
destruction of Sodom, and Jerusalem, yea, take in the rejection of the evil
Angels, yet none of all these were comparative to the example in the text, and
Heb. 1. Christ is set above the Angels, and has a name above every name, yet
even upon him Divine Justice has passed, never any Justice was like this, yet
this must go for Gospel-justice, yea, this is the end of all that grace, that
the Lord has showed in the Gospel, and in the death of Christ; it is for the
demonstration of the Justice of God, yea, the indispensable Justice of God: The
Lord would convince all the World in the Tenor of the Gospel, how terrible his
Justice and his Wrath is. That is very remarkable. Romans 1.17, 18. That in the
Gospel the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith. Even since
that, in the same Gospel, The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, etc. why, but was not Gods Wrath
revealed in the Old Testament? Truly, the Text shows that it was never so
cleared and demonstrated before. Now let me add this, that the Text holds
forth in those words [at this time] what time was that time, but the time of
the Gospel? whereby the Spirit of God intimates, that there would be mighty
need (and more than ever) in the secure times of the Gospel, that the Justice
of God should be manifested: now many will think, that since the death of
Christ nothing but the Grace of God should be heard of, and that it would be
accounted Legal Preaching, to tell the people of the Justice of God, but even
at this time, behold, I say in these wanton times of the Gospel, behold, that
God would have his justice declared, more than ever in former times, and say
not, that in the Gospel times, this justice, as executed only upon Christ, is
declared: for though that be true in regard of the members of Christ; yet
doubtless as for others; no doubt but the state of Chorazin and Bethsaida,
Tire and Sidon is far worse than the state of unbeleevers and impenitent
persons in the times of the Old Testament; I do willingly receive and embrace
the difference betwixt the Law and Gospel, held forth by the Protestant
divines; that free grace and remission of sins is promised and bestowed in the
Gospel upon all believers, Joh 3.16. which the Law strictly taken, mentions
not, yet the contempt or neglect of this grace, being a greater sin than any
other, must needs bring an heavier weight of justice upon them that are guilty
thereof. Let all this serve to rectify our judgment, concerning the main Scope
of the Gospel, which is not only to set forth Gods infinite grace in Christ,
but also to demonstrate his justice against sin.

Use 3. The grounded security of the faithful.
Instruction. It may show us the impregnable and grounded security of the
faithful, and the strongest foundation of assurance that I know of in the whole
book of God: that is, in short, the infinite love of God in Christ, that
follows necessarily upon this demonstration of his justice in the death of
Christ. If that the Lord had forgiven sinners, without any more ado, of his
mere will and Grace, without any price or ransom, this easy way of forgiveness
(prated of by the Socinians and Carnal Gospellers) would in no sort have so
declared or demonstrated the infinite love of God to the Elect, as this does,
that when as God the Father without violence and wrong, to his just and holy
nature (I may speak it with reverence) could not pardon one sin by his grace,
yet in his admirable wisdom and grace, he has been at that cost to give his
Sons blood to be a ransom for sin, that justice may have its due course. This
is the meaning of that, verse. 24. we are justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: this is admirable grace, and free grace
indeed; All the Angels in Heaven, and men on earth may be astonished at this.
Oh! how exceeding precious were our sinful souls to the Lord our God, that they
should be valued at such a price by the Lord himself, when as the Son of God
himself was valued but at thirty pieces of silver by sinful men! there was
never such a price as this given for any creature besides: and never such a
love as this, that either would or could be at this cost.

Object. It is profanely and wickedly objected by Heretics in this case, that
if Christ dyed for sinners, then the Sons love to us far exceeded the Fathers
love, the Father deals rigorously with sinners, but the Son lays down his life
for them: God the fathers love to the faithful in scripture expressions and
diverse effects.
so all the Love is in the Son, and not in the father.

Answ. In the general, the love of all the Divine persons is infinite and the
same; and therefore cannot admit degrees: let us therefore abhor all such
odious comparisons. More particularly, to root out all such evil surmises, see
what course the Scripture takes to discover the Fathers love in this whole
mystery, which is by all means to be acknowledged and adored.

1 There is the Fathers eternal Purpose and Decree to save a certain number of
fallen mankind, and to redeem them from destruction; which is called his so
loving of them, Joh. 3.16.

2 There is the Fathers love in sending of his Son to take flesh upon him, 1 John 4.9, 10. herein is the love of God manifested, that he sent his Son into
the World, etc.

3 There is the Fathers commandment given to his Son to dye for his Elect;
thus the Son himself acknowledges, Joh. 10.18. I have power to lay down my
life, and power to take it up, This commandment have I received of my father.

4 God the Father therefore loves his Son, because he laid down his life, Joh.
10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life.

5 God the Father is pleased to reveal this grace in the Gospel, and the
ministry thereof, 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God who has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, and has given us the ministry of reconciliation.

6 There is the imputation of Christ's propitiation to particular selected
sinners; this is also ascribed to the Father, Romans 4.6. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works.

7 There is the infusion and gift of Faith, to apprehend this, and the comfort
of it. Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved by grace through faith, not of your selves, it
is the gift of God, etc.

Lastly, The preservation of faith and grace unto glory is attributed to the
Father, Romans 8.3. Whom he has justified, them also he has glorified.

These things I mention, not that any should conceit that the other persons are
excluded from such intensness, and wonderful acts of love to sinners; for as
Christ says, Joh. 14.11. Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father
in me: So that their love is one, and Joh. 5.23. The Father has committed all
judgment to the Son, that all men may honor the Son as they honor the
Father: as they honor him, not more nor less: but therefore I speak these
things, to show that a carnal heart has no just cause from the Scripture to
make or conceit any disparity in the divine subsistence.

To shut up this use, The love of all the Divine persons equal.
Let us consider the infinite love of all the persons of the holy and undivided
Trinity to poor sinners, that has devised and provided such an unspeakable way
of Righteousness and Peace to kiss each other, that poor sinners might be
justified and saved. Ephesians. 2.7. That in ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. So here, that at
this time he might declare his righteousness.

And can we imagine that all this cost and labor of Gods love in Christ
should be lost? can we possibly fear that God should lose his end in the
shedding of his Sons blood? as sure as he is just, he is the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus; this the Text shows, and we cannot without Atheism
question his justice, therefore why should the believer question the other? so
that we may boldly say with Paul, who shall separate us from the love of God
that is in Christ Jesus? Romans 8.38, 39.

Use 4. Carnal and obdurate persons should consider this end of God.
Exhortation; and it is, 1 To carnal and unregenerate persons, to remember and
seriously consider the weight of this point. Let me propound this Meditation
to all such as have benumbed and obdurate hearts and consciences; That the Lord
would have his Justice declared and proved by such a manifest token thereof
represented, wheresoever the Gospel or Christ is Preached; yea, why is this
reserved for the last times of the days of the Son of man? why? truly the Lord
has a most wise and holy end therein, surely that it may be an awakening to
Christlesse sinners in the times of the Gospel.

I beseech you, to say to your own hearts, why would the Lord have this Justice
declared to me, and such exact Justice as this is? can any reasonable Creature
imagine, that such justice should be executed upon the Son of God, that had no
sin, but by imputation? and yet that a Christlesse sinner, should escape the
justice of God and his righteous judgment? Surely, Their judgment sleeps not,
neither does their damnation slumber? If any say, that he looks at Christ as
answering the justice of God, let such a one hear what Christ says to such,
Mat. 7.23. Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity, I know you not. Ah poor
creature, bethink thy self at the last, that the Avenger of blood is pursuing
of thee at the heels, yea, sin lies at the door, This was Preached in a sick
time.
and thou have yet no sanctuary or place of refuge to hide thy self in: yea,
that Justice is riding circuit in the Country, and goes from house to house,
yea, from person to person; yea, this Gospel justice, which is the most
terrible, which must stand at the bar to answer it in their own persons: and
let not any please themselves with their privileges or profession, call that
to mind, Zephan. 3.5. which is spoken of Gods people of old, The just God is
in the midst of them, every morning he brings his judgments to light; but the
unjust knows no shame. Oh beloved, this the Lord will do even still, that
judgment shall begin at the house of God.

Now take a few Considerations,

1 That now in the times of the Gospel it is in vain for any man to plead
ignorance of Gods justice, Considerations and directions to hard-hearted
sinners.
seeing that it is so solemnly published and declared.

2 No man can now doubt of it, seeing that in Christ's death there is such a
manifest token and demonstration of it, ye may be sure that Gods threatenings
against sin are in good earnest, when he makes such execution.

3 There be very few that do know the justice of God even amongst Professors;
what means that heavenly Prayer, Joh. 17.25? Righteous Father the World, has
not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent
me: he speaks of God as a righteous Father even toward himself, which none
of the world knows, and he does evidently intend or comprehend the Jews in
that world, though the people of God.

4 If justice be not satisfied, and anger withdrawn, all thy proud Helpers
will stoop under him; Job 4.1^. Mat. 3.17.
conceive what helps the World can afford thee, or the wit of men invent, they
will be but broken reeds to succor or support thee. God is not well pleased,
but in his Son.

Quest. What course should a poor sinner take in this Condition?

Ans. 1 Let him conclude undoubtedly with his own soul, that there is abundance
of unrighteousness in every sin committed by him, much more in all his sins
together: seeing that Gods justice proceeds so severely against imputed sin.
Gods justice and judicial proceedings do clearly discover, and are directly
opposed to the unrighteousness of sin; therefore labor by all means to see, by
the consideration of Gods righteousness, what abundance of unrighteousness
there is in sin. Ponder that place well, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounds, there
grace abounds much more, but the Law entered that sin might abound. The Law
shows, that there is abundance of wickedness in every sin, do not think that
it belongs only to some kind of sins of an heinous nature, for it belongs to
all sins whatsoever, being transgressions of Gods Law, as the Text is clear:
therefore do not slight any sin.

2 Be sure that God is exceeding willing that his justice should be satisfied
in and by the Surety, and he would not have poor sinners to endure the brunt,
and the intolerable burden of it: thou may in the saddest thoughts of thy
condition stay up thy heart with this: that Christ's death was as well for
remission of sins, as to declare the justice of God: yea, and though sin
abounds, yet Grace abounds much more.

3 Remember also, that this justice is satisfied in the death of Christ for
sins of all sorts and degrees. I might tell you of multitudes, for David's
Murder and Adultery; for Paul's persecution and blasphemy; for the Corinthians
Theft, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Extortion, reviling, unnatural Lusts, 1 Cor.
6.10, 11. Thence it is said, 2 Cor. 5.21. That Christ was made sin for us, that
is, all manner of sin was imputed unto him; yea, and he was made a sacrifice
for all manner of sin without exception, on the behalf of all believers: this
may much encourage a poor sinner to fly to him.

4 Faith in Christ's blood (so it be of the right kind) though never so weak,
is the means to bring home the satisfaction of Christ. I have spoken of it
before, and (also that we ought especially to attend unto) that faith of the
right kind seems to be described by that phrase [The justifier of him, that
is, of the Faith of Jesus] that may imply two things. First, That true faith is
a separating and distinguishing grace, as when the Jews are said to be of the
Circumcision, Gal. 2.12. Col. 4.11. it is spoken to distinguish them from all
others; Alas! That is a poor faith that makes no distinction between a believer
and an unbeleever, a ruffian, and a Saint. 2 The phrase imports a powerful and
efficacious faith, that overswaies the whole man, and the whole Course; so that
he may be said to be of the faith. So Gal. 3.9. They which be of the faith
are blessed with faithful Abraham; that is, as Abraham was of the faith, I mean
efficaciously for kind, though not for degree; see that ye be not mistaken in
this.

Use 5. Exhortation to believers in three branches. Believers should understand
and claim their privilege.
1 Let it persuade them, now to understand their good estate, and boldly to
claim their privilege: their good estate is such as is very precious in these
times. I may tell them of that, 1 Pet. 5.12. and testify (as Peter did) that
this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand: much is spoken in these days
of the grace of God, but I fear many will find at the last, that the grace they
trust in will not be found the true grace of God: neither will they stand in
it: but the believers estate that builds upon his union with Christ, and his
communion with him in Gods justice satisfied, is that which will stand, and the
believer shall stand by it.

Now hereupon humbly and boldly claim a discharge from satisfied justice upon
all occasions, in infirmities, relapses, temptations, desertions, and sinkings
of heart; lay claim to the manifest demonstration of the justice and mercy of
God in Christ's death, for both are here wrapped together, and our ground is, 1 John 2.1, 2. Little Children, these things I write unto you that ye sin not, if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, and a Propitiation, etc.
every Child of God (though but a little one) and such an one as makes
conscience not to sin, may have daily recourse to this Propitiation, where
mercy and justice meet. These be the wings of God (as it were) that with David
we should make our refuge in the worst times, Psalm. 57.1.

2 Let us eternally celebrate the name of God in Christ, They should praise the
name of God in Christ.
his justice, mercy holiness, wisdom, providence, etc. for his glory in all
these things, is the last end of all these dispensations toward his people,
this therefore should be adored by us, and by these things we live, we may
take up David's Song of mercy and judgment in this sense also, Psalm. 101.1. and
add that, Psalm. 17.15. My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and
salvation all the day, for I know not the numbers thereof. David was a good
Arithmetician in counting Gods mercies and judgments, has his new Songs still
for renewed mercies, but he is fain to confess, that his Arithmetic fails
him, he cannot sum up the numbers thereof: so we may say, we cannot number
things. God has and should have all his glory in the Saints. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.

3 Let this be an engagement to us, They should be righteous, as God.
to be righteous, as our heavenly Father is righteous; that is, to follow the
pattern of Gods righteousness. Oh beloved! if the Lord has thus declared and
glorified himself to us in a way of righteousness, and if it cost him so dear
to show himself both just and merciful toward us, what an inviolable bond is
this to us to be righteous before him, and to glorify Gods righteousness in a
righteous conversation, in righteous dealing and judging, and walking
continually? yea, let us declare and demonstrate this before God and men, yea,
make it our end, as the Lord makes it his.

Lastly, Let us do it at This time; Now when there is so much unrighteousness
among Professors, as it is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. That Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his generation, that is, the worst Generation that ever water
wet: so though the Generation we live in, be very bad, yet let us labor to be
just in it, for they must be such that would be sheltered in this Ark, when
the floods of error, and sin and wrath do overflow all.

Finally, let me conclude with that, Hos. 10.12. Sow to your selves, in
righteousness, and reap in mercy, break up your fallow ground, for it is time
to seek the Lord, till he come and rain down righteousness upon you; the seed
of righteousness sown by us, shall be watered with the showers of Gods
righteousness from heaven, and you may then conclude assuredly, that ye shall
have a plentious harvest, and crop of everlasting mercy from the Lord.

Finis.
Deo Gloria.
A Table of the chief things in this Treatise.
For the readier use of which thou art desired (Gentle Reader) first to correct
the figures of the 20, 21, 29, 66, 69, 178, 272. pages. In the exact
enumeration of any other escapes of the Press, we should little advantage the
Work, and seem too too mistrustful of thy ability, to correct them, and of thy
charity to cover them: they being not many, nor of any great moment.

A.
ACquittance of our sins to be gotten from God, page 46, 49 Affection of God
to his elect is eternal, but the manifestation of it not before faith. page 91
Afflictions of the godly are not properly called punishments, page 61 Wherein
they differ from the punishments of the wicked, page 62, 95 Comforts to be had
under them, page 65 Agony of Christ in the Garden, and on the Cross described.
page 53, 54 Anger of God, its severity unknown to several sorts of sinners.
page 93, 94 No appeal to be made from Gods sentence. page 9 The manner of
application of redemption, page 32, 104 Attributes of God are all equal, and
infinite in him. page 254
B.
Believing the only way to make our election and redemption sure. page 79
Weakest Believer justified as well as the strongest. page 48 All believers, and
only such are partakers of Gods imputed righteousness. page 229 It is imputed
to them all indifferently. page 230, 236 Benevolence of God and his beneficence
distinguished. page 91 Blood put for all the Sufferings of Christ. page 51 How
it sets forth the glory of Gods justice in several respects, page 292 None of
it could be abated. page 70 It is the most special object of justifying faith.
page 155 Boasting excluded by free justification. page 14 Boldness of the
redeemed in approaching to God. page 277 Bondage of the unregenerate. page 25,
26, 27 How discerned. page 169. 30
C.
CAreless persons their dangerous estate. page 42 Cautions about the trial of
faith, and to prevent deceit and presumption. page 237 Certainty of the object,
and of the subject. Children of godly Parents in bondage to sin, as well as
others. page 28 Rash judging of the Children of God reproved. page 95 Christ's
redemption, 23. and satisfaction, 36. His sufferings, 52. and seq. he is a full
and real Redeemer, 25. the Surety of the elect. 39. He is our propitiation, 90.
his being proposed as such, 108, 109, 116. how we may set him forth before
God, and unto men, 119. He is the object of justifying faith, 136. especially
as crucified, 155. Christ the only way to satisfy Gods Justice, 272, 275. how
he was made a curse for us, 254. he is to be received wholly and unlimitedly,
47. He is compared to the Mercy-seat under the Law, 90. Motives to come to him.
page 141 Comfort manifold to the justified upon several grounds, page 8, 17,
29, 33, 64, 48, 112, 129, 201, 268. Conscience a light to discover our
Spiritual estate. 100. Vide Direction.
D.
DAnger of refusing Christ's redemption. page 33 Pains of the first and second
Death suffered by Christ. 53. The large extent of Christ's death, 78, 104. Death
vanquished by Christ, and believers delivered from it. Why Christ could not be
holden by the pains of death. page 56 Several deceits of men to keep them from
Christ, reproved, page 57 Declaration of Gods Justice in Justification. page
291 Decree of God concerning Christ. page 109 Deliberation in choice of means
in many cases excluded as vain and noxious. page 274 Desertions how expedient.
page 66. The end of God in them, page 67. Directions for such an estate, page
68, 95 Devices of the Devil to deceive men in sin. page 261 Diligence will be
used by all that are real with God, and their own souls. page 111 Direction to
troubled Consciences in seeking justification. page 9, 19
E.
ELection of believers is made in Christ. 231. It is not from faith or works
foreseen. 234, 109. Faith gives the sense, and the enjoyment of it. page 91
The Doctrine of Election does not prejudice the outward call. page 117 Evil day
to be seriously thought of, and provided for. page 103 Evil of sin how great it
is, page 256. 257, 303 The duty of the examination of our Spiritual estate, 97
98, 99. How it may be known, page 100, 101 Exhortation to persons unjustified,
18, 130, etc. to the justified, page 18, 104, 118
F.
FAith in what sort it works in Justification. 49. How it is said to justify,
and its special properties therein, 121, 122, 123. Its object is Christ, page
137. Faith as taken passively, is that which justifies, 229. Justification
before faith refelled, 233. Excellency of faith, 144 Signs of true faith, 125,
126, 127, 140. How it is obtained, 132, 133, 145. Hindrances of its exercise,
150. Directions about it, 152. Faith in Christ's blood to be strengthened, 118.
It is of constant use in justification, 134 The degrees of faith, 127. Faith of
Jesus what it is, page 304 God the Father the fountain of Justification, 2, 3.
proved by reasons, 5. and the particulars whereby it further appears page 115
and 301 Forgiveness could not be without satisfaction, page 245, 246, 273 Free
Grace, vide Grace. We are freed from the power, but not from the molestation of
sin, page 36 The term freely explained, page 11, 12 Freeness of Justification
notwithstanding its being purchased by Christ, 13, 14. this freeness
manifested in four particulars, with the reasons of it, 14. Hence an
encouragement to seek the favor of God. page 18
G.
GOd only does justify. 4. He is just as well as merciful in a Sinners
Justification, 243. proved by reasons, ibid. He is true and unchangeable in his
Word, 259. God to be justified in all his dealings, page 76, 264 Gospel
manifests the Justice of God more than does the Law, 298. It sets forth sin in
its deepest dye. page 60 Government or judiciary power of God, a cause why he
will punish sin. page 247 Grace what it is, 12. Not to be turned into
wantonness, 17. We must adventure our souls upon it, 77. Free Grace asserted,
and its abuse to licentiousness repressed, 172, 214. Despisers of grace, their
sin and danger, and who they are, 199. Riches of grace singularly manifested in
justification of sinners. page 295
H.
HAtred of God against every sin. page 253 Hatred that is in sin and sinners
against God, 257. Hatred against sin should be in every Child of God, 35, 83,
84, 85. how gotten into the heart, page 267 Holiness of God ingageth him to
hate and punish sin, 246. It is eminently manifested in a sinners
justification. page 296 Holiness of life, vid. works. Vain hopes of carnal
persons, page 57, 58, 59, 248 Our duty to humble our selves under Gods hand.
page 76
I.
IMputation of righteousness to us what it is, 207. Objections against it
answered, 209. Reasons for it, 211. How we may be assured that this
righteousness is imputed to us in particular, 218. Motives to seek it, 223. How
attained, 224. Comforts flowing from it to the partakers thereof, 220. It is
alike to all believers. page 230 Inexcusablenesse of infidelity, page 16
Inherent righteousness not to be trusted in, 112. It is accepted through the
imputed righteousness of Christ. page 222. v. works. Insufficiency of man's
righteousness to justify. page 197 False Judges set up over our Spiritual
estate. page 9 Rash judging reproved. page 95 Judgments threatened are to
prevent sin, 265. they begin at the House of God. page 87 Justice of God to be
acknowledged and adored in all his ways. page 278 Its eminently set forth in
Christ's Sufferings, 292. the reasons of it, page 293 It concurreth with Gods
truth and grace in our Justification, page 242 Its the terror of sinners, and
the comfort of believers, 270. Justice must have its course in every sin, 252.
The Doctrine of Gods Justice most agreeable to the Gospel, 298. which answers
all cavils of Satan, etc. 271. why it is so manifested in the times of the
Gospel, and considerations thereupon, page 302, 303 Justification what it is,
4. Its necessity, worth, and due esteem, 46. Its efficient cause. 2. The
impulsive, 11. The meritorius cause, 22. the instrumental cause, 120. the end
thereof. page 163 Justification by men is of no value, 7. How to discern that
God justifies us, 10, 125, 99. Justification how to be attained, page 19, 45,
303
K.
KIngdom of God set up through Christ. page 296 How to know that a man is
justified, page 10, 99 Knowledge of Christ crucified necessary, and how
discerned. page 158 Knowledge of God is to be of him in all his Attributes.
page 291
L.
THe Laws first work is the discovery of sin and wrath. page 98 Spiritual
liberty the best news on earth, 33. to be sought with diligence and
resolution, 34 and to be kept entire. page 36 Love to Christ, 86, 276. and the
degree thereof according to the Gospel. page 277 Love to God for the pardon of
sins, of what sort it is. page 191, 19 Love to the Members of Christ. page 88
Love of God the strongest ground of assurance. page 300
M.
THe matter of Justification passively taken is the person elected, otherwise
its the redemption by Christ. page 239 Mercy alone no sufficient ground for
hope, page 244, 44 Mercies are Curses without Christ, page 87 Popish Merit
refelled. page 15 Meritorious cause of redemption, 22. amplified. page 107
Ministry of the Word, its use and efficacy, 117, 113. Christ generally and
seriously offered therein, 78. and diligently to be attended, page 75 Misery of
irregeneracy, 42, 92. and an unjustified estate. page 200 Mourning for sin.
page 80, 81
N.
NAtural man is a bondman, 26. pity to be exercised toward such. page 37
O.
OBedience of Christ both active and passive, our righteousness. page 196
Obedience and homage to Christ persuaded. page 50 General offer of Christ in
the Gospel. page 117, 78
P.
PAcification, or atonement by Christ, 91. Reasons of it, 92. Means to get the
benefit, 103. When we should use it, and how, 105, 106. Duties flowing from it.
page 118, 119 Pardon of sin to be still prayed for, 180. how it may be
cleared to a man's self, 189. it must be sought so as may consist with Divine
Justice, 227. No sin so vile (final impenitency excepted) but may be pardoned.
page 72 Patience of God to sinners, admirable. page 265 Peace of Conscience how
far found in all the redeemed. page 102 Perfect righteousness what it must
be. page 198 Possibility of salvation a sufficient ground to seek it. page 103
Power of God to be dreaded by impenitent sinners, 103. It is eminently
manifested in the pardoning of sin. page 269 Presumption reproved. page 248
Prayer incessant to be made for our redemption. page 35, 77 Price of our
redemption paid only to God, 22. The properties thereof. page 24 Promises
justify as they exhibit Christ. page 139 Propitiation what it signifies, 89.
when more especially to be made use of, and how to do it. page 105
Proposition of Christ for a propitiation in times of the Old Testament, and of
the New. page 108, 110 Punishment of Christ our redemption, page 52 Punishments
properly so called not inflicted on the Elect. page 61, 62, 63
R.
Trials whether we be redeemed, 30, 31, 32. From what evils we are redeemed,
29. The duties of redeemed ones. page 35, 36, 37 Redemption what it is, 21. Its
excellency, 23, 29, 33. It is by Christ: and the reasons of it, 22, 23, 24. how
applied, 32. and obtained. page 34 Reformation for future no expiation for sins
past. page 260 Remission of sins what it is, 164. highly to be prized, 184. how
gotten, 187. It is equally bestowed on all believers, 186. Remission of sins,
and imputation of righteousness go together. page 206 Renouncing our own
righteousness wherein it stands. page 224 Repentance to be continually
renewed and increased. page 78 Righteousness of God in Justification, what it
is, 196, 240. why called the righteousness of God, 195. wherefore requisite,
197. This alone to be trusted in, 213. how it is evidenced in Justification,
241. and witnessed to, by the Law and Prophets, 198. It is conveyed to us by
imputation. page 206 No righteousness of our own can justify us, 43. our
engagement at this time to be righteous.
S.
SAlvation manifested as possible and probable by the redemption of Christ.
page 71 Sanctification required, and an evidence of Justification, 69. v.
works. Satan's subtilty to hold men secure in sin. page 98, and 261
Satisfaction, what the matter and form of it is, 39. The necessity of it in
Justification, 40, 41, 43, 70. Directions to compass it, 46, 74 to 79.
Comforts by it, 48, 49, 170. Duties it calls for, 80 to 88. It was available
before the death of Christ, 166. It was made to the full, 48. The manner of it.
page 51 The evils of security in sin. page 98, 99 Self-justifiers in a sad
estate. page 6 Sin is a debt, and how, 29. It is opposite to the nature of God,
255. proved, 257. A destroyer of the Creatures, 256. In what respect it may be
called infinite, 259. It is to be striven against, 266. shunned, 83, 86. and
hated, 267. Any sin allowed enough to condemn us, 214 The disposition of a
child of God in regard of sin, 31. How far a believer may charge his soul
with it, 176. and how far take comfort about the forgiveness of it. page 182
Socinians error manifested. page 297 Godly sorrow to be always kept alive, and
in exercise, urged upon several considerations. page 80 81, 82 Souls of men
much to be prized. page 119 Sufferings of Christ, 52, 53, 54. Objections about
them answered, 55, 56. how they set forth the glory of Gods Justice, 292. How
necessary they were, 70. They do not at all exempt any Christlesse souls. page
59 Sufferings of Saints are suited to their conditions. page 63
T.
TError to persons unjustified, page 6, 57, etc. Terrors of Conscience excluded
by free justification. page 15 Thankfulness to God urged. 227, 37 All Persons
of the sacred Trinity cooperate in our Justification, page 3, and 115, 301
V.
UNbeleevers danger, 124. and inexcusablenesse. 110, 168 Unbelief under the
Gospel a token of Reprobation. page 234, 235
W.
WAY to Salvation but only one, 110. even Christ. page 111 Wisdom of God seen
in a Sinners Justification. page 295 The profit that accrueth to all by the
Word. page 101 Dreadful condition of them that contemn the Word of God. page 42
We must work out our salvation with Gods working. page 75 Works how said to
justify, page 122. They are required in justified persons, but not to their
Justification, 50, 130, 214. what use they are of. page 216 Works of the
Trinity ad extra undivided. page 3 Wrath of God against Sinners intolerable,
261. All men by nature are under it, 101. What such ought to do, page 102,
103, 116
FINIS.

