THE WATCH CHARGED. OR, A Warning to GOD'S WATCHMEN. Being a Sermon preached
at Bridge-water in the County of Somerset on the 29. Day of September 1658.
which was a day set apart for Ordination, and the general meeting of the
Associated Ministers in that County.

By JOHN CHETWIND, Mr. of Arts, Preacher of the Gospel, and one of the
joynt-Pastors for the City and Parish of Cuthberts in Wells.

2 Timothy 4.1,2. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom,

Preach the Word, be instant, in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all long-suffering and doctrine.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL, and are to be sold by Edward Brewster at the
sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

Reverendis Christi Ministris and speculatoribus sollicitis in Comitatu
Somersettensi constitutis, and (quo melius pro salute animarum excubias agant)
ibidem consociatis.
QVo vos candore (Reverendi Patres and Fratres) subsequentia haec (...)
audivistis nuper pro concione prolata eodem obnixe rogo accipiatis exarata, and
in lucem edita. Neque enim ausus essem minutula haec (novi enim quicquid in me
est quam sit exiguum) utcunque in aurem dicta and frequenti coetu praedicata,
in aspectum etiam protulisse, nisi vehementius auditorum quorundam desiderium,
and nonnullorum e vobis consensus accessisset, animumque mihi addidisset ut in
publicum prodirent.

Non diffiteor tamen facilem me amicorum votis aurem praebuisse, partim quidem
quia paraenetica haec ea sint visa quae ministerii candidatos (in quorum
gratiam parata sunt) aliquantulum possint adjuvare: praecipue vero (and quod
prae aliis omnibus animum mihi ad scrib ndum impulit) ut publicum gratitudinis
meae erga Deum Opt. Max. extaret monumentum.

Siquidem non nescii estis inter vos plurimi ex quali and quanto malorum
labyrintho solius Dei manu erepta est anima mea, quae longa laborabat (...)
(neque enim pudet dicere quod sapienti Deo visum est facere) cumque a morbo hoc
phrenetico respirare coeperam, successit ilico and pluribus me mensibus
obsessum tenuit gravissima melancholia, and torpor quasi lethargicus. Duris
hisce (attamen Patris) probationibus diutius detentus plurima feci indigna, and
dignatuli. Tandem vero precibus vestris, and plurimarum Dei Ecclesiarum, usque
ad miraculum restitutus sum, and menti, and memoriae, and officio in Ecclesia
Dei; sit Deo Trinuni in aeternum gloria. Cum itaque quod cecinit Psalmista
saepius and m rito in animo versatur, Ps. 116 12.
Quid retribuam? occurrit subinde gravissimum salvatoris monitum, Luc. 22.32.
Tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres tuos. Quod ut facerem, ansam
exhortandi fratres a vobis oblatam libenter arripui, and Spartam hanc nactam
viribus queis poteram ornavi.

I am vero quid restat, quin ut memet vobis (Charissimi Fratres) in exemplum
proponam, tum divinae severitatis, tum divinae (...); Severitatis inquam, quae
ob incuria^, negligentiam, (...) superbiam and (...), aliaque id genus peccata,
me gravissime afflictum dederat; and haec erat debit a poena. (...) etiam, qua^
ex mero benevolentiae suae motu, and sua sola manu ereptum me mihi reddidit;
and haec erat indebita gratia. Ita ut verissimum divinum illud expertus sum
Oraculum, Ps. 89.31,32.
Si statuta mea profanaverint, and praecepta mea non observaverint, visitabo
quidem virga defectionem little, and plagis Iniquitatem eorum. Sed benignitatem
meam non irritam faciam ab eo, neque mentiar contra fidem meam: non profanaho
fedus meum, and pronunciatum labiorum meorum non mutabo.

Quapropter velim (O Charissimi Fratres) ut meo discatis exemplo: ideoque ut
Funccius ille Chronologus olim ob laesam incaute majestatem jamjam suspendendus
circumstantem monuit coronam, Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi, sic ipse
Ego (Fratres) divinam ob peccata praedict a expertus iram, serio vos obtestor,
ut tanquam pestem perniciosissimam fugeretis negligentiam, superbiam, (...),
etc. and totis viribus ministeriali incumberetis operi; consilio obtemperantes
Psalmistae, Psalm. 2.11. Heb. 12.29.
Colite Iehovam eum reverentia, and exultate cum tremore; Deus enim noster
ignis est consumens.

Quid vero a nobis Speculatorum titulo insignitis summus Ecclesiae moderator
exigit, ex sequentibus pro modulo meo innotescet: vigiles constituti sumus,
excubias agamus sedulo, moneamus fideliter, ne sanguis pereuntium in nostra
redeat capita.

Evenium quendam ovium pastorem ob amissa pecora obcoecatum legimus.

Quid fiet nobis ob animas nostra incuria perditas?

Quia igitur 2 Cor. 5.11.
novimus terrorem illum Domini nostri, filiis hominum ut speculatores Dei
suademus; Acts 20.28,30.
Attendamus igitur nobis ipsis and toti gregi, in quo constituit nos Spiritus
Sanctus Episcopos, ut pascamus Ecclesiam Christi quam acquisivit sanguine suo:
Illud saepius memoria recolentes, Apostolum nocte and die non cessasse cum
lacrymis admonere unumquemque.

Libentius haec ex sacra pagina and mihi and vobis (Reverendi Patres and
Fratres) ob oculos proposui, utpote vobis (sat scio) non minus grata quam nobis
omnibus necessaria.

Pluribus supersedeo, ne perangustae (quod aiunt) civitati patentior
praestruatur porta.

Quod superest, Fratres, Commendo vos Deo, and sermoni gratiae ipsius qui
potest aedificare vos, and dare vobis haereditatem cum omnibus Sanctis;

Qui etiam coitionem vestram in timore Domini susceptam, and coadunatos in Dei
gloriam and populi salutem conatus, indies magis magisque augeat, benedicat,
and prosperis in aeternum coronet successibus. Haec praecatur

E Musaeo meo 9. Nov. 1658. E vestro numero symmista, conservus, vobisque
omnibus devotissimus, JOH. CHETWIND, Pastor Wellensis in agro Somersettensi.

IMMANUEL.
Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel;
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.


THe occasion directs my discourse, and the words read shall limit it: the time
prevents less necessary excursions. Only by way of Introduction I shall mind
you,

That though this work were far fitter for a graver head, and a more
experienced heart, then for my self; who for some personal considerations, not
unknown to many, have more need to mourn in secret, then to appear in public;
to learn in silence, then undertake to instruct instructours; yet being
designed hereunto by my Reverend Brethren, I shall endeavor with what
faithfulness God shall enable me to discharge their trust, and shall only by
way of preface earnestly desire you, Reverend Fathers and Brethren, to expect
and receive what shall be spoken, not as curious ears do harmonious sounds, to
please for the present; but as patients do the advices and prescriptions of
Physicians, to follow them for the future, as occasion shall be given.

And though my work be an exhortation, yet knowing that it is one of the
principal methods of seducers to persuade first, and afterward to instruct,
which (by reason of our corruption) is prevalent to pervert; and that it is
Gods way, first to instruct, and then persuade: the only course like to prevail
to durable good (persuasions without instructions being but as fire in straw,
that soon flames, and soon is extinguished; but when ushered in by instruction,
like fire in hard wood, though longer kindling, yet longer lasting.) I shall
therefore give you first the doctrinall part of this Scripture, and then
improve it by application.

In the which we have

For the sense, no difficulty that might stop us in our passage.

For the Analysis, no intricacy; the words on the first view resolving
themselves into these two parts. 1. The prophets office, a watchman. 2. The
prophets furniture, and fitting to and for that office: In which 1. His
Commission, I have made, etc. 2. His instructions. 1. Hear from my mouth. 2.
Warn them from me.




For the various reading of that word which our Translation renders [warn] I
shall refer you unto Dr. Waltons Biblia Polyglotta, the result of all which
amounts to thus much.

Son of man, I have made thee my officer and Deputy, the Churches Watchman,
overseer and teacher; and therefore hear from me, and in my name, in my stead,
and by my authority, speak to them, warn them of their danger, admonish them of
their duty, declare my mind, exhort them to the practice of it, and press them
to it with the discovery of my threatening, and their danger in the neglect of
it.

Now I shall not consider the words distinctly, according unto their
forementioned parts; each of which would afford many useful instructions: but
only in general, in reference to my present work, having made choice of this
Scripture to bound my meditations, and found the following exhortation upon;
and that in this method, by showing from the Text, 1. That ministers are
Watchmen. 2. What is required in and from such by virtue of that relation.


Now what a Watchman is, whether civil or military, there are few ignorant;
and their office the Prophet shows, as in this, so in the 33. chapter of this
prophecy from the first to the seventh verse.

In Cities and camps watch men and sentinels were usually placed in some higher
and eminent station; 2 Samuel 18.24. 2 Kin. 9.17.
On the roof, on the tower, that thence they might see whether fire, or any
enemy were likely to endanger, and thereof to give timely notice, either by
trumpet, bell, outcry, fire, or other appointed sign, that so the danger might
be prevented: especially in time of war such were diligently to observe the
preparation and approches of the enemy, and to give warning thereof, that the
City or camp might not be unexpectedly endamaged.

To apply this then to our purpose, 2 Timothy 6.12. Cant. 4.
the profession of our Christianity is a warfare, the Church of God a camp,
terrible as an army with Banners, every Christian a militant soldier, fighting
the good fight of faith against spiritual enemies, Jesus Christ the Captain
General, Heb. 2.10.
on whom the care of the welfare of the whole army rests, who out of his
love and care toward it, has and does appoint his officers, his vicegerents,
sentinells and watchmen under him, to look to and take care of his camp.

1. Such were 1. The Prophets. Isa. 52.8. Hab. 2.1. 2. The Apostles. Acts 20.31.


2. Such are ordinary pastors and teachers, whom Christ ascending on high has
bequeathed as his great legacy to his Church, with whom he promises to be to
the end of the world.

And that ordinary pastors are such, I shall only point you to that Scripture,
Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

True it is, that Jesus Christ is the Churches chief watchman, he that never
slumbreth nor sleeps, Heb. 13.12. 1 Pet. 2.25.
the great shepherd, the chief (...), speculator. But he being gone into a far
country, having ascended up on high, does always provide for his Churches
welfare, and therefore substitutes, Ephesians. 4.8,11,12,13.
as his vicegerents, ordinary ministers and pastors to be his watchmen for
the Churches good, unto the worlds end.

2. What is required in and from such by virtue of that relation.

And that which I shall speak to you in opening of this, I shall give you in
these particulars, unto which I conceive all things else may be reduced.

There are five principal requisites in a civil Magistrate, and so much more
in a spiritual watchman. viz. 1. Courage, an undaunted spirit. 2.
Understanding, a discovering eye. 3. Prudence, a discreet tongue. 4.
Faithfulness, an upright heart. 5. Diligence, an active vigilance.


1. Courage, fortitude, an undaunted spirit; Thus shall we find God directing
and fortifying Ezekiel. chap. 2.6. chap. 3.9. Ezekiel. 2.6.
And thou son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words.
Though briars and thorns be with thee, and though thou do dwell among
scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though
they be a rebellious house.

chap. 3.8,9.
Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead
strong against their foreheads.

As an adamant harder them flint have I made thy forehead; fear them not, nor
be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

Christ is not willing that any of his soldiers, much less his officers and
watchmen, should have their hearts distempered and distracted with fears and
terrors: hence find we that, (whether precept or encouragement) Fear not, so
often inculcated.

It being the first word in the first Annunciation of Christ his 1. Conception,
Luke 1.30. 2. Birth, Luke 2.10. 3. Resurrection, Matthew. 28.5.


And almost the last word of his last exhortation, a little before his death,
Let not your hearts be troubled, and be of good comfort, Ioh. 14.1. and 16.
chap. 33.

It Is requisite then, that as civil and military, so spiritual watchmen
(God's ministers) should be (as well as magistrates) men of courage, and that
on these three respects, viz. Because of 1, Danger from the Enemy. 2.
Difficulty of their work. 3. Disregard from their friends.


1. Danger from the Enemy.

We all know that the sentinells, those that lie perdue, the Scouts and
Forlorn-hopes, in times of war are most in danger of the Enemy, as lying
nearest, and most open to their approches: and so is it with Christ's
ministers, they are first struck at.

They have most enemies, and their enemies malice is most against them.

That command given, 1 Kin. 22.31.
Fight not against small nor great, etc. is comparatively true in this case.

The Churches adversaries principal spite is against the Churches watchmen.

This the experience of all persecutions have made good.

This the experience of our times verify; Now then if they are exposed to the
greatest dangers, is it not reason they should have the greatest courage.

There Is many an Ahab will frown upon a faithful preacher, and had they had the
power, Est. 7.9
would do for them as Haman did for Mordecai; and Francis the first of France,
for Charles the fifth his Ambassador, even set up a Gibbet for them.

Nemo attingat hujus muneris functionem, nisi paratus sit millies animam suam
in mortem tradere.

2. Difficulty of their work.

There Is a great deal of hardship to be endured by civil and military
watchmen, Genesis 31.40.
night and day, cold and heat, wet and dry.

Thus it is with spiritual watchmen.

They that think the ministerial labor to be an easy and slight work, know
not what it is.

They that are acquainted with it, cry out, 2 Cor. 2.16.
who is sufficient?

And indeed did not Christ help with us, our shoulders were never able to bear
that burden.

Paul tells us Ephesians. 4.11
that Christ gave Pastors for the work of the ministry. Now as the word
[ministry] forbids lording: so the word [work] forbids loitering.

Jacob's speech of himself shows us that a watch-mans employment, though it be
but over sheep, is no easy work, much more then, our souls.

Genesis 31.40.
I was in the day consumed with the heat, and with frost in the night, and my
sleep departed from mine eyes.

There was in him, and must be in ministers Isa. 21.8.
1. Assiduity, night and day. 2. Patience, heat and frost. 3. Sollicitousnesse,
sleep went from his eyes.


3. Disregard from friends.

Even from those they watch over.

There Is not only opposition from the Devil, and the world a foreign force,
but from mutineers amongst our selves, the repulsing, resisting, and refusing
to be warned.

How many sad complaints have God's watchmen made! Isa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain.

Isa. 53.1.
Who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed?

Jer. 20.7,8.
I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. The word of the Lord was made
unto me a reproach and derision daily.

Yea our Savior complains, John. 1.11.
that he came unto his own, and his own received him not: and hence those
tears, Luke 19.41.
when he wept over Jerusalem, for her not understanding the things of her
peace.

Now have not God's ministers need of courage, that they may meet with and
overcome all the oppositions they shall have in the way of their employment.

The enemies are many, their work is hard, their discouragements great.

They must as those that repaired the walls of Jerusalem, have their swords in
one hand, and therefore need as our prophet to have Ezekiel. 3.9.
adamantine faces, that they may do that which Paul commands Timothy, 2 Timothy
4.5.
even watch in all things, endure afflictions, etc. intimating hereby what
ministers must expect in the doing their work, no other but what sheep and
lambs find amongst wolves. Mat. 10.16.23. c, 34.


They that enter this calling, 2 Cor. 11.26.27.
must resolve with Paul to be in deaths often, disgraces, reproaches,
persecutions.

If they said John has a Devil, Mal. 11.18,19.
Christ was a wine-bibber, what may not Christ's ministers expect.

It being (as Luther speaks) to preach the Gospel (as it ought to be preached,
to stir up all the furies of hell against us.

And therefore such of all men have most need of resolution and fortitude, to
tread under feet all oppositions.

Contemptus est a me Romanus favor and furor.
Spernere mundum, spernere nullum, spernere sese,
Spernere se sperni; Quatuor ista beant.
2. Understanding, a discerning eye.

For how can they warn others of that they are themselves ignorant of; how can
they teach others, what they themselves know not?

We find in sacred History, that they who were placed as military watchmen
were discerning men. 2 Samuel 18.27. 2 Kin. 9.20.
One knows at a distance the running of Ahimaaz, another the driving of Iehu.

And shall not Gods watchmen then, who are the light of the world, shall not
they be as of old, 1 Samuel 9.9.
they were called seers.

Acts 20.28.
Episcopus est oculus Ecclesiae; yea the Churches overseer, and shall he be
blind? nay rather, he ought to be as those beasts about the throne full of
eyes; Rev. 4.6
least being blind, God call for the beasts of the field, and the forest to
devour them. Isa. 56.9,10.

Now there are three things that watchmen, especially such that are not only
seers, but overseers, are to discern: 1. The strength, stratagems and approches
of the enemy. 2. The weakness, danger, and infirmities of their charge. 3. The
course to disappoint the enemy, and the way to secure their charge.


If we know not all these, we shall make but bad watch men.

1. The strength, stratagems and approches of the enemy.

This Paul knew, 2 Cor. 2.11.
when he tells us, we are not ignorant of his devices.

Our spiritual adversaries can put on disguises; and therefore we had need
know them, that as the Prophet did Ieroboam's wife, 1 Kin. 14.6.
we may call them by their own names, least (as the Saracens in the slain
French men's attire, had like to have surprised Damiata) Knowls Turk. Hist. p.
105.
so Satan's temptations disguised by plausible appearances, prevail for an
uncontrouled entertainment.

2. The dangers, weaknesses and infirmities, the estate and condition of their
own charge. How else can provision be made for them, if we are unacquainted
with their conditions?

How can a Physician prescribe to a patient, whose disease he knows not?

What advice can a Lawyer give in a case he is ignorant of?

Hence that counsel, Prove. 27.23.
be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.
This Paul did, Phil. 2.19.
and therefore sent Timothy to the Philippians, that he might know their state.

3. The course to disappoint the enemy, and the way to provide for their
charges safety.

The Physician must know his Art as well as his Patients disease. The
Counselor must know the Law as well as his Clients case.

God's ministers must know God's mind.

Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people seek it at their
mouth.

Thus then (to mention no more) watchmen must be seers, have a discerning eye,
be skillful to judge enemies from friends, and friends from disguised enemies,
since Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14.


God's watchmen had need be quick-sighted to discern his secrets, and discover
them to their charges, as Elisha did the king of Arams to the king of Israel. 2
Kin. 6.


And therefore they must have eyes, and eyes open to look about them; whosoever
have a charge committed to them, must not be as that man, who was here and
there, 1 Kin. 20.40.
but take heed unto their charge, not shut, but keep their eyes open. Isa,
56.10. Acts 20.28.
It was while the servant slept that the enemy sowed tares. Mat. 13.25.
Somnolentia pastorum est gaudium luporum.

3. Prudence, a discreet tongue.

Watch men do not always and inopportunely make outcries, but in the proper
time; first, diligently observe what the enemy is endeavoring, what the
adversary is driving at, and then seasonably acquaint the General, or the next
officer, not the whole army; they do not beat an alarm undiscreetly: so must
it be with God's watchmen, as they must have eyes to discern, so they must
have discretion to declare; and that this is requisite, Solomon's example
teaches us, Eccles. 12.10,11,12.
who because the preacher was wise. he still taught the people knowledge; yea
he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs. The Preacher
sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright,
even words of truth; and being such, they were as goads and as nails fastened by
the masters of Assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

This that precept to Timothy enforces, 2 Timothy 2.15.
study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, carving to each his portion, and
that cannot be without discretion.

Rightly dividing, viz. not the word in respect of it self into it is due
logical Analysis, but in respect of the persons to whom the division is to be
made. It Is an allusion to the legal sacrifices, some parts whereof were given
to the Priest, other to the People. Vide Leigh in locum.


Now this discretion as in civil and military, so in spiritual Watchmen must
appear in these three things. 1. Warning seasonably. 2. Warning suitably. 3.
Warning seriously and affectionately.


1. Warning seasonably.

Isa. 50.4.
Having the tongue of the learned, that they may know how to speak a word in
season to him that is weary.

Such word being like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Prove. 25.11.


Though it be not good Heraldry to lay metal upon metal, yet thus to tin
discourse is a principal part of a preacher's prudence, who must give notice of
sins and errors that are approaching, that they may be prevented, not suffer
by their silence their charge first to be seduced or fall into sin, and after
endeavor to reclaim them, but give warning of the enemy's coming before he
comes.

Abigail came to David in the due season; 1 Samuel 25.32,33,34. Eccl. 3.11.
and in the due time every thing is beautiful.

Ministers should be such as the Children of Issachar, 1 Chr. 12.32.
which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought
to do.

To sound an alarm at the approach of friends, is to raise a combustion, to be
silent when enemies draw near is to betray the safety of the camp.

2. Warning suitably, and that to their charges. 1. Condition. 2. capacity.


1. Condition.

Making a difference, some must be pulled out of the fire, startled, roused,
awaked, Jude 22.23.
and on some have compassion: as skilful Physicians know that the same
ingredients are not fit for every sickness, and therefore so mix their potions
as to remove the malignant humors of the particular disease; and as a wise
Surgeon does not lay an healing plaster on a festred wound, but fits the
salve unto the sore, which would otherwise rather hurt then heal.

So do God's watchmen deal in their imploiment, Paul has a rod for some, for
others a spirit of meekness; Christ a woe be to you, to the Pharisees; a peace
be to you, to his Disciples.

Each must have his portion, however they like it.

If Preachers only float in general notions, and never descend to suitable and
particular application, they will beat the air.

It Is beating the Pomander that makes it savoury: Ioh. 5.35.
it is striking the flint that makes it give fire.

We must not only be luciferi, but igniferi, light-bearers, but fire-bearers,
rightly dividing and cutting the loaf in pieces, give every Child a portion,
and his own portion. Not smite where God smiles nor flatter where God frowns.

Gods song is as David's mercy and judgment, Psalm. 101.1.
and they that sing it must tune it rightly, giving each his due, Applying
general doctrines to the particular state of the souls and consciences of
their hearers. As did Nathan to David thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.17.
the prophet to Ahab, who took away his ashes, 1 Kin. 20.41.
Peter to his hearers, whom ye have crucified, John Baptist to Herod Non licet
tibi, Acts 2.
Paul to the Galatians O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? Gal. 3.1.


Thus shall we be workmen that need not be ashamed, Luke 12.41.
if with that faithful steward we give each his portion.

Consider 1. the word is bread; now a whole loaf cannot feed us, and children
cannot cut themselves, and therefore preachers must not only give the meaning
by right exposition, but bring home the word by due application, that they may
hear it, and know it for their good. Neh. 8,8. Acts 8.31. Deuteronomy. 32.46,47. Job
5.27


2. Men's partiality corrupts their judgment, so that they understand not
what is clearly delivered, if not particularly applied, as David did not
Nathan's parable, till he told him thou art the man.

And the woman of Samaria, till Christ came home to her, and told her what she
was.

And therefore God's watch men must convince, as Tamar did Judah, Genesis 38.25.
by plain tokens, not content themselves with general speculations. Quibus
sibi applausum, non planctum audientibus in salutem creant, whereas lacrymae
auditorum sunt lauds ministri: such pointlesse swords and firelesse lamps,
neither warm our affections, nor destroy our corruptions.

In this then lies the highest point of a watch-mans prudence, even in rightly
dividing to each his portion, giving to each his due, knowing when and where to
be sons of consolation, when and where to be sons of thunder, Mark 3.17.
when to mourn, that people may lament, when to pipe, that people may rejoice.

There was in the Ark of the Testament the golden pot of Manna, Heb. 9.4.
as well as the rod of Aaron; a Preacher should have both, and as a good mother
ubera as well as verbera, and with the be, a sting as well as honey. Now the
right suiting of these is and ought to be the watch-mans chiefest care; to
apply rightly that which is most proper, save some with fear; on others have
compassion.

Honey cleared Ionathan's eyes, and gall Tobit's, meal healed the pottage, salt
the water. 2 Kin. 2.23. and 4.42.

The good Samaritan powered in both wine and oil, to cleanse and supple: and
thus must Gods watchmen cast down, lift up, terrify, allure; sometimes come
with a rod, sometimes with a spirit of meekness, 1 Cor. 4.21.
always speak suitably to their hearers condition.

2. To the hearers capacity.

1 Cor. 14.8.
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself unto the
battle?

The excellency of an Orator is perspicuity: so of a Preacher plainness.

True it is, that as amongst Gods Prophets, so amongst Christ's ministers there
is and may be difference; an Isaiah as well as Amos; a Paul, rude in speech, as
well as an Apollo's eloquent in the Scripture. 2 Cor. 11.6. Acts 18.24.


But whatever skill, talent, and gift they have, this they must and will
regard, to speak clearly, and to apply themselves to the capacity of their
present auditors.

Thus shall we find our Savior did; the wise Astrologers he draws by a star,
the Samaritan woman at the well by water, the Capernaits that followed him for
loaves, he minds of spiritual bread, Andrew and Peter fishermen, by working a
wonder in catching of fish; he speaks to the husbandmen of sowing.

Thus did Christ, and so should Preachers suit their instructions to their
hearers capacities. And therefore know that plain preaching is best, I mean not
crude, careless, negligent, slothful and slovenly handling the word; but that
which is most to the understanding and necessity of the hearers: such preaching
is best, because it is 1. Most convincing. 2. Most saving, though not most
pleasing. 3. Most agreeable to a ministers calling, 1 Cor. 1.21.
who is a watchman, a Physician. 4. Most agreeable to Scripture Language,
which (as laws) would loose their authority, if written above peoples
capacities: States show not their eloquence, but their authority.

5. It Is most comfortable for the conscience of the Preachers, when they shall
be able to say as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12.
Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world.


Let not hearers then like man's wit better then Gods word, the preachers
affectation better then his affection, nor storm at plain dealing, as Pharaoh
and Ahab, nor scorn as the Athenians, who when Paul preached of the
resurrection, called him babbler. But love it, submit to it, and attend it, as
patients do Physicians, who come to them not to hear their eloquence, but
procure their own health.

Let preachers then being Gods watchmen 1. Not speak falsely. 2. Not speak
impertinently. 3. Not speak flatteringly, that were to poison men with sweet
meats. 4. Not speak too highly in lofty and obscure expressions, for that were
to show children bread, and hang it our of their reach, which course would
rather fret them then feed them.


It is not reasonable to apparel a chaste virgin in the fashions of a strumpet,
nor to cloth divine wisdom in affected and fantastical flourishes.

It is an observation I have read, Lord G. Digby's Letter.
that some discourses are so tempered with elegancy of expressions, and
weakness of argument, that they give great contentment, but little
satisfaction; please the ear, but not convince the judgment, nor work upon the
affections, and least of all move the conscience.

True indeed, carnal ears desire words without matter, sauce without meat,
they would have their fancies pleased, not their consciences wounded: but God
in the Old Testament would have his Altar built with unpolished stones, to
testify that he loved simplicity in his service.

Let not preachers endeavor to speak plausibly, but plainly; not make their
sermons riddles, and tire their auditors with Quotations, let them not draw
matter from Abana and Pharpar, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, etc. but from the
wells of salvation, Moses, the prophets and Apostles.

Alas Beloved, humane authorities are too weak to strike sin dead; it is Gideon
himself, and not his sons that must kill Zebah. Judge. 8.


It must be Gods word and not man's that must throw down strong holds. 2 Cor.
10.4,5.
It is only that which is the sword of the spirit; Ephesians. 6.
and as David spoke of Goliah's sword, there is none like it.

This it was that Christ used in his encounter with the Devil, and this alone
is able to make a man wise unto salvation, and the man of God thoroughly
furnished. 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17.


One stone out of David's scrip, one text of Gods word is of greater force to
kill Goliath, to destroy sin, then all Readiness armor, then all the counsels and
precepts of the wisest moralists.

And therefore when men serve their humane and secular learning, as the
Israelites did by the Egyptians earrings make calves of them, that they may be
worshipped, stuff their sermons full of humane authorities, sentences of Poets
and Orators, to fish for applause, Aaron's excuse will not serve the turn,
populus exigebat, Exodus 32.23.

But here I would not be mistaken, as if I did mislike all use of secular
learning, Quotations, authorities in sermons. No, know

1. There may be much use where there is no show; and as that eloquence is best
that flows naturally, and is not forced (as a native beauty is better then a
painted face) so is it the best art to conceal art.

2. In some cases, in some auditories, for the understanding of the sense of
words, the customs of times (as argumenta ad hominem) there is and may be
necessary and good use of such citations.

So that as Calvin speaks on Tit. 1.12. they may be accounted superstitious,
that utterly condemn the borrowing any thing from profane authors. Yet I
conceive in popular auditories, in ordinary labors, the more sparingly used,
the better; Gods ministers are watchmen, and such must not speak curiously and
quaintly, but scasonably and plainly, suitably to their charges condition, and
their charges capacity.

They who would be fuller satisfied concerning the use of secular learning in
sermons may consult. Dr. Tho. Tailor on Tit. 1.12. Zanchy praefat. ad lib. de
Scriptura.

3. Warning seriously.

Affectionately, prevailingly, earnestly, endeavoring to the utmost that
people may take warning: Ministers must warn 1. Importuneately. 2.
Compassionately.


1. Importunately.

Isa. 58.1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice as a trumpet.

2 Timothy 4.2. Eccles. 12.10.
Be instant in season, and out of season, exhort, reprove, rebuke with all
authority: speak home to the sinner, that their words may be as nails fastened,
never give over, till by Gods trumpet they be awakened, call heaven and earth
to witness, warn night and day. Isa. 1.2. Acts 20.29.


2. Compassionately, with affection, commiseration, out of love, and with
abundance of pity toward perishing souls, 2 Timothy 3.
with long sufferance, meekness, yea with tears: thus did Paul, Luke 19.41.
and thus did Christ warn Jerusalem.

When Alexander saw the dead corpse of Darius: and Julius Caesar the head of
Pompey; and Marcus Marcellus Syracuse burn; Scipio Numantia spoiled, and Titus
Jerusalem made even with the ground, they could not abstain from weeping,
albeit they were mortal enemies. And shall not we that are Gods watchmen be
affected, when we see dead souls hastening toward destruction, even toward
easelesse, endless and remediless ruins: whence is it then, that our Pulpits
have no more tears? is it not from a senseless incompassionatenesse of our
peoples perishing condition?

It Is true indeed, ministers must sharply and severely reprove, and that with
all authority.

But yet it must be wisely with these and the like cautions. 1. That they light
on those that need them. 2. That they aim at the humbling of the sinner, and
not disgracing. 3. That they flow not from carnal respects.


But through all, a spirit of compassion must manifest it self, that our
hearers may know that we do not desire the woeful day. Ier. 17.16.

Our reproofs of others must not be with fury but meekness. Gal. 6.1.


As Chirurgions and bone-setters with tenderness restore dislocated joints,
not give gall and vinegar to wounded consciences, when we should give milk and
water. If true love have not a part in the scene of reproof, we shall but act a
Tragedy, and with Hazael under pretense of easing Benhadad, stifle our Brother
with a thick cloth dipped in water.

Should we come upon our Brethren, as Eliab did on David, 1 Samuel 17.
in heat and choler, we should at best but do what the Jews blasphemously
charged on Christ, Cast out Satan by Satan, Iam. 1.20.
since the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

God came to Adam in the cool of the day, and appeared to Elijah in a still
voice.

The dead fly of (appearing) envy or anger, makes many times the ointment of
reproof to savor ill.

Reprehension indeed is one principal part of the ministers work, Lev. 19.17.
but it must be wisely performed.

No railing Shimei, nor furious Iehu, but a prudent Nathan is fit for this
employment, who wrapped his pill in sugar, and dressed his reproof as usually
Christ did his in parables.

Hot reprehensions are not always coals taken from Gods altar, but sometimes
flow from our own mistaken zeal, who come as Iehu in a fury, who with James and
John, call for fire on the Samaritans: we many times mistake, and know not what
spirit we are of, God is not always in such thunder. 1 Kin. 14.


Obsecratio frangit animum, and placide se instillat.

Christ's Ambassadors must beseech. How often does the Apostle come with Dearly
Beloved.

Downright blows do not always pierce deepest.

Paul reproves the Galathians sometimes. 1. Translatione criminis, there be
amongst you. 2. Ex suppositione, if you bite, etc.


As a wise father that knows his son is riotous, yet falls not presently on him
with downright reproofs, but writes to him thus: Son, if you continue in such
and such courses, beggary and shame will be the end. As a wise Physician to a
regardlesse patient, if you do this or that you will endanger your life.

Lipsius relates of a physician, that being to administer to a squeamish
patient that disgnsted all physic, directed her to drink the milk of a Goat
that had been fed with physical herbs.

Thus must Gods ministers mingle the bitter potion of deserved reprehensions
with the sweet milk of winning persuasions, beseeching those whom they might
enjoin, as Paul did Philemon, Phil. verse. 8.
not deal treacherously, but yet compassionately.

Corrasives and lances must be used sometimes, but then the Surgeon comes
with grief.

4. Faithfulness.

A faithless watchman is a most dangerous mischief, in that he has, being
watchman, an opportunity of giving intelligence to the enemy, and thereby of
ruining the whole army: so is it spiritually, and therefore in such especially
faithfulness is required.

For Confirmation of this consider. 1. God promises to raise up a faithful
priest. 1 Samuel 2.35.
2. God requires in stewards that they should be such. 1 Cor. 4.2.
3. God counted Paul faithful, and put him in the ministry. 1 Timothy 1.12.
4. God ordains that the office of the ministry should be committed to
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others. 2 Timothy 2.2.
5. The Scripture lays it down as the singular commendations of the choicest
ministers.


Paul, Tychicus, Sylvanus are all commended in that they were faithful. 1 Cor.
7,25. Ephesians. 6.21. Col. 1 7. 1 Pet. 5.12.


By all which we may see, viz. Gods promising, requiring, appointing, directing
and commanding, by all which, I say, we may clearly see, that ministers (as
watchmen) are to be qualified with faithfulness for this employment, and
this particularly to be shown in respect of 1. God, his truths. 2. Themselves,
their own lives. 3. Their charge.


1. God his Truths.

Gods watchmen must be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.13. cap. 2.1,7,8.
speaking those things which become sound doctrine, showing therein
uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, and
holding fast the form of sound words, delaring Gods word faithfully. 2 Timothy
1.13. Ier. 23.28.


2. Themselves.

To their own souls, by an holy and unblamable conversation, 1 Cor. 9.27.
least preaching to others they themselves become cast awaies. Qui sibi nequam,
cui bonus? How can they look to the souls of others, that have no regard unto
their own? 1 Can. 6.
that though they are made the keepers of the vineyard, yet their own vineyard
they have not kept? ministers ought to be examples to the flock, showing
themselves patterns of good works, Tit. 2.7.
otherwise they will prove offenses in stead of furtherances.

For though Gods truths do not depend on man's weakness, yet as a sluttish cook
makes us loath wholesome meat, so a profane life causes a disrelish even in
good doctrine.

3. The flock.

Watch men and stewards must be faithful, as to their General and masters, so
to the army and servants, Giving each their portion. Luke 12.42.


Ministers are debtors to the wise and unwise, and must pay each their due,
Romans 1.14.
that so when the sermon is done, none may complain that they go away without
their share.

There are some have need of strong meat, others of milk, the unruly must be
warned, the feeble-minded comforted, 1 These. 5.14.
the weak supported, gainsayers must be convinced, the fallen through infirmity
restored, Galat. 6.1.
the word must be rightly divided, that each, both babes and men may have their
portion.

It Is all the flock, not some of them, Acts 20.28.
that we are overseers of.

It Is the whole house of Israel that Ezekiel is a watchman to, the greatest as
well as the smallest were in the compass of his commission.

Nathan must tell even a David, 2 Samuel 12.
a great man and a good man, Thou art the man.

John Baptist must tell Herod, Matthew. 14.
though a bloody tyrant, Non licet tibi; the greatest must hear, the smallest
must be looked to, Psalm. 119.46.
Feed my lambs. Onesimus, though a runaway servant, yet must have pains taken
with him.

5. Diligence.

Watchfulness, care, sollicitousnesse. Thus Jacob, when he kept Laban's sheep,
sleep departed from his eyes. How much greater care lies then on spiritual
watchmen and shepherds, who of all men must not be slothful in business, but
fervent in spirit, having earnest care for the churches welfare. 2 Cor. 7.12.
cap. 8.16. 1 Timothy 3.5. 2 Phil. 20.


Watchmen then and ministers must be diligent, sollicitous and careful, and
that on these three grounds. 1. Their work is difficult. 2. Their adversaries
are watchful. 3. Their own charge are careless.


1. Their work is weighty and difficult: now hard work will not be done with
lazy endeavors: great work calls for great industry; the weighty work of
winning souls will never be discharged with lazy hands, and careless hearts,
thence those counsels.

Be instant in season, out of season, stir up the gift, etc. 2 Timothy 4.2. 2 Timothy
1.6.


Paul's practice, in labors more abundant. 2 Cor. 11.23.


2. The adversaries are watchful. 1. The adversaries of truth ly in wait to
deceive. Seducers compass sea and land to gain proselytes. It was while the
servants slept that the enemy sowed tares. 2. The adversaries of holiness, the
world, flesh, the Devil, they are watchful, Satan has wiles, devices,
methods, in which he uses diligence and industry, your adversary the Devil
goes about, etc. 1 Pet. 5.8.



3. Their charges are careless.

The generality dead in trespasses and sins, not minding, nor fearing, nor
being sensible of their danger, and therefore ministers have more need to be
sollicitous.

Epaminondas a Theban Duke, when his citizens gave themselves on certain
festival days more licentiously to their pleasure, he alone sober and
serious. Arma lustrabat, and maenia perlustrabat, looked carefully to the walls,
and being asked why he did so, Answered, therefore, because the citizens were
less sober, was he the more careful.

Now have not ministers great cause to do so for their charge?

Thus Job did for his children, Job 1.5.
while they feasted, he rose early and sacrificed.

Well then, the ministers work is great, the adversaries many, and their own
charge careless; it much concerns them then to be diligent, careful,
sollicitous and industrious in their places, that (as from Jacob's tending
Laban's flock) the sleep may go from their eyes, while they with Paul watch and
warn every one night and day with tears, Acts 20.26.31.
that they may take their hearers to record, that they are pure from the blood
of all men, having not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of God.

And thus (Reverend Fathers and Brethren) though you know these things, and are
established in them, yet according to my duty I have made bold to put you in
remembrance of them, that thereby I may as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1.12,13.
stir up your pure minds. And though I question not but your own consciences
will apply and improve the doctrinall truths you have heard; yet least I should
be wanting to my duty and your expectation, I shall endeavor as the time will
bear particularly to press them home.

You have heard that ministers are watchmen, and as watchmen must be thus
qualified, viZ. with courage, understanding, prudence, faithfulness and
diligence.

Suffer then the word of exhortation, and in the stations that God has set
you: remember that you are his watchman, and therefore resolve with the
prophet Heb. 2.1.
To stand upon your watch, set you upon the tower, and watch to see what he
will say unto you, and what you shall answer. And in your so doing, that I may
press home particulars in the doctrine mentioned.

1. Be courageous.

Fear not their faces, nor be dismayed; I have shown you in the doctrinall part
of my discourse why.

I shall now lay before you some considerations that may support, strengthen,
and encourage you: and all I shall say, I shall reduce to these three heads. 1.
You have Gods commission. 2. You have Gods assistance. 3. You are sure of good
success.


1. You have Gods commission, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman.

And shall we not be bold, when we have this warrant for what we do? Do we not
see mean men, Heralds, Trumpetters, carry themselves boldly on Princes and
Generals commissions? And shall not Gods commissions make us courageous? what
though we be as sheep among wolves, yet he sends us.

True it is (Brethren) were we without commission, we might very well be
without confidence.

If we could not answer who made thee a watchman, as it was supposed Moses
could not? Act. 7.27.
Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over us? we might very well fly and fear as
he did.

But if we can evidence our commission to our own consciences, we may with
boldness manage that which God has trusted us with.

It is not my purpose, neither will the time bear it to handle the doctrine of
Gods commissionating watchmen. That, by a Reverend Brother in the hearing of
most of you, and on the like occasion, was performed, whose Sermon is now made
public. Mr. Norman of Bridgewater at Somerton, June 9. 1658.


I shall only at present mind you, what Luther formerly; we may now observe
four sorts of spiritual watchmen. 1. Only from God and not man. 1. Prophets.
2. Apostles.
2. Only by man and not God, unlearned, unworthy. 3. Neither by God nor man,
false prophets, Enthusiasts, wolves in sheeps clothing. 4. Both by God fitted,
and man ordained as the Elders of Ephesus, and others in the primitive, and now
the ministers in the reformed Protestant churches. Acts 20.28. Acts 14.23.


Now then, when we speak in Gods name, in his stead, by his commission, as his
Ambassadors shall we not speak boldly? 2 Cor. 5.20. Isa. 58.1.
Yea, cry aloud, and not spare.

2. You have Gods presence and assistance, Lo I am with you to the end of the
world. Now if an Herald in the absence of his Prince, Mat. 28.20.
being thereto authorized will proclaim war against, and defy another Prince
even in the head of his forces. How much greater reason have Gods Heralds to
deal undauntedly, since they have him with them.

When God sent Moses, Exodus 3.11,12.
and he drew back, God tells him, I am with thee, and this indeed may suffice
us against the multitudes of enemies, and likelihood of oppositions.

As when Antigonus's Admiral told him that the number of his adversaries far
exceeded his own forces, he answered, True, but how many do you set me against?

So when our faithless hearts discourage us, and prompt us, that our
oppositions are greater then our strength. Let us then consider how many do we
set God against? and if he be with us, as he is with his servants, owning their
injuries, and espousing their just quarrels, if God be thus for us and with us,
who can be against us? who can prevail against us, so as to procure harm to us?

3. You have assurance of good success, Ezekiel. 2.5.
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; yet they shall know that
there has been a prophet amongst them. Isa. 49.5.
Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, and my God shall be my strength.

2 Cor. 2.15.
For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in
them that perish.

Now shall not this embolden us, when probabilities of success make men
venture far.

We read of Agesilaus, that to encourage his soldiers before a battle,
clapping his hand upon the Altar by a foreplotted device he brought of victory
engraven on his palm, which he showed to his soldiers, who were thereby so
encouraged, that they got an unlookt and an unlikely victory. Now to encourage
Gods watchmen and soldiers, we have an assurance that we shall be Romans 8.37.
Mat. 18.18.
more then conquerours, the gates of hell shall not prevail.

Well then (Reverend Fathers and Brethren) let us consider, that where a door
is open, though there be many adversaries; frowning Ahabs, persecuting
Iezabels, scoffing Ishmaels, mocking Micals, and sometimes angry Asa'es: Yet we
have Gods warrant, his presence, his promise, and so as Elisha told his
fearful servant; 2 King. 6.16,
there are more on our side then there are against us. Let us not then fear
man, who have a God to warrant us his presence with us, and who has promised a
comfortable success unto us.

Especially considering that

1. Our fear of man is the next way to lay us open to Gods fury.

That watchman that removes from his station for the fear of an enemy, does
thereby actually incur the danger of a capital sentence from his own
General.

2. Herein if ever that observation is verified, Cowards are cruel.

The Emperor Mauritius enquiring concerning Phocas what he was, heard he was a
coward, then answered, he is a murderer.

It Is most true in this case.

Ministers cowardice is cruelty, he that fears faces, hates, kills souls.

2. Labor for a discerning eye.

Why ministers should be men of knowledge, you have heard.

I shall only now point to you from the text how they may be such.

Text.
Therefore hear the word at my mouth.

Gods mouth, which spiritual watchmen are now (since immediate converse with
him is ceased) to hear Gods mind from, is 1. His works. 2. His Scriptures.


For as Aristotle had two sorts of writings, one called exotericall, for common
auditors: another called Acroamaticall for his private Scholars and familiar
acquaintance: so God has two Books. 1. The creatures, the shepherds Calendar,
the plow-mans Alphabet. Vniversus mundus nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus.

Romans 1.20.
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world, are clearly
seen, being understood, by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead. (...).


Psalm. 19.12.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the earth show forth his handy work.

In which Scripture, as one observes the Psalmist shows that the creatures are
1. Dilligent preachers at all times. 2. Learned preachers in all tongues. 3.
Catholic in all countries.


2. The Scriptures the most plain, evident, and clear discovery of his mind.
Psalm. 19.7.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple, etc. And those are for his choice and
domestic scholars. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: Psalm. 147.19,20.
He has not dealt so with any nation; and as for his judgments they have not
known them.




Now Gods watchmen must hear his mind from both, Gods works and word; but
especially the later.

In reference to which I shall leave with you these two directions.

1. Search the Scriptures. Ioh. 5.39,


Converse much with those sacred pages, thereby 2 Timothy 3.17.
the man of God may be perfest, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. And
therefore the counsel that Paul gives Timothy, let me beseech you in the name
of Jesus Christ to have regard unto.

1 Timothy 4.13,14.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profiting may appear to all.

The Scriptures are the more sure word whereunto we do well that we take heed
as unto a light shining in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.19.


It Is Gods revealed will alone must be our light.

It Is not Thus says Austin. etc. but Thus says the Lord, must be our warrant.
As those in the 137 Psalm, would not sing the Lords song in a strange land: so
ministers must not sing strange songs in the Church, which is the Lords land,
Hos. 9.3.

Ambassadors must not go extra mandata, besides their instructions, neither
may preachers bring doctrines which the word warrants not, whatever great names
they may be ushered in by.

We are to be Gods mouth, and therefore must not speak hominum commenta, but
divina oracula. Aaron was to speak as Moses bad him, ministers what Christ
commands.

It is his bread which we must break, that which Christ has blessed, or else
twill not multiply in our hands.

And therefore let me beseech you (especially those of the younger sort) that
you would bestow your pains and time in the study of the Scriptures.

When Isaac Casaubon sent his Notes on Diogenes Laertius (being the first
fruits of his studies) to his Father, who was a Reverend minister in France,
his Father sent him this Answer.

Leigh Epist. Dedic. in Notas in N. T.
Mi fili, laudo tuum studium, verum hoc scito rem gratiorem te mihi facturum,
si velunum dictum sacrae scripturae difficultatibus aliquibus obstructum
explicaveris, quam si mill profanorum scriptorum loca depravata correxeris.

2. Beg of God, and labor for an experience of the word in your own hearts. It
is (as one notes) the chief mystery in divine Rhetoric, to feel what a man
speaks, and then speak what a man feels.

The heart understands the language of the heart.

It Is but a cold breath that comes only from the mouth.

They can best teach the way to cure others that are sensible of the cure
wrought on themselves.

Psalm. 51.
Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Luke 22.32.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

Psalm. 66.
I will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul.

Ministers then ought to be as good Physicians, that first experience on
themselves; or as nurses, that feed their hearers with what themselves have
eaten.

Ezekiel. 3.1.
Ezekiel was first to eat the roll, and then to prophesy.

And here (would the time have given me leave) I should have been earnest with
you (Reverend Fathers and Brethren) that you would especially regard these two
things. 1. To have the experience of the power of the word in your own hearts.
2. To manifest it to others by an holy, blameless, and unrebukable
conversation.


To persuade you to which care, I shall only mind you of two things.

1. You will thereby preach more profitably and pertinently; by how much the
more you speak experimentally.

There are some divine truths that cannot be comprehended by the head as by the
heart.

2. You are like thereby to preach more successefully.

2 Kin. 4.31.
Elisha's staff in Gehazi's hand had no virtue.

Luke 4.34,35.
Christ bad Satan hold his peace, when he said, Thou art the holy one of God.

Men will not easily believe that ministers preaching, whose practice they see
contradicts it.

Cujus vita despicitur, restat, ut praedicatio contemnatur.

Loquendi authoritas perditur, quando vox opere non adjuvatur.

Been vivendo, and been docendo, populum instruis, quomodo vivere debeat: been
autem docendo and male vivendo, Deum instruis quomodo te debeat condemnare.

Qua liberate peccatum corripere potest, cum tacitus ipse sibi respondeat,
eadem se admisisse quae corripit?

Qua front (Patres and Fratres charissimi) arguunt culpabiles ipsi culpandi?
ebrius temulentum, avarus avarum, superbus superbum? Clodius moechum, Catilina
let hegum. Comata capita (dolenda ministrorum macula) qua front arguant comas
protensas? Caetera quid referam? Pudet haec opprobria nobis, Et dici potuisse
and non potuisse refelli.

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

And therefore in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, I do most earnestly
beseech you to have an especial care of your conversations, that you may be
examples to the flock, of what is good, and not of what is evil.

Since we find by sad experience, that magistrates and ministers are as
looking-glasses to the places in which they live, by which men dress
themselves, who (falling into sin) like men in a crowd, many fall with them.

Men's souls being as apt to be infected by ill examples, as their bodies by ill
air. Peter at Antioch dissembling, misled Barnabas.

O let not Gods ordinances suffer by our irregularities.

In the times of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.17.
the oblations were contemned because of the sins of the Priests.

Thus the bad lives of able preachers bring a deep disparagement on Gods
ordinances. And therefore, I beseech you, let us be walking sermons, building
up Gods house by our practice, as well as preaching, otherwise what one spoke
of Erasmus will be true of us, that he was but half a Christian: so shall we be
but half preachers, throwing down with our bad lives more, then our good
doctrine can set up.

God teaches by his word, and by his works; and so should we, otherwise it
will be bad with our hearers, but worse with our selves: if we speak like
Balaam's ass to another understanding, and not our own, we may peradventure
as Noah's carpenters, help build the Ark, as the Tyrians and Sidonians, bring
materials to the temple, and yet our selves be shut out, and prove cast awaies.

Let Gods watchman then see to it, that he be potens verbo, and pius vita, apt
and able to teach, and an example to the flock; join both life to learning,
either single will be in a minister, as the solitary Helena to the mariners,
always unhappy: such dead Amasa's will stop Gods people in their passage.

Having detained you thus long, I shall press home the three last requisites
of a watchman together, viz. prudence, faithfulness, and diligence; and
therefore

Let me beseech you to show forth all these in the discharge of the place where
God has set you.

Divide the word of God aright, give every one his own portion.

Study the state of your charge, that you may apply your selves unto them, and
be faithful in delivering whatever message God sends by you: let not an Ahab's
proud look, nor a Mical's scoffing tongue divert you, though the message be
what Ahijah sent to Jeroboam by his masked wife, 1 Kin. 14.6.
though it should displease never so much; yet let us resolve as Micajah,
though the King himself, and four hundred false prophets speak otherwise; yet
to declare only, and all what the Lord commands, though we be, and be thought,
as Ahijah told Ieroboam's wife, (...). Gal. 1.10.
Considering that Christ's ministers must not please men but God.

And in all this let us use diligence, not rush into Gods service hand over
head, stand in the Pulpit before we have sat in our studies, or kneeled before
the throne of grace. I beseech you (Brethren) let us not come unprepared, but
first hear from Gods mouth before we speak in his name.

A due preparation is necessary to all serious undertakings; will thou speak
unto thy Prince what thou have not before thought of?

Antonii, Cicerones, Pericles, Demosthenes, pulpita non ascenderunt, nisi
parati. Alio tempore vult Antonius cogitare quid dicat, alio dicere.

Pericles being spoken to ex tempore perorare, answered, non meditatus fui, and
Demosthenes, non sum paratus: shall we then offer unto God, and propose unto
his Church what cost us nothing?

Be not rash with thy mouth, when thou enterest into Gods house; but first
learn, and be assured what is Gods mind, before thou come to warn others of it;
and here give me leave to mind you, not to put off your preparations to such
straits of time, which usually necessitates us to feed our people with crude,
immature, and unconcocted provisions, and many times cause an intrenchment
upon, if not a profanation of Gods day, by doing what should be our own working
days labor on it. I speak unto wise men, judge ye what I say.

Now to press you to this triple care of prudence, faithfulness and
diligence, I shall leave with you, and desire you to consider a ternary of
arguments drawn from these three prevailing, powerful, and commanding passions
and affections of the soul.

Fear. Hope. Love.

By all which we may find the Apostle Paul urging himself unto this duty, and
we may and ought to press our selves to ours: now as one observes, Fear is
servile, Hope is mercenary, Love is filial. Hope has an attractive virtue,
and draws us: Fear has an impulsive, and drives us: Love a compulsive faculty,
and sweetly moves us: Hope hales before, and Fear drives behind; but love like
the soul, acts within us a natural motion that is free and constant. Now since
though we are Gods Ambassadors, yet we are but men, and subject to the like
passions as others, God sees it fit by arguments drawn from each, and all of
these to press us to our duty.

1. From Fear.

Hence the Apostle Paul presses both him and his hearers to persuade, and to
be persuaded, 2 Cor. 5.11.
as knowing the terror of the Lord.

Hence God stirs up the prophet in this context to warn, etc. for if he did
not, their blood should be required at his hands. Ezekiel. 1.


O Beloved, the blood of souls will lie heavy one day upon the account of
careless watchmen.

If Abel's blood lay so heavy on Cain's heart, Genesis 4.
that his countenance fell, O how will wretched careless ministers look God in
the face, when he shall ask them, where is thy Brother, where is such and such
that I have committed to thy charge, Heb. 13.17,
and for whom thou must account?

O Deal not then with your charge, with your flock, as the Ostrich with her
eggs, leave them, and forget that Job 39.14,15,16.
the foot may crush them, that the wild beast may break them: she is hardened
against her young ones, as though they were not hers.

Consider what God threatens against such idol shepherds that leave the flock,
woe be unto him: Zech. 11,17.
the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be
clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Since God speaks to every minister what that man of the sons of the prophets
told Ahab was spoken unto him. 1 Kin. 20.39.
Keep that man; if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life go for his
life.

O how many may say to many ministers concerning their perished, relations, as
Martha did to Christ, O Sir, if you had been here, if you had been faithful,
and careful, and painful in your charge, my Brother, sister, friend had not
died.

Consider then, I pray you, that dreadful curse on him that does the work of
the Lord negligently: Ier. 4.8.10.
what is due to him then that does it not at all? consider the threatening in
this text, His blood will I require. It Is dangerous for watch men to be out of
their stations: it is dangerous for such to sleep. Consider how it fared with
that sentinel his General found sleeping, he thrust him through, and left him
with this sarcasme; Mortuum inveni, mortuum reliqui.

2. From Hope.

Thus the Apostle Paul, from arguments drawn hence, encourages himself from
the 13. verse of the fourth chapter of the 2 Cor. to the 10. of the 5. chapter.
Now Gods watchmen bave a double hope 1. Of success. 2. Of reward.


1. Of success; because God is with them in their work.

The woman of Tekoah 2 Samuel 14.
was subtle and powerful to persuade and prevail, because the hand of Ioab
was with her.

So are Gods ministers powerful to persuade, to throw down strong holds, to
hit the heart, to convince the conscience, because the hand of God is with
them: 1 Cor. 14.24.
so that those who are convinced, shall confess that God is with them of a
truth.

Cambyses being charged with drunkenness by Prexaspes a noble Counselor,
commanded this Counselors son to be set before him as a mark, and calling for
his bow and arrow, shot the lad through, and opening of him, found the arrow in
his heart, asking his father what he thought, the sorrowful father answered;
the Gods cannot shoot better.

And thus indeed Peter's hearers found, Acts 2.
who having in the beginning charged the Apostles with drunkenness, but at
length were hit so right, that they found themselves pricked at the heart, and
had good cause to say, none could shoot better.

And so it is still; however, carnal and secure sinners mistake, misjudge; yet
those that are indeed wrought upon, will acknowledge that God was in his word,
1 Cor. 14.25.
and with his messengers of a truth.

Though ministers many times draw their bows at adventure, as that man that
killed Ahab; 1 Kin. 22.34.
yet God directs their arrows, Psalm. 45.5.
yea many times into the heart of Christ's enemies.

2. Of reward.

Isa. 49.5.
Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious.

Dan. 12.3. Mat. 24.46.
They that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever.
They that be faithful servants shall be blessed, when their master comes, and
finds them so doing.

Consider.

1. God has honored ministers in employing them in his choicest service, as
his Ambassadors, and in some sort to represent him. It was an excellent speech
of Luther's, that may encourage all ministers in the discharge of their duties.

Summa summatum haecest, and inaestimabilis gloria conscientiae nostrae contra
omnem contemptum in mundo, quod Christus nos praedicatores quasi deos plane
creat; dicendo, qui vos recipit, me patremque meum recipit. Mat. 10.40,41.


2. God has engaged for their protection, while they do his work.

Christ holds Rev. 1.16.
the stars in his right hand: dogs may bark at them, but there is no reaching of
them.

Satan and his instruments cannot harm them without Christ's commission: we know
that the devil could not enter the Gadarenes swine, till Christ suffered them,
much less harm Christ's ministers.

3. God owns their quarrels, revenge all their wrongs.

Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed, do my prophets no harm.

They that do, shall be sure to smart for it. Mat. 25.
Inasmuch as you have done it against these little ones, you have done it says
Christ against me.

David sent Ambassadors to Hanun, and he abuses them, cuts their garments,
shaves their beards: but you know how severely David revenged that indignity
that was done to them, he brought forth the people, and 2 Samuel 12.31.
put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick kills.

God now sends his Ambassadors unto sinners, to speak kindly to them, and to
proffer terms of peace; but how many are there every where, that cut their
garments, shave their beards, rob them of their rights, and wrong them in their
names, but what will be the issue? such may read it 2 Chronicles. 36.15,16,17. 2
Cro. 36.16.
They mocked his messengers, and despised his word, and misused his prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against them, till there was no remedy, nor
healing.

4. God will be their play master.

Their reward is with him, and unto him they are a sweet savor, he will not be
unmindfull of any labor of such love.

What though we have none or inconsiderable reward from men; yet let us know,
that both our work is it self a reward, and we are sure of a good reward, if
not here (which yet usually God affords, he being a good master, that delights
in the prosperity of his servants) yet assuredly hereafter, when we shall shine
as the stars in the firmament for ever, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflicting labor for the present, working out for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Well then (Reverend Fathers and Brethren) let hope draw us, let fear drive us;
but especially let love as the soul act within us.

3. From love.

Let the principle of love act in us, and powerfully prevail upon us for the
doing our duty.

1. Love to God and Christ; let that constrain us as it did Paul. This was
Christ's argument to persuade Peter to feed his sheep, love thou me?

2. Love to our charge.

The whole armies welfare depends on the watch-mans care, ministers are
spiritual fathers, and such have, or at least should have natural affections.

Thus the Apostle, Phil. 1.18.
God is my record how greatly I long for you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.
O how did his affections work within toward his Brethren, when he wished
himself accursed for their sakes.

Let not us be then as that false mother, that cared not what became of the
living child. But put on the bowels of a tender mother, that thinks no office
too mean, no work too hard, no pains too much, which is for the necessary
well-being of her child.

3. Love to our selves.

Let that prevail with us, shall we be negligent of our charges, we shall
indeed endamage them, but the greatest harm will be our own: they shall die in
their sins, but their blood will God require at our hands, And shall we be
vigilant and industrious to save their souls, we shall likewise save our
selves, as well as those that hear us.

Well then, let love to God, love to our charge, love to our selves, let these
prevail with us to be diligent, faithful, industrious in the particular places
and charges God has set us in, that so we may give up our account with joy at
the great day.

And now, dear Brethren, shall not these arguments prevail with us? shall not
love move us, fear drive us, hope draw us to be men of courage, prudent,
faithful, diligent and industrious to feed the flock of Christ committed to
our charge, and put under our hands, we that persuade others, O let us suffer
our selves to be persuaded, let us humble our selves for former failings, and
in good earnest set our selves to work in the Lords harvest, since the harvest
is great, and they that labor as they ought, are very few; let us stir up the
gift of God that is in us, and given to us. O let us not stand all the day
idle, but first hear from God, then warn. First fit and fill our selves, that
we may be instruments to fit and fill others; let it never be said truly of any
of us that are Christ's Ambassadors, what Cato scoffingly spoke of three Roman
Ambassadors appointed for Bythinia: of whom the one had his head full of
scars, the other did vecordia laborare; the third had the gout in his feet, of
these Cato said, Romana legatio neque caput, neque, cor, neque pedes habet.

It were great pity Gods Ambassadors should be such without knowledge, without
affections, without activity, who ever heard of blind watch men? deaf and dumb
Ambassadors? It Is true indeed, there were sons of Eli that were sons of
Belial, and the wisest of the people Ieroboam's Priests, and indeed the basest
of men were good enough to make priests of such Gods as were but calves.

But what has God or his truth deserved? God calls for the firstborn, and
indeed the best we are or have is too bad to serve our God by. But since he
has honored us who are but worms and dust, so far as to make us his watch men
and Ambassadors; let us remember our office, and be careful and industrious
in the faithful and conscientious discharge of it.

Thus far in what has hitherto been said, I have made bold, according to the
charge committed to me to be Gods remembrancer to my Reverend Brethren in the
ministry.

And the good God persuade us all to act according to these counsels, and to
steer our courses in our several places, according unto these directions, that
so peace may be upon us as upon Gods Israel.

And though I have been somewhat large in my main work, yet I may not dismiss
the congregation without some particular instructions in reference to their
carriage toward their watchmen. And in this I must cut short, only know, that

Instructions belong to hearers in a two fold respect.

1. In genere essend; as they call for practice, and so indeed all hitherto
spoken has a peculiar and proper respect unto Gods watch men.

2. In genere cognoscendi; as they call for knowledge, and so what has been
spoken concerns all, even the whole congregation.

And I shall help them to improve it by these three directions.

Are Gods ministers watch men, and ought to be so qualified, as you have heard,
with courage, understanding, prudence, faithfulness, and diligence, then hence
learn, 1. To esteem them useful. 2. To help them in their work. 3. To regard
their warnings.


1. Esteem them useful. Apprehend and be convinced of the usefulness and
necessity of the ministerial employment: can an army be, and be safe with out
watchmen? the welfare of the whole camp depends on their care.

Hence we find, that ministers in Scripture are set forth by those things that
are most necessary: they are called. 1. The light of the world. O how sad a
thing is it to be without the Sun! 2. The salt of the earth, what can be
savoury, what can be preserved without corrupting, if salt be wanting?


To be left without Gods word, and without Gods watch men, is the greatest
misery on this side hell.

The famine of the word is far worse then the famine of bread.

What readier way to ruin, then to be without a watchman, witness Laish,
whose watchlesse security gave them up as a prey to the roving Danites.

Romans 10.
How is it possible we should have spiritual life, faith, repentance, etc. or
salvation without a preacher?

Mat. 9.31. Mat. 21.43.
And therefore the Gospel is called not only Evangelium regni, the Gospel of
the kingdom, but regnum ipsum, the kingdom it self.

So that the Gospel being removed, the kingdom of grace and glory are removed
too.

God having so built these three kingdoms of the word, Grace, Glory, as
Marcellus did in Rome, the temples of virtue and honor, that as that of virtue
was the threshold to that of honor, to note that none can be truly honorable
that are not first virtuous: so the kingdom of the word is the entrance to the
kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of grace is the threshold to the kingdom
of glory; none coming to the last but by the second, and none ordinarily to the
second but by the first, so miserable a thing is it to have the word removed
from us, in effect to be excluded heaven and happiness for ever.

And this Satan knows, and therefore endeavors what he can to keep people
without preachers, and from preaching, doing herein as the Philistines did with
Israel, who would not suffer them to have a Smith amongst them, that so being
weaponlesse they might the easier be over-mastered by them.

Beware therefore how ye reject and slight the word of God: beware how ye put
it from you, for in so doing Acts 13.46.
ye judge your selves unworthy of eternal life. When Saul rejected Gods
counsel, God rejected him.

When Ahab hated Micajah and Elijah, he soon perished.

When Pharaoh drove away Moses, his destruction was near.

What though ministers are in themselves but mean and contemptible instruments,
yet it is Gods 1 Cor. 1.21.
pleasure by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, that all
the glory may be his own.

Hence it is that God usually works by such weak means, that praise cannot
rationally be attributed to.

Hence the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.7.
we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of us.

We read in the history of the Judges, that the Midianites were destroyed by
Gideons three hundred soldiers, who had nothing but a trumpet on one hand, and
pitchers and lamps in the other: and in Joshua, how Ierichos walls were blown
down with the priests Rams horns, weak means; yet in the hand of God are strong
enough to do what they were commissionated for.

Learn then not from man's weakness to despise, but from Gods appointment to
value the ordinance of the ministry.

Be convinced of the necessity and usefulness of the preachers employment,
which was the great legacy which Christ leaving the world, left unto the earth,
Ephesians. 4.11.12.
who when he ascended on high, gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ.

2. Help them in their work.

If ministers be watchmen, and ought to be men of courage, faithful, etc. if
their work be great and weighty, then

Further them in it, encourage them in the doing of it.

Say unto them as Shecaniah did unto Ezra, Ezra 10.4.
Arise, for this matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee, be also
of good courage, and do it.

There are two things I shall commend unto you.

1. Pray for them: that is your duty that they need, and such as are faithful
much desire; see how earnest Paul is.

Romans 15.30.
Now I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the
love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me; and Again

Ephesians. 6.18,19.
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints.

And for me, that utterance may begiven unto me, that I may open my mouth
boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel.

And what he had thus importunately desired from the Romans and Ephesians, he
is likewise earnest with the Thessalonians, for

2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
Finally my Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.

There are many are ready to complain against their preachers, that they are
dead and dull, and to them unprofitable, but few there are that pray for them,
and therefore let me entreat you to take this rule with you.

Never speak against your ministers unto men, until you have spoken unto God
for them.

Shall we think to have blessings and never beg them? one great reason why
ministers labor in vain, and preach so unsuccessefully I am persuaded is,
because their congregations pray no more for them, and therefore know, the more
you pray for us, the better we shall preach to you.

2. Encourage them: stir them up, say to Archippus, Col. 4.17.
take heed to thy ministry.

Break not their hearts by your obstinacy, who are spending their spirits for
your good.

Be not robbing of them of their dues, who are wrestling with God for your
souls.

1 Cor. 9.11.
It is a great matter when they sow spirituals, that they reap carnals?

Consider, watchmen cannot forage, much less plunder for themselves but must
keep their stations, and shall they be starved while they are doing their work?
shall there be no provision made for them? 1 Cor. 9.9.
Does God take care for oxen? and shall not he that preaches the Gospel live
of the Gospel?

Superstition, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, have enough, but truth goes a begging.
Iezebel nourishes eight hundred false prophets, but Elijah flies the kingdom;
but blessed be God it is not yet so amongst us, and let it never be so, though
too many desire it were so.

O know there is nothing lost which is laid out for God in the necessary
maintaining of his Ambassadors, Matthew. 10.41.
they who entertain a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets
reward. That widow that first made a Cake for Elisha, her oil increased.

Consider what God speaks in this Case. Mal. 3.10,11,12.
Bring you all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me herewith, says the Lord of Hosts; if I will not open to
you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not
be room enough to receive it.

And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine tree cast her fruit before the
time in the field, says the Loyd of Hosts.

And all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome land,
says the Lord of Hosts.

And again by Solomon, Prove. 3.9,10.
Honor the Lord with all thy substance, and the first fruits of all thin
increase; so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst
out with new wine.

There Is nothing lost by a just dealing with, or a liberal bounty to, Gods
ministers.

3. Regard their warning.

O suffer the word of exhortation, Heb. 13.17.
obey them that have the rule over you: for they watch for your souls.

Let not God's calls, counsels, warnings admonitions, be always to no purpose.

Let not God always stretch out his hand to a stubborn, rebellious, and
gainsaying generation, that provoke him to anger every day.

Let not Christ's complaint be directed against us, as it was against the Jews,
that he would have often gathered us as an hen gathers her chickens, but we
would not, and that we would not come unto him, that we might have life, that
he would have healed us, but we would not be healed.

We read of Noah, that preacher of righteousness, how he warned the old world
a long while, but they took no notice of it: and of Lot, how he warned his sons
in law, but he was unto them as one that mocked.

Now what was the issue? an inundation of water overwhelmes the one, and God
rains down (as it were, hell from heaven) and destroies the other, and has
recorded both as examples for us, on whom the ends of the world are come, that
we may take warning, not to despise warnings.

Let us then be prevailed with to have an eye to the watch tower, and when the
beaken is fired, be not secure.

Let us not hear sermons which are Gods watch words to admire, much less to
deride preachers, but to learn our own state, and mend our own consciences.
Consider,

He profits most by a sermon, that says, how ill have I lived? not, how well
has this man spoken?

Let us entertain Gods messages that he sends to warn us, as David did, 2 Samuel
12.
who humbled himself, and acknowledged his sin, not as Ahab did, 1 Kin. 22.27.
who stormed at the message, and imprisoned the prophet. As Peter's hearers
did, Act. 2.37.
who were pricked at the heart, and cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? viz. to be saved, as the sailer in the like case expressed; and Peter's
answer implies.

Not as Stevens hearers, Act. 7.54,57,58.
who being cut to the heart, gnashed on him with their teeth, cried out with a
loud voice, stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, cast him out
of the city, and stoned him.

Be not like Herod, that was well pleased with John, while he preached against
others, he heard him gladly; but when he touched him on his sore, reproves him
for Herodias, then John shall sooner loose his head, then Herod leave his lust.

The Pharisees could not away with Christ's teaching when he came home
particularly to them, so that their consciences forced them to say, Mat. 21.45.
In so saying thou reprovest us, and when they perceived he spoke of them, they
sought to lay hands on him: and at another time, Luke 16.14.
the Pharisees that were covetous heard these things and they derided him.

Thus it is still if preachers beat in the air, and only preach general
notions without descending to particular applications, these hearers like them
well enough, but if once they come close and speak home, as Nathan to David,
and John to Herod, then then the land cannot bear his words, and as they of
Paul, that they are ready to say Away with such a fellow, It is not fit that he
should live; They that turn the world upside down are come hither also.

But (Beloved) if ever you would have the cure wrought, be contented that the
plaster be applied to close the sore, that ministers speak home to your
Conscience, that being convinced, you may say that God is in them of a truth.

That plaster is most like to cure that makes the wound smart, like then those
sermons best that come home closest to your states and Consciences: and say as
David, Psalm. 141.5.
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break mine head.

Let us attend Ministers, as desirous to be bettered by them to learn what is
amiss, and to amend, to know our danger, and endeavor to escape it.

Now shall we neglect to attend upon, and shall we slight these warnings: the
Apostle tells us Heb. 2.2.
there can be no escaping, viz. either the blood of our own Corruption, the
snares of Satan, the Judgments of God, or the damnation of Hell.

I shall end all with my earnest desire unto you, that you would seriously
consider how it fared with those Egyptians whom we read of, who were all warned
of the approaching tempests.

Exodus 9.20,21,25
He that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh, made his
servants and cattle flee into the houses, and they escaped.

And he that regarded not the word of the Lord, left his servants and cattle in
the field, and they perished.

So will it be in this case, if hearers take warning, they save their souls, if
not, they are sure to miscarry.

However, as for us Ministers let us be sure to give warning that we may
secure our selves that the blood of our charge be not required at our hands;
Let us all have this resolution (Especially you my Brethren that are now
solemnly set apart for this work) to stand it out to the uttermost against all
oppositions and as that wise and valiant soldier William the conqueror, who
when he had landed his men, burnt his ships, cast away all draw backs, and
remember that solemn sentence of our savior with which I shall conclude.

Luke 9.62.
No man having put his hand to the plough and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God.

FINIS.

