TRUTH TRIUMPHING OVER Error and Heresy. OR, A Relation of a Public
Disputation at Oxford in S. Mary's Church, on Monday last, Jan. 11. 1646.
between Master Cheynell a Member of the Assembly, and Master Erbury the Seeker
and Socinian.

Wherein the Socinian Tenants maintained by Master Erbury are laid down, and
Master Cheynels clear Confutation of them, to the joy and satisfaction of many
hundreds there present, is declared.

1 John 7.9, 10. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Anrichrist.

Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the
Son.

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.

London, Printed for E. B. and S.G. 1646.

Truth triumphing OVER ERROR AND HERESY.
GOod Reader, diverse Letters of godly Ministers and Citizens of Oxford, ear and
eyewitnesses, written from thence, coming to my hand, of a public Conference
and Disputation in Saint Mary's, the University-Church, between Master Cheynell
a Member of the Assembly, and Master Erbury a great Sectary, on Monday the
eleventh of January, 1646. I thought it good for thy benefit, to publish the
sum and substance of them, that thou may see how God has left the
Independents and Sectaries (this man being within these few years a famous
Independent) and to what a height they advance, both for damnable Errors, and
of confidence to maintain openly in one of the Universities, in the most
public place, before many hundreds, such damnable Heresies, and that in the
time of a Parliament sitting, and to the faces of such Ministers as were sent
down by them to prepare the way for the Reformation of that University. Master
Cheynell being challenged by some of Master Erbury's followers to meet him at
Saint Mary's on Monday, Jan. 11. could do no less (for many Reasons) then
come; where Master Erbury maintained these Ten following Positions.

I. That all the fullness of the Godhead, the same fullness of the Godhead
which is in Christ, dwells in the Saints in the same measure, though not in the
same manifestation as it does in Christ; and that the Godhead shall be
manifested in the same manner and measure in the Saints, as it is in Christ.

II. The Saints have a more glorious power then Christ, Joh. 14.12. and do
greater works then ever Christ did.

III. The manifestation of God the Father in our flesh, is God the Son.

IIII. The holy Ghost is the power of God, or rather the coming forth of this
power.

V. The Father is the Godhead.

VI. The Prophets spoke more clearly of Christ then the Apostles; only the
Prophets did not understand what they delivered.

VII. John the Divine spoke clearly, but the Book was sealed, which contained
the mystery of Christ, and no man could open it; yet Master Erbury presumed to
tell us what was in it: but it did appear that his Revelation was not from
heaven, but Poland; that he took the Scriptures in the same sense, and cited
them in the same order as they were taken and cited in Volkelius, and the
Socinian Chatechisme.

VIII. God the Father is God of himself the true God, greater then all, Highest
of all.

IX. The Saints have the same Worship, Honor and Glory given to them that is
given unto Jesus Christ: Ergo The Saints are the only Preachers. God speaks
only in them, because God dwells only in them.

X. That when Christ came to take flesh of the Virgin, he did not take the
Humane nature. He dreams that Christ was man before the world was; and so,
though he came to be made of a woman, he came not to be made man, but to be
made Flesh.

The contrary truths were maintained, explained, and clearly proved by Master
Cheynell against him, and that before a great Audience. The Dispute continued
at least four hours; Master Cheynell had general approbation: and the truth
was readily embraced with shouting and acclamations, for which let God have all
the glory. It Is hoped the Honorable Houses of Parliament will not suffer a man
to draw away the people, as he has done (under the specious name of Saints and
sanctity, and with strange mysterious Expositions of Scripture) already very
many, especially women; but will proceed effectually against him, and make him
an example to all other Sectaries, both for his damnable errors, and
unparalleled boldness, in so open a manner and place maintaining them.

Januray 14. 1646.
Imprimatur.

JAMES CRANFORD.


