ARTICLES PUBLISHED AT BERLIN, BETWEEN HIS Most Christian Majesty, THE King of
Sweden, And His ELECTORAL HIGHNESS of Brandenburgh.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

ARTICLES Published at BERLIN, etc.
INprimis, A lasting Peace betwixt all Parties, and a free Trade by Sea and
Land and all fresh Water. 2. A General Amnesty. 3. All Hostilities to cease in
ten days after the Signing hereof. 4. The Munster and Osnaburgh Treaty to
remain firm, excepting in such Alterations as shall be made in the following
Articles. 5. The Duke of Brandenburgh shall restore all he possesses in
Pomeren, Straelsond and Stetin, and all that is granted Sweden by the Treaty of
Westphalia. 6. Both Parties are to separate their Countries with Limitations.
7. All on the other side of the Odor as far as Dam and Golnow shall remain to
the Brandenburghers, only that the Duke of Brandenburgh, in Consideration that
Golnow is very serviceable to him, shall pay 50000 Crowns to the King of
Sweden, but that place is again to be given to the Swedes if the Money be not
paid. 8, 9. The Swedes are to desist from the Toll which they had at Golbergen,
and other Places in Pomeren, according to the Treaty of Stetin in the Year
1653. 10. That all the Rights and Revenues from all Places on the other side of
the Odor to be granted to the Duke of Brandenburgh. 11. All Inhabitants in
those parts are to be Released from their Oath of Allegiance. 12. Odor shall
remain as a Sovereignty to the King and Kingdom of Sweden. 13. That upon the
Exchange of the Ratification the King of France shall cause his Army to retire
out of all Places belonging to the Duke of Brandenburgh, except 1000 Horse to
remain in Wesel and Lipstade, till the full Execution of this Treaty with
Sweden. 14. That the Duke of Brandenburgh shall cause all his Forces to march
out of the open Country. And in regard at present Sweden wants Forces to
possess his places, the Brandenburgh Forces shall remain Two thousand Men in
Straelfond, Ten or twelve hundred at Stetin, and so proportionably in other
places, till Sweden shall send Forces to take possession of the same. 15. That
the Duke of Brandenburgh is free to carry out such Cannon and Ammunition as he
has brought into those Places he took from Sweden, but not any of those he
found there. 16. That Endeavors be used to make Peace with Denmark, and that in
the mean time the Duke of Brandenburgh shall give no Assistance to that King.
17. That the King of France obliges himself to deliver the Ratification from
the King of Sweden in three Months, and till the Ratification be delivered
Brandenburgh shall not be obliged to make Restitution to Sweden. 18. That the
Ratification of France and Brandenburgh shall be Exchanged in one Month, and
that of Sweden in three.
There is another Article for endeavoring to accommodate the Difference
between the Houses of Brandenburgh and Lunenburgh. And one Article more, by
which France obliges himself to pay unto Brandenburgh, within the space of two
Years, 300000 Crowns toward the Charge of the War.

This Treaty was Signed June 29 S. N. at S. Germains. FRA. MINDERS.


