Die Mercurij, 25. Martij, 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That M. Holles and St Peter
Wentworth, do from this House give thanks to M. Bolton and M. Cheynell, for the
great pains they took in the Sermons they preached this day at the entreaty of
this House, at St Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of Public
Humiliation) and to desire them to Print their Sermons; And it is Ordered that
none shall presume to Print their Sermons, without license under their hands
writing.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

March 28. 1646.
I Appoint Andrew Kemb to Print my Sermon.

Samuel Bolton.

A PLOT FOR THE GOOD OF POSTERITY. COMMUNICATED IN A SERMON TO THE HONORABLE
HOUSE Of COMMONS For the sanctifying of the Monthly Fast. March 25. 1646.

By FRANCIS CHEYNELL.

Posteris sero, aeternitati pingo.
Parents sunt liberorum praeceptores.
(...).
Xenophon. Cyropaed. l 8. Magistratus pius totius Regni pater est.
The wise in heart will receive Commandments, but a prating fool shall fall.

Prove. 10. 8. Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long.

Prove. 23. 17. LONDON: Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen I received Your Order, I was not in case to obey it, being scarce able to
write or read; We should learn by every fit of sickness the greatness of Gods
Majesty and our frailty. We live in sickly times, and You are collecting many
wholesome and Medicinable ingredients, only take heed that you do not mistake
one Herb for another, it is easily done, and whilst You are but making
Essays it may be easily rectified: Be pleased to consider that the Antidote
must be made according to the Dispensatory the prescription of the great
Physician of Souls in his saving Gospel, that the blessing of Christ may be
upon it, and it may prove a sovereign Antidote for the preventing as well as
removing of Church-offences. Jesus Christ has not entrusted any State to make
new Institutions, or create new offices in his Church. There are several forms
of Civil government in several Christian States, but there should be the same
Church-offices, and for substance the same Church Government in every Christian
State, though that government cannot be so peaceably exercised in some places
as in other; There is so much equity and prudence in Evangelical rules and
Institutions, that they ought to be observed in all Christian States and
Common-weals thoroughout the world: Those orders which Christ has sent us by
his Apostles must be obeyed, there can be no exception against them, there must
be no Prohibition of them; Romans 16. v. 17, 18.
This is a Rule of Christ, that they who walk inordinately, and cause divisions
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, 2 These. 3. 14, 15.
must not be admitted into society with the Saints. 1 Cor. 5. 11.
I need not insist upon other rules. 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5.
Our Savior did enjoin his Apostles to teach Christians to observe all things
he commanded, Matthew. 28. 20. Now St. Paul did not only teach Timot^y to ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. but Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in every
Church. Act. 14. 23. And when St. Paul spoke of his departing out of the world,
and seeing their faces no more to whom he had preached, he recommended the
oversight or government of the Church to Elders, assuring them that the holy
Ghost had made them overseers over the Church. Act. 20. 1^, 25, 28, 29. and
therefore it is easy to conclude, that the Elders were, Jure Divino, by the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ, to succeed the Apostles in the ordinary
government of the Church, and Christ promised to be with the Apostles, and
their successors, not for two or three hundred years only, till some
Magistrates did turn Christians, but even to the end of the world: and the holy
Ghost seals up the promise with Amen, Matthew. 28. 20. If then there be ten
thousand Churches in England, there should be ten thousand Elderships; but the
government by these Elders is not Arbitrary, all the Censures which they pass
must be in some sort Evangelicall, because agreeable to the Word of Christ; for
the Elders are not to govern in their own name, or in the name of the
Magistrate, no nor in the name of the people, but in the name of Jesus Christ,
from whom they do immediately receive their power and authority, and therefore
are to receive their orders and directions from the Gospel of Christ. The
Christian Magistrate ought to protect the Elders, that they may peaceably
exercise that Church Power which is committed to them by Jesus Christ, for the
Christian Magistrate does owe a spiritual subjection to all the ordinances of
Jesus Christ. Erastus himself confesses, that the Magistrate in ordering of
sacred things must not depart one hairs breadth from the Word of God. p. 161.
and 162. li. 3. Confirm. These. It will be very dangerous for a Magistrate to do
any thing of his own head about Church affairs, and it will be as dangerous for
Ministers to complement in this weighty point; all the power that a Magistrate
has settled upon him in Romans 13. is settled on him as he is a Minister of God,
and therefore they who teach Magistrates to despise the Authority of Ministers,
because they are but Ministers of God, teach the Magistrates to despise their
own authority. Officers of Christ's instituting, and powers of Gods ordaining,
must agree together, and uphold one another, or else both will be vilified:
Ministers must not usurp a civil power, nor Magistrates lay claim to any
Spiritual power properly so called: if a man go about to thrust two swords into
one scabberd, let him take heed he does not split the scabberd, and cut his
fingers. Mr. Robinson and those of his mind say, that if the Magistrate be a
Church Officer, he must be called to his office, and may be deposed from it by
the Church, and and if the Magistrate be a ruling Elder, he is inferior to
teaching Elders, and deserves less honor, according to that order, 1 Timothy 5.
17. In his Iustificat. of Separat. p. 216. if the Magistrate (say others)
challenge a Church Power, and deny himself to be a Church Officer, then we have
a good Argument for Popular government, because there is a Church^power in some
that are not Church officers; and none can be entitled to Church Power, but by
a Church office, or by Church Membership; and if by the latter, then say they,
Every member has as much power as the Magistrate; who knows not what the
Anabaptists say upon this point; The Church of Scotland has declared their
judgment; and they who plead for a Congregationall government have expressed
themselves after this manner: The Governors of the Church have not their power
from the members of the Church, but from Christ, they are invested with the
power of Jesus Christ, they exercise his power, and do act in his name, and not
in the name of the Church, says Mr. Buroughs in his ^ren. p. 50. And for my
part, I shall readily grant that these Officers ought to transact all things
which concern the consciences of the people in such a convincing way as may
best tend to Common edification and satisfaction. Church ordinances are to be
dispensed by the Church, that is, by the Elders with consent of the people,
says Mr. Rutherford, in his late book p. 398. We should quickly think of some
expedients for an happy agreement, if You would be pleased to free us from the
much feared Commissioners.

Church power must needs be acknowledged to have the proper notion and
character of Authority in the Elders, to which the multitude ought by a command
from Christ to be subject and obedient, as to an ordinance to guide them in
their consent, and therefore in the sentence of the Elders the ultimate for mall
ministerial act of binding or loosing should consist. Christ has placed a
Rule and Authority in these officers over the ^est of the congregation, not
directing only, but binding. (See the Epistle to Mr. ^ottons book of the Keys)
When these officers gathered in Christ's name do pass a right judgment upon
heretical congregations, or persons declaring them to be such as have no
communion with any of the Churches of Christ, those heretical persons or
Churches are put out of the kingdom of Christ, and consequently put under the
power of Satan: Heart divisions, p. 44. The Rule urged by many is this, Nemini
fit injuria cui praeponitur Christus, we prefer the Authority of Christ above
all authority of men, or societies of men: King, Parliament, and people must
subject themselves to Jesus Christ. None must plead privilege to live
scandalously, though Peers of the Realm. The Tigurine Divines are accounted
most favorable or rather remiss in this point; but Guather in his Epistle to
Ionvill, says, Excommunicatio legibus nostris praecipitur qua a tribuum
Societate, and publicorum pascuorum usu fructu excluduntur qui contemptis
admonitionibus tam publicis quam privatis aliter vivunt quam homines deceat
Christianos: and Bullinger in his Epistle to Mr. Dathen speaks for them all,
and says, That if Noble men amongst them were taken in the act of
uncleanness, they were publicly degraded. Solemus maechos, (...), deprehensos
honor and trabea exutos public ded^corare; And Erastus says, that they who
do pertinaciously violate Gods commands, may be put to death. Confirmat These.
p. 337. You see that Erastus did not encourage pertinacious offenders. They
that desire such a monstrous kind of liberty, as to live as they list, and be
accountable to none whatsoever they hold or do, are not only unworthy of
Christian, but Humane society, says Mr. Burroughes, Heart-divisions, p. 166.
and 177. You see what a general severity is expressed by all, that desire any
true Reformation, though they be men of different persuasions. In the judgment
of the Assembly, None are fit to be admitted to the Sacrament, who do usually
neglect to pray in and with their families, or to instruct them in those
principles of Religion, the ignorance of which, is sufficient cause to debar
any one from the Sacrament. Be pleased then to take these things into your most
retired thoughts, and doubt not but the godly Ministers and people of this
Kingdom will stick close to you for promoting of a thorough-reformation; only
let me entreat you, that when bloody Delinquents come to compound 3. things may
be excepted. 1. That their composition may not authorize them to communicate at
the Lords Table with those friends of yours, whose fathers, brothers, etc they
have slain with wicked hands, and have not as yet given any public testimony
of their repentance. 2. That they may not deprive any Parish of a powerful
Ministry, by denying sufficient maintenance to the Minister, that they may
raise their Fine, or a good part of it out of the Impropriations, which come
into their hand upon their composition. 3. That they may not make themselves
whole, by oppressing and racking those poor Tenants of theirs, or their
widows, or orphans who have been faithful to You, and spent their estates, or
lost their lives in your Service, Help the honest Tenants to an easy
composition with their Malignant Landlords. If I did not Honor You, I would
not be thus plain with You, I leave it to your wisdom to draw conclusions from
all, for the putting of your own Order in execution, for suspending all that
are scandalous sinners from the Sacrament, though the sins which they be guilty
of be not yet enumerated; let all be fairly interpreted, as it is humbly
presented, by him who desires Your perfection.

Francis Cheynell.

A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS, March 25. 1646.
GENESIS 18. 19. For I know him that he will command his children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah to do Justice and
Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him.
BE pleased to consider the Form and Matter of the Text: If you look upon the
Form, the Rational Particle For points backward, and shows you that the
Words contain a Reason why God did acquaint Abraham with his Intention
concerning Sodom: Abraham had the honor to be taken into Covenant with the God
of Heaven, Isaiah 41. 8.
nay to be styled the Friend of God: and God deals with him as a friend, he
communicates certain secrets, Arcana Imperii to him, and makes him in some
particulars of his Privy-Councell; for he imparts to him his great Design
(upon wicked Sodom) in a kind of familiar and loving way. What says God,
shall I conceal this Secret from my Friend Abraham, blessed Abraham, in whose
Seed all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed? I know him, and love him
well, and know that he will make a good use of it. For I know him that he will
command etc.

Secondly, If you look upon the matter of the Text: it is in one word,
Abraham's Testimonial subscribed by God himself; a Divine Testimoni^ll indeed,
which did not only certify what Abraham was for the present, but what he
should be for the future: This is the Testimonial of a God.

First, for the present, God bears witness to the integrity of Abraham, I
know him says the Lord, I know his judgment, I know his heart, I am well
acquainted with the frame of his spirit, the inclination of his will, and the
bent of his affections.

Secondly. For the future, God foretells, First, What Abraham would do for
God: he would endeavor to bring all that were under his Command, to be at Gods
Command. Secondly, What God would do for Abraham, namely Fulfill his Promise,
Keep his Word. From the Form of the Words as they yield a reason, Why God
did communicate this Secret to Abraham, I raise this Observation.

God does communicate Rare Secrets to certain known and chosen men.

It is Gods Prerogative Royal to communicate Secrets to whom he pleases: and
therefore these Known men are fitly termed Chosen men. I know whom I have
chosen* says our Savior, John 17. 18. God makes choice of some men for State
Service, and some for Church Service: and God does communicate different
Secrets to several men answerable to those several Services for which he has
chosen them. 1. To his Servants the Prophets he did reveal Prophesies,
foretell the ruin of Monarchies and States, such secrets were proper for them,
Amos 3. 7.* 2. Our Lord and Savior did reveal Doctrinall Secrets to his
Disciples, such Gospell-Secrets as they were to communicate to the Church of
Christ. John 15. 15. I call you friends, and I deal with you as friends, I
impart Secrets to you not that you should keep them close and conceal them,
but that you might publish and declare them; I have not shunned says Saint
Paul to declare unto you all the Counsel of God, Acts 20. 27: 3. God does
impart Secrets of State to men of Public Spirits: that black secret of the
Powder Plot was by a wonderful providence discovered and prevented: and we
have had such admirable experiments of Gods mercy in this kind within these
five years last past, that our posterity will scarce believe what we have
seen. 4* God does impart Mysterious Secrets to his chosen people whom he has
fore-knowne: Some Secrets are communicated to them* to make them his friends,
and other Secrets are imparted to them after they are his friends, because they
are his friends, his Saints, his Heirs, that they may thereby know themselves
to be the Elect of God, which is a Secret indeed.

First, The Secrets which God does impart to his Elect, that they may become
his friends, and fall in love with him, and holiness, (...). Arist. Eth. lib.
3. cap. 7. Qualis homo, talis finis: qualis finis, ^alis cursus; qualis cursus,
tali^ discursus.
are Convincing Secrets, Humbling Secrets, and both being set home by the
Spirit are Converting Secrets: for men do discourse and act according to that
Habit of Principles, which is ingrafted in them, and the last end intended by
them.

The Spirit does impart Convincing Secrets to us, that he may take us off from
our selfe-conceitednesse, and selfe-dependance: for whilst we are in our
natural estate, we have ^igh thoughts of our selves, and base thoughts of
Grace and holiness, nay mean thoughts of God and Christ. Now the holy Spirit
does convince us of our error: Elenchus est Syllogismus cum contradictione
conclusionis; hoc est Syllogismus concludens contr^rium ejus quod positum fuit
in These.
I say, Convince, that is, the holy Spirit does clearly and undeniably prove
that to be most false, which we conceive to be most true. You says the Spirit
(to these natural, but chosen men) think your selves wise, and strong, rich,
and righteous, highly favored by God, because you are flattered by men: but
the truth is, You are fools and weakelings, you are slaves and beggars*
prisoners, guilty, filthy, miserable, abominable, corrupted* cursed, and almost
damned: These are Humbling as well as Convincing Secrets: The body sweates, and
the soul trembles at such amazing Secrets as these. I am sent this day not to
whisper, but to speak this truth aloude in your ears; All you that are yet in
your natural estate, let your Parts, Gifts, Titles, Places, be what they will,
this this is your condition; Give me leave to rent that veil asunder, which is
before your eyes, and over your hearts. I arrest you this day at the Suit of
the great Jehovah, the glorious Commander of heaven and earth, for a debt of
ten thousand thousand talents, my millions of millions, and over and above of
high treason against all the three blessed Persons of the holy Trinity; You
cannot deny the debt, you must stand to the arrest, you can have no protection,
you are in as great danger, as if Death, were before you, the Devil, behind
you, and both ready to seize upon you. The Spirit does convince you that you
are in a state of sin because you are in a state of unbeleife, John 16. 8* 9.
The Spirit does reprove, the word signifies, Convince the whole world of
unregenerate men, Of sin because they believe not in Christ. The Spirit does
convince all carnal men, that they are in the state of wrath, nay of enmity:
because their hearts rise, and swell against the Simplicity and Power of
godliness. Are these things Secrets to you, or are they not? if they be, the
God of all grace set these convincing truths home upon your Spirits; If they be
not, then tell me all you that are in a state of enmity, how dare you go to
sleep in that estate? I tell you in the Name of Jehovah, that That man who
does not only commit an act of sin against knowledge, but resolves to
continue in a state of sin after conviction is within, some few steps of
the unpardonable sin. Thou that have mean thoughts of God, consider thy
dependence upon God, and Gods absolute Independency, his Infinite Excellency,
the Sovereignty of his Overruling Providence, as well as the Supremacy of his
Almighty Power, think of his satiating All Sufficiency, and Flesh confounding
Majesty, that thou may learn to abase thy self before this great Jehovah
the God of Glory; Now let me speak, and speak freely to thee, whilst thou
have these vigorous impressions of Gods Excellency upon thy spirit, This God of
Heaven, this Lord of Glory is a Professed Enemy to all those who resolve to
continue in a State or course of sin: Do thou hear me? the God of Heaven
is thine Enemy, That God in whose hand thy life, breath, counsels, ways,
comforts are, is thine Enemy: Does not thy soul tremble at such a thought? Thy
sins which thou look on as trifles, are so many injuries, nay affronts
offered to this Almighty God: thou have abused him to his face, and if this
offended Majesty should refuse to be reconciled unto thee, thou will for
certain die and perish to all eternity; Let these humbling considerations
abide upon thy soul, let the terrors of the Almighty dwell upon thy spirit:
thou art now in a course of physic, and if thou feel convul^ions in thy
bowels, and tortures in thy conscience, be patient under the hand of God that
thou may be cured. Be humbled, be abased, but do not despair, be ashamed,
but be not discouraged: Consider the filthinese of sin, the Purity, Justice,
Majesty of God, his Wrath, Displeasure, Zeal, Indignation against every
sin: and let all these considerations move thee to fly from sin, but not
from God; bless God for that Secret, for it is a Secret which has supported
and revived many a fainting soul, and wounded spirit.

Tell me, how do these Secrets work upon thee? art thou willing to take a
pardon upon fair and honorable terms? would thou do any thing, suffer
any thing, forgo any thing, that thou might be at peace with this mighty
God? Do thou desire Direction from God, Reconciliation and Communion with
him? Why then I have some Encouraging Secrets to impart unto thee.

God has discovered his rich mercy, his undeserved love, and free grace by a
Covenant of grace sealed with the Blood of Jesus Christ; Guilt cannot look on
Majesty, and Majesty is most terrible in an Enemy and a Judge: but when Christ
enterposes, God is a reconciled God, and tender Father in Jesus Christ, In
Christ Gods nature is lovely to us, and our persons lovely to God. God does
beseech you, and Christ intreates you to be reconciled: God shows mercy to
them that deserve no mercy: There is an Heartbreaking, and yet an Encouraging
Secret, a Gospel Secret: these Secrets are usually the first ground of faith,
and hope: Now faith and hope do kindle in us a love to God, and love does most
sweetly break the heart, and humble the soul: My froward soul is now
willing to abase it self before so good a God, a God so willing to show mercy
to such a wretch as I am who deserve no mercy: I see nothing in my self to
encourage me to go to God, but I see enough in my self to drive me to him,
and I see enough in God for to encourage me to run unto him: I see mercy
enough in God, merit enough in Christ, holiness enough in the Spirit of
holiness to persuade me to run to God for grace as well as mercy, for faith
and repentance as well as any other graces, for pardon of sin and power
against it.

Come then be convinced of thine own naughtiness in spiritual respects,
humbly and yet chearefully cast thy self upon Gods free grace for pardon:
depend upon Christ's obedience alone for righteousness, upon his holy Spirit
the Comforter for holiness and comfort; and say as Bradford did, I am Hell,
but God is Heaven, I am sin, but Christ is righteousness. Bless God for
providing thee a Surety, a Savior who is able to pay all thy debts, and to
supply all thy wants. I hope by this time thou art encouraged to trust Christ
steadfastly, and love him heartily: and if thou find thy heart overcome by
the love of God in Christ, then thou may go to Christ not out of pure
need, but pure love: and Christ will give thee such liberal entertainment,
and hearty welcome, that thou will prize and love Christ for himself, and for
his holiness, and all his excellencies as well as benefits: and the more thou
do prize him, the faster will thy devoute soul by a lively faith cleave unto
him: and the more thou do cleave to him by faith, the faster will thou adhere
to him by love; and the more thou do love Christ, the more will thou hate
sin, abhor thy self for ^inne, and deny thy self for Christ; And the more
thou art convinced of thy sinfulness, and abased for thy sin, the more will thou prize Christ, and love him, and run to him for grace and mercy, and draw
new virtue and fresh supplies from him, that thou may every way express thy
love unto him* And believe it, there will be no love lost between thee and
Christ: thou shall be delighted with his presence, satisfied with his love, and
acquainted with those other Secrets, which God imparts to men after they are
made Saints and friends; Not only the wisdom of God hid in a Mystery of
faith and godliness, but the deep things of God, the Secrets of the Spirit of
Adoption, those Love-Secrets which Christ imparts to us when he comes in to
suppe with us, even Miracles of love, and Treasures of glory: And when Christ
does thus feast you with his love, you will the^ demonstrate your Spouse-like
love to Jesus Christ, you will be able to say that you love Christ for (...)
for what you have from him, or by him, but you (...) in your love to him,
though you lose all you have for him. When God does bestow these love^tokens,
and impart these Love-Secrets to his elect, by a Spirit of Revelation,
Regeneration, Adoption, and has taugh^ (...) to know him, love him, and cry
Abba Father to him: the^ (...) ownes them for his sons and daughters, and
says of them as he (...) here of Abraham, I know them, I love them, approve
them, because I chose them from all eternity.

Ob. But you will say, the Secret imparted to Abraham, seems to be a
Secular-Secret, rather then a Religious-Secret.

Sol. I answer, this Secret was imparted at least in Ordine ad Spiritualia, for
religious purposes, and there are many edifying Secrets contained in it;
Abraham was not to repeat it as a story, but as a Sermon to his Posterity,
that they might behold the Majesty of Jehovah, in this great example of Divine
vengeance, and be persuaded to walk in the way of Jehovah, as it is in my
text: This Secret was communicated before hand, that the burning of Sodom might
not be imputed to chance, fortune, or a violent tempest raised by the common
course of nature, but to the immediate hand of God: That the sin-revenging
Justice of God might be magnified, and Posterity deterred from the sins of
Sodom, Pride, fullness of bread, abundance of Idleness, unnatural lust, and
base fornication, Ezekiel. 16. 49. 2 Pet. 2. 6.

Secondly, Addit Rabbi Sal^mon jam ei donaverat Dominus illam terram ad cujus
sines Sedom and Hemorrha pertinebant, ergo videtur illi indicandum -- Ne res
tanta si inopinato accideret forte perte^rete^ amicum Dei: P. Martyr in locum.
This Secret was imparted to Abraham by way of Prolepsis, for the preventing of
an Objection, which might have staggered his faith: for God had given that Land
to Abraham, Lot had made choice of Sodom, and Abraham's Portion bordered upon
Lots, and therefore Abraham would have been exceedingly staggered at the
Overthrow of Sodom, if God had not acquainted him with this Secret before hand:
And therefore I have so freely discoursed of Encouraging Secrets, that I might
remove those blocks at which our faith is most apt to stumble.

Thirdly, By the imparting of this Secret, Lots policy is confuted, and
Abraham's selfe-denying faith commended: Lot chooses the richer soil, but the
fouler seat, because of worldly accommodations; but on a sudden the
wickedness of the place calls for a devouring fire, which licks up all the
wealth, and buries all the glory of Sodom in dust andashes: this Secret is not
secular, which takes off the heart from all secular accommodations, and teaches
men to choose their seat or dwelling, not for secular advantages, but for
Spiritual Accommodations.

Fourthly, It was requisite to show you when a man is in an approved condition,
and how a man may be brought to lay hold upon the Covenant, because when God
(speaking of Abraham) says* I know him, the meaning is, I approve him as a man
in Covenant with me: he is a sincere upright man, and will be true to me in the
most declining times.

God takes notice of his Saints and Servants with a Knowledge of Approbation, a
sweet loving knowledge which implies a dear and tender respect: but God takes
notice of every particular person, with a Knowledge of Observation: for God
observes all our dispositions, habits, and inclinations, all our thoughts,
plots, designs, all our desires, intentions, resolutions, words and actions,
and will call us to an account for all in the presence of Saints and Angels,
before the Tribunal of Christ; when Hypocrites and Apostates, scandalous and
impenitent persons, who lived and died in sin, appear at that terrible day
of accounts, Christ will protest unto them, that he never knew them: that is,
He never approved them, Math. 7. 23. Nay for the present, Christ does usually
set a brand upon all false-hearted men, though they are highly conceited of
themselves, and cried up by others for prudence and piety: yet Christ says, I
know such and such, but I will never trust them, because I know them, and I
will lay them open to my people that they may know them, for they will deceive
all that trust them: Some men's sins go before to judgment, and some men's
follow after: for they that are otherwise, cannot be hid, 1 Timothy 5. 24, 25.
When Christ wrought miracles, many believed in his name, but Christ did not
trust them, for he knew what was in man, in every man: for he knew all men,
John 2. 23, 24, 25. Christ works miracles in our days, and there are many
that seem to believe in his name: but if they be not sincere, Christ will lay
them open: for it is impossible to deceive the Searcher of hearts, and Judge of
Secrets, our Omniscient and Impartial God.

Lastly, We may learn from hence, That what ever God does approve in man, he
does work in man: for this knowledge is not a Notionall, but a Practical
effectual knowledge; Vi^e (...) de^ ^^desm* A^x l. Orat. Alvarez. A^x. Orat.
lib. 1. cap. 6. ^. Twiss. dissert de Scientia media. Aquin. p. 1. q. 14 Act. 9.
Contra Gent. 1. cap. 66. and 69. ad 11. D. Rivetum* in Gen 18. ver. 19. Aria^^
(...) Scientiam in Deo constituebant, uti videre est in Concilio Ephesino lib.
1. tom. 1. Conciliorum. Novoque apud illos ( hoc st Semip^lagianos)
absurditatis genere, and non agenda praescita sint, and praescita non a cta
sint. Epistol. Prosperi. ad Augu^inum.
whatsoever God knows to be future, he does will: if it be evil, he does
willingly permit it, or else he would certainly hinder it; For even sin
which is against his will, cannot come to pass without his will; but if that
which is to come to pass be good, then God does not only know or permit it,
but work it also: for God is the Author of every thing that is good, and
therefore God foresees no good in the best of men, but such as he from all
eternity decrees: and in time does (according to his decree) work in them.
Socinus makes quick work in this point: for rather then he will deny the
liberty of man's will, he like an Atheist denies the foreknowledge of God.

I shall not here launch into the deep, and discourse of Scientia simplicis
intelligentiae, scientia visionis, nor trouble you with the confutation of that
Jesuiticall, nay Arian Semipelagian invention of Scientia Media: nor will I
wrangle with Pererius about Abraham's foreseen merits, which in his conceit
moved God to make, nay to decree to make Abraham so great and glorious. I can
with one light touch crush these Apples of Sodom, and make them vanish into
smoke, or fall into ashes.

Impossible est quod detur in Deo aliqua cognitio, quae nec sit naturalis nec
libera: in Deo ponendae non sunt imperfectiones semiplenae deliberationis;
omnis itaque actus divinus est vel totaliter naturalis, vel totaliter liber.
Inter rem existentem in se, and existentem in causa non datur medium. Ergo.
Vide Navaret. Controv. 56. Scientia Dei quatenus a voluntate divina sejuncta
consideratur, non facit res futuras, sed tantum praescit: causa itaque cur res
ex mere possibilibus evadant futurae, in Dei ipsius voluntatem atque decretum
unice rejicienda est. Vide Nazarium Ledes^am. and Dominicanos passim;
contingens qua sic, est indifferens ad utrumlibet, and proinde indeterminatum
in se. Propositiones itaque de futuro contingenti non sunt determinate verae
vel falsae; nihil autem indeterminatum intelligitur ut futurum, quia effectus
non possunt certo praecognosci, nisi in causa determinata and completa, quae
non potest impediri; nulla autem talis causa datur futurorum, nisi divina
voluntas, quae impediri non potest per causam inferiorem, nec per seipsam, cum
sit immutabilis. Vide Alvarez. lib. 1. cap. 9. Aux. Great.
God knows all things that are possible, because he knows his own Power: God
knows all things future, because he knows his own Will: for nothing can
pass out of the rank of things merely possible, into the rank and order of
things Future before some Act or Decree of Gods Will has passed for its
Futurition. A thing must be Future, before God can know it to be future, and
therefore the futurition of a thing is not knowable, no not in Signo Rationis,
before God has passed a decree for its futurition: If God should foresee any
good habit or action proceeding from man's will, before he has decreed to work
both in man and for him; Man's will would be the first and Independent cause of
something which is good. We must speak Scripture reason, God sets his love
upon us, because he loves us, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. And out of free grace and
undeserved love decrees to make us holy, and so foresees and approves our
holiness. The Knowledge then in the text being a Knowledge of Approbation,
supposes the free grace, undeserved love, Immutable and Effectual Decree of
God, which is the fountain of grace and glory. In bad actions, we can hardly
take enough to our selves; for the devil cannot make me sin, unless he ask
me leave, and gain my consent: but in good actions I can never ascribe too
much to God, who saves me out of free grace, without any contributions of
help, or attributions of worth seen or foreseen in my frail and sinful
self.

True it is, God does bestow his saving benefits in a certain Order, so that
one of his Favors does make way for another: But his second favors cannot be
deserved by his first, because his first favors make way for his second, and
both proceed from his free grace.

The Decree of God is a sure foundation, the Foreknowledge of God is a
certain Seal: The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The
Lord knows them that are his. There is the Privy-Seale: the Broade-Seale is
stamped upon them, In the next words, And let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord does bring all that are
his, not only to name the Name of Christ, to profess his Name, call upon his
Name, and believe in his Name, but to depart from iniquity, live holily, and
persevere in faith and holiness; Faith by fetching strength from Christ, does
strengthen all, patience bears all, love sweetens all, and perseverance
crowns all; thus then in a word, I know him says God, that is, I love him,
and cannot but approve him, because I have chosen him for mine own, and am
resolved to stand to my choice: I have bestowed effectual grace upon him,
which has moved him to choose me for his God, as I have chosen him for my
friend: Quia cognovi cum inde fiet ut praecipiat ^iliis suis. D. River. in
locum.
and my grace shall be further effectual to make him stand to his choice, and
therefore I know both what he is, and what he will be: he is right for the
present, and I know he will be upright for the future, because I know him,
thence it will come to pass that he will command his children, faith an acute
and learned Expositour upon the place.

Doct. It is our duty to endeavor to bring all that are under our command, to
be at Gods Command.

Abraham did not leave his children and servants to their own Genius, their
own counsels, their own lusts: though it is certain, that diverse of them
would have thanked him for such a liberty; Josh. 24 2, 3.
for they had been nursed up in superstition and Idolatry, as Abraham was,
Genesis 17. 23.
and might have pretended that they were not satisfied in point of conscience;
but Abraham knew how to distinguish between Phantasy, and Conscience, between
Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty of Lust: and therefore would not allow them
such a Liberty as would have enticed them into the worst kind of Bondage.

Abraham did command, I know (says God) that he will command, he will make his
children know that he is their Father, and his servants know that he is their
Master. Abraham showed his Authority, Prudence, Love, Diligence, and
Faithfulness, by laying a strict and special Command upon his Household for
the eternal welfare of their precious souls.

First, His Authority, he was a King, a Priest, a Prophet in his own Family,
and therefore did command them to subject their hearts, wills, consciences, to
the Will and Pleasure of Jehovah, Genesis 14. 19.
the mighty God, the great Creator, the high Possessour, and glorious
Commander both of Heaven and Earth.

Secondly, His Prudence, he laid no unnecessary burden upon them, his
Commands were not a Cabala of his own Invention, God did first catechize
Abraham, and then Abraham was the Doctor of his family, and catechized his
household: there is no doubt but he did advise his household in Prudentials; but
he did command them in Points of Faith and Worship, to walk in the way of
Jehovah. It is the most imprudent thing in the world not to distinguish
between Prudentials, and Articles of Religion, Articles of Faith.

Thirdly, His Love to the precious souls of his children, servants, slaves. O
happy thrice happy slaves, who by the Care and Instruction of a godly Master
were brought home to God, and made the freemen of the great Jehovah.

Fourthly, His Diligence, It was no easy matter to instruct children and
bondslaves with line upon line, and precept upon precept.

Fifthly, His Faithfulness, For all his Commands were Regular, Abraham kept
close to the rule, and therefore neither son nor servant could pretend
Liberty of Conscience, to depart from that Rule, which Jehovah who gives Laws
to the Conscience had commanded them to set up for a Rule in their very
Conscience. No man can grant a license, or give liberty to depart from the
Rule, for that were to grant an Irregular Liberty, an Unconscionable Liberty.
Liberty is a Privilege, Irregularity a Sin, and no man has a Priveledge to
sin; Observe the Command in the text, The Way of Jehovah.
it is, To keep the way of Jehovah, to d^e Justice and Judgment. It is the
Scripture phrase to express Religion under the Notion of a way to teach men to
make a constant progress in Religion: 1 Kin. 11. 33. 38.
By way is meant the way of Faith, Worship and Obedience, Act. 22. 24.
Acts 18. 25, 26. Lnke 1. 6. Nay the way of inward worship as well as the parts
of outward worship, Genesis 6. 12.
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Enoch and Noah walked with God, Act. 24. 14.
Genesis 5. 22. 24. Genesis 6. 9. It is not meant of obedience only, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
but of Faith. Heb. 11. 5. 7.
I must not be a Selfe-mover: I must not be my own Rule, my own way, or my
own righteousness: Coloss. 2. 6.
Christ is Jehovah my way, and as I have received Christ, Ephesians. 2. 10.
so I must walk in him, and by the grace of Christ; I must walk in those good
works which God has prepared that I might walk in, Genesis 6.
not in the way of the old world, Jude ver. 11
the way of Cain, the way of Balam, 2 Pet. 2. 2. 15.
any wicked way. Jerem. 2. 18.
Diverse learned men conceive that Abraham did catechize his household in these
weighty points, Concerning God, Creation, Providence: Concerning the innocence
and happiness of man in his first estate: Concerning the Fall, Sin, and
misery of man: Our loss and corruption by the Fall, Our danger if we continue
in that corrupt estate: I change the persons that I may speak to you and my
self. Others there are that add many more necessary points, concerning the
Law of nature, the Immortality of the soul, but the Mortality of the body, the
Day of Judgment, Eternal life, and Eternal death. And O that we would
consider that our souls must certainly have an everlalasting Being, either in
glory, or in torments, That we may in this our day consider those things which
belong to our everlasting Peace, least hereafter they be hid from our eyes.

But it is out of question that Abraham did communicate many other precious and
saving truths to his beloved family Concerning the rich mercy, and free grace
of God: Concerning salvation by faith in the promised seed: Concerning Prayer,
Vows, Sacrifices, the Covenant of Grace, and Circumcision, the Seal of the
Covenant. To do Justice and Judgment.
Moreover the Commands of Abraham were not only Regular, but Practical
Commands: he did not only command them to know the way of Jehovah, but to
walk in it: nor were they only to talk of Judgment and Justice, but to d^e
it: Judgment and Justice are here taken in a strict and practical notion: the
22. Chapter of Jeremiah, from the thirteenth to the twentieth verse is an
excellent Comment upon my text. Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, and King of
Judah was buried with the burial of an Ass, because he did not learn of his
Father to do Judgment and Justice, ver. 15. and to judge the cause of the
poor and needy, ver. 16. If the greatest of men remain unjust, they will have
no blessing upon them all their life, no honor at their death.

I shall not so much as examine whether those precepts which some say were
delivered to the sons of Noah, Vide Petrum Cunaeum de Repub. Hebr. lib. 1. p.
3. 4.
were not only pressed upon Abraham's family, but upon all those that were
thought worthy of humane society; by this little that has been said, it is
clear and evident that Abraham did not go about to set up himself, but to
set up God in his family, by a kind of Theocracy, the best of Goverments.

But the Jesuits tell us that Abraham had no written Catechism, to
communicate to his Posterity, and therefore they conceive that they may vent
their unwritten lies upon the Credit of some doting Pope. Our answer is
brief. The Scriptures have been necessary, Deuteronomy. 17. 18 Josh. 1. 8. Romans 15.
4. Jude ver. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 11. b. John 4 25. John 15. 15 John 16. 13. Math. 28.
19, 20. 2 Cor. 3. 6 8. 11. Revel. 22. 18, 19, 20^
ever since it pleased God to express his mind in writing, and will be so
even to the end of the world. We must not expect such unwritten Revelations as
were vouchsafed to Abraham, because the whole Counsel of God, his Royal Will
and Pleasure do now stand upon record as his perfect Law, full Testimony,
Complete and Supreme Testament, nothing is to be added to it, or taken from
it; To say the Scriptures are not perfect, is not to dispute, but blaspheme:
and if the Scriptures were not perfect, it is for certain that they could
never be perfected by humane traditions, which are so full of imperfection.

A Synod is a solemn Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and I look upon that Counsel
Acts 15. not only as a Precedent, but as a Warrant for the Examination of
matters of Fact, as well as Doctrines of Faith: And such a determination of
both, as does not only direct, but oblige several Congregations to do their
duty by virtue of that Ministerial Authority which is stamped upon such a
Synod or Counsel by an Ordinance of Jesus Christ; And yet unless it were in
that Counsel, Acts 15. the Church did for about three hundred years together
convince and condemn Heretics by scripture, before any general Councels
were gathered, or the Popes throne erected. I have been at pains to remove a
great deal of rubbish that lay in my way, but now I shall begin to build.

1. Governors of families are Gods Deputies, they must command for God, and
give an account to him: all the power that any man can challenge in his family,
as an Husband, Father, Master, is a subordinate and limited power, not an
Independent or Absolute power: for we must testify our dependence upon God,
and Subjection to him, by commanding our wives, children servants, in the Lord,
and for the Lord.

2. Order is the cause of peace; where there is no order in a family, there can
be no peace; and it is impossible that there should be any happy Order without
the highest Order, I mean a Religious Order, which sets God uppermost in the
family, and keeps the whole Household, Master, Mistress, and all in subjection
to the God of Order, the God of Peace; the truth is, Religion puts a family in
Order, and then keeps it so: Policy may help to furnish an house with worldly
accommodations, for the support of our outward man; but when men seek
temporal advantages with a neglect, if not contempt of God and godliness,
Policy is but a kind of subtle disorder and demure foolery; Achitophell sets
his house in order, but you know what followed: because he had not set either
his heart or house in a religious order, though he was esteemed an Oracle of
God for wisdom, he lived an ungodly life, and died a desperate and shameful
death; and all Politicians may learn by his fall, that Policy without Piety
can never give a man satisfaction whilst he lives, nor comfort when he dies.

Thirdly, Families are the first root of humane consort and communion; for
Government was first settled in those little Nurseries: now if the root be
rotten, what will the branches be? A Kingdom consists of so many families
united by one common Covenant for the Common good: and if the families be
poisoned and corrupted, what will become of the towns and the cities, and how
will the Kingdom flourish?

Fourthly, How can we expect a blessing upon our family, or hope to convey Gods
blessing to our Posterity, if we do not labor to set up God, by setting up of
godliness in our family. Abraham had the promise of a blessed Seed, but
Abraham was to command his children and servants to walk in the way of
Jehovah, that the blessing of Jehovah might be upon them.

Ob. But you will say, that in Abraham's time there was no settled Ministry, and
therefore Masters of families were to catechize their children and servants;
but there is not the same reason now, etc.

Sol. I answer, that when there was a settled Ministry under the Law, there was
a special Command for men to teach not their sons only, but their sons
sons. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and to whet the Precepts of God upon their children, to
sharpen their wits, and settle their minds by diligent instruction, Deuteronomy. 6.
from the fourth verse to the seventh. Hezekiah looked upon those as dead and
buried, who neglected this duty: The grave, says he, cannot praise thee, nor
they that go down into the pit hope for thy truth; the living, the living he
shall praise thee, the father to the children shall make known thy truth,
Isai. 38. 19. Parents are or may be better acquainted with the disposition,
Quomodo ad nos pertinet in Ecclesia loqui vobis, sic ad vo^ pertinet in domibus
vestris agere, ut bonam rationem reddatis de his qui vobis sunt subditi.
August. enarrat. in Psalm. 50.
and capacity of their own children, then any Minister can be with the
disposition and capacity of all the children in the Parish; children do
commonly learn more profaneness at home, then they can learn good at Church
or school: the negligence or ill example of their parents, or some in the
family, does usually bring a curse upon the sad pains of the most laborious
Minister; Parents then and Ministers must be helpers to one another in Jesus
Christ; godly Parents catechize their children in private, that their minds
and hearts may be prepared for the receiving of those truths which shall be
taught them in the Public Ministry: Parents repeat Sermons in private,
Ministers press catechisticall points home in public, and so there is a
sweet correspondence between both for the edification and salvation of all
those that are committed to their charge. There is a Prophecy, Filiab^tur
nomen eius, sive propagabitur.
Psalm. 72. 17. that there shall be as it were a Succession of Christ's name from
generation to generation; His name shall pass from Father to Son, as the
phrase imports: every Father then must by Christian instruction and godly
example hold forth the name of Christ to his son, that so the name of Christ
may pass from Father to son: This Prophecy concerns the days of the
Gospel, and you know that in the New Testament Parents are encouraged to bring
their children unto Christ, and commanded to bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. (...), in Discipline, as well as Doctrine:
for the word (...) tells you that you must put more understanding into them by
instruction, and (...) may signify Correction: every father will challenge the
Power of Correction; but he must consider that he does likewise stand obliged
to the duty of Instruction; (...). Phi^. Praecept. Polis.
Mere Naturalists will tell you that correcting without instructing is like
snuffing of the Lamp without pouring any oil into it. If you do but
consider, what a difference there is between children whose education is
different, I need add no more; Absalom for his beauty, and Adonijah for his
comely stature were more cockered by David then Solomon, they had more liberty,
and Solomon more learning, being more hardly and religiously bred, but you know
how Absalom and Adonijah miscarried, and Solomon was the Crown of his Fathers
joy, and the heir of his Crown.

Bethel was a superstitious place and therefore the children no doubt had
learned of their superstitious parents to revile the most powerful Ministers
of God: (for they that affect a kind of blind and apish devotion, are most
apt to scoff at the power of religion:) The children of Bethel scoffed at
Elisha, and are torn in pieces, 2 King. 2. 23, 24. But those children who had
no doubt been told that Christ was the Son of David, Matthew. 21. 15.
Math. 21. came into the Temple, and cried Hosanna to the Son of David;
Bestow religious education upon your children, and you shall see, that when
other men's children that are basely bred, scoff at the zealous Ministers of
God, your children will sing Halleluiahs in the highest to the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Use of this Point is to teach us all in our several places, Application
callings, relations, to command for God.

First, Every man has an household within himself.

Secondly, Governors of families have an household.

Thirdly, You that are Parliament men are Members of an Honorable House, and
the only way to preserve your Honor is to walk in the way of Jehovah.

Fourthly, The Kingdom is your Household, the Commonwealth is your Family, and
by doing Justice and Judgment you may not only command, but persuade the
Kingdom to walk in the way of Jehovah.

First, Every man has an household within himself, a little world, and
therefore sure a great household within the Circuit of his inward and outward
man. Our first and greatest command is over our own selves; and the truth is,
that we are not fit to rule others, no no^ to rule and govern our families,
until we have learned how to rule our selves; we are not fit to command till
we have put our spirits under an higher and better spirit then our own: He
that rules his own spirit, is a better man then he that takes or rules a City,
Prove. 16. 32. If I my self do not walk in the way of Jehovah, I shall never
get my family into it, or keep them in it. Personal holiness does fit us for
Household godliness: Zacheus did not endeavor to bring his family into the way
of faithful Abraham, till he himself became a Son of Abraham, Luke 19. 9.
Salvation comes to our hearts, before we are seriously Isntrumental to bring
it into our houses: Christ said to Zacheus upon the day of his conversion, This
day is salvation come to this house, for so much as he also is the Son of
Abraham; if you will be members of Christ, you must be sons of Abraham: Do
not say that I persuade you to be men of an Old Testament spirit; sure the Old
Testament, and the New were written by the self same spirit, and the self
same Covenant of grace is propounded in both, though under very different
administ ations. Abraham was a man of an Evangelicall Spirit under the Old
Testament: nothing could satisfy his raised spirit, and enlarged heart but
Jesus Christ: God made him a gracious promise, Genesis 15. 1. but Lord God says
he, what will thou give me since I go childlesse, ver. 2. as if he had said,
how shall I have thee for my God and Father, reward and Savior, if the
promised Seed who is to break the head of the Serpent, all the power and
policy of the devil, do not spring from my loins? It is clear and evident,
that Abraham's heart was not set upon any common seed, but that promised seed in
which all the Nations of the earth were to be bl^ssed. For the Apostle shows
that the promise, Genesis 13. 15. is meant of Christ, To thy Seed, which is
Christ, Gal. 3. 16. Abraham was not justified by believing that he should have
a numerous of spring, but by believing in Christ, he saw the day of Christ by
faith, rejoiced in hope, and believed against hope: and if we will be his
sons, the Apostle shows what we must believe in the fourth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and the three last verses. That by the way; but if you
will fully prove your selves to be sons of Abraham, you must have the same
mind and heart, the same faith that Abraham had, and walk in the same way and
steps that Abraham did, as far as Evangelicall administrations will permit,
for you must observe that difference: be pleased then sadly to consider these
few Observations.

First, Abraham was a man much given to Heavenly meditation, a fundamental
duty of Religion, which lays the groundworke, and contrives the Plat-forme of
Houshold-godlinesse. Abraham had his mind fixed, and his heart warmed with
meditation, that he might be raised and enlarged for the highest strains of
spiritual devotion, when God gave him a promise that Sarah should have a son,
Abraham meditates upon the promise till his heart was even enravished with love
and joy: The good man is pleased in his mind, and laughes in his heart, and
breaks forth into Soliloquies upon this occasion, and when his heart is by
these contemplations and solitary discourses, put into a praying frame, put
into tune as it were, O then he prays, Genesis 17. 17, 18. Prayer is not the
child of wit and fantasy, it is the rapture of an elevated spirit, the
heavenly dew of a broken heart: I mean a spirit elevated by a spirit of faith,
and a heart broken with the spirit of love. Would you be sons of Abraham?
learn this divine Logique, this sacred Eloquence, Let meditation fit you for
Soliloquies, and Soliloquies for Prayer. Meditation helps the memory, purges
the conscience, purifies the heart, reformes the life; It makes all our
knowledge to become practical, because it affects the heart with those truths
which we believe; it kindles love, inflames zeal, and when our love burns,
and our zeal flames, we shall warm others by speaking from our own hearts to
the hearts of our family, the convincing and quickening truth of God.

Secondly, Abraham was an humble and mortified man. When he received a gracious
message from God in precious promises, he falls down upon his face, not out of
a superstitious fantasy, but out of a sweet selfe-abhorrency in adoration of
Gods Majesty, and thankfulness for his mercy. You may read of this Son-like
reverence twice in one chapter, Genesis 17. 3. 17. O let us consider Gods Majesty
and our baseness, Gods purity and our sinfulness, Gods freegrace, and our
unworthiness, Gods rich bounty, and our unthankfulness, that we may learn to
abase our selves, and exalt our God; Abraham his thoughts did assuredly dwell
upon humbling and mortifying considerations, he laid out his money upon a
buryi^g place, as if it had been the most necessary purchase: and when he was
at prayer, O says he, I am but dust and ashes, Gen 18. 27. as if he had said,
what am I that I should approach into the presence of so great a Majesty, Alas,
I am but dust and ashes, and yet I take upon me to speak to Jehovah the God of
glory: Our blessed Savior did more then once at the feast break out into a
discourse of his burial, Vide Cartwright. Harmon. Evang.
once at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, Math. 26. 6. and another time
in the city at the house of a Pharisee, Luke 7. 36, 37. Our dear Lord would
teach us to be of such a composed spirit, that the dainties of a feast, or the
fragrant smell of costly Ointments may not tempt us to take off our thoughts
from humbling and mortifying considerations: Whilst we are feasting, we may be
dying, Jobs children were struck dead whilst they were feasting and drinking
wine: Consider it all you that sit in the Congregation of the mighty: though
you sit there as Gods, you must dye like men.

Thirdly, Abraham was a selfe-denying man; at the Command of God, he left his
father, forsook his country, renounced his idols, circumcised himself and his
household: though it was painful to the flesh, and seemed immodest, nay
ridiculous to carnal men, and cost him his blood: he turned Hagar and Ismael
out of doors, and was ready to sacrifice his dearest Isaac, though the Command
seemed contrary to nature and religion, to Gods promise and his own salvation:
You may suppose him disputing with himself much after this manner, What shall
I sacrifice my son Isaac, the son of my age and love, my heart, my bowels
tell me that it is unnatural: what will my Sarah, my servants, the Heathens
say? who will ever live within my walls, or be of my religion, when I have cut
the throat of my dearest son? Lord, where is my blessing, where is thy
promise, nay where is my faith? How shall the promised Seed spring from my
loins if Isaac die? En dignam Deo spectaculum: this was a sight worthy of God
to look upon, a work worthy for God to perform: God gave Abraham a
selfe-denying spirit, and that carried him through all. We cannot be sons of
Abraham, Members or followers of Christ without self-denial, Mark 8. 34. I
must deny my graces, services, sufferings, my whole regenerate self in point
of Justification, as I must deny my corrupt self in point of mortification,
and must deny even my natural self, my natural life, and the comforts of it,
if I am called to suffer Martyrdom, Luke 14. 26. 33. But alas, how many are
there that are more willing to deny Christ and deny the Scriptures, then to
deny themselves? This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation: Few men
are willing to circumcise their hearts, mortify their lusts, cast out their
Ismaels, offer up their Isaacks, part with their estates and lives for Jesus
Christ; Come let us deny our reason, and submit to Gods Counsel, deny our
wills, and submit to Gods Will, quiet our passions, and submit to Gods
Providence.

Fourthly, Abraham was a man of faith, the father of the faithful, he believed
against sense, against reason, carnal reason, nay against hope he believed in
hope, Romans 4. 18. Was it reasonable to expect that a child should spring from
withered loins, from a dead body? The Objection was considerable, but Abraham
was so wise as not to consider it: he considered not his own body now dead,
ver. 19. The most plausible Objections in the world, are not one whit
considerable, if framed against the plain word of God. It is the crying sin
of this age, to set up the wit and fancies of men in competition with the
Authority of God, the Word of God, and therefore I desire to speak freely, I
would I had time to speak fully; men do consider witty objections too much,
and the word of God too little: If we were not benighted at high noon, that is,
if we did not shut out the light, it were impossible that so many rotten
opinions should seem beautiful, nay glorious in the eyes of considerable men;
you know what the Philosopher says, Rotten things shine in the dark:
Plausible Objections are curious Copwebs: I admire the art of them, yet I know
that they may be framed out of the bowels of a spider, and they are the common
habitation and Nest of spiders. Come, come let us learn of Abraham, let us be
fully persuaded, and let us not be staggered, Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at
the promise of God through unbeleefe, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded, Act.
17. 23.
etc. Let us be fully persuaded, First, That the God of Abraham, Romans 1. 23. 25.
the God who made heaven and earth is the only true God: Let us not worship,
Tu Jupiter sive coelum es, sive ether, sive terra 1. King 18. 21. 36.
First an Idol of our own brain. Secondly, an Inviduum vagum, or an Unknown
Diety, as the Athenians did: but let us fix our belief upon the true and
everliving God, and declare him to be our God, as the Psalmist does. Psalm. 48.
14.
For this God, says he, you see he fixes upon a certain Diety: Vide
Bradwardin. de Causa Dei. (...).
This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death;
It is a short Creed, but a very excellent one: it stands upon record, Psalm.
48. 14.

Reason tells us that this God is Optimus Maximus, and summum Vide Simplicium
in 1. Physis. Platonem in Timaeo. Aristot. 8. Physic. and lib. 1. de coelonec
non 12. Metaph. Ubi non tantum probat Deum esse, sed quaedam attributa de Deo
demonstrat (...), etc. Aristot. Metaphys. lib. 12. cap. 9, 10. Vide
demonstration ^^ S. Thomae de Existentia Dei ex Aristotele desumptas. Paul.
Ferii Scholast. Orthodox. Ciccron. de Natura Deorum. Deus ille Maximus
Potentissimusque ipse vehit omnia. Senec. Epistol. 31. quod Sacris convenit,
inquit Muretus, Portans omnia verbo virtutis suae.
bonum, the best and the greatest infinite wise just and merciful. But what
shall I call him? Why Jehovah that is the title in the Text, To note that he
has Being of himself, gives being and well-being to all things else, and more
especially that he gives a subsistence to his promises. That so our faith might
prevent time, and make those things present to our minds for the comfort of
our hearts, which in themselves are future, and have no being at all; Let us
fix our faith in Vide Salo Buxtorfi. Glassium. Mercerum.
Jehovah our God. All other titles fall short of his excellency. God cannot be
reduced to the Praedicament of substance, but the very substantiality of
substance is reduced to him, who gives subsistence to all substances: If then
you call God substance, that word is not substantial enough; If you call him
End, that word has not Being enough, for he is Principium totius esse, not as
we say, a point is Principuum lineae, which is intrinsecally contained within
the line: for he is the Efficient and Exemplar of all Being and well-being.
Therefore some that have been strict and accurate, do not only say, that God
is most excellent, but that he is super-excellent: because he does excel even
excellency it self.

Reason tells us that this God deserves to be worshipped: that he is wise
enough to judge what worship is due to him: and that it is certain he has
revealed his Judgment somewhere, that he may be served and worshipped
according to his own mind, and will: because otherwise our worshipping of him
cannot be obedientiall: And where has God revealed this but in the Scripture?
therefore we must fix our faith upon the Scripture, and not only believe that
God has revealed his mind somewhere, but that he has revealed it here in the
Old and New Testament. When God desires to make us sensible of our frailty by
eclipsing all the glory of the world, Isai. 40. 5, 6, 7. 8.
that he might reveal his own glory: what does he bid the Prophet say? Why
cry says he, All flesh is grass, as the goodlinesse of the flower of grass
which is withering, fading, dying, but says he the Word of our God shall stand
for ever.

Beloved, let me freely speak to you, let us build our faith upon that which
shall stand for ever, upon the word of God only. Our faith builds for
eternity, and therefore we had need build upon that which will stand for ever.
Our faith is not built upon the Votes of the Assembly, Internas perswasiones
sine externo verbo tanquam Sa^ana Iudibria cavemus: ex scripturis sapimus, cum
scripturis sentimus, propter scripturas credimus. Whita^k. de Authorit.
Scriptur. lib. 1. cap. 10. prope finer^.
the Ordinances of Parliament, the Pleasure of Kings, the Fancyes of the
multitude, the New light of Saints that are yet carnal, or but comparatively
perfect; nay to go higher yet, my faith is not built upon the definitions of
Counsels, or the Revelations of Angels, but upon the Word of God, that Word
that stands for ever. But you will say that place of Isaiah is meant only of
the Old Testament: I will show you the self same words in the New Testament, 1
Pet. 1. and the three last verses, Ye are borne again, Of what Seed? Not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and
abides for ever. For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades away, but
the Word of the Lord endures for ever. But where is it? says some poor
soul, for I am to seek where it is; Why here it is, says the Apostle: in
this Gospel read on, the last words of the chapter will give thee full
satisfaction. And this is the Word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you;
Say not then in your hearts, who shall ascend into Heaven to bring down the
mind of Christ, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.
The Word is nigh unto you, Oh let it be nearer to you yet: let the word of
faith which is preached out of this Gospel, be a word of faith ingrafted in
thy heart: thou may safely build thy faith upon the holy Scriptures, for
they are the words of God, and though the Kingdoms of the earth be shaken, yet
the Words of God will stand, and stand for ever. Be convinced and fully
persuaded that this is the truth, be not staggered about it, but be confident
of it: If the Word of God fail, I will give thee leave to curse me upon thy
death-bedde, for I can with reverence and confidence appeal to God: and say,
Lord, if in this point, I am deceived, thou thy self have deceived me.

Fifthly, Abraham was the Friend of God: We are all by nature enemies to God*
we do naturally conceive an Atheistical hatred against him, only because he
is a God to Truth, Justice, and Purity, and threatens to torment us for those
sins which we are unwilling to forsake: wicked men wish with all their hearts
that God were not so pure, just and true, as indeed he is, and must be,
unless they would have him to be no God at all; Are you not ashamed of this
Atheistical quarrel? Consider that God is truth, can an understanding mind
hate truth which is the very dareling of the understanding? God is goodness it
self, and can thy will hate that which is good, even goodness it self,
infinite goodness? God is love, and can thou be out of love with love it
self? Do thou not see that thy nature is extremely perverted, and become
even unnatural? but let me tell you that our enmity, though thus unnaturally
natural, and grossly Atheistical, is highly aggravated by the Love of
Christ. Christ died to save me, though he knew that I would be his deadly
enemy, and offers me a pardon sealed with his precious blood: and therefore I
do even hate my self for hating Christ, and am willing to be ordered as well
as justified by Jesus Christ: Christ's mind shall be my mind, Christ's will
shall be my will, I desire to be a man according to Christ's own heart: I will
be a friend to Christ, though I seem to be an enemy to my self, I profess my
self a friend to all the friends, and an enemy to all the enemies of Jesus
Christ: Oh I feel I bless God, I feel my self transported even beyond my
self with raptures, and ecstasies of love: I am sensible of Gods eternal love
to me, and I cannot be content with any less then an eternity to express my
love to him: I will subscribe my self, the eternal friend of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, Abraham was a Covenanter, a perfect Covenanter, Walk before me, and
be thou perfect or upright, and I will make a Covenant with thee, says God to
Abraham, Genesis 17. 1, 2. Walk perfectly in the perfect way of Jehovah, as in
the presence of Jehovah: You must walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and by sincere
obedience, Ephesians. 2. 10. Let your heart be perfectly engaged to God, and when
that is done all is as good as done in respect of Gods acceptance and your
comfort.

Our Savior concludes his spiritual Exposition of the Law with this
Exhortation, Be you therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. Matthew. 5. 48. to show, that our sincere obedience is called perfect,
because our obedience in respect of our desire must be as large as the
perfection of Gods holy will revealed in his Word; nay he must endeavor, and
not only desire to come up to the rule in the most nice points, in every Iota
and Title of the spiritual Law, and glorious Gospel; they who do ordinarily
commit known sins, and neglect known duties, will not be esteemed Honest
Covenanters; they who study excuses, or frame objections to elude plain
Commandments, (the Wise man says) are prating fools, men of great lips, and no
brains, a fool of lips, void of heart, or brains: Prove. 10. 8. 13. Tell these
men such a thing is a breach of Covenant, such a thing is a duty, such a thing
is a sin, they say they care not, it is a clear case that they despise their
ways, and Gods precepts; and if they do not repent of their contempt, they
shall die for it. He that keeps the Commandments, keeps his own soul; but he
that despises his ways, shall die. Prove. 19. 16.

7. Abraham was a good Housekeeper, he took care of his family; and so I pass
from Personal Holiness to Household-godlinesse. We must command our children,
and Household to walk in the way of Jehovah; The whole family should be perfumed
with the graces of the Governor: for though all the pious actions which are
performed by every member of the family proceed elicitive from that habitual
godliness which is in that member, yet they should proceed Imperative, from
the godliness of the Governor, He should command; Give me leave to enquire
into the state of your families, are they Nurseries of Piety? do you look upon
your heirs as Gods heritage, and labor to make them sons of God, and heirs of
Heaven? Do you desire to be spiritual, Psalm. 127. 13.
as well as natural Fathers to all your Children; I am as it were born again
in my child, oh that my child might be born again in Christ, and Christ in
him: I see too much of my own image in him, oh that the image of Christ might
be stamped upon him! these are the heavenly ejaculations of holy parents. We
must say of our children as Jacob did of his, These are the children which God
has graciously given: oh let them be graciously educated. Have a special care
of your sons, they are the support of the family, O teach them to support
Religion also, that they may bear up Christ's Name as well as yours. Have a
tender care of your daughters, for by them other Families are linked to yours,
therefore season them with Religion, and you may by them propagate Religion to
many Families. Would you have your Heirs good Statesmen, teach them how to whet
their tools at the Sanctuary, to oil their wheels with prayer, and steel their
Engines with Religion, that they may seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness in the first and highest place, and secular advantages in a
subservient way. But when, and how soon should we begin to teach our children?
why truly when they are able to learn any thing that is bad, it is high time to
teach them something that is good: when they can stammer out an oath, or lisp
near a blasphemy, it is high time to teach them their Catechism, and instruct
them in Principles of Christianity. Teach them their Catechism in A. B. C. The
holy Spirit has composed some Abcedarian Psalms in Achrosticall verses,
according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, that children might learn an
Alphabet of godliness, and parents teach their children the first Elements of
Religion as well as Learning; the first letters of the verses of certain
Psalms, the 25. 34. 37. 119. are set down according to the order of the
Alphabet, and they are all of them choice Psalms, full of sweet streins and
raptures of devotion. Tim^thy learnt the Scriptures of a child, (...), 2 Timothy
3. 15. a word of a very young signification. Childhood and youth are ages of
Fancy, and therefore certainly parents should set heavenly truths in fresh and
lively colors, that the fantasy of their children may be taken with the
sensible representation of spiritual things; God does reveal heavenly truths
in certain apt similitudes, which do exceedingly please the fantasy, because
whilst our soul is joined to our body, nothing can come into the understanding
but by the senses, and so through the fantasy; and therefore a similitude
does exceedingly help the understanding. God descends to our weak capacity,
when he clothes an heavenly truth with an earthly representation, Joh. 3. 12. I
have told you of earthly things, says our Savior, that is, I have represented
heavenly truths by comparisons taken from earthly things, I have brought down
the bough which was out of your reach, and put it into your hand, and helped
you up, so that you may now climb from Earth to Heaven by these similitudes: I
have used similitudes says God, Hos. 12. 10. and therefore it is an higher
aggravation of our unbelief and disobedience, if when we have such helps we do
not profit by instruction; you know the Sacraments help our faithly our senses,
and so by our fantasy, and fantasy will return a quick message to the
affections, and the affections will sway the will, and consequently the whole
man; and therefore if we can please the fantasy of a child, by representing
the joys of Heaven to him under the notion of a Banquet, or a crown of Gold,
and so invite him to Heaven, and sweeten all the exercises of Religion to him;
and on the other side terrify him from sin, by representing the torments of
Hell to him under the notion of fire and brimstone, and then show him that
there is ground for these representations in the Word of God, you will at once help
his understanding, and work upon his affections, and withal lay a firm ground
for his faith, that his faith laying hold on the Divine revelation in the Word,
and his fancy fastening on the sensible representation of that divine truth,
his understanding may be enlightened, his faith strengthened, his fancy pleased,
his affections ordered, his will turned.

2. Children have very good memories, if you make use of them betimes, and our
memory does work strongly upon our affections. 2. Corinthians. 7. 15. His inward
affection or bowels are more abundant toward you whilst he remembers the
obedience of you all. God did empart an history to Abraham to communicate to
his children, children are excellent at the remembering of stories; relate the
story of drowning the World, and the burning of Sodom to your children, such
stories will work upon them.

3. Children are full of affection, and Aristotle says, that the first thing
that you should teach children, is somewhat that concerns the ordering of their
affections, what they ought to delight in, and what they ought to grieve for,
and consequently what they ought to love, and what they ought to hate.

Pray for your children as well as instruct them; Si nil curarem, nil orarem,
says Melancthon; if you do not pray for your children, you do not care for
them; pray for your children (...), continually, that is as some expound it,
daily, the daily sacrifice was called the continual sacrifice; or as others
expound it, pray for them seasonably upon all occasions. Do not only pray for
your children in general, but pray as Job sacrificed, for every particular
child, according to the number of them all, Job 1. 5. As you provide a
distinct portion, and a distinct suit of clothes for every child; so provide,
I mean, Sue cut a special blessing by a distinct prayer for every particular
child. You must be jealous over your children with a godly jealousy as Job
was, If you suspect that they have sinned, let that suspicion bring you upon
your knees; and cause you to lift up a prayer for them with all your strength;
if you do but fear that they may sin, labor by good counsel to prevent their
sin. Finally, give good example to your children, and take care of them when
they are grown up and married from you: when Jobs children had houses of their
own to feast in, yet Job took care of their souls, and sent to them to
sanctify themselves, which was to prepare themselves for holy service. Job 1.
4, 5.

Do not forget your beloved wife, the choicest part of your self and family;
she will never be at your command, unless you teach her to be at Christ's
command. The Philosopher will tell you that souls have no sexes, thy wives soul
is as manly, and as precious as thine own, and therefore take care of her
precious soul, instruct her, pray with her, dwell with her as a man of
knowledge, that you may walk together hand in hand to heaven, like heirs of
grace, till you come to be coheirs in glory. Command your servants to walk in
the way of Jehovah, and instruct them in that way: Oh do not use your servants
as you use your Beasts, you work and feed your beasts, but never instruct them;
and you make as very beasts of your servants, if you do not instruct them in
the way of Jehovah, for you do only find them work and food. Tell your family
what considerations did at first move your heart, and work upon your spirits,
that the same considerations may by Gods blessing melt, and turn their hearts;
a religious Servant may improve thy zeal, and bring a blessing on thy
posterity and estate, when thou art dead and gone.

Set up Houshold-godlinesse in order, not in opposition, to Congregationall
godliness.

Labor to make thy wife the spouse of Christ; thy children, the children of
God; thy servants, the servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the blessing of
Heaven rest upon thee, and thine.

I have not done, Application to the Parliament.
for I have a farther journey to go: the Lord give me the strength and spirit
of Elijah, that I may not faint by the way: I consider that I am bound to speak
to that Honorable House which called me hither, and never was man called to
speak in a more Critical Juncture of time: I have put up many prayers, and
powered forth many tears for direction to the God of Heaven, that I may speak
the words of soberness and truth: my heart tells me that I speak out of love
and respect to you, and my conscience tells me I speak in obedience to God; all
the Households of the Commons of England are represented in Your Honorable
House; Your House is a Paradise, but may not the Serpent get into Paradise? as
great as you are, you are under God, every one of your Members, and the whole
House, must be at Gods devotion and command: if you will walk wisely, and
safely, you must walk in the way of Jehovah, and keep in the way of Jehovah:
the Angels have charge over you as long as you walk in that way, and Christ the
head of Angels as well as Saints, will beat down your Enemies under your feet;
Ier. 23. 6.
The way of Christ is the way of Jehovah, for he is Jehovah our righteousness;
But you will tell me, that learned and godly men cannot agree about the Way of
Christ.

My first motion is, That we may not be beaten off from those principles in
which we agree, because there are some things about which we differ.

2. That it may be diligently considered, how far we agree; few men believe
that there is so sweet an agreement in so many uniting Principles between
godly, prudent, and charitable men of different persuasions, for the preventing
and removing of all scandals, as indeed there is.

3. That those many fair Expedients which are propounded for the healing of
breaches, and composing of differences, may be speedily taken into your most
serious thoughts.

4. Consider, that not only the eyes of all the Churches abroad, but the eyes
of God, nay the vows of God are upon you, and the Word of God is set before
you. And therefore I beseech you, as you tender the good and welfare of three
Kingdoms, and as you will answer it to the Lord Christ at the dreadful day of
Accounts, that you observe the directions of the word, How will you satisfy
your conscience upon your deathbed, how will you look Christ in the face at
the day of Judgment, if you reject the counsel of Christ. I will not question
your intentions, what am I ( the last of Ministers, and least of Saints) that I
should judge a Parliament? I desire to judge my self, and deny my self: I was
not sent to divine, but to preach, and I dare not assume to my self the
property of God, which is to know the hearts of men; It is enough for me to
remember you that it does specially concern you in this great work of
Reformation, to approve your selves to the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of
secrets. I have no design upon you, I affect not power, but desire purity: I
ask no power of You: I have enough already more then I know how to use, or
answer for: It is the free use of power which is desired for purities sake. I
shall not entreat you to part with any of your Civil Interests to make us
friends, I submit my self to all that Power which belongs to you as Christian
Magistrates; but remember that it is a Limited power, Christ has set bounds to
Your Power, as well as ours: and you are obliged to improve all your Interests,
and use all your Power for the service of Christ, in promoting the great work
of Reformation; I will not at present so much as state the great question for
debate, for this is not a fit place or day to dispute the point in
controversy; and it would be very absurd for me to take that for granted,
which you expect should be proved. I am resolved to follow my conscience, and
you are obliged to follow yours; but if your Conscience be not rightly
informed, how many thousands are there that will be endangered? Far better were
it that all our Armies were routed in the Field, then that the Parliament of
England should be deceived, Quod plane contra aliis in Rebus publicis fuit quae
legibus fundatae cum essent legibus eversae sunt.
I say, but deceived: to perish by Act of Parliament, is to perish
irrecoverably, to perish by consent: And wise Statesmen have observed, that as
some Kingdoms have been wasted by Arms; so others have been overthrown, quite
overthrown by Laws. My humble motion therefore is, That you will not make more
haste then good speed in deciding the great Question. You may yet be
counseled, Petrus Cunaeus, de Repub. Hebr. li. 1. cap. 1.
because the work is not yet perfected; my motion may seem strange to some, but
I know full well, that though a Kingdom may be quickly corrupted, yet it cannot
be so suddenly reformed; and if you take longer time that the Questions in
controversy may be fully debated, your Consciences rightly informed, and
satisfied, you will gain time, and light experience and comfort by such a thrifty
expense of time. That I may not countenance any politic delays, and may
improve the motion to the height, be pleased to keep a Private Fast, and call
some judicious and self-denying men to Preach before you, who will deal
plainly, and faithfully with you in the nicest points. My Reasons to back the
Motion are briefly these.

1. Because you were never in greater danger then now, you are exercised with
temptations on all hands, surely this, this is the Hour of Temptation, you had
need pray hard, that you may not be led into temptation.

2. Good men are apt to be secure, because you are Masters of the Field, and
are entering into your much desired Canaan; Numb. 25.
but consider that when the people of Israel were upon the very borders of
Canaan, and all their Enemies were not able to overthrow them, they did, by
closing with temptations, and giving way to their corruptions, overthrow
themselves.

3. The points in agitation are points of high concernment, points that have
been studied, and much perplexed by great Scholars, and witty men on both
sides; Be not too pleasant, though much of this week be spent already, yet if
you be not very circumspect, nay if you do not beg counsel of the Lord, you
may undo three Kingdoms this week in three days.

4. When we mingled tears in Private Fasts, we had a sweet experience of Gods
mercy; your fidelity and resolution even then when you were at lowest, and it
will be your wisdom, and your Honor, to walk humbly and closely with God when
you are at highest, that God may bring upon you all the good that he has
promised to them that rule with God, Hos. 11. 12.
and are faithful with the most Holy, and all his Saints.

5. There are sins with you, Ministri non debent ex Magistratibus populo
sp^ctacula facere.
even with you, and such as must be reproved; but as things now stand, it is
not so fit to reprove them in a mixed Assembly.

6. There are some proposals to be made to you, which are not fit to be
divulged when they are first presented.

But I am not worthy to advise a Parliament, the motion is humbly presented;
and though it be rejected with smiles, I intend not to appeal from you to the
people: but give me leave in my Masters Name to present the Peoples Appeal to
You: Consider the cries, and outcries of the godly part of this Kingdom for a
Reformation, they speak plain, and tell you, that,

1. They have fasted, prayed, wept, for a Reformation.

2. They have exhausted their Treasures, many of them,

3. Adventured their lives, lost their limbs, their blood, their friends, for a
Reformation.

4. You have promised us a Reformation.

5. And we have paid for a Reformation. And,

6. You are therefore in debt to us for a Reformation.

7. We are bold to challenge such a Reformation as will quit the cost, and
answer the price which we have paid, and the pains we have bestowed.

8. We desire such a Reformation as that we may not be forced to make a
Separation, that is the language of some that are serious and peaceable Saints;
and therefore it is the more to be considered.

9. By the help of a thorough-Reformation, there may be a
thorough-Reconciliation amongst all that are prudent, pious, and charitable:
all who mind the same things, purity and peace, and desire to walk by the same
rule in faith and love, A thorough-Reformation would make us all friends; for
some of our Brethren tell us, that they know not whether or no they can close
with us, till they see what Reformation will be allowed us.

There are divisions enough already, and I have many things to propose which
may unite all that are judicious Christians, nothing that may divide them, we
all desire that the ordinances of Christ may be purely administered, that all
scandals that threaten us may be prevented, and all that disquiet or pollute us
may be removed: we all desire to walk in the way of Jehovah, as it is in my
Text.

1. In the way of faith, our God is a jealous God, and he is jealous in point
of faith, as well as worship; The least Iota of divine truth is more precious
then Heaven and Earth: I bless God, Qui resistunt contumaciter, suaque
pesti^era and mortifera dogmata emendare nolunt, sed defensare persistunt
haereti^i fiunt.
and honor You, for expressing your selves so freely in this heretical and
licentious age against Subverters of the Faith. There is as much difference
between errors, as there is between poisons: some destroy by heat, some by
cold, some by corrosion; but there are certain poisons, whose very substance is
malignant; Physicians say their very specificall Form is destructive: and You
have furnished us with an excellent Antidote against these subverting errors,
these heretical poisons, August. de Civit. Dei, li. 18. ca. 51.
whose very substance is pestilentiall, and whose authors and abettors are full
of contumacious malignity. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Trallenles.
An Heretic cannot be as the seducers talk an honest man, for Heresy is a
brat begotten of the flesh by the Devil; an heresy is a flood cast out of the
Dragons mouth, one of the lies and depths of Satan, a work of the flesh. What
is more precious then Gods truth and our souls? 2 Cor 11. 15.
Now heresy corrupts the soul, Revel. 12. 16.
and subverts the Faith. Rev. 2. 9. 24.
Heresy is like an Hectique fever, Ioh. 8. 44.
which at first is very easy to be cured, but very hard to be known; Gal. 5.
20.
but when once it has gotten strength, and discovered it self by undeniable
symptoms, though it may be easily known, it is hardly cured.

There are some Errors that have more vanity then malignity in them, Romans 14. 1.
and yet they may do much mischief if spread abroad. 1 Cor. 10. 32.
1. Some may be entangled, ensnared. 2. Others offended. Gal. 5. 12.
3. The Church divided, and rent asunder, if these vain Errors come to be
professedly taught or divulged: 1 Cor. 1. 10.
concerning these lighter errors, Romans 16 17.
I shall say as Hippocrates says of raw humors, they must be ripened, and
concocted before they are purged, unless (says he) they be stirred by their
own violence: vain errors have a deluding efficacy in them when they meet with
vain men; and errors are more stirring and active in pragmaticall busy men,
then in meek modest men; and therefore the advice of St. Jude is seasonable in
this point; Of some have compassion, making a difference, and others save with
fear, plucking them out of the fire; the fire of contention, keeping them out
of the fire, the fire of Hell, and guiding their feet into the way of peace and
truth, the way of Jehovah, as it is in the Text.

Obj. But you will say, if we must all walk in one way of faith, then there must
be an uniformity, and though unity be Christian, yet (if some may be believed)
uniformity is Antichristian. 2 Timothy 1. 13. (...)


Sol. I am not at leisure to wrangle about words, I might distinguish between
Vniformiter difforme, and difformiter uniforme: Romans 2. 20. (...).
but I desire to speak plain English; when the Apostle exhorts Timothy to hold
fast the form of sound words which he had heard of him in faith and love which
is in Christ Jesus: Was not that a Christian uniformity? I mean no more. I
conceive it is requisite for a Christian State to hold forth the Christian
Religion in an wholesome Form of sound words that cannot be condemned; Romans 6.
17. (...).
that there may be a sweet Harmony between all the Churches of Christ: 2 Timothy
1. 14. (...).
and if a Christian State shall find it necessary to descend to some
disputable points in their Confession, that they may top the rising errors of
the time, Heb 5 12. (...).
I shall never move that learned men of a different persuasion should be
forced, or by preferment tempted to subscribe o^ swear to that Form against
their judgment, Hebr. 6. 1. (...).
to which the Civil sanction is annexed, because I know full well what a great
temptation it was to young and old in the time of the Prelates reign, to
subscribe to such forms as they had never thoroughly examined, because they
could not be preferred unless they Subscribed; Yet I humbly move that men's
mouths may be stopped from blaspheming or reviling the truth of God held forth
for the increase of Christian Uniformity. It is clear and evident, that if a
truth may no longer be maintained then till it be questioned, it will not be
long ere some out of the pride of their wits, or wantonness of their spirits,
Gloriantes se esse Emendatores Apostolorum. Iren* lib. 3. cap. 1.
will be bold to call it into question; the Socinians, Arminians, and some that
tread in their steps, have taken upon them, like those old Heretics in the
time of Irenaeus, to be Emendatores Apostolorum, the reformers of the Apostles:
but let not us be afraid to press those truths upon a In primis hoc propono
unum and certum aliquid a Christo institutum esse quod credere omnimodo debeant
nationes. Tertul. Praescript. advers. Haeret.
whole Nation which are delivered by God, though they be questioned by men; for
the Gospel is to be Preached to all Nations, to every creature. Mark 16. 15.
Col. 1. 23. 28.

2. We must walk in the same way of Worship: I shall not here discourse of
Natural or Civil helps which may some way further us in the worship of God;
it is clear that the Members of every Congregation respectively are obliged to
an Uniformity in respect of time and place; they must agree to meet at the same
time in the same place, to join together in acts of Divine Worship. The Lords
day is not a bare circumstance, there is an Institution for it, and a
spiritual efficacy in it by virtue of that Institution, to draw me nearer to
God, and God to me; nay to commend my service to God, for the tender of my
respects to God in public is more kindly taken upon that day, then upon any
other day; A Christian State is not at liberty to worship God solemnly in the
public Congregation, or neglect his worship upon the Lords day: we are all
obliged to a Christian Uniformity in this particular, humane prudence must
submit, and con^orm to the Command of the Lord of the day. Moreover, God is a
jealous God, and will not allow of Superstition, Idolatry, or profaneness, and
therefore we are bound up to an Uniformity in point of worship. The Libellatici
of old were (as some conceive) in fee with the State, that they might not be
forced to worship Idols, though they held too much correspondence with
Idolaters: but Abraham's servants, though once Idolaters, had no such
dispensation, they were commanded, peremptorily enjoined by Abraham to walk in
the way of Jehovah: and I hope we shall have no Libellatici amongst us, men in
fee with the State that they may worship Idols. On the other side, I do not
know that there is any humane Set-form of prayer like to be imposed upon the
Ministry of this Kingdom, and yet there ought to be a firm and uniform
agreement amongst us about the substantials of worship, that we may all observe
those general rules laid down in the Word; Exercise our gifts, stir up our
graces, and ^eg supplies from the Spirit of grace and supplication to help our
infirmities. Finally, we must in our prayers have a special respect to order,
and edification, to the necessities of the people, the state of the times,
juncture of circumstances, the work of Christ in our hands, and the work of the
Spirit in our hearts. Behold a Christian Uniformity without the Imposition of
any Humane Set-form of Prayer.

3. If you enquire after Government, you have my Reasons why I say so little,
and I have not time to say much more; There are some substantial parts of
Church Government which must be maintained, that the ordinances of Christ may
be set up, and maintained in Power and purity* Men that pretend to great
things, and know nothing, seem to be much afraid of a Classical tyranny; but
you that are acquainted with the secrets of that Honorable Committee for
Accommodation, know that there has been liberty enough offered, and fair
expedients propounded in that particular.

Obj. But you will say, that Saints are to be left wholly to their liberty, and
Liberty cannot consist with Uniformity.

I answer. Saints are men, and must be ruled; or else their unregenerate part
which often prevails will make them too unruly. It is the observation of some
reverend Divines, that Jonah was a peevish Saint, and Sampson a desperate
Saint, and certainly there are many peevish and desperate men that pass for
Saints in this time of Liberty, these must be ruled and overruled. There are
some that seem to be Saints, because they have a form of godliness; but they
are no Saints, because they deny the power of godliness. What will you say to
those men who challenge an Absolute liberty to say and do what they list, till
it pleases God to work on them by spiritual means; whereas the truth is, they
live in contempt of all those means which should work upon them. You Will easily
grant that no pretense, nay no scruple of conscience can exempt a man from any
Civil duty which he owes to the State, or the government thereof, for his own
and the public good: why then should any pretense or scruple exempt him from
attendance upon quickening ordinances, and powerful means of Reformation? If
men broach damnable doctrines, and pertinaciously defend them against common
light, I mean the Common light of Nature, or Christianity, if their errors be
destructive to Faith, Piety, Justice or Charity; if a man plead conscience in
the point of Community of goods; if one pretend that his conscience puts him
upon the ensnaring of other men's consciences; Non est haec libertas eredendi
sed errandi, non conscientiae sed phantasiae, non libertas sed Libertinismus.
in a word, If under pretense of liberty of Conscience, he take liberty to be
unconscionable, sure this is but an Atheistical Libertinisme, it is not
liberty of conscience, but liberty of fantasy, liberty of error, liberty of
lust: he that has no other title to Saintship but a bare profession, does by
such errors and practices unsaint himself, and is sit to be cast out of the
society of Saints, and protection of Parliament. Mar. 9. 42.


2. Saints are Saints, and therefore though they must be ordered, yet they must
not be scandalized, Mark 9. 42. If they judge us we must not despise them; we
must not despise them as simple, because they condemn us as profane; if they
be peevish, we must not be proud.

3. Saints must not be persecuted; though they be peevish, nay desperate, yet
they must not be punished beyond their desert, the warm blood of sheep is no
drink for me, it is too high and heady; nor must I out of a sullen humor deny
a peevish Saint the right hand of fellowship, unless he will be overawed by
me, and forced to confess something to be true which he conceives to be false,
or practice something which he believes in his conscience to be a sin; Surely
if Saints urge arguments which may tempt wise men, or sway weak men, they
should be dealt with in a spiritual, brotherly, and convincing way; Church
power is for edification, not for destruction. Christians must not be like
brinish lights, which spit fire one at another till both go out, and dye in a
smoke and stench.

4. I am so far from endeavoring to persecute Saints, that I humbly desire
that we would all study how to make more Saints; we quarrel very often about
gathering of Saints, and the ordering of Saints: I beseech you that we may all
look upon it as our business how to make Saints; Oh it will be a comfortable
work to gather and order Saints of our own making.

5. Saints must have a Saint-like liberty: we are not obliged to obey any
person, or any company, or society of persons in any thing which is
prejudicial to Gods glory and our salvation: and we are at liberty to do any
thing which is religious or virtuous, Iam. 2. 8. 9. 12
because there is no Law against any duties, Libertas in amplitudine quadam
Independentia animi consistit, animus quippe noster nulli eorum quae sunt infra
Deum addictus est nisi propter Deum, etc. Gib^uf.
for which we are enabled by the fruits of the Spirit. The fruit of the Spirit
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, against such there is no law. Galat. 5. 22, 23. No man is Lord of
my faith or conscience, and if men will be displeased with me for pleasing
Christ, I am at liberty to displease all the world. Gal. 1. 10. This is a
Saint-like liberty, but Saints are not at liberty to sin against the Royal Law
of Liberty; they must fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, or
else they will be convinced and judged by the Law of Liberty. Saints are men of
generous spirits, and take themselves to be at liberty to do any thing Servato
ordine finis, any thing that God allows them; true Saints affect not, challenge
not a kind of Free Will to think, believe, speak and act according to the garb
and humor of the time. True Saints will not say that a man may be of what
Religion he pleases, so he be of any Religion, and seem zealous for it; There
is one precious truth maintained by all Sectaries and most Heretics, That
there is but one only true Religion, and therefore for the most part every one
Nullus error se audet extollere ad congregandas sibiturbas imperitorum qui nou
Christiani nominis velamenta conqu^rat. Aug. Epist. 56.
of them does hold forth his way and opinion as the only true Religion, and
saving way; I say most Heretics do so, but there was of old a
Catholique-Heresie, so I call it because it did approve and extol all
heresies. A Rhetorio baeresis exortaquae omnes haereticos recte ambulare and
vera dicere affirmat. etc. Aug. de Haeres.
Augustine calls it the Heresy of Rhetorius, and says, that it is admirable
for vanity, and I fear that some in our days who take themselves to be Saints,
are fallen into this Heresy; I believe this fond conceit, was first broached
amongst the Pagans by Vide Socrat. Histor. li 4. ca. 27.
Themistius the Philosopher, Jude v. 3.
who said, That God was well pleased with variety of opinions, because his
glory was much illustrated by them. But true Saints will not play the
Sceptiques; they that think it a kind of bondage to fix their belief upon that
truth, which Christ has by his Apostles once for all delivered to the Saints,
and are therefore willing to hear any one rather then Christ, and his Apostles,
These men are no Saints; for he that is so ready to be of any religion, is for
the present of no religion. Faith is no jesting matter, we must not be so
indifferent in our judgment in points of faith: the Question is not of Tertul.
de Patient. Cujus judicium in suos non in compede aut pileo vertitur sed in
aeternitate aut poenae aut salutis.
Liberty, but of Eternity, as Tertullian speaks, and therefore it is fit, that
all pretenders should be silenced that we may hear Cyprian. S^ solus Christus
audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putaverit,
sed quid qui ante omnes Christus prior fecerit. Cui succinit. Aug. Epist. 48.
Audi dicit Dominus non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentus, aut Hilarious,
aut Augustinus, sed dicit Dominus.
Christ speak: for all true Saints will give ear to him, rest in his
determination, and curse all those that preach any other Gospel, though they
pretend to be Saints, Apostles, Angels; Though we (says the Apostle) or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel to you then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. Gal. 1. 8.

For the making and ordering of Saints then, and directing of our steps in the
way of Jehovah, be pleased.

1. To set up the Primitive teaching from house to house, or something
correspondent to it; unless you lay your Civil obligation upon governors of
families, Church Officers will find them too uncivil; we talk much of
reforming Congregations, but till there be a Reformation wrought in our own
persons, and families, it is a madness to think that our Congregations can be
reformed; as long as families are poisoned with ignorance and profanesse,
ordinances will be neglected or profaned in our Congregations: but by your
Order even the Governors of families would submit to be catechized in those
Articles of faith, the knowledge whereof is by Ordinance of Parliament required
of all these that are to be admitted to the Sacrament. Believe it, our
Congregations will not be (...) Churches, till our families are turned into
Churches; Oh that I might live to see that happy (...) when the Church in this
House, and the other House, and so along from house to house, shall be all
united in Church Fellowship, and a Congregation shall be a Church consisting of
many domestical Churches united in one body, under a powerful Ministry, and
Christian discipline, for the edifying of it self in faith and love. I shall
deal plainly with you, till some such course be taken for the Reformation of
families, there are diverse parts of the Country, if not some whole Countries,
that are incapable of Discipline. There must be some time given for the
instructing of men that have parts and gifts in the nature and quality of that
office to which they are designed; and I humbly offer it to your consideration,
whether the power of a people in choosing Officers, be not much like the power
of a son in choosing a wife? You know what a wise father will say, if my son
have wit and grace to choose a wife, I will allow him the more liberty in his
choice; if he have not, why then the less skill, the less liberty. I leave it
to your wisdom to make application of that rule, Mutatis mutandis to the point
in hand.

The people of this Land are as unstable as water (...). Arist. de Genesis and
Cor. li. 2. ca. 2.
, water sets no bounds to it self; the people of England are as it were
boundless for the present, and it is certain that they will set no bounds to
themselves: and truly if you set no bounds to them, you will find them very fluid,
they will run away from you and themselves; from Gods service and yours, from
their principles, and your conclusions; from your safety and their own. You
know how many changes the generality of this Kingdom have made in the great
business of Religion, they turned from being Protestants in profession to be
Papists indeed when the Articles were pressed in H. the 8. his Reign; and from
being Papists, to be seeming Protestants in Ed. the fixth time; in Queen Mary's
time they were Papists, and in Queen Elizabeth's Protestants again: The same men
changed their Religion four times in a matter of fourteen or sixteen years.
Bellarmine lays it as a reproach upon the English Nation, and truly I cannot
impute this inconstancy to any thing more, then to the neglect of catechizing
in public and private: There has been no care taken to settle Religion in
families, to acquaint young and old with the Principles of Religion, and men
will not die for a religion which they do not understand. Great Scholars read
over their Grammer-rules, and Logique-rules very often, that they may retain
the grounds of Learning; good Divines read their Catechism often, that they
may retain the grounds of Divinity: It was very well said of noble Luther,
Fateor me catechismi discipulum; I confess that I am neither too wise, nor too
old to learn my Catechism. The people of this Kingdom will never be rooted and
grounded in faith and love, if the general neglect of family duties may pass
unpunished; the Sabbath will be polluted, and the Sacrament profaned, as long
as family duties are so grossly and wilfully neglected as now they are. Is it
fit that men should receive the public Badge of Christianity in the Sacrament
which they receive as an Honor to them, when they will not wear the private
Badge of Christianity, will not own Jesus Christ for their Master, by the
performance of religious duties in their families, though Christ would take it
kindly from them, and look upon it as an Honor to him, if they would set up
Christ in their hearts and houses. Assure your selves, that if the generality
of England be not true to Christ, Nostri ^um (...) legibus Papae liberi sint,
etiam a lege Dei liberi esse volunt, nihil nisi Politica sequi, sed sic ut sub
illis quoque pro libito sin^. Luther.
they will never prove true to you: you will loose us much by their inconstancy
(shall I say) as the Pope has lost, give me leave to say as Christ has lost;
do not deceive your selves, the people if they are left to their humor, are,
as some others have been, more willing to shake off Christ, then ever they were
to throw off the Pope; and they that are not willing to be subject to Christ's
Laws, will not, if they be left to their liberty, submit to yours; they embrace
the Ordinances of Parliament, and seem to respect your Orders, as long as you
over-aw them, but if they see their time, and have a fair advantage, judge what
they are like to do; I am confident that when you are in streights, they will
never be at your command, unless you, now you are in your full power, prevail
with them to be at Gods command. I humbly conceive that a more equal division
of Parishes would much conduce to their Reformation, M^. White one of our
^^verend Ass^^ss^rs in his Sermon before the Lords.
but there has been enough presented upon that Argument by a very learned and
judicious Divine, and therefore I forbear to press that point.

2. To purge the Universities, you have done worthily in laying a good
foundation for the reforming of that University which is within your power; be
pleased to take some speedy course for the reducing of the other University,
for it is the grief of our souls that whilst You are casting salt into one
Fountain, the Enemy is casting poison into the other; I will pray, and hope to
be heard, that it may be the Honor of this Parliament to reduce, and reform
both Universities; the Philistines did desire to put out both our Eyes, and
certainly one was bleared, and the other darkened, but by Gods blessing upon
Your endeavors, we begin to see with one Eye, and hope that we may in due time
recover the other; and then I doubt not but you will help us to all the good
old Statutes which were repealed and cancelled by some, that new Statutes might
be imposed for the countenancing of an Matters were referred to the Chancellor
to determine pro arbitrio, sive in jud^cio, sive ^xtrajud^cium.
Arbitrary Government against Statute. I shall not move You to repeal those new
Statutes, for as Cicero said when he was unjustly banished, I need no Law to
restore me from my banishment to my Country, for I was not banished by Law; so
say I, there needs no Law to repeal those Statutes which were never established
by Law; Nihil nobis opus ^rat Lege, de (...) nihil actu^ esset legibus.
Cicerode Legib li 3.
yet it will not be amiss (if you in your wisdom think it sit) to declare them
to be null. The old Statutes did recommend Calvin's Institutions to Tutors as a
fit book to be expounded to their Scholars, but that good Statute was omitted
in the book of new Statutes, because there are so many precious truths in
Calvin's Institutions contrary to the The Reign of Canterbury
piety of those times in which the new Statutes were invented. Paul the 2d
condemned all those for Heretics (as Platina relates) who did but name an
University either in jest or earnest, but I hope there are none of his strein
in this Honorable Assembly.

3. To encourage faithful Ministers, the Apostle does beseech you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12, 13. We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you: and to esteem them very highly for
their works sake, and be at peace among your selves. God does endear his
Ministers to the greatest of Christians, by sending glad tidings, and
love tokens by them to all the Saints; hence those endearing relations, which
the Apostle mentions in several places: Ministers are instead of Fathers,
Mothers, Nurses, A^ 1 These. 2. 11.
Fathers they beseech you, as Gal 4 19.
Mothers they travail with you, as 1 These. 2. 7.
Nurses they cherish you. Be pleased not only to command, but to encourage the
Ministers to walk in the way of Jehovah, for they are like to meet with
manifold discouragements in dispensatione offi^ii; when they rebuke with
Authority, and rebuke men of corrupt opinions sharply that they may be sound in
the faith, Aug. Epist 50. Jumenta eos calce morsuque appetunt, a quibus eorum
curanda vulnera contrect^ntur.
when they come to warn the unruly, and charge the disorderly, and confute the
gainsayers, some will show their teeth; and when they come to be dressed, and
cured, turn their heels; for too many are like the Horse which has no
understanding, and such as will not be instructed, must be bridled, curbed.
Psalm. 32. 8, 9.

4. To provide able Schoolmasters, youths must be ordered by Quia utile est
juventuti regi, impositi sunt illi quasi M^g^stratus dem^st^^, sub quibus
contineretur. Senec de Benef^ii 3. An Philippus Macedonum Rex Alexandro silio
s^o prima literarum elementa tradi ab Aristotele summo ejus aetatis philosopho
voluisset, aut ille suscepisse^ hoc officium si non studiorum initia a perfect
s^imo quoque tractari pert^^ere ad summam credidisset Quin til. lib. 1. cap 1.
Non sunt con^emnenda quasi parva sine quibus magna constare non possunt.
Hieronym Epist. ad Laetam.
domestical and scholasticall Magistrates, before they come to be ruled by
Civil Magistrates: a Schoolmaster is a kind of Magistrate, his Office is as
honorable as it is useful; none contemn that office, but such as are unable
to discharge it, or unworthy to be trusted with it: All learning is upheld by
the grounds of learning. If the foundation be weak, the fairest fabrique will
reel and fall; A School is a kind of little kingdom, nay a private Church; for
the grounds of Religion, as well as Learning, are to be first taught by
religious and judicious Schoolmasters, let their maintenance be as honorable
as their office; for, believe it, they help to support Church and State. If you
will take these proposals into your saddest thoughts, you will lay a strong
foundation for the good of future generations; so that if the old siurdy
Malignants of our time will not submit, and conform to Gospel-rules, there will
be good hope of the next generation, when their fathers (who are ^otten
already) will be dead and gone. And the godly men of this Kingdom will die with
comfort, when they see the Kingdom put into such a posture, and such provision
made for the instruction of their children, whom they leave behind them: they
may say to their children, as Israel said to Joseph, Behold I die, but God
shall be with you. Genesis 48. 21. This Kingdom may be happy hereafter, though it
should refuse to be happy now; if men will be stubborn in this
wildernesse-condition, and are resolved to perish in their stubbornness, yet
there is some hope that though the fathers die in the wilderness, some of
their children, nay the very next generation may enter into Canaan, and be
quiet.

Finally, my Text remembers me to call upon you to do Justice and Judgment.
You must distribute rewards, and inflict punishments with a single heart, and
an impartial hand. The Parliament is the Fountain of Justice, righteousness,
and judgment must flow forth from thence, and run thorough out the Kingdom
like a mighty stream, which bears down all before it, and refreshes the dry and
thirsty corners of the Land. You have been assaulted by violence, and you could
not be compelled to be unjust; but now you will be counted with flatteries,
what will you be flattered into injustice? There are some desperate Malignants
that take the Covenant with a salv^, who keep it in their own sense, but break
it in curs, in the true genuine literal sense. There are so^e (...) Malignants
who are too wise to be scandalous; they do not roar like a Lion, ^o 5. 12. 14.
Gregor.
but fret like a M^ath; They do m^st mischief, who keep least noise. Tinea
damnaum facit, and s^nitum non facit. You will be importuned by some plausible
solicitors, that these men may be spared, because they are not s^andal^us in
their lives. Have you not read of one, qui sobri^^s acc^ssit ad perdendum
(...)? Must men be spared because they do not fiercely ass^ult Church and
State, though they do subtly undermine both? If so, you must despair of
safety, and we of a Reformation.

But it is not enough for you to be just your selves, you are to provide good
Justices in all parts thoroughout the Kingdom. You may delegate part of your
power, but you cannot delegate your prudence, nor your Bowels, witness those
sad and just complaints which are presented against Country Committees, and
Malignant Justices. I shall not dispute that question in the Politiques,
Whether it be better to have good Laws, or good Magistrates? But I am sure that
good Laws will do no good without good Magistrates. A Justice should be Custes
utriusque Ta^ulae, but such is our condition in the Country, that both Tables
may be broken without control; the Lords day is profaned, and in some places
even in the time of religious Exercises the Alehouses are fuller then the
Churches. When shall unclean persons be brought to their deserved punishment?
Men commit this wickedness with a bold brazen face, and brag that if the worst
come to the worst, they are able to keep their misbegotten brats, and save the
Parish and themselves harmless.

You know we have vowed a Reformation, and yet you know what the general part
of the Kingdom are even to this very day; nay there are some that look high and
big, and make a notable profession also, and yet if you observe their dealings,
and look into their families, you will find very little charity, less Justice,
and no Religion; Charity is comprehended under Justice, Qui ambulet prout*
aequ^m est eoram Deo Ier. 22. 15.
and Judgment. Praecepta Domini sunt Regulae juris and aequi: There is a kind
of equity in charity. But there are some that have spent all their stock of
charity upon the Enemies of the Church and State, you may prove them Bankrupts
by that forfeiture they have made; but if this be charity, it is a left handed
charity, for they distribute favors with the wrong hand to them that are of
the wrong side; Sure I am there is a great outcry, and a cry that reaches
Heaven gone up from those widows and orphans, whose husbands and fathers lived
and died in your Service: and some of your friends profess, that they would be
glad of those favors which are vouchsafed to your Enemies: I mean such
Enemies, as have out of a forced and Psalm 66. 3. yield feigned obedience, Hebr
a Lie, as it is in the margin of our Bibles.
feigned obedience compounded with you upon easy rates, and gained
extraordinary favors, and considerable advantages, besides their Arrears; and
I mean such friends ^s bave lost or given away all they have to promote the
cause of God in your hands; and yet they complain that they cannot procure
those Arrears which are due to them for that service in which they adventured
(all that is left them) their lives.

Oh let Justice and Religion flourish, or else your friends will be
discouraged; It would g^ieve my ^oul, and even break, my heart, to see your
friends come weeping from you. Be just, ^e just both to your enemies, and your
friends; or el^e you can never be true to your own interests. Some have
complained that crying abominations, besides those that have been pointed at,
do pass unpunished; they say that not only simple uncleanness, but even
gross adultery does escape unpunished; When Abraham came amongst the Heathens,
that had no fear of God before their eyes, he considered that his wife was
beautiful, and they lustful, and though he did fear that they would defile
his wife, yet he did verily believe that they would slay him first, Poeniend^s
peccatis tres esse debere causas ^aist: matumest, (...), cum dignitas au^^ori^^
asque, ejus in quem est peccatum tuenda est. (...). cum Paena adhibetur
emendandigrat^^: (...), cum poen^tio propt^r ex^m^ um est necessria. A. Gel.
Noct. Attic. l. ^ ca. 14.
and defile her afterward, because Adultery was, in the opinion of those
profane Heathens, a f^uler sin then Murder it self.

Talk no more of Justice and Judgment, Fiat Justitia; my Text remembers you,
that Justice and Judgment are things not to be talked on, but to be done: The
Philosophers give three Reasons why Justice should be done. 1. That Authority
might be preserved, the authority of God and his Officers. 2. That Delinquents
might be reformed. 3. That others might be deterred by those Examples of
Justice, which are frequently made in a wise State, and Nation.

I have spoken my mind clearly, and should have spoken more fully, and freely,
had I had the advantage of speaking in private; If I have offended the
conscience of my Governors by satisfying my own, I shall bear their Censure,
and hope by Gods grace to bear any punishment which they shall think fit to
inflict, with as much comfort as they inflict it. Reprehensus olim Albutius
Rhetor est, quod de omni causa dicere cuperet, non quicquid debebat dici, sed
quicquid p^terat.
Albutius the Orator was condemned for the profuseness of his Rhetorique,
because he spoke all he could upon every Argument which he took in hand; I have
by his error learnt this truth, that It is better to say enough, then to say
All.

FINIS.
Errata.
In pa. 16. l. 15, and 16. read (...). p. 16. l. 27. r. then Solomon was. p.
19. l. 30. r. at a feast. p. 22. l. 13. r. if you call him Ens. p. 25. l. 6. r.
nay we must. p. 26. l. 32. r. should set forth.


