SIGHS for SION: OR, FAITH and LOVE Constraining some grievings in her Sorrow,
and groanings for her Deliverance: By a few of her weak and unworthy Children.

Humbly, and in all faithfulness, presented to those Assemblies of hers, where
Grace has set them as Watchmen; and unto any others, that in every place call
upon the Name of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, both theirs and ours.

In way of ESSAY, To blow the Trumpet in Sion, and sound an Alarm in Gods holy
Mountain, To the awakening them that are at ease, and pressing and encouraging
all the upright in heart, to be in pain with her, in this day of her sore
travel, and great Expectation.

PSALM. 137.1. -- We wept, when we remembered Sion.

ISA. 62.6, 7. I have set Watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall
never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep
not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth.

LAM. 2.18, 19. Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of
Sion: let tears run down like a river night and day, give thy self no rest, let
not the apple of thine eyes cease; arise, cry out in the night, in the
beginning of the watches pour out thy heart like water before the face of the
Lord, etc.

MIC. 4.10. Be in pain and labor to bring forth, O daughter of Sion, like a
woman in travel.

ISA. 66.8. -- As soon as Sion traveled, she brought forth her Children.

LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes head alley. 1656.

To the several Congregrations respectively, to which we stand especially
related; viz. In Plymouth, Abingdon, Totness, Bovhey-Tracy, and Dartmouth.

Dearly Beloved,
WE know, and acknowledge our selves to be debtors (yea, we owe our own selves)
to the Lord, and you, for the exceeding grace that we (though most unworthy)
have found in his sight, counting us faithful, and putting us into the Ministry
of his Gospel; and for that our service amongst you has been, and is in any
measure accepted. Under the sense of which engagement, it is the least we can
do, to be ready to render an account of our selves from time to time unto you;
the which we the more cheerfully now undertake, as being under the persuasion
of a Call of the Lord, leading us forth thereunto, and having good hopes,
through grace, that our labor shall not be vain in him; in and through whom we
are,

Yours, faithfully laboring (though in much weakness) for your Souls
prosperity, as those whose joy and rejoicing, both here, and in the day of
Christ, wait to be fulfilled therein. Abraham Cheer, Henry Forty, John
Pendarves, Tho: Glass, Robert Steed.


Sighs for Sion, etc.
THE GREAT GOD OF HEAVEN AND EARTH, who has GRAVEN you, O YE PRECIOUS SONS AND
DAUGHTERS OF SION, on the Palms of his Hands, has also greatly endeared you to
our hearts; insomuch as we may say with the Apostle, Ye are in our hearts (in
the Lord) to live and dye with you: yea, we trust our inward affection is more
abundantly toward you, then our visible expression in the ensuing lines:
whereof at present we find no better Testimony wherewith to present you, then
that which is here tendered to your view: Your candid acceptance of so poor a
mite, with a favorable construction, and a due improvement of this Word in
season, to the Glory of God our Father, and the comfort of you his dear
Children, will be that wherein our Desires and Ends will be answered, and our
Souls encouraged in the Work of God, and your Work; with resolution in the
power of God to hold on therein, passing by evil and good report, yea, and
gladly to spend and be spent for Christ's sake, and for your sakes, who are
Christ's.

But here we must begin with judging our selves, and covering our faces with
deserved shame, that we who have stood forth so long to minister the Word among
the Saints, and to make mention of the Work of God; and have yet had so little
searchings of heart in the matter that is now before us; have known and felt so
little, not only of the power, but even of the form of this blessed Work, so
as either to stir up and engage our own hearts, or to provoke the Churches of
the Saints unto their concernments of this nature: But have rather eased and
pleased our selves and others, in discoursing of, and prosecuting some other
things, though good in themselves, and in their places, yet such as wherein our
private interest of Peace and Comfort is more sensibly wrapped up; in the mean
time falling short of (at least not so self-denyingly reaching after) the
advancement of that Name, Interest, and Glory of God, that should be upon our
hearts, to have made manifest in all the earth, from the rising of the Sun, and
from the West. Isa. 59.19.


And as we cannot but be sensible of the narrowness of our own spirits, with
grief, and shame; so also, as that which is weighty on us, we do observe, That
a self-seeking and self-pleasing Spirit, has taken great hold of, and
advantage on many Professors in these days; witness their little
naturally-caring for Sions state, most seeking their own things, and so few
seeking the things of Jesus Christ, and of their Brethren, for edification. And
Oh! that there were not among you, even among you, 2 Chronicles. 28.10
who are the Churches of Christ, cause of complaint in this respect. These
things we mention, not to cast reproach upon you, but with grieved hearts, God
knows. And now, that we might discharge, and have the answer of a good
conscience, in following the Lord fully, we have taken the opportunity of this
Work, that we trust himself has been fixing on our Spirits, after seeking to
God, and waiting upon his Majesty, To beseech and provoke you, and every one of
you, as you have any fellowship with Christ our Head, by faith, or in and with
his body, the Church of the firstborn, by love, you would for his, and his
Sions sake, hear, and receive our exhortations, considering with weighty
Spirits what we say: and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

The Cause then that we desire with trembling to plead, Jer. 30.17.
(Brethren) is Sions, even hers, whom men have called an outcast, saying, This
is Sion, whom no man seeks after; and of whom that ancient Lamentation may in
a great measure be taken up, as verified in this our day, Isa. 51.18.
There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she has brought forth,
neither is there any that takes her by the hand, of all the Sons that she has
brought up; Lam. 1.2.
among all her lovers she has none to comfort her, etc. And her Professed
friends, (many of them) have dealt treacherously with her, and are become her
enemies.

Dear Souls! our request on her behalf is, that you would look upon Sion, Isa.
33.20. Psalm. 87.3. and 50.2. and 48.2. Isa. 60.15.
that City of our Solemnities, of whom glorious things are spoken, and laid up
in Promise for her, even to the rendering her the Perfection of Beauty, An
eternal Excellency, The joy of many generations. And oh! that your hearts may
be so sutably affected with an holy sympathy in her state, through that one
Spirit that is in Promise for all her children, that you may truly say, as
Souls whom faith and love have transported into her interest, Psalm. 78.7.
All my Springs are in thee.

But lest we be mistaken in your thoughts, while we speak of her in that
figurative term; and to the end our apprehensions may be distinct and clear, in
our wrestlings together on her behalf, we pray you to consider what we intend
and mind in the expression [Sion.]

First, SION considered in a more large sense, Heb. 12.22, 23 Joh. 10.16. 2 Timothy 2.19. Joh. 17.20, 21. Col. 1.29. Gal. 4.19. 2 Timothy 2.10.
takes in the whole Election of God, Whose names are written in Heaven, that
whole Body for which Christ gave himself, and whereof Christ is given to be
Head; not only those who have believed, but those also who shall believe, for
whom, as Christ has prayed, That they all may be one, as the Father is in him,
and he in the Father, that they may be one in them, that the world may believe
that the Father has sent him: so ought we to strive mightily with God, and
them, traveling in birth for them, till Christ be formed in them all; enduring
also all things for their sakes, that they also may obtain the Salvation which
is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

But secondly, by Sion, Ephesians. 2.19. and 3.15. Gal. 6.16. Isa. 34.8. Luke 18.7,
8. Rev. 18.20, 24 Psalm. 73.1. Romans 10.12. Jer. 50.34.
we here intend more especially and particularly, Gods called and faithful
people, Jews and Gentiles, fellow-Citizens in Christ, even the whole Israel of
God, as considered or concerned in a controversy with Babylon, stated in the
Scriptures; taking in, as well those of that blessed family, who are now in
heaven, for the avenging of whose blood, we ought without fainting to cry day
and night, as the peculiar people of God upon the face of the whole earth; even
all that in every place call upon the name of the Lord out of a pure heart: in
whom the glory of God is more highly concerned, then in all things else in the
world, not only in his pleading thoroughly their cause in all the controversies
of Sion with her Adversaries, but also in beautifying her with his glorious
Presence, and restoring her to her primitive Glory, in respect of a pure
GOSPEL-FAITH, UNION, and ORDER; wherein being found as a blessed BRIDE,
prepared for the coming of the glorious BRIDEGROOM, she may be counted worthy
of all that glory that shall be brought unto her, at the second appearing of
Jesus Christ, NOW DRAWING NIGH.

This blessed People, this SION, Gods glorious Building, and Workmanship in
Christ, the true seed of Abraham, and Heirs of the Promise, both Jews and
Gentiles; Isa. 49.14, 15, 16.
however in the Issue they shall be a Name, and Praise to him in all the Earth:
And although this great Work in and for them, be still before him; yet is it
the wisdom and good pleasure of the Father, in the depths of his Everlasting
Counsel, to let the manifestation of it in the world, and his dispensations
about it, be very various, and seemingly to carnal eyes, unsuitable to such
intendments, through the many deaths, distresses, and unlikelyhoods, with which
he cloatheth it in their sight: the which he turns nevertheless to the
exceeding advantage of his Name all along, Mic. 4.11, 12.
not only by exercising thoroughly the Patience, Rev. 13.10. and 14.12.
Obedience, and Faithfulness of his Children, in owning the truth of his
Testimony, and bearing their Testimony for him unto the death; but withal, by
giving full occasion, and opportunity, for that MYSTERY OF GOD to be Finished,
who has Testified, and declared by the Spirit of Prophecy to the Churches,
and permits by an hand of Providence, the rising, and raging of That man of
Sin, that Bloody Mystery of Iniquity, until it have answered and fulfilled
whatsoever is held forth of it, in all the various Scripture-Prophesies,
figures, and representations both of its Civil and Ecclesiastical concernment.
The which, as it has gotten to its height both of Renown and Cruelty, by the
occasion of that exceeding great offense, wherewith the cause of Christ has
been presented in its appearance to the World, being a Stumbling-Stone to the
Children of this worlds Wisdom and Glory: So shall its ruin arise from that
Jealousy of the Lord wherein he has promised to plead the cause of his own,
and his peoples glory; finding in, and recompensing on that generation, on whom
the hour of his wrath shall fall, all that righteous blood that has been
shed, and all that unworthy and treacherous usage that SION has met withal in
the days of her poverty and distress.

The day of SIONS FULL DELIVERANCE, the destruction of her enemies, and the
setting up of CHRIST'S GLORIOUS KINGDOM, is very much upon his heart, Isa. 63.4.
as a fruit of the sore Travel of his Soul, Isa. 53.11, 12. and recompense of
that unworthy usage that himself, Isa. 49.7. and 61.3, 7.
his cause and people have had upon the earth; and for which, sitting at the
right hand of God, he is in continual expectation, Heb. 10.13. as that which
must be given him as a fruit of his intercession, Psalm. 2.8, 9. and to which he
is preparing his way, by terrible things in Righteousness, Psalm. 65.5, 8.
Shaking both Heaven and Earth, and making a Quick dispatch, Luke 18.7, 8.
ordering, and ruling all things therein, and making them subject to this his
great and glorious work. And indeed, so much the more is this Design and Work
declared to be upon his heart, as the whole management of it will lie upon his
own shoulders; Isa. 9.7. Psalm. 132.17.
they being very few among men, that will be found to have regard to it, in the
budding of it; not only through the blindness and enmity of those that are
aliens from him, but the very great sleep and slumber that will be found among
them that pretend to him, either through their want of faith, Luke 18.8. or
their sensual engagements in this present evil world, Chap. 17.26, etc. So that
notwithstanding that Salvation he works for them, and his pleading their cause,
lays them under no small engagement to him; when his cause comes to be pleaded,
the complaint is made by the Prophet, Isa. 59.16. And he saw that there was no
man, and wondered that there was no intercessor. Therefore his arm brought
Salvation unto him. The which great defection even of Saints themselves, from
FOLLOWING THE LAMB, in this special service, together with the fixation of the
work upon the heart of Christ notwithstanding this, serves highly now more
then ever, the day drawing nearer, to commend, and greatly to encourage and
excite the faithfulness of any, though the weakest and most despised of the
Lords holy ones, who are in a right spirit engaged for, and together with
Christ, in their constant waitings, and fervent expectations of this
manifestation of his Glory: they hereby witnessing that they have the mind of
Christ; and having one mind, give their power and strength to the Lamb, 1 Cor.
2.16. Rev. 17.13, 14. Psa. 72.15. and 137.6. Heb. 13.3. 1 Cor. 12.27
as CALLED, and CHOSEN, and FAITHFUL, (when others have one mind to give
theirs to the Beast) making prayers also for him continually, and preferring
him and his interest before their chief joy, through the spirit of faith and
love; always reckoning themselves as being in the body, and members in
particular.

A taste of this worthy Spirit (Brethren, beloved in the Lord) we humbly trust
our God is giving us, who address our selves to you, with some fervent desires
that we may be made more to partake of it. And indeed, such is our love to your
Souls, and delight (through grace) in this work before us, that we cannot but
commend it to you, with more then an ordinary importunity; beseeching you, and
every one of you, from the greatest to the least, notwithstanding diverse
differences amongst you, touching the time, way and manner of Gods effecting
those great things, that by the will, and in the way of the Lord, you be found
reaching after the same Spirit, and wrestling much together and apart for it.
And Oh! that it may be the pleasure of the Lord herein, 2 Cor. 9:2.
that your zeal may provoke many, and you may be found to have stood in this
hour of Temptation, Rev. 14.1.
and this BACKSLIDING TIME, faithful with the Lamb on the Mount Sion, Psa.
84.5, 6, 7.
having not only His Fathers Name written on your Foreheads, but his work
graven upon your hearts, and all those blessed Characters disposing you
thereunto, shining in all your conversations; which will make you covet, that
the Lord make his Work appear to you as his servants, though he reserve the
revelation of his glory unto your Children. Psa. 90.16.
For what greater joy, or Crown of rejoicing, can we have at the appearing of
our Lord, then that we with you, and ye with us, be presented faultless before
his Throne? whereunto we also labor, Jud. 24. Col. 1.28.
and desire to strive mightily, according to his working. In which work, and to
which end, we pray you bear with us, while we follow this Exhortation a little
further in a few words.

Is not the exercise of such a PUBLIC SPIRIT for the whole Work of the Lord
most desirable? if we consider farther, not only its sweet likeness unto, and
fellowship with the heart of Christ; but withal, Isa. 66.10. Zeph. 3.18.
that very great Blessing that has been promised, and all ages they have found
to their particular souls, who have been given up to mind most naturally, and
follow most fully, that design of God, that had its present tendency in that
very age to promote Sion: the Lord is not unrighteous to forget such work, and
labor of love, Heb. 6.10.
that is showed toward his name. How has that word been made good to them
that pray for her Peace, Psa. 122.6.
They shall PROSPER that love thee? And see, we pray you (dear Brethren) how
God has bid his choice remnant to consider, and reckon from that very day,
wherein they set their hearts and hands about the Work of Sion, from this day
will I bless you, Hag. 2.18, 19. what choice Testimonies of the great love of
God to himself, did Daniel find at several times! (He is said to be a man
greatly beloved, or a man of desires, Dan. 9.23. and 10.11, 19.) when he was
wrestling for the NAME and Work of God singly, not minding a word of his own
interest (that we read of) farther then it was wrapped up in the Lords? besides
the great secrets that were opened to him, of the deep designs of God for a
great while to come. What a desirable foresight had David given him by the
Spirit, 1 Chro. 28.12 19. etc.
in all the pattern of the house of the Lord, and large furnishments thereunto?
yea, what provision, to his astonishment, did God make for building him an
house, 2 Samuel 7. beg.
and establishing his Kingdom, when in the time of his rest he was taking care
of that house of Gods glory, 1 Chro. 6.33.
because of which all the people of the earth might know his name?

What a constant observation was Nehemiah enabled to take of the hand of God
for good upon him, Neh. 5.19. and 6.9. and 13.14, and 22, 31.
Neh. 2.8, 18. and what boldness, and clearness of access, and appeal to the
Lord, was he still furnished withal, whiles he was in the fear of God, (Chap.
5.9, 15.) about the work of Sion?

Was not Ezra's experience much of the eye and hand of the Lord accompanying
him, Ezra 5.5. and 7.6. and 9.8. and 8.18, and 22, 31.
in all that great work he did for the Lord his God?

Moreover, it deserves our serious observation, being written for generations
to come, Psa. 102.17, 18.
how much the Lord is delighted in the faithful fervent prayers of those who
have sought him, in behalf of the People called by his name; in that he has
carefully preserved the memorial of them, causing them to be expressly recorded
in his book; as appears in the first of Nehemiah, and the ninth of Daniel: all
which, with many others that might be named, are ensamples unto us, that we by
their pattern might be stirred up to serve our generation, Act. 13.36.
with faithful spirits, by the will of God.

To which also we might add, the remembrance of the Curse on them that hate
Sion; yea, Psa. 129.5.
the apparent withering and blasting that has been, and is on them, that in
following their private interests, neglect her, and defer her work, under this
pretense, The time is not yet come, Hag. 1.2, to 11.
the time that the Lords house should be built; whilst in the mean time they
prefer their relations, possessions, and other worldly accommodations, before
this dear interest of Jesus Christ: for which, that Judgment in a spiritual
sense is come upon some, and may justly be feared as coming on others, Hag.
1.10, 11. The heavens over them are stayed from dew, etc. Yea, and has not God
punished this neglect in many, with such a decrease of their spiritual
moisture, as that word is made good in them, Psalm. 137.6. Their tongues even
cleave to the roofs of their mouths; whilst others, faithful in improving
their received measure of a Spirit of Faith and Prayer, are abundantly
increased therein. Oh! what dreadful Woes are pronounced to them that find
their pleasures in such a season, but regard not the work of the Lord, Isa.
5.11, 12. and 22.12, 13, 14. Amos 6.1. to 6. Isa. 32.9, 11. and 57.1, 4.
nor consider the operation of his hands; that are at ease in Sion, but are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph; Careless daughters, that lay not to
heart the perishing of the righteous, and consider not the taking away of the
merciful men; with whom the Lord will plead, as with them that sport themselves
against him: the desire of such slothful ones will kill them, Prove. 21.25. and
their prosperity destroy them, Prove. 1.32.

And now, Brethren, is it not high time, that we cry aloud, Isa. 58.1. Joel
2.1, 15.
and spare not; lift up our voice like a Trumpet, when it is too too evident,
that in the day of a little ease wherein for a little space grace has been
given us from the Lord our God, even a little reviving in our bondage, to set
up the house of our God, Ezra 9.8, 9.
and to repair the desolations thereof, men are sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber in every corner, saying, It is not nigh; let us build houses? etc. And
is not Pride, Ezekiel. 16.49.
and fullness of bread companions to this abundant idleness, Prove. 18.9.
through which the building decays? Oh that at length, for the Lords sake, we
might be provoked to be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and that knowing
the time, Romans 12.11. and 13.11.
that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now ours, and Sions
Salvation, is nearer then when we believed.

For the Quickening of our hearts to this work, and the heighthning of our
expectations therein, has not the Lord given us, among many other, this
remarkable sign of the times, even a mighty spirit of faith and prayer,
through some choice discoveries of grace raised up in his people? by the
exercise of which, in the management of SIONS CONTROVERSY, great and glorious
WONDERS have been wrought in these Nations, by unlikely means, in answer to
the prayers of the Saints; as has been openly confessed by the instruments
employed, which have caused themselves, and others, beholders, to stand amazed
thereat: and although many who once seemed to be pillars in this Cause, have
soon forgot these great works, and have turned back fom following fully after
God in this way; yet there is a REMNANT, a generation that remain upon their
WATCHTOWER, with whom the hand of the Lord rests wonderfully, upholding their
faith and hope for Sion, notwithstanding all discouragements, in their
uncessant prayers for her. Has God said to his at any time, Seek ye me in
vain? Isa. 45.19. has not God by evident answers of prayers in these days,
sealed it in a good measure to his people, that the time to favor her, yea the
set-time is come? for he has regarded the prayer of the poor destitute, and
has not despised their prayer: and is not this written for our sakes? see Psa.
102.17, 18. God who beautifieth his mercies to his people, by giving them in
their due season, having in these latter days given forth this glorious
blessing of a Spirit of grace and supplication so abundantly, and continuing
the same, has he not some great work to be further carried on thereby?

Oh! that we could present unto you, in a lively way, what our souls have begun
to taste of those first ripe fruits, of that arising and growing Spirit, that
grace has in a measure visited some Saints withal, that have jointly and
severally desired to be found faithful for the Lord: they have to our abundant
refreshing witnessed that their labor is not in vain in the Lord; nay, in
keeping such Commandments there is great reward: whilst they have felt (though
as yet it be but a little of) Sions pangs upon their hearts, they have been
strongly carried up into the Spirit of that day, and their souls were made as
the Chariots of Aminadab: Cant. 6.12.
which declares clearly to us, that were we but put into perfect travel in our
Spirits, Isa. 66.8.
did we take Pleasure indeed in her stones, and favor the dust thereof, it
would turn to us for a further Testimony, that the time of God's arising to
show mercy to Sion, Psa. 102.13, 14.
the time to favor her, yea the set time were come.

But alas for us! we have not only sought our ease when pain should have been
upon us, but as foolish Children, Hos. 13.13.
have stayed long in the place of the breaking forth of Children; and by the
iniquities that we have contracted since we were named Sions Children, Jer.
5.25.
we have kept back good things from her: what remains now, but that we lay
her state so much the more deeply to heart, as we have drawn grief upon her,
and added to her deformity? being earnest in a SPIRIT of faith and prayer NIGHT
AND DAY in her behalf, as becomes Children nursed at her side, sutably
affected, and acted with and for her: not expecting our own deliverance, Esth.
4.13, 14. Heb. 11.40.
any other way then in hers, knowing that we without her cannot be made perfect.

And that we may hold on our way without fainting, and not be in our mournings
as men without hope; Luke 18.1.
would it not prove of great advantage, to the raising and keeping up our
Faith, to be much exercised and delighted in the prospect that is to be had,
through the promises, into her (ready to be revealed) glory? However, her
visage is now blacker then a cole; Lam. 4.8. Isa. 24.16. and 59.9, 11, etc.
she is not known in the streets: treacherous dealers have dealt very
treacherously with her; a disappointment has be fallen many of her hopeful
expectations, because her transgressions are many: reproach has befallen her
at the hands of Professors; and the enemies that know not the Lord, Blaspheme.
The light and Spirit of the Lord is belyed and abused by vain men, unsound in
the faith, disobedient to, and despisers of the Precious Ordinances of Jesus
Christ; through which also, loss of Children has here and there betided her
Assemblies. Yet has JEHOVAH spoken it, and his faithfulness is engaged in an
Everlasting Covenant, that though she has Been forsaken and hated, that no man
went through her, yet he will make her an eternal Excellency, a Joy of many
generations, the City of the Lord; Isa. 60.14, 15.
the Sion of the Holy one of Israel shall She be called; Zech. 2.10.
in nothing more glorious, then in the perpetual presence of her KING, and GOD
with her, Ezekiel. 37.27, 28, 29. Rev. 21.3, 21, 22, 23.
who shall Tabernacle with men, and dwell with them, they being his people, and
he himself shall be with them, and be their God, being in stead of a Temple,
Sun, and Moon; the glory of God and the Lamb always lightning her, the Lord
being her everlasting light, Isa. 60.19.20.
and her God her glory. -- How amiable in the day of her deliverance, shall
Sion be, through the bringing to her glory that ancient People, the Family of
Abraham, Zech. 12.10.
Gods friend, when they shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn for
him, and be saved by him in that great day of Jezreel, Hos. 1.11. Isa. 11.13.
Jer. 3.18.
the Lord uniting Ephraim and Judah, making them very great, holy, and a
blessing round about? Eze. 34.26. And what shall the receiving of them be, but
life from the dead? Romans 11.15. and when the glory of the Lord shall be risen
upon her, then shall the Gentiles come unto her light, and Kings to the
brightness of her rising, Mal. 1.11.
Isa. 60.1.3. Yea, from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same,
shall the Name of the Lord be great among the Gentiles; all Nations flowing
unto the Mountain of the Lord, when it shall be advanced to the tops of the
Mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and exalted above the hills: yea, what glorious things are said of this City
of God? There shall be births in Rahab, and Babylon, Philistia, Ethiopia, and
Tire; and yet when God shall count up the people, he shall say of Sion, This
and that man was born in her, and the highest himself shall establish her, Ps.
87.3, 4, 5. the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this. And Oh! that all the
Lords people were so fully prepared, as a Bride, to meet their blessed
Bridegroom; that we might all unfeignedly say with one accord, Even so, Rev.
22.20.
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Had we but truly-Noble Spirits, how would these discoveries of glory ravish
us, and our eye affect our heart? setting us with restless spirits, to be
looking for, and hastening unto, 2 Pet. 3.12.
that day of the Lord; this day of the manifest exalting JESUS, as KING OF
SAINTS, Isa. 33 18.
and KING OF NATIONS? Nay, would it not fill our hearts with jealousy for his
Name, against all that stands up in the earth, to oppose his Kingdom and
glory, Rev. 15.3, 4.
beginning at home in our own spirits? the zeal of the Lords house would eat us
up, Psalm. 69.9.
and the love of it would crucify us more unto, and wean us from those
interests of earth, and men, whereupon we have been apt to lean, and whereunto
we have been deeply and dangerously engaged: causing us also to wait to be with
Jesus, which is best of all; and in the mean time to pant, and thirst
uncessantly, for that holy Spirit of Promise, that alone can present us with
the ravishing glory of that expected day, and raise up our spirits to a sweet
and suitable disposition, according to the will of God, to wait and act aright
toward it.

Dear hearts, let your faith be high, and your wrestlings without weariness;
neither be ye in any measure discouraged, nor discouraging one another: Numb.
6.32, 7.
in this matter the strong cannot say to the weak, I have no need of thee; 1
Cor. 12.21.
should not all our interest in heaven be improved to the uttermost, in this
day of Jacobs trouble? Oh strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees, Isa. 35.3. Provoke one another to this love, and these good works; say
to one another, Heb. 10.24. Zech. 8.21.
Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I
will go also. And ye, O poor of the flock, that wait upon the Lord, and know
that this is the word of the Lord, be strong, yea, be strong and of good
courage; Zech. 11.11.
knowing, that in this Work of Gods Tabernacle, he receives in good part your
sincere, though weak, breathings; your Badgers-skins, and Goats-hair, Exodus
35.21, 23.
is in no wise cast out. Ye that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not:
behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense; he will
come and save you, Isa. 35.4. What shall one then answer the Messengers of the
Nations? That the Lord has founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall
betake themselves to it, Isa. 14.32.

And ye also, beloved and honored Brethren, who minister the Word of Grace
among the Saints, How comely will your goings be, as he-goats before the
flocks, in this Work? Have you not the Prophets of old, who have spoken in the
Name of the Lord, for an example; whose words accompanied with the same Spirit
of Faith, will they not furnish to this Work? In reading their writings,
consider their work in such a time as this, (Professors then being in such a
posture of security as now) was it not to warn them (with a Woe unto them) who
were at ease in Sion, Amos 6.1, 3, 4, etc. and such as regarded not the work of
the Lord, nor the operation of his hands? Isa. 5.12. Which duty had they
neglected, would not God have required it at their hands? Did they not call
upon the people to assemble together, to fast and pray, to mourn and weep
before the Lord, to plead the cause of his people, his heritage? Joel 2.15, 16,
17. Thus did they, whose example is laid before you, as wise Stewards, giving
to those of the household a portion, suitable to the present season. Should we
not resemble them in this, crying out with the Watchmen upon Mount Ephraim,
Jer. 31.6. Arise ye, and let us go up to Sion, unto the Lord our God; withal,
waiting daily on God for such a discerning of the Times, as might render us
like the Children of Issachar, who knew what Israel ought to do? 1 Chronicles.
12.32. If this rude Essay, or small tinkling (as it may be judged) may provoke
you, who are more skilful, to blow the Trumpet, and the Lord spirit you
thereunto, do it, we pray you, as for his, and his peoples sake, with all your
might; not sparing to lay out your more worthy Labors, for the carrying on of
this Work. Bear with us, yet a little, in our humble importunity: Is not the
glorious Name of God, the peace of Jerusalem, and its prosperity, the
prosperity of your own Souls also, and the people to whom you relate, who may
be discouraged by your remissness, eminently concerned in this matter? Yet once
more, we beseech you therefore, in the bowels of Christ, let not any worldly
interest, prejudice, jealousy, fear of ill events, or any carnal reasoning
whatsoever, withhold your hearts or hands, from helping in so good and glorious
a Work.

What shall we say more, dearly beloved? if there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels
and mercies, fulfill ye our joy, in being of one accord, and one mind, in this
weighty Work commended unto you; wherein the NAME AND GLORY OF GOD (which
ought to be dearer to us then our lives) is so eminently concerned. And
withal, add to your diligence, in looking into the concernments of Christ,
and his Saints, that having arrived unto a distinct knowledge of them, your
hearts being duly affected with them, you may go on prosperously, not only to
spread before the Lord, both his, and his peoples Cause, 1 King. 8.59.
as the matter shall require; but also wait for the return of prayer;
discerning this in your selves, That they best know how good God is to them
that seek him, that after seeking, wait for him, Lam. 3.25, 26. Having been
thus bold with you for Sion, we humbly crave for our selves, That we may be had
in especial remembrance on your hearts before the Lord, that we may be fitted
for, and faithful in the work of our Dear REDEEMER: Into whose embraces we give
you up, and remain,

Your poor unworthy Brethren, through rich Grace firmly knit unto you, in the
bonds of Gospel-Love; and one with you in your Spiritual warfare, and waiting
for the exaltation of Jesus Christ, Abraham Cheer, Henry Forty, John
Pendarves, Tho: Glass, Robert Steed.


FINIS.

