A Discourse OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE. I. In General: That there is a Providence
Exercised by God in the World. II. In Particular: How all Gods Providence in
the World, are in order to the good of his People. By the late Learned Divine,
STEPHEN CHARNOCK, B. D. sometime Fellow of New-Colledg in OXON.

Psalm 103.19. His Kingdom rules over all.

LONDON: Printed by R. Roberts for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, near the Stocks-Market. 1684.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THOU art here presented with a little piece, of a Great Man; Great indeed, if
great Piety, great Parts, great Learning, and great Wisdom, may be admitted to
claim that Title: And we verily believe that none well acquainted with him,
will deny him his right; however malevolent Persons may grudge him the honor.
It has been expected, and desired by many, that some account of his Life might
be given to the world; But we are not willing to offer violence to his ashes,
by making him so public now he is Dead, who so much affected privacy while he
lived. Thou art therefore desired to rest satisfied with this brief account of
him, That being very young he went to Cambridge, where in Immanuel College he
was brought up under the Tuition of the present Archbishop of Canterbury. What
Gracious workings and Evidences of the New Birth appeared in him while there,
has already been spoken of by Mr. Johnson in his Sermon on occasion of Mr.
Charnocks death.
one, who was at that time his Fellow Collegiate and Intimate. Some time he
afterward spent in a private Family, and a little more in the exercise of his
Ministry in Southwark; then removed to New-Colledge in Oxon, where he was
Fellow, and spent several years; being then taken notice of for his singular
Gifts, and had in Reputation by the most Learned and Godly in that University,
and upon that account the more frequently put upon Public work. Being thence
(the year after he had been Proctor) called over into Ireland to a constant
public Employment, he exercised his Ministry for about four or five years, not
with the approbation only, but to the admiration of the most Wise and Judicious
Christians, and with the concurrent applause of such as were of very different
sentiments from him in the things of Religion; Nay, even those that never loved
his Piety, yet would commend his Learning and Gifts, as being beyond exception,
if not abve compare. About the year 1660. being discharged from the public
exercise of his Ministry, he returned back into England, and in and about
London spent the greatest part of fifteen years, without any call to his old
work in a settled way; but for about these five years last past has been more
known by his constant Preaching, of which we need not speak, but let them that
heard him, speak for him; or, if they should be silent, his Works will do it.
He was a Person of excellent Parts, strong Reason great Judgment, and (which do
not often go together) curious Fancy, of high Improvements, and general
Learning, as having been all his days a most diligent and methodical Student,
and a great Redeemer of time, rescuing not only his restless hours in the
Night, but his very walking time in the Streets from those impertinencies and
fruitless vanities, which do so customarily fill up men's minds, and steal away
their hearts from those better and more Noble objects, which do so justly
challenge their greatest regards: This he did by not only carefully watching
(as every good Christian should do) but constantly writing down his Thoughts,
whereby he both governed them better, and furnished himself with many materials
for his most elaborate Discourses. His chief Talent was his Preaching Gift, in
which, to speak modestly, he had few equals. To this therefore, as that for
which his Lord and Master had best fitted him (neglecting the practice of
Physic, in which he had arrived at a considerable measure of knowledge) he did
especially addict himself; and direct his Studies, and even when Providence
denied him opportunities, yet he was still laying in more stock, and preparing
for work against he might be called to it. When he was in Employment, none that
heard him, could justly blame his retiredness, he being even when most private,
continually at work for the Public; and had he been less in his Study, he
would have been less liked in the Pulpit. His Library, furnished (tho not with
a numerous, yet) a curious Collection of Books, was his Workhouse, in which he
labored hard all the Week, and on the Lords Day made it appear he had not been
idle; and that tho he consulted his privacy, yet he did not indulge his Sloth.
He was somewhat reserved where he was not well acquainted; otherwise very free,
affable and communicative where he understood and liked his company. He
affected not much Acquaintance, because be would escape Visitants, well knowing
how much the ordinary sort of Friends were apt to take up of his time, which he
could ill spare from his beloved Studies, meeting with fevv that could give him
better entertainment with their company, than he could give himself alone.
They had need be very good, and very learned, by whose converse he could gain
more than by his own Thoughts and Books. He was a true Son of the Church of
England, in that sound Doctrine laid down in the Articles of Religion, and
Taught by our most famous ancient Divines and Reformers; and a real follower of
their Piety, as well as a strenuous maintainer of the Truth they professed. His
Preaching was mostly practical, yet rational and argumentative, to his hearers
understandings, as well as affections; and where controversies came in his way,
he showed great Acuteness and Judgment in discussing and determining them, and
no less skill in applying them to practice: So that he was indeed a workman
that needed not to be ashamed, being able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and
convince gainsayers. Some have thought his Preaching too high for vulgar
Hearers, and it cannot be denied but his gifts were suited to the more
intelligent sort of Christians; yet it must withal be said, that if he were
sometimes deep, he was never abstruse; he handled the great Mysteries of the
Gospel with much clearness and perspicuity; so that if in his Preaching he were
above most, it was only because most were below him. Several considerable
Treatises on some of the most important points of Religion, he finished in his
ordinary course, which he has left behind him, in the same form he usually
writ them for the Pulpit. This comes out first as a Prodromus to several others
designed to be made public, as soon as they can be with convenience
transcribed, which (if the Lord will, and spare life) shall be attested with
our hands; and whatever any else shall publish, can be but imperfect Notes (his
own Copies being under our revisal at the request of his Friends) taken from
him in the Pulpit, in which what mistakes do often happen, every one knows, and
we have found by experience in the case of this very Author, more than once.
This was thought fit to be said, to secure the reputation of the Dead, and
prevent the abuse of the Living. These Sermons might have come out with the
solemn ceremony of large recommendations, the Authors worth being so well known
to, his Preaching so highly esteemed by the most eminent Ministers about the
City; but it was judged needless, his own works being sufficient to praise him.

One thing more is to be added, That such as he is here, such he is in his
other Pieces; so that thou have here, Reader, a specimen of the strain and
Spirit of this holy Man, this being his familiar and ordinary way of Preaching,
and these Sermons coming out first, not as if they were the non-such of what he
left behind him, but because they could soonest be dispatched, and to obviate
the injuries might else be done by spurious Treatises, both to him, and thee;
and likewise by this little taste to gratify the Appetites of such who having
been his Auditors, did long even with greediness to feast themselves again upon
those excellent truths, which in the delivery were so sweet to them. Perhaps
too it may quicken their appetites who never heard him, it may be never yet
heard of him. If thou like this Cluster, Fear not but the Vintage will be
answerable: If this little earnest be good Metal, the whole sum will be no
less current. That a Blessing from Heaven may be upon this work, and upon thee
in Reading, and Studying the Nature, and Beauty, and Ends of Divine Providence,
and that the Lord of the Harvest (especially when so many are daily called
home) would send forth more and more such laborers into the Harvest, is the
hearty prayer of.

Thine in the Lord. Richard Adams. Edward Veal.

A Discourse of Divine Providence.
2 Chronicles. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole
Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
toward him.


IN the beginning of the Chapter you find Baasha King of Israel raising walls
about, and Fortifying Ramah, a place about twelve miles from Jerusalem, the
Metropolis of Judah, intending by that means to block Asa up, because Ramah lay
just upon the road between Jerusalem and Samaria, the seats of the two Kings,
ver. 1.

Baasha was probably afraid of the Revolt of Israel to Judah, upon that
Reformation of Religion wrought by Asa, and therefore would Fortify that place
to be a hinderance, and to intercept any that should pass upon that account.
And to this purpose makes great preparation, as appears ver. 6. for with the
provision Baasha had made for the fortification of Ramah; Asa, after the
seizing of these materials, builds two Towns, Gaba and Mizpah.

Asa seeing Baasha so busy about this Design, and fearing the consequence of
it, has recourse to carnal policy rather than to God: And therefore enters
into league with Benhadad a neighbor, tho an Idolatrous Prince, and purchases
his assistance with the Sacrilegious price of the Treasure of the Temple, v. 2,
3. And hereby engages him to invade the King of Isreal's Territories, that he
might thereby find work for Baasha in another part, and so divert him from that
Design upon which he was so bent, v. 3. Go, break thy league with Baasha, that
he may depart from me.

Benhadad is easily persuaded by the quantity of gold, etc. to break his League
and make an Inroad, and proves victorious, and takes many Cities, where the
Magazines and Stores were laid up, v. 4

Baasha now to save his country, and make head against his enemies, is forced
to leave Ramah; whereupon Asa, who watched his opportunity, seizes the
materials he had left for the fortifying of Ramah, and puts them to another
use, ver. 5.6.

Hanani the Seer is presently sent by God with a threatening of War, because he
applies himself to a heathen Prince, rather than to the Lord of Hosts, v. 7.
his sin is aggravated by Gods former kindness to him, and experience he had
given him of his miraculous Providence in his success against that vast Army of
the Ethiopians and Lubims, or Lybians, and that upon his recourse to, or
reliance on God. And that he should afterward have recourse to the arm of
flesh, was a disparagement to Gods providential kindness, v. 8. He further
aggravates his sin by the consideration of Gods general providential care of
his creatures, and the particular end of it, and of all his providence, viz.
the good of his Church and people, v. 9. For the eyes of the Lord, etc. eyes of
the Lord, in Scripture, signify,

1. His knowledge, Job 34.21. For, his eyes are upon all the ways of man, and
he sees all his goings. Heb. 4.13. all things are naked and opened unto the
eyes of him with whom we have to do (...) significat spinam dorsi, and in
mactatis anima libus per spinam omnia apparent interiora; itaut nihil latere
potest. Glassius, Vol. 3.1.106.
.

2. His Providence,

1. For good, So it notes his Grace and good Will; so his Eyes and his Heart
are joined together, 1 Kings 9.3. mine eyes and my heart shall be there
perpetually, viz. in his Temple, the place which he had hallowed to put his
Name there for ever. Psalm. 32.8. I will guide him with mine eye, that is, I
will counsel him, and direct him in a gracious and a favorable way. Therefore
to be cut off from the eye of the Lord, is to be deprived of his favor, Psa.
31.22. for none can be cut off from a simple knowledge of God: So Zech. 3.9.
seven eyes upon one stone, that is, the Providence of God was in an especial
manner with Christ in the midst of his Passion.

2. For evil, So it notes His anger and vindictive justice. Isa. 3.8. their
doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. Kindness and
anger appear first in the eye, one by its pleasantness, the other by its
redness.

(Run) that notes diligence and care; an industrious inspection into all
things. Psalm. 119.32. I will run the ways of thy Commandments; noting speed and
diligence.

In the Verse, we have, I. A description of Gods Providence. II. The end of it.


I. The description of Gods Providence,

1. The immediateness of it, [his eyes] his own eyes, not another. Not like
Princes, who see by their Servants eyes more than by their own, what is done in
their Kingdoms; his care is immediate. Though Angels are the Ministers of his
Providence, the Guardians and Watchers of the World, yet God is their Captain,
and is always himself upon the Watch.

2. Quickness and speed of Providence [run]; His eyes do not only walk, but run
the round; they are not slumbering eyes, nor drowzy eye lids, their motion is
quick and nimble.

3. Extent of Providence [the whole Earth] all things in the Earth, all the
hairs on the Heads of these men: The meanest Worm as well as the mightiest
Prince; the lowest Shrub as well as the tallest Cedar, every cranny, corner or
chink of the Earth.

4. Diligence of Providence [to and fro]. His care is repeated, he looks this
way and that way, again and again, his eyes are not consigned to one place,
fixed on one object, but are always rouling about from one place to another.

5. The Efficacy of his Providence; His care does engage his strength; he does
not only discover dangers, but prevent them; he has eyes to see, and Power to
order all things according to his pleasure. Wise to see, and strong to save.

II. The end of Providence [ to show himself strong, etc.]

1. Finis cujus, [to show him self strong.] Heb. to make himself strong, but
best Translated to show himself strong. It is not an addition of strength, but
an exercise of strength that is here meant.

2. Finis cui, or the Persons for whom, Those that are perfect in heart.

Doctrines.

1. Doct.
There is a Providence exercised by God in the World. 2. All Gods Providence
in the World, are in order to the good of his people. 3. Sincerity in Gods way
gives a man an interest in all Gods Providence, and the good of them.
1. For the first, Doct.
There is a Providentitial inspection and Government of all things in the world
by God: It Is not a bare sight of things that is here meant by Gods eye, but a
sight and knowledge in order to the Governing and disposing of them. View this
doctrine at your leisure, preached by God himself, with an inconceivable
elegancy, and three whole Chapters spent in the Sermon, and Job 38.39.40.
by the Psalmist Psalm 147.148.
.

Some observe that the society of Angels and Heavenly creatures is represented
Ez. 1. by a quaternarian number, because the World is divided into 4
dimensions, East, West, North, and South, Hadsons Divine right of Government
chap 6. page 53.
as intimating the extention of Gods Providence over all parts.

Things are not ordered in the World caeco impetu; not by blind fortune, but an
alseeing deity, who has the management of all sublunary affairs (...); Clomens
ad Corinth. page 34.
was the Theological Maxim of the Stoics.

Before I come particularly to explain the Providence of God, I shall lay down
some Propositions as the Foundations of this Doctrine.

1. God has an indisputable and peculiar Right to the Government of the World:
None ever questioned Gods Right, no nor his act, but those that were swelled
with an unreasonable ambition, such as Nebuchadnezzar, who for this cause
underwent the punishment of a 7 years banishment from the society of men.

None indeed that acknowledge a God, Dan. 4.17.
did or can question Gods Right, though they may question his Will, an actual
exercise of his Right. He is the Creator, and therefore is the Sovereign Lord
and Ruler. The World is his Family, and as a Master, he has an undoubted Right
to govern his own Family. He gave all creatures their beings, and therefore
has a right to enact their laws, appoint their stations, and fix their ends.
It Is as much his property and prerogative to rule, as it is to create. Creation
is so peculiarly proper to God, that it is not communicable to any creature, no
not to Angels, though of a vast Capacity in other things, and that because they
are Creatures themselves. It Is as impossible for one creature or all to govern
the World, and manage all the boisterous passions of men to just and glorious
ends, as to create them. It Is true, God uses instruments in the executive part
of his Providence; but he does not design the Government of the world only by
instruments. He uses them not for necessity, but ornament. He Created the
World without them, and therefore can Govern the World without them.

Virtus Creativa est fundamentum providentiae and argumentum ad providentiam.
This right is founded upon that Creation, as he is the efficient cause of it.
This right is also founded upon the excellency of his Being. That which is
excellent having a right to rule in the way of that excellency, that which is
inferior; every man has a natural right to rule another in his own art and
skill wherein he excells him: If it be the right of a chief Magistrate to
manage the concerns of his Kingdom, with what reason can we deny that right to
God?

2. God only is qualified for the universal government of the World. All
Creatures as they were unable to create themselves, so are unable to manage
themselves without the Direction of a Superior power, much more unable to
manage the vast body of the world. God is only fit in regard of

1. Power; Conservation is continuata Creatio; that power which is fit to
Create, is only sit to preserve. A continued Creation belongs as much to
Omnipotency, as the first Creation.

The Government of it requires no less power, both in regard of the
numerousness of the objects, and the strange contrariety of passions in
rational creatures, and qualities in irrational; conservation is but one
continued act with creation, following on from an instant to duration, as a
line from its Mathematical point Tailors exemplar, preface. 6.31.
.

2. Holiness and righteousness. If he that hates right is not fit to govern,
Job 34.17. then he that is infinitely Righteous, and has an infinite love to
Righteousness, is the fittest to undertake that task; without Righteousness
there would be nothing but confusion in the whole creation; Disorder is the
effect of unrighteousness, as order is the effect of justice. The justest man
is fittest for subordinate Government among men, and the infinite just God is
fittest for the universal Government of the World.

3. Knowledge. An infinite knowledge to descry all the contrivances and various
labyrinths of the hearts of men, their secret intentions and aims, is
necessary. The Government of the World consists more in ordering the inward
faculties of men, touching the hearts, and tuning them to play what notes he
pleases, than in external things. No creature has the skill or power to work
immediately upon the will of man; neither Angels nor Devils can do it
immediately, but by proposing objects, and working upon the fancy, which is not
always succesful. He that created the heart, knows all the wards of it, and
has only the skill to turn it, and incline it as he pleases; he must needs
know all the inclinations of the creatures, and their proper activities, since
he alone conferred all those several principles and qualities upon them. Act.
15.8.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world, viz. the
particular natures, inclinations, inward motions, which no creature fully
understands; he needs no deputy to inform him of what is done, he is every
where, and sees all things: Worldly Governors cannot be every where
essentially present.

God is so perfect in his knowledge of all things, that he cannot be imposed
upon by the evil suggestions and flatteries of men or Angels.

In nature it is so, the eye guides the body, because that is the chief Organ
of sensitive knowledge; the mind, which is the seat of Wisdom guides the whole.

4. Patience. Infinite patience is requisite to the preservation and government
of the World in the circumstances wherein it has stood ever since the fall:
What Angel, though the meekest, or can all the Angels in Heaven be Masters of
so much patience as is needful for this work of governing the World, though for
the space of one day? Could they bear with all those evils which are committed
in the world in the space of 24 hours? Might we not reasonably conceive that
they would be so tired with the obliquities, disorders, deformities which they
would see in the acts of men, (besides all the evil which is in the hearts of
men, which lie without the verge of their knowledge) that they would rather call
for fire from Heaven to burn the world to Ashes.

Trap in Exodus 34.
Averroes thought, that because of Gods slowness to anger, he meddled to with
sublunary concerns: This rather fits him for it, because he can bear with the
injuries of wicked men, otherwise the world would not continue a moment.

Angels, though powerful, holy, wise and patient creatures, yet being
creatures, they want the infiniteness of all these qualifications which are
necessary to this government: Though they are knowing, yet they know not men's
hearts; though they are wise, yet they may be charged with a folly incapable of
this; though holy, yet not able in this respect to manage it to the ends and
designs of an infinite holiness; though nimble, yet cannot be in all parts of
the world at every turn: but the Providence of God is infallible, because of
his infinite Wisdom; indefatigable, because of his Omnipotency; and righteous,
bcause of his Goodness.

3. There can be no reason rendered why God should not actually govern the
World, since He only has a right and a fitness. If God does not actually
govern it, it is either because He cannot, or because He will not.

1. Not because He cannot; this inability must be either for want of knowledge,
or want of power. The one if asserted, would deny his Omnipotence, the other
his Omniscience; the one would make him a weak God, the other an ignorant God,
and consequently no God.

2. Not because He will not. If He can and will not, it is, say some, a
testimony of envy, that he maligns the good of his creatures. But not to insist
upon this; This must be either because of the

1. Difficulty, This cannot be: What difficulty can there be in a single word,
or one Act of his will, which can be done by God without any molestation, were
there millions of Worlds as well as this? For still they would be finite, and
so governable by an infinite Superior. May we not more reasonably think the
forming such a Mass would require more pains than the government of it? The
right stringing an instrument is more trouble to a skilful Musician, than the
tripping over the strings afterward to make an harmony. What difficulty can it
be to Omnipotence? Is it a greater labor to preserve and govern, than it was
to create / Does not the Soul order every part of the body, and all its
functions without any pain to it? and shall not the God that made that Soul so
indefatigable, much more manage the concernments of the World without labor to
himself? Is it not as easy with God to guide all these things by one single
act of his Will, as for me by an act of my Soul to do many things without a
distinct act of cogitation or consideration before? Can it be more laborious to
him, to govern the world, than it is to know all things in the world? He sees
all things in an instant by one act of his understanding, and he orders all
creatures in a moment by one act of his will. Can one act of his will be more
painful, than one act of his understanding? Can he with a word make this great
Ball, and can he not with as much ease order all to conform to the law of his
own righteous will? Can a continual eruption of goodness be a difficulty to an
infinite Being, which we find natural to the Sun, to the Fountains, to the Sea,
to many works of that Omnipotent Goodness? Or,

2. Disparagement. Denial of Gods Providence over the lesser things of the
World, did arise from the consideration of the state of Monarchs, who thought
it an abridgment of their felicity and dignity to stoop to such low
considerations as the minutula of their estates might exact

from them, but left them to their Vicegerents. But they consider not, that the
felicity of God as it respects the creature, is to communicate his goodness to
as many subjects as he has made capable of his care. If it were his glory to
create the world, can it be his dishonor to govern it? The glorifying his
Wisdom is as honorable to him as the magnifying his Power; though both are
eminent in Creation and Providence, yet his Wisdom is more signal in the
Governing, as his Power was in framing of the world.

Why was it not as much a disparagement to God to create things contemptible in
our eyes, as since he has created them to take care of them, and marshal them
for his own glorious ends. The Sun in the Heavens is a shadow of God, which
does not disdain to communicate its natural goodness, and emit its beams to the
meanest Creatures, and let the little flies sport themselves in them, as well
as the greatest Princes: and transmits its influences upon things obscure and
at a distance from it, whereby it manifests an universal regard to all. And
would it not be a disparagement to an infinite goodness to be out stripped by a
Creature which he has set up for a natural communication of goodness to the
rest of the World? The very consideration of the Sun, and the nature of it,
gives us as much an account of God, as any inanimate being whatsoever: It Is as
much the Suns honor to produce asmall Insect, as the growth of the greatest
Plant.

Have not all Creatures a natural affection in them to preserve and provide for
their own? has not God much more, who endued all creatures with that
disposition? Whatsoever is a natural perfection in creatures, is eminently an
infinite perfection in God. If it be therefore a praise to you to preserve your
own, can it be a disgrace to God? You may as well say, it is as much a
dishonor to him to be good, as to have a tender regard to his creatures.
Censure him as well, you may, for creating them for your delight, as preserving
and governing them for the same end. They are all good, for he pronounced them
so, and being so, a God of goodness will not account them unworthy of his care.
Are they now the Products of his Omnipotent Wisdom, and shall not they be the
objects of his directing wisdom? If they are not unworthy of God to create, how
can they be unworthy of God to govern them? It would be as much below him to
make them, as to rule them when they were made.

4. Fourthly.
Therefore, God does actually preserve and govern the world; though Angels are
in Ministry in some particular works of his providence, yet God is the
Steersman, who gives out his particular orders to them.

Jacobs Ladder had the top in Heaven, where God stood to keep it firm: Its foot
on Earth, and the Angels going up and down upon several errands at their
Masters beck.

As God made all things for himself, so he orders the ends of all things made
by him, for his own glory. For being the most excellent and intelligent agent,
he does reduce all the motions of his Creatures to that end for which he made
them.

This actual government of the World by God, brancheth it self out in three
things.

1. Nothing is acted in the World without Gods knowledge. The vision of the
Wheels in Ezekiel presents us with an excellent portraiture of Providence,
there are eyes round about the wheels Ezekiel. 10. their wings were full of eyes,
etc.
.

The ey of God is upon the whole circle of the creatures motion. In all the
revolutlons in the world, there is the Eye of Gods Omniscience to see them, and
the arm of his Omnipotence to guide them: Not the most retired corner, or the
darkest cell, not the deepest cavern, or most inward project, nor the most
secret wickedness, not the closest goodness, but the eye of the Lord beholds
it, Pro. 15.3.
Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good. He hears the words, sees the actions, knows the thoughts, registers
the gracious discourses, bottles up the penitent tears, and considers all the
ways of men; not a whispered Oath, not an Atheistical thought, though but only
peeping upon the heart, and sinking down again in that mass of corruption; not
a disorderly word, but he knows and marks it. The Soul has a particular
knowledge of every act, because it is the spring of every act in any member;
and nothing is done in this little World, but the Soul knows it. Surely, then
there is not an act done in the world, nor the motion of any creature, but as
God does concur to it, he must needs know what he does concur to. The knowledge
and ordaining every thing is far less to the infinite being of God, than the
knowledge and ordaining every motion of the body is to a finite Soul.

Or, Suppose a Soul clothed with a body of as big a proportion as the matter
of the whole creation, it would actuate this body, tho of a greater bulk, and
know every motion of it. How much more God, who has infinity, and excellency
and strength of all Angels and Souls, must needs actuate this world, and know
every motion of it? There is nothing done in the World, but some creature or
other knows it; he that acts it, does at least know it: If God did not know it,
the creatures then in that particular knowledge would be superior to God, and
know something more than God knows; can this be pessible?

2. Nothing is acted in the World without the will of God. His Will either
commands it, or permits it Ephesians. 1.11 He works all things after the Counsel of
his own will.
. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and earth.

Even the sins of the World, his will permits them, his power assists in the
act, and his Wisdom orders the sinfulness of the act for holy ends. The Four
Chariots in Zech. 6.2, 3, 4, 5. by which some understand Angels, are sent upon
commission into the several parts of the world, and compared to Chariots, both
for their strength, their swiftness, their employment in a military way to
secure the Church. These are said to come v. 1.
out of the two Mountains of brass, which signify the irreversible decrees of
God, which the Angels are to execute. Rey nolds.
He alarums up the Winds, when he would have Jonah arrested in his flight. He
sounds a retreat to them, and locks them up in their Chambers Psalm. 107.25, 26.
. Bread has a natural virtue in it to nourish, but it must be accompanied with
his secret blessing, Mat. 4.4.

Virtute primi actus, agunt agentia omnia quicquid agunt.

3. Nothing does subsist without Gods care and power. His eyes running to and
fro, implies not only knowledge, but care. He does not carelessly behold what is
done in the World, but like a skilful Pilot, he sits at the helm, and steers
the World in what course it should Sail. Our being we owe to his power, our
well being to his care, our motion and exerting of every faculty, to his
merciful providence and concurrence; in him we live, and move, and have our
being Act. 17.28.
. He frames our being, preserves our life, concurs with our motion. This is an
Idea that bears date in the minds of men, with the very notion of a God. Why
else did the Heathen in all their streights fly to their altars, and fill their
Temples with cries and sacrifices? To what purpose was this, if they had not
acknowledged Gods superintendency, his taking notice of their cause, hearing
their prayers, considering their cries? Why should they do this, if they
thought that God did not regard humane affairs, but stood untouched with a
sense of their miseries?

If all things were done by chance, there could be no predictions of future
things, which we frequently find in Scripture, and by what ways accomplished.
Impossible it is that anything can be continued without his care. If God should
in the least moment withhold the influence of his Providence, we should melt
into nothing, as the impression of a Sea upon the water, vanishes, as soon as
the Seal is removed, or as the reflection of the face in the glass disappears
upon the first instant of our removal from it. The light in the air is by
participation of the light of the Sun; The light in the air withdraws upon the
departure of the Sun. The Physical and moral goodness of the Creature would
vanish upon the removal of God from it, who is the Fountain of both.

What an Artificer does work, may continue, tho the workman dies, because what
he does is materially, as to the matter of it, ready to his hands, he creates
not the matter, but only sets materials together, and disposes them into such
a form and Figure: But God gives a being to the matter and form of all things,
and therefore the continuance of that being depends upon his preserving
influence Stilling-fleer Orig. sacrae lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 3.
. God upholds the World, and causes all those laws which he has impressed upon
every creature, to be put in execution; not as a man that makes a Watch, and
winds it up, and then suffers it to go of it self; Or that turns a River into
another Channel, and lets it alone to run in the graff he has made for it; but
there is a continual concurrence of God to this goodly frame. For they do not
only live, but move in him, or by him; his living and Omnipotent power runs
through every vein of the Creation, giving it life and motion, and ordering the
acts of every part of this great body. All the motions of second causes are
ultimately resolved into the Providence of God, who holds the first link of
them in his hands Hos. 2.21, 22.
. More particularly the nature of Providence may be explained by Two
propositions.

The universality of it. First Proposition.
His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole Earth.

It Is over all Creatures, 1. The highest. 2. The lowest.

I. The highest and most magnificent pieces of the Creation. First.


1. Over Jesus Christ, the first born of every creature. Gods providence was in
an especial manner conversant about him, and fixed upon him. It was by the
determinate counsel of God, that he was delivered up Acts. 2.23.
: His providence was diligently exercised about him in his whole course. Christ
answers his Mothers solicitousness with the care his Father took of him Luke
2.49. Wist you not that I must be about my Fathers buisines; (...). Hammond in
loc.
. Do you not know that I am about those things my Father takes care of?* This
exposition best agrees with his reproof, who blames them for creating so much
trouble to themselves upon their missing him in the Town. It Is not, why do you
interrupt me in my dispute with the Jewish Doctors? But [How is it that you
sought me? Do you think I am not under the care of my Father?] It was
particularly exercised on him in the midst of his passion. Zach. 3.9.
Seven eyes were upon the Stone. Seven, a number of perfection, a perfect and
peculier care of God attended him.

2. Over Angels and Men. The Soul of the least Animal, and the smallest plant,
is formed and preserved by God, but the breath of Mankind is more particularly
in his hand: Job 12.10. In whose hand is the Soul of every living thing, and
the breath of all Mankind.

1. Over good Angels and Men. He charges his Angels with folly and weakness.
They cannot direct themselves without his wisdom, nor preserve themselves
without his power. God has a Book of Providence wherein he writes down who
shall be preserved, and this Book Moses understands, Exodus 32.33. Whosoever
has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my Book; not the Book of
Election; no names written there are blotted out; but out of the Book of
Providence. As it is understood, Isa. 4.3. [every one that is writtin among the
living in Jerusalem] i.e. every one whom God designs to preservation and
deliverance. Hortons Sermon. Ps. 87. P. 56.
That God, surely, that has a care of the mean animals, will not be careless
of his affectionate Worshippers. He that feeds the Ravens, will not starve his
Doves. He that satisfies the Ravening Wolf, will not famish his gentle Lambs
and harmless Sheep. He shelters Jacob from Labans fury, and Genesis 31.29.
tutors him how he should carry himself toward the good man. He brought Haman
out of favor, and set Mordecai in his place for the deliverance of the Jews
which were designed for slaughter.

2. Over evil Angls and Men. Gods power preserves them, his patience suffers
them, his wisdom orders them and their evil purposes and performances to his
own glory. The Devil cannot arrest Job, nor touch a Lamb of his Flock, nor a
hair of his head, without a commission from God. He cannot enter into one
filthy Swine in the Gaderens herd, without asking our Savior leave. Whatever
he does, he has a grant or permission from Heaven for it. Gods special
providence is over his people, but his general providence over all Kingdoms and
Countries.

He takes care of Syria, as well as of Judaea, and sends Elisha to anoint
Hazael King of Syria, as well as Jehu King of Israel 1 King. 19.15.
. Though Ishmael had mocks for Isaac, yet the God of Isaac provided for the
wants of Ishmael Genesis 25.16, 17, 18.
. He causes his Sun to shine upon the unjust as well as the just; to produce
Fruits and Plants for their preservation.

II. Over the meanest Creatures. As the Suns light, so Gods Providence disdains
not the meanest worms. It Is observed, that in the enumeration of the works of
Creation Genesis 1.21.
, only the great Whales and small creeping things are mentioned, and not the
intermediate creatures, to show that the least as well as the greatest are
under his care. It Is one of his Titles to be the preserver of Beasts as well as
men Neh. 9.6.
. He is the great Caterer for all creatures Ps. 104.21.
. The young Lions seek their meat from God. They attend him for their daily
portion; and what they gather and meet with in their pursuit, is Gods gift to
them, verse. 27, 28. He listens to the cries of the young Ravens, though they
are Birds of Prey. Psalm. 147.9.
He gives to the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens which cry. In Psalm
104. David throughout the whole reads a particular Lecture of this Doctrine,
wherein you may take a prospect of Gods providence all over the world. He acts
them by a Commandment and imprinted Law upon their natures, and makes them
observe exactly those statutes he enacts for the guidance of them in their
proper operations. Psalm. 147.15. [he sends forth his Commandment upon earth,
and his word runs very swiftly,] viz. his word of Providence. God keeps them in
the observation of their first ordinance Psalm. 119.91. They continue this day
according to thine Ordinances, for all are thy Servants, i. e. The Earth and
what is upon it.
. They observe their stations, the Law God has set them, as if they had a
rational knowledge of their duty in their particular motions, Ps. 104.19. the
Sun knows his going down. Sometimes he makes them instruments of his Ministry
to us; sometimes executioners of his judgments. Lice and Frogs arm themselves
at his command to punish Egypt. He makes a Whale to attend Jonas dropping into
the Sea, to be an instrument both to punish and preserve him; Yea, and which is
more wonderful, the multitude of the very Cattle is brought among others as a
reason of a peoples preservation from destruction, Jonah 4.11. the multitude of
the Cattle are joined with the multitude of the infants, as an argument to
spare Nineveh. He remembers Noah's Cattle as well as his Sons, Genesis 8.1. God
remembered Noah and every living thing, and all the Cattle that were with him in
the Ark. He numbers the very hairs of our heads, that not one falls without his
Will. Not only the immortal Soul, but the decaying body; not only the vital
parts of that body, but the inconsiderable hairs of the head, are under his
care. A particular act of remembrance is exercised by God for the very Cattle.

I. This is no dishonor to God, to take care of the meanest Creatures. It Is as
honorable for his power to preserve them, and his Wisdom to govern them, as
for both to create them. It Is one part of a man's righteousness to be merciful
to his beast which he never made; and is it not a part of Gods righteousness as
the Rector of the World, to take care of those creatures which he did not
disdain to give a being to?

II. It rather conduces to his honor.

1. The honor of his goodness. It shows the comprehensiveness of his goodness,
which embraces in the arms of his Providence, the lowest Worm, as well as the
highest Angel. Shall infinite goodness frame a thing, and make no provision for
its subsistence? At the first creation he acknowledged whatever he had created,
good in his kind, good in themselves, good in order to the end for which he
created them; it is therefore an honorable thing for his goodness to conduct
them to that end, which in their creation he designed them for; and not leave
them to wild disorders unsuitable to the end of that goodness which first called
them into being. If he grow out of love with the operations of his hands, he
would seem to grow out of love with his own goodness that formed them.

2. The honor of his Power and Wisdom. The Power of God is as much seen in
making an insect full of life and spirit in all the parts of it, to perform all
the actions suitable to its life and nature, as in making creatures of a
greater bulk; and is it not for the honor of his power to preserve them, and
the honor of his Wisdom to direct these little animals to the end he intended
in their creation? for as little as they seem to be, an end they have, and
glorious too, for natura nihil facit frustra. It seems not to consist with his
wisdom to neglect that which he has vouchsafed to create. And though the
Apostle seems to deny Gods care of Brutes, 1 Cor. 9. Does God take care for
Oxen? It Is true God did not in that Law only take care of Oxen, i.e. with a
legislative care, as making a Law only for them, though with a providential
care he does; but the Apostle there does not deny Gods care for Oxen, but makes
an argument a minori ad majus.

2. Providence extends to all the actions and motions of the Creature. Every
second cause implies a dependence upon a first cause in its operation. If God
did not extend his providence over the actions of creatures, he would not every
where, and in all things and beings be the first cause.

1. To natural actions. What an orderly motion is there in the natural actions
of Creatures, which evidenceth a guidance by an higher reason, since they have
none of their own? How do fish serve several coasts at several seasons, as if
sent upon a particular message by God? This cannot be by any other faculty than
the instinct their Maker has put into them. Plants that grow between a barren
and fruitful Soil, shoot all their roots toward the moist and fruitful ground;
by what other cause then a secret direction of Providential Wisdom An. drews
Catechi -- stical Doctrine, P. 60.
? There is a Law impressed upon them and their motions, that are so orderly, as
if they were acted according to a covenant and agreement between them and their
Creator, and therefore called the Covenant of the day and night Jer. 33.20.
. What avails the toil and labor of man in plowing, trading, watching, unless
God influence, unless he bless, unless he keep the City? The proceed of all
things depends upon his goodness in blessing, and his power in preserving. God
signified this, when he gave the Law from Mount Sinai, promising the People,
that if they kept his Commandments, he would give them rain in due season, and
that the Earth should bring forth her Fruit Levit. 26.3.4. Then will I give you
rain, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall
yield their fruit.
. Evidencing thereby, that those natural causes can produce nothing without his
blessing; that though they have natural principles to produce such Fruits
according to their natures, yet he can put a stop to their operations, and make
all their Fruits abortive. He weighs the waters, how much shall be poured out
in showrs of rain upon the parched earth. He makes a decree for the rain, and
gives the Clouds a Commission to dissolve themselves so much and no more Job
28.23; 24, 25, 26.
. Yea, he does order the conduct of them by counsel, as employing his wisdom
about these things which are of concern to the World. Job 37.11, 12. He
scatters his bright cloud, and it is turned round about by his counsels, that
they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the world in the earth.

2. To Civil actions. Counsels of men are ordered by him to other ends than
what they aim at, and which their Wisdom cannot discover. God stirred up
Senacherib to be the Executioner of his justice upon the Jews, and afterward
upon the Egyptians, when that great King designed only the satisfaction of his
ambition in the enlarging his Kingdom, and supporting his greatness. Isa. 10.6,
7. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my
wrath: howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so, (He designs
not to be an instrument of my justice) but it is in his heart to destroy and
cut off nations not a few. His thoughts and aims were far different from Gods
thoughts. The hearts of Kings are in his hands, as wax in the hands of a man,
which he can work into what form and shape he pleases. He has the sovereignty
over, and the ordering the hearts of Magistrates, Psa. 47.9. the shields of the
earth belong unto God. Counsels of men for the good of his people, are his act.
The Princes advised Jeremiah and Baruch, Jer. 36.19. to hide themselves, which
they did; yet ver. 26. it is said the Lord hid them. Though they followed the
advice of their Court-friends, yet they could not have been secured, had not
God stepped in by his providential care, and covered them with his hand. It was
the Courtiers counsel, but God challenges the honor of the success.

Military actions are ordered by him. Marshal employments are ordered by his
Providence. He is the great General of Armies. It Is observed that in the two
Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah, God is called the Lord of Hosts no less than a
Hundred and Thirty times*. Arrow smith Chain of Principles. Exercit. 1. Sect. 1.


3. To preternatural actions. God does command creatures to do those things
which are no way suitable to their inclinations; and gives them sometimes for
his own service a writ of ease from the performance of the natural Law he has
impressed upon them. A devouring Raven is made, by the Providence of God, the
Prophets caterer in a time of Famine 1 King 17.4.
. God instructs a ravenous Bird in a lesson of abstinence for Elijah's safety,
and makes it both a Cook and a Serving-man to the Prophet. The Whale that
delights to play about the deepest part of the Ocean, approaches to the shore,
and attends upon Jonah to transport him to the dry land Jonah 2.10.
. The fire Dan. 3.
was slaked by God, that it should not singe the least hair of the three
childrens heads, but was let loose to consume the Officers of the Court. The
mouths of the ravenous Lions which had been kept with an empty stomach, were
muzled by God, that they should not prey upon Daniel in a whole nights space.
God taught them an Heroical temeperance with so dainty a dish at their mouths;
and yet they tore the accusers in a trice.

4. To all supernatural and miraculous actions of the creatures which are as so
many new creations; as when the Sun went backward in Hezekaih's time; when it
stood still in the valley of Ajalon, that Joshuah might complete his Victory on
the Canaanites. The boisterous waves stood on a heap like Walls to secure the
Israelites passage; but returning to their natural motion, were the Egyptians
Sepulcher. When creatures have stepped out of their natural course, it could not
be the act of the creatures, it being so much against and above their natures,
but it must be by the order of some Superior Power.

5. To all fortuitous actions. What is easual to us, is ordained by God; as
effects stand related to the second cause, they are many times contingent; but
as they stand related to the first cause, they are acts of his Counsel, and
directed by his Wisdom. God never left second causes to straggle and operate in
a Vagabond way; tho the effect seem to us to be a loose act of the creature,
yet it is directed by a Superior cause to a higher end than we can presently
imagine. The whole disposing of the lot which is cast into the lap, is from the
Lord*. Pro. 16.33.
A Soldier shoots an arrow at random, and God guides it to be the Executioner
of Ahab for his Sin 1 King. 22.34.
; which death was foretold by Micajah, v. 17.28, God gives us a certain Rule to
judge of such contingencies, Exodus 21.13. And if a man lie not in wait, but God
deliver him into his hand. A man accidentally kills another, but it is done by
a secret commission from God. [God delivered him into his hands.] Providence is
the great Clock, keeping time and order, not only hourly, but instantly to its
own honor Fuller Eccles Hist. Cent. 6. book 2. P. 51.
.

6. To all voluntary actions.

1. To good actions. Not by compelling, but sweetly inclining, determining the
Will, so that it does that willingly, which by an unknown and unseen necessity
cannot be omitted. It constrains not a man to good against his will, but
powerfully moves the will to do that by consent, which God has determined
shall be done. The way of man is not in himself; the motion is man's, the action
is man's, but the direction of his steps is from God. Jer. 10.23. It Is not in
man that walks, to direct his steps.

2. To evil actions.

1. In permitting them to be done. Idolatries and follies of the Heathen were
permitted by God. He checked them not in their course, but laid the reins upon
their necks, and suffered them to run what race they pleased, Acts 14.16. Who
in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Not the most
execrable villainy that ever was committed in the world, could have been done
without his permission. Sin is not amabile propter se, and therefore the
permission of it is not desirable in it self, but the permission of it is only
desirable, and honestaturex fine. God is good and wise and righteous in all his
acts; so likewise in his act of permitting sin: and therefore he wills it out
of some good and righteous end, which belongs to the manifestation of his
glory, which is that he intends in all the acts of his will; of which this is
one. Wicked men are said to be a staff in Gods hand; as a man manages a staff
which is in his own power, so does God manage wicked men for his own holy
purposes, and they can go no further than God gives them license.

2. In ordering them. God governs them by his own unsearchable Wisdom and
Goodness, and directs them to the best and holiest ends. Contrary to the
natures of the sins, and the intentions of the sinner. Joseph's brothers sold
him to gratify their revenge, and God ordered it for their preservation in a
time of famine. Pharaoh's hardness is ordered by God for his own glory, and
that Kings destruction: God decrees the delivering up Christ to death, and
Herod, Pilate, the Pharisees and common rout of People in satisfying their own
passion, do but execute what God had before ordained. Act. 4.28. For to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Judas his
covetousness and the Devils malice are ordered by God to execute his decree for
the redemption of the World. Titus the Emperor, his ambition led him to
Jerusalem, but Gods end is the fulfilling of his threatenings, and the taking
revenge upon the Jews for their murdering of Christ. The aim of the Physician
is the Patients health, when the intent of the Leeches is holy to suck the
blood. God has holy ends in permitting sin, while man has unworthy ends in
committing it. The rain which makes the Earth fruitful, is exhaled out of the
Salt-waters, which would of themselves spoil the ground, and make it
unfruitful. The deceiver and the deceived are his, Job 12.16. Both the action
of the Devil the Seducer, and of wicked men the seduced, are restrained by God
within due bounds, in subserviency to his righteous will [for with him is
strength and wisdom.]

2. As Providence is universal, Second Proposition:
so it is mysterious. Who can trace the motions of Gods eyes in their race? He
Psalm. 104.3.
makes the Clouds his Chariot in his motions about the Earth, and his throne is
in the dark. He walks upon the wings of the wind. His providential speed makes
it too quick for our understanding. His ways are mysterious, and put the
reason and wisdom of men to a stand. The clearest sighted Servants of God do
not see the bottom of his works; the motion of Gods eyes is too quick for ours.

John Baptist is so astonished at the strange condescension of his Savior to be
baptized of him, that he forbids it*; Mat. 30.14.
Man is a weak creature, and cannot trace or scent out the wisdom of God.

But this mysteriousness and darkness of Providence adds a luster to it. As
stones set in Ebony, though the grounds be dark, make the beauty and sparkling
the clearer.

1. His ways are above human methods. Dark Providence are often the
groundwork of some excellent piece he is about to discover to the world. His
methods are like a plaited Picture, which on the one side represents a Negro,
on the other a Beauty. He lets Sarahs womb be dead, and then brings out the
root of a numerous Progeny. He makes Jacob a Cripple, and then a Prince to
prevail with God; He gives him a wound, and then a Blessing. He sends not the
Gospel till reason was nonplust, and that the world in that highest wisdom it
had at that time attained unto, was not able to arrive to the knowledge of God.
1 Cor. 1.21. After that the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

2. His ends are of a higher strain than the aims of men. Who would have
thought that the forces Cyrus raised against Babylon to satisfy his own
ambition, should be a means to deliver the Israelites, and restore the Worship
of God in the Temple? God had this end, which Isaiah prophesied of, and Cyrus
never dreamt of, Isa. 44.28. That says of Cyrus, thou art my Shepherd, and
shall perform all my pleasure, even saying that Jerusalem shall be built, etc.*
And this a long time before Cyrus was born: Isa. 45.1.
Pharaoh sent Israel away in the very night, at the end of the four hundred and
thirty years, the time prefixed by God; he could not keep them longer because of
Gods promise; he would not because of Gods Plagues. God aims at the glorifying
his truth, in keeping touch with his word. Pharaoh designs not the
accomplishing Gods will, but his deliverance from Gods judgments.

There is an observable consideration to this purpose, how Gods ends are far
different from man's. Luke 2.1, 4. In the taxing the whole World by Augustus.
Augustus out of pride to see what a numerous people he was Prince of, would tax
the whole world: Some tell us he had appointed the enrolling the whole Empire
Twenty Seven years before the Birth of our Savior, and had proclaimed it at
Tarracon in Spain: But soon after this proclamation, Augustus found a breaking
out of some stirs, and thereupon deferred his resolution to some other fit
time, which was the very time of the birth of Christ. See now Gods wise
disposal of things, in changing Augustus's resolution, and deferring it till
the Forty fourth year of his Reign, when Christ was ready to come into the
World! And this by giving occasion, yea necessitating Mary to come from
Nazareth, where Joseph and Mary dwelt, who perhaps being big with Child,
without this necessity laid upon her by the Emperors Edict, would not have
ventured upon the Journey to Bethlehem: there she falls in travel, that so
Christ the seed of David being conceived in Nazareth, should be born at
Bethlem, where Jesse lived, and David was born. How wisely does God order the
ambition and pride of men to fulfill his own predictions, and to publish the
truth of Christ's birth of the seed of David? for the names of Joseph and Mary
were found in the Records of Rome in Tertullians time?

3. God has several ends in the same action. Jacob is oppressed with Famine,
Pharaoh enricht with plenty, but Joseph's imprisonment is in order to his
Fathers relief, and Pharaohs wealth; his Mistresses anger flings him into a
prison. Joseph is wronged, and has Captivity for a reward of his chastity. God
makes it a step to his advancement, and by this way brings him from a Captive
to be a favorite. What is Gods end? Not only to preserve the Egyptian Nation,
but old Jacob and his Family. Was this all that God aimed at? No. He has a
further design, and lays the Foundation of something to be acted in the future
age. By this means Jacob is brought into Egypt, leaves his posterity there,
makes way for that glory in the working of the future miracles for their
deliverance, such an action that the world should continually ring of, and
which should be a type of the spiritual deliverance by Christ.

4. God has more remote ends than short sighted Souls are able to espy. God
does not eye only the present advantage of himself and his Creature, but has
an eye to his own glory in all, yea, in the very last ages of the world. In
small things, there are often great designs laid by God, and mysteries in the
least of his acts. Isaac was delivered from his Fathers Sword, when he was
intentionally dead, to set forth to the World a type of Christ's resurrection,
and a Ram is conducted thither by God, and entangled in the thickets and
appointed to sacrifice, whereby God sets forth a type of Crists death Halls
Contempl. p. 796.
. He uses the captivities of the people to enlarge the bounds of the Gospel.

The wise men were guided by a Star to Christ as King of the Jews, and come to
pay homage to him in his infancy; when was the foundation of this remarkable
event laid? Probably in Balaams prophecy ( Numb. 24.17. I shall see him, but
not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh. There shall come a Star out of
Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, etc.) transmitted by tradition
to those Wise men, and perhaps renewed by Sybylla Chaldaea, and confirmed in
their minds by the Jews, whilst in the Babylonish captivity they conversed with
them. Thus God many ages before, in this prophecy had an end in promoting the
readier entertainment of Christ among this people, when he should be born; what
the wise men's end was, the Scripture does not acquaint us; but however, their
gifts were a means to preserve our Savior, Joseph and Mary, from the rage of a
Tyrant, and affording them wherewithal to support them in Egypt, whither they
were ordered by God to fly for security. So 2 King. 7-1, 2, 17.
God threatens by the Prophet the Nobleman for his scoffing unbelief, that
though he should see the plenty, that he should not taste of it. See how God
does order Second causes, naturally to bring about his own decree! The King
gives this person charge of the gate, whilst the people crowd for provision to
satisfy their hunger, they accomplish the threatening which they had no
intentions to do, and trod him to death. Now I come to show, That there is a
Providence,

1. The Wisdom of God would not be so perspicuous, were there not a providence
to the world. It Is eminent in the creation, but more illustrious in the
Government of the creatures. A Musician discovers more skill in the touching an
instrument and ordering the strings, to sound what notes he pleases, than he
does in the first framing and making of it. Isa. 28.29. This also comes from
the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in Counsel and excellent in working.
All Gods providence are but his touchof the string of this great instrument
of the World. And all his works are excellent, because they are the fruit of
his wonderful counsel and unsearchable wisdom, which is most seen in his
providence, as in reading the verses before. His power is glorified in creating
and upholding this Fabric. How shall his wisdom be glorified but in his
government of it? Surely God will be no less intent upon the honor of his
wisdom, than upon that of his power. For if any Attribute may be said to excel
another, it is his Wisdom and Holiness, because those are perfections which God
has stamped upon the nobler part of his Creation. Inferior creatures have more
power and strength than man; but Wisdom is the perfection of a rational
creature. Now it is Gods wisdom to direct all things to their proper end, as
well as to appoint them their ends, which direction must be by a particular
providence, especialy in those things which know not their end, and have no
reason to guide them. We know in the World it is not a part of wisdom to leave
things to chance, but to state our ends, and lay a platform of those means
which direct to an attaining of them. And Wisdom is most seen in drawing all
things together, and making them subservient to the end he has fixed to
himself; and therefore one of the great things that shall be admired at last,
next to the great work of redemption, will be the harmony and consent of those
things which seemed contrary, how they did all conspire for the bringing about
that end which God aimed at.

2. The means whereby God acts, Secondly.
discover a providence. He acts

I. By small means. The considerable actions in the World have usually very
small beginnings. As of a few letters, how many Thousand words are made? of Ten
figures, how many Thousand Numbers? And a point is the beginning of all
Geometry. A little stone flung into a pond, makes a little circle, then a
greater, till it in largeth it self to both the sides. So from small
beginnings, God does cause an efflux through the whole World.

1. He uses small means in his ordinary works. The common works of nature
spring from small beginnings. Great Plants are formed from small seeds. The
Clouds which water the great Garden of the World, are but a Collection of
Vapors. The noblest operations of the Soul are wrought in an Organ, viz. the
Brain, composed of coagulated Phlegm. Who would imagine that Saul in seeking
his Fathers Asses, should find a Kingdom?

2. In his extraordinary works he uses small means. Elisha that waited upon
Elijah, and poured water upon his hands, shall do greater miracles than his
Master. And the Apostles shall do greater works than Christ John. 14.12.
; that the world may know that God is not tied to any means that men count
excellent; that all Creatures are his, and act not of themselves, but by his
Spirit and power.

In his extraordinary works of Justice. He makes a Rod in the hand of Moses to
confound the skill of the Egyptian Magicians: He commissioned Froggs and Flies
to countercheck a powerful and mighty people. When Benhadad was so proud as to
say, the dust of Samaria should not suffice for handfuls for his Army, God
seattered his army by the Lacquies of the Princes 1 King 20-14. The young men
of the Princes of the Provinces.
, about two hundred thirty two. The little sling in the hand of David a youth,
guided by Gods eye and hand, is a match sit enough for a blasphemous Giant, and
defeats the strength of a Weavers beam.

In his extraordinary works of mercy. 1. In the deliverance of a people or
person. A dream was the occasion of Joseph's greatness and Jacob's preservation.
He used the Cacklings of Geese to save the Roman Capitol from a surprise by the
Gauls. He picks out Gideon to be a General, who was least in his fathers esteem
Judge. 6.15.
; and what did his army consist of, but few, and those fearful Judge. 7.6, 7.
, those that took water with their hands, (which as Josephus says, is a
natural sign of fear) did God choose out to overthrow the Midianites, who had
overspread the Land as Grasshoppers, to show that he can make the most fearful
men to be sufficient instruments against the greatest Powers, when the
concernments of his Church and people lie at stake.

God so delights in thus bassling the pride of men, that Asa uses it as an
argument to move God to deliver him in the strait he was in, when Zerah the
Ethiopian came against him with a great multitude, when he was but a small
Point and center in the midst of a wide circumference 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Lord, it
is nothing with thee to help with many or with few.
. Hereby God sets off his own power, and evidenceth his superintendent care of
his People. It was more signally the arm of God for Moses to confound Pharaoh
with his Lice and Frogs, than if he had beaten him in a plain field with his
Six Hundred Thousand Israelites.

2. In the Salvation of the Soul. Our Savior himself, though God, the great
Redeemer of the World, was so mean in the eyes of the World, that he calls
himself a worm, and no man Psalm. 22.6.
. He picks out many times the most unlikely persons to accomplish the greatest
purposes for men's Souls. He lodges the Treasures of Wisdom in vessels of
Earth. He chose not the Cedars of Lebanon, but the Shrubs of the valley; not
the learned Pharisees of Jerusalem, but the poor men of Galilee; out of the
mouths of Babes and Sucklings he ordains praise to himself.

The Apostles breeding was not capable of ennobling their minds, and fitting
them for such great actions as Christ employed them in. But after he had new
molded and enflamed their Spirits, he made them of Fishermen, greater
conquerors of the World, than the most magnified Grandees could pretend to.

Thus Salvation is wrought by a crucified Christ; and that God who made the
world by wisdom, would save it by the foolishness of preaching; and make Paul,
the least of the Apostles, as he terms himself, more succesful than those who
had been instructed at the feet of Christ 2 Cor. 15.9, 10.
.

2. By contrary means. God by his Providence makes contrary things contribute
to his glory, as contrary Colors in a picture do to the beauty of the piece.
Nature is Gods instrument to do whatsoever he pleases; and therefore nothing so
contrary, but he may bring to his own ends. As in some Engines you shall see
wheels have contrary motions, and yet all in order to one and the same end. God
cured those by a Brazen Serpent, which were stung by the fiery ones; whereas
Brass is naturally hurtful to those that are bit by Serpents Grotius. Mat.
20.16. Es naturaliter nocet (...).
.

1. Afflictions. Joseph is sold for a slave, and God sends him as a Harbinger;
his Brother sold him to destroy him, and God sends him to save them. Paul's
bonds in the opinion of some might have stifl^d the Gospel, but he tells us,
that they had fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel, Phil. 1.12.

2. Sins Hall contempl. book 3. p. 806, 807.
God does often effect his just Will by our weakness, neither thereby
justifying our infirmities, nor blemishing his own action. Jacob gets the
blessing by unlawful means, telling no less then two lies to attain it; [I am
Esau, and this is venison] But hereby God brings about the performance of his
promise, which Isaac's natural affection to Esau would have hindered Jacob of.

The breach of the first Covenant was an occasion of introducing a better. Man's
sinning away his first flock, was an occasion to God to enrich him with a
surer. The loss of his original righteousness made way for a clearer and more
durable. The folly of man made way for the evidence of Gods wisdom; and the sin
of man for the manifestation of his grace, and by the wise disposal of God,
opens a way for the honor of those Attributes, which would not else have been
experimentally known by the Sons of men.

3. Casual means. The Viper which leapt upon Paul's hand out of the bundle of
sticks, was a casual act, but designed by the providence of God for the
propagation of the Gospel. Pharaoh's Daughter comes casually to wash her self
in the river, but indeed conducted by the secret influence of God upon her, to
rescue Moses exposed to a forlorn condition, and breed him up in the Egyptian
learning, that he might be the fitter to be his Kindreds deliverer. Saul had
been hunting David, and at last had lodged him in a place whence he could not
well escape, and being ready to seize upon him, in that very instant of time a
Post comes to Saul and brings the news that the Philistines had invaded the
Land, which cut out other work for him, and David for that time escapes 1 Samuel
23.26, 27, 28. Thirdly.
.

3. Reason. Such actions and events of things are in the world, which cannot
rationally be ascribed to any other cause than a supreme providence. It Is so so
in common things. Men have the same parts, the same outward advantages, the
same industry, and yet prosper not alike. One labors much, and gets little;
another uses not altogether such endeavors, and has riches flowing in upon
him. Men lay their projects deep, and question not the accomplishment of them;
and are disappointed by some strange and unforeseen accident. And sometimes men
attain what they desire in a different way, and many times contrary to the
Method they had projected. This is evidenced,

1. By the restraints upon the passions of men. The waves of the Sea, and the
tumults of the People are much of the same impetuous natures, and are quelled
by the same power Psalm. 65.7. Which stilleth the noise of the Sea; and tumult
of the people.
. Tumults of the People could no more be stilled by the force of a man, than
the Waves of the Sea by a puff of breath. How strangely did God qualify the
hearts of the Egyptians willingly to submit to the sale of their Land, when
they might have risen in a tumult, broke open the Granaries, and supplied their
wants Genesis 47.19, 21.
. Indeed, if the World were left to the conduct of chance or fortune, what work
would the savage lusts and passions of men make among us? How is it possible
that any but an Almighty Power can temper so many jarring Principles, and rank
so many quarrelsom and turbulent Spirits in a due order? If those brutish
passions which boil in the hearts of men, were let loose by that infinite power
that bridles them, how soon would the World be run headlong into unconceivable
confusions, and be rent in pieces by its own disorders?

2. By the sudden changes which are made upon the Spirits of men for the
preservation of others. God takes off the Spirit of some as he did the wheels
from the Egyptian Chariots, in the very act of their rage. Paul was struck
down, and changed while he was yet breathing out threatenings, etc. God sees all
the workings of men's hearts, all those cruel intentions in Esau against his
Brother Jacob; but God on a sudden turns away that torrent of hatred, and
disposes Esau for a friendly meeting Genesis 33.4.
. And he who had before an exasperated malice by reason of the loss of his
birthright and blessing, was in a moment a changed man. Thus was Saul's heart
changed toward David, and from a Persecutor, turns a justifier of him,
confesses David's innocence, and his own guilt, 1 Samuel 24.17, 18. thou art more
righteous than I, for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee
evil, etc. What reason can be rendered for so sudden a change in Readiness
revengeful Spirit, which had all the force of interest to support it, and
considered by him at that very time? For verse. 24. he takes special notice that
his Family should be disinherited, and David be his Successor in the Throne.
How suddenly did God turn the Edge of the Sword, and the heart of an Enemy from
Jehosaphat? 2 Chronicles. 18.31. Jehosaphat cried out, and the Lord helped him, and
God moved them to depart from him. The Holy Ghost emphatically ascribes it to
Gods motion of their wills, by twice expressing it. But stranger is the
preservation of the Jews from Hamans bloody designs, after the decree was gone
out against them. Mordecai the Jew is made Ahasuerus's Favorite by a strange
wheeling of Providence: First, The Kings Eyes are held waking, and he is
inclined to pass away the solitariness of the night with a Book rather than a
Game, or some other Court past-time; no book did he six on but the Records of
that Empire, no place in that voluminous Book, but the Chronicle of Mordecai's
service * in the discovery of a treason against the Kings life; he does not
carelessly pass it over, Estier 6.1, 2.
but inquires what recompense had been bestowed on Mordecai for so considerable
a service, and this just before Mordecai should have been destroyed had
Ahasuerus slept, Mordecai and all his Contrymen had been sacrificed
notwithstanding all his Loyalty. Could this be a cast of blind chance which had
such a concatenation of evidences in it for a superior Power?

3. In causing Enemies to do things for others, which are contrary to all rules
of policy. It Is wonderful, that the Jews, a People known to be of a stubborn
nature, and tenacious of their Laws, wherein they differed from all the
Nations, should in the worst of their captivities be so often befriended by
their Conquerors not only to rebuild their City, and reedify their Temple, but
at the charge of their Conquerors too. The very Enemies that had captived the
Jews, though they knew them to be a People apt to rebel: That the People whose
Temple they helped to build, would keep up a distinct worship and difference in
Religion, which is usually attended with the greatest animosities; and when
they knew it to be so strong in situation as to be a Fort as well as a place
of worship. That for this, their Enemies should furnish them with materials,
when they were not in a condition to procure any for themselves, and give them
money out of the public Exchequer, and timber out of the Kings Forest, as we
read Ezra 1.1, 2, 4, 7. Ezra 4-12, 15, 19. Ezra 6-4, 5, 8, 9, 11. Nehem. 2.8.
. And all this they look upon as the hand of God. Ezra 6.22. The Lord had
turned the heart of the King of Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in
the work of the house of God. And the Heathen Artaxerxes takes notice of it.
Cicero tells us, that in his time Gold was carried out of Italy for the
ornament of the Temple. They had their rites in Religion preserved entire under
the Roman Government, though more disserent from the Roman customs than any
Nation subdued by them. Dion and Seneca, and others, observe, that wherever
they were transplanted, they prosper'd and gave Laws to the victors And this
was so generally acknowledged, that Hamans Cabinet council (who were surely
none of the meanest Statesmen) gave him no hopes of success, when he appeared
against Mordecai, because he was of the race of the Jews Esth. 6.13.
; so much did God own them by his gracious Providence: They were also entire so
in all their Captivities before their crucifying of our Lord and Savior, that
they count their genealogies.

4. In infatuating the Counsels of men. God sets a stamp of folly upon the
Wisdom of men, Isa. 44.25. That turns the wise men backward, and makes their
knowledge foolishness: And makes their Counsels as Chaff and Stubble. Isaiah
33.11. [Ye shall conceive chaff, and shall bring forth stubble.] Herod was a
crafty person, insomuch that Christ calls him Fox. How foolish was he in
managing his project of destroying Christ, his supposed competitor in the
Kingdom? When the wise men came to Jerusalem, and brought the news of the birth
of a King of the Jews, he calls a Synod of the ablest men among the Jews. The
result of it is to manifest the truth of Gods prediction in the place of our
Saviors birth, and to direct the wise men in their way to him. Herod had no
resolutions, but Bloody, concerning Christ Mat 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
. God blinds his mind in the midst of all his craft, that he sees not those
rational ways which he might make use of for the destruction of that which he
feared; he sends those wise men, mere strangers to him, and intrusts them with
so great a concern; he goes not himself, nor sends any of his Guard with them
to cut him off immediately, upon the discovery, but leaves the whole conduct of
the business to those he had no acquaintance with, and of whose faithfulness he
could have no assurance. God crosses the intentions of men. Joab slew Abner
because he thought him his rival in David's favor, and then imagined he had rid
his hands of all that could stand in his way; yet God raised up Benajah, who
drew Joab from the horns of the Altar, and cut him in pieces at Solomon's
command. God does so order it many times, that when the most rational Counsel
is given to men, they have not hearts to follow it. Achitophel gave as suitable
Counsel for Absaloms design, as the best Statesman in the World could give 2 Samuel 17.1, 2.
. To surprise David while he was amuz'd at his Sons rebellion, and dejected
with grief at so unnatural an action, and whilst his forces had not yet made
their Rendezvous, and those that were with him were tired in their march. Speed
was best in attempts of this nature. David in all probability had been cut off,
and the hearts of the people would have melted at the fall of their Sovereign.
But Absalom inclines rather to Hushai's Counsel, which was not so proper for
the business he had engaged in, v. the 7th, to v. 14 Now this was from God. For
the Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent
that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom. So foolish were the Egyptians
against reason, in entering into the Red Sea after the Israelites; for could
they possibly think that that God who had by a strong hand, and an Army of
Prodigies brought Israel out of their Captivity, and conducted them thus far,
and now by a miracle opened the Red Sea, and gave them passage through the
bowels of it, should give their Enemies the same security in pursuing them, and
unravel all that web he had been so long a working.

5. In making the Counsels of men subservient to the very ends they design
against. God brings a Cloud upon men's understandings, and makes them the
contrivers of their own ruin, wherein they intend their own safety; and gains
honor to himself by outwitting the Creature. The Babel-projectors fearing to
be scattered abroad, would erect a tower to prevent it and this proved the
occasion of dispersing them over the World in such a confusion that they could
not understand one another Genesis 11.4, 8.
. God ordered Pharaohs policies to accomplish the end against which they were
directed; He is afraid Israel should grow too mighty, and so wrest the Kingdom
out of his hands, and therefore he would oppress them to hinder their increase,
which made them both stronger, and more numerous. [Exercise strengthens men,
and Luxury softens the Spirit.] The Jews fear, if they suffered Christ to make
a farther progress in his Doctrine and Miracles, they should lose Cesars
favor, and expose their Country as a prey to a Roman Army; this caused their
destruction by those enemies they thought by this means to prevent. God
ordering it so, that a Roman army was poured in upon them, which swept them
into all corners of the Earth. Priests and Pharisees sit close together in
Counsel, how to hinder men's believing in Christ, and the result of their
consultation was to put him to death, and no man then would believe in a dead
person, not capable of working any miracles, Joh. 11.47, 48, 49, 50.
for the a musin of the People; and by this means there were a greater number
of believers on him, than in the time of his life, according to his own
prediction, Joh. 12.32. and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all
men unto me.

6. In making the fancies of men subservient to their own ruin. God brings
about strange events by the mere imaginations and conceits of men, which are
contrary to common and natural observation, and the ordinary course of rational
consequences 2 King. 3.22.23.
. The Army of the Moahites which had invaded Israel, thought the two Kings of
Judah and Israel had turned their Swords against one another, because the
rising Sun had colored those unexpected waters, and made them look red, which
they took for the blood of their Enemies, and so disorderly run without
examination of the truth of their conceit; but instead of dividing the spoil,
they left their lives upon the points of the Israelites swords. So the Syrian
Army are scared with a panick fear, and scatter themselves upon an empty sound.
Thus a dream struck a terror into the Midianites, 2 King. 7.6.
and the noise of broken pot-sheards made them sear some treason in their Camp,
and caused them to turn their swords into one another bowels, Judge. 7, 19, 22.
The Lord set every man's sword against his fellow.

But here I shall answer 3 Questions which may be proposed as objections
against Gods Providence. Quest.


First Question. If Gods Providence orders all things in the world, and
concurrs to every thing, how will you free God from being the Author of sin?

I Answer in several propositions. Answ.


1. ' It Is certain, God has a hand about all the sinful actions in the World.
The selling Joseph to the Ishmalites, was the act of his Brethren; The sending
him into Egypt, was the act of God Psalm. 105.17. He sent a man before them,
even Joseph, who was sold for a Servant.
, Genesis 45.8. It was not you that sent me hither, but God. Where Joseph ascribes
it more to God than to them. Their wicked intention was to be rid of him, that
he might tell no more tales of them to his Father; Gods gracious intention was
to advance him for his honor and their good; and to bring about this gracious
purpose, he makes use of their sinful practice. Gods end was righteous, when
theirs was wicked. It Is said, God moved David to number the People, 2 Samuel
24.1. the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them to say, Go number Israel and Judah. Yet Satan is said to provoke
David to; number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel,
and provoked David to number Israel. Here are two agents; But the text mentions
Gods hand in it out of Justice to punish Israel; Satan's end, no question, was
out of malice to destroy. Satan wills it as a sin, God as a punishment, God,
say some, permissive; Satan efficaciter. In the most villainous and unrighteous
action that ever was done, God is said to have an influence on it. God is said
to deliver up Christ, Act. 2.23. Him, being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. Acts 4.28. for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. Not barely as an act of his Prescience, but his
Counsel, and that determinate, i. e stable and irreversible. He makes a
distinction between those two acts. In God it was an act of Counsel, in them an
act of wickednses [by wicked hands;] there was Gods counsel about it, an actual
tradition. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all. All the Agents had several ends. God in that act aimed at the
redemption of the world; Satan at the preventing it; Judas to satisfy his
covetousness; the Jews to preserve themselves from the Roman invasion, and out
of malice to him for so sharply reproving them. God had a gracious principle of
love to mankind, and acted for the Salvation of the World in it; the
instruments had base principles and ends, and moved freely in obedience to
them. So in the affliction of Job, both God and Satan had an hand in it. Job
1.12. The Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he has is in thy power, verse.
11. touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face; their ends were
different, the one righteous for Trial, the other malicious against God, that
he might be cursed, and against Job that he might be damned. Gods end was the
brightning of his grace, and the Devils end was the ruin of his integrity, and
despoilng him of Gods favor.

2. In all Gods acts about sin, there is no stain to Gods holiness Senguer.
Metaph. lib. 2. cap 15. S. 5.
. In second causes, one and the same action proceeding from diverse causes, in
respect of one cause may be sinful; in respect of the other, righteous. As when
two Judges condemn a guilty person, one condemns him out of love to justice,
because he is guilty; the other condemns him out of a private hatred and
spleen: One respects him as a Malefactor only, the other as a private Enemy
chiefly. Here is the same action with two concurring causes, one being wicked
in it, the other righteous. Much more may we conceive it in the concurrence of
the Creator, with the action of the Creature.

1. God moves every thing in his ordinary providence according to their
particular natures. God moves every thing ordinarily according to the nature he
finds it in. Had we stood in innocence, we had been moved according to that
originally righteous nature; but since our Fall we are moved according to that
nature introduced by us with the expulsion of the other. Our first corruption
was our own act, not Gods work; we owe our creation to God, our corruption to
our selves. Now, since God will govern his creature, I do not see how it can be
otherwise, than according to the present nature of the creature, unless God be
pleased to alter that nature. God forces no man against his nature; he does not
force the will in conversion, but graciously and powerfully inclines it. He
does never force nor incline the will to sin, but leaves it to the corrupt
habits it has settled in it self, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels; Counsels of their own
framing, not of Gods. He moves the will which is sponte mala, according to its
own nature and counsels. As a man flings several things out of his hand, which
are of several figures, some spherical, tetragons, cylinders, conicks, some
round, and some square; though the motion be from the agent, yet the variety of
their motions is from their own figure and frame; and if any will hold his hand
upon a ball in its motion, regularly it will move according to its nature and
figure: and a man by casting a boul out of his hand, is the cause of the
motion, but the bad biass is the cause of its irregular motion. The power of
action is from God, but the viciousness of that action from our own nature. As
when a Clock or Watch has some fault in any of the wheels, the man that winds
it up, or putting his hand upon the wheels moves them, he is the cause of the
motion, but it is the flaw in it, or deficiency of something is the cause of
its erroneous motion; that error was not from the Person that made it, or the
person that winds it up, and sets it on going, but from some other cause, yet
till it be mended it will not go otherwise, so long as it is set upon motion.
Our motion is from God [Acts 17.28. In him we move] but not the disorder of
that motion. It Is the foulness of a man's stomach at Sea is the cause of his
sickness, and not the Pilots government of the ship.

2. God does not infuse the lust or excite it, though he does present the
object about which the lust is exercised. God delivered up Christ to the Jews,
he presented him to them; but never commanded them to crucify him, nor infused
that malice into them, nor quickened it; but he seeing such a frame, withdrew
his restraining grace, and left them to the conduct of their own witiated
wills. All the corruption in the World arises from lust in us, not from the
object which God in his providence presents to us. 2 Pet. 1.4 the corruption
that is in the World through lust. The Creature is from God, but the abuse of
it from corruption. God created the grape, and filled the Wine with a
sprightliness; but he does never infuse a drunken frame into a man, or excite
it. Providence presents us with the Wine, but the precept is to use it soberly.
Can God be blamed, if that which is good in it self, be turned into Poison by
others? No more than the flower can be called a criminal, because the Spiders
nature turns that into venom which is sweet in it self. Man has such a
nature, not from Creation, wherein God is positive; but from corruption,
wherein God is permissive. Providence brings a man into such a condition of
poverty, but it does not encourage his stubbornness and impatience. There is no
necessity upon thee from God to exercise thy sin under affliction, when others
under the same exercise their graces. The Rod makes the Child smart, but it is
its own stubbornness makes it curse. In short, though it be by Gods permission
that we can do evil, yet it is not by his inspiration that we will to do evil,
that is wholly from our selves.

3. God supports the faculties wherewith a man sins, and supports a man in
that act wherein he sins, but concurrs not to the sinfulness of that act. No
sin does properly consist in the act it self, as an act; but in the deficiency
of that act from the rule. No action wherein there is sin, but may be done as
an action, though not as an irregular action. Killing a man is not in it self
unlawful, for then no Magistrate should Execute a Malefactor for murdering
another, and justice would cease in the World; man also must divest himself of
all thoughts of preserving his Life against an invader; but to kill a Man
without just cause, without authority, without rule, contrary to rule, out of
revenge, is unlawful. So that it is not the act, as an act, is the sin, but the
swerving of that act from the rule, makes it a sinful act: So speaking, as
speaking, is not a sin, for it is a power and act God has endued us with; but
speaking irreverently and dishonourably of God, or falsely and slanderously of
man, or any otherwise irregularly, therein the sin lies. So that it is easy to
conceive that an act and the viciousness of it are separable. That act which is
the same in kind with another, may be laudable, and the other base and vile in
respect of its circumstances. The mind wherewith a man does this or that act,
and the irregularity of it, makes a man a criminal. There is a concurrence of
God to the act wherein we sin, but the sinfulness of that act is purely from
the inherent corruption of the creature. As the power and act of seeing is
communicated to the eye by the Soul, but the seeing doubly or dimly, is from
the vitiousness of the Organ, the eye. God has no manner of immediate
efficiency in producing sin; as the Sun is not the efficient cause of darkness,
tho the darkness immediately succeeds the setting of the Sun, but it is the
deficient cause. So God withdraws his grace, and leaves us to that lust which
is in our wills. Act 14.16. Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in
their own ways. He bestowed no grace upon them, but left them to themselves.
As a man who lets a glass fall out of his hand is not the efficient cause that
the glass breaks, but its own brittle nature, yet he is the deficient cause,
because he withdraws his support from it. God is not obliged to give us grace,
because we have made a total forfeiture of it. He is not a debtor to any man by
way of merit, of any thing but punishment. He is indeed in some sense a debtor
to those that are in Christ upon the account of Christ's purchase, and his own
promise, but not by any merits of theirs.

4. Gods providence is conversant about sin as a punishment, yet in a very
righteous manner. God did not will the first sin of Adam as a punishment,
because there was no punishment due to him before he sinned; but he willed the
continuance of it as a punishment to the nature sub ratione boni. This being a
judicial act of God, is therefore righteously willed by him. Punishment is a
moral good. It Is also a righteous thing to suit the punishment to the nature of
the offense; and what can be more righteous than to punish a man by that
wherein he offends? Hence God is said to give up men to sin. Romans 2.26, 27. for
this cause God gave them up unto vile affections. And to send strong delusions
that they may believe a lie. And the reason is rendered 2 These. 2.12. that they
all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. What more righteous than to make those vile affections, and
that unrighteousness their punishment, which they made their pleasure, and to
leave them to pursue their own sinful inclinations, and make them (as the
Psalmist speaks) Psalm. 5.10. fall by their own counsels? A Drunkards
Beastliness is his punishment as well as his Sin. Thus God delivers up some to
their own lusts as a punishment both to themselves and others. As he hardened
Pharaohs heart for the destruction both of himself and his People.

5. God by his providence draws glory to himself, and good out of sin. It Is the
highest excellency to draw good out of evil; and it is Gods right to manifest
his excellency when he pleases, and to direct that to his honor, which is
acted against his Law. The Holiness of God could never intend Sin as Sin. But
the Wisdom of God foreseeing it, and decreeing to permit it, intended the
making it subservient to his own honor. He would not permit it but for some
good, because he is infinitely good, and could not by reason of that goodness,
suffer that which is purely evil, if by his Wisdom he could not raise good out
of it: It Is purely evil as it is contrary to Law; It is good ratione sinis as
God orders it by his Providence; yet that goodness flows not from the nature of
sin, but from the wise disposal of God.

As God at the Creation framed a beautiful world out of a Chaos, out of matter
without form, and void: So by his infinite wisdom he extracts honor to
himself, out of the sins of men. As sin had dishonored him at its entrance, in
defacing his works, and depraving his creature: So he would make use of the
sins of men in repairing his honor, and restoring the creature.

It Is not conceivable by us, what way there could be more congruous to the
Wisdom and Holiness of God, as the state of the World then stood, to bring
about the death of Christ, which in his decree was necessary to the
satisfaction of his justice, without ordering the evil of some men's hearts to
serve his gracious purpose. If we could suppose that Christ could commit some
capital crime for which he should deserve death, which was impossible by reason
of the hypostatical union, the whole design of God for redemption had sunk to
the ground. Therefore God does restrain or let out the fury of men's passions,
and the corrupt habits of their wills to such a degree as should answer
directly to the full point of his most gracious will, and no further. He lets
out their malice so far as was conducing to the grand design of his death, and
restrains it from every thing that might impair the truth of any prediction, as
in the parting his garments, or breaking his bones. If God had put him to death
by some thunder or otherwise, and after raised him, how could the voluntariness
of Christ appear, which was necessary to make him a perfect oblation? How would
his innocence have appeared? The strangeness of the judgment would have made
all men believe him some great and notorious sinner. How then could the Gospel
have been propagated? Who would have entertained the Doctrine of one, whose
innocence could not be cleared? If it be-said, God might raise him again, what
evidences would have been had, that he had been really dead? But as the case
was, his Enemies confess him dead really, and many Witnesses there were of his
resurrection.

1. God orders the sins of men to the glory of his grace. As a foil serves to
make the luster of a Diamond more conspicuous; so does God make use of the
deformities of men to make his own grace more illustrious, and convey it with a
more pleasing relish to them. Never does grace appear more amiable, never is
God entertained with so high admirations, as by those who of the worst of
sinners are made the choicest of Saints: Paul often takes occasion from the
greatness of his sin, to admire the unsearchable riches of that grace which
pardoned him.

2. God orders them to bring forth temporal mercies. In Providence there are
two things considerable. First, Man's Will. 2. Gods Purpose. What man's will
intends as a harm in sin, God in his secret purpose orders to some eminent
advantage. In the selling of Joseph, his Brothers intend the execution of their
revenge; And God orders it for the advancement of himself, and the preservation
of his unrighteous Enemies, who might otherwise have starved. His Brothers sent
him to frustrate his dream, and God to fulfill it. Our reformation and return
from under the yoke of Antachrist, was by the wise disposal of God occasioned
by the three great Idols of the world, the lust of the Eye, the lust of the
Flesh, and the pride of life; lust, covetousness and ambition, three vices
notoriously eminent in Henry the Eighth, the first instrument in that work.
What he did for the satisfaction of his Lust is ordered by God for the glory of
his mercy to us. And though the Papists upon that account reflect upon our
Reformation, they may as well reflect upon the glorious work of Redemption,
because it was in the wisdom of God brought about by Judas his covetousness,
and the Jews malice.

3. God orders them for the glory of his Justice upon others. Nathan had
threatened David, that one of his own house should lie with his Wives in the
sight of the Sun 2 Samuel 12.11.
Ahithophel advises Absalom to do so, not with any design to fulfill God's
threatening, but secure his own stake by making the quarrel between the Father
and the Son irreconcilable; because he might well fear, that upon a peace
between David and Absalom he might be offered up as a Sacrifice to David's
Justice. God orders Ahithophel's counsel and Absalom's sin to the glory of his
Justice in David's punishment.

The ambition of Vespasian and Titus was only to reduce Judea to the Roman
Province after the revolt of it. But God orders hereby the execution of his
righteous will in the punishment of the Jews for their rejecting Christ, and
the accomplishment of Christ's prediction, Luke 19.43.
Luke 19.43. for the days shall come, that thy enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, etc. To conclude, if we deny God the Government of sin in the
course of his providence, we must necessarily deny him the governmnt of the
World, because there is not an action of any man's in the World, which is under
the government of God, but is either a sinful action, or an action mixed with
sin.

God therefore in his government does advance his Power in the weakness, Vid.
Ovid Amor, lib. 3. Eleg. 3. v. 1. and v. 27.
his Wisdom in the follies, his Holiness in the sius, his Mercy in the
unkindness, and his Justice in the unrighteousness of men; yet God is not
defiled with the impuritius of men, but rather draws forth a glory to himself,
as a Rose does a greater beauty and sweetness from the strong smell of the
Garlike set near it. Boethius de Conso. lib. 1.


Quest. 2.
Second Question. If there be a providence, how come those unequal
distributions to happen in the World? How is it so bad with good men, as if
they were the greatest enemies to God, and so well with the wicked, as if they
were the most affectionate friends? Does not virtue languish away in obscurity,
whiles wickedness struts about the world? What is the reason that splendid
virtue is oppressed by injustice, and notorious vices triumph in prosperity? It
would make men believe that the world was governed rather by a blind and
unrighteous, than by a wise, good, and just Governor, when they see things in
such disorder, as if the Devil had, as he pretends, the whole power of the
world delivered to him Luke 4.6.
, and God had left all care of it to his will.

Answ. See instances in Jackson, vol. 1.8. cap. 4. Sect 5.
This consideration has heightened the minds of many against a providence. It
was the notion of many Heathens, when they saw many who had acted with much
gallantry for their Countries, afflicted, they questioned whether there were a
superintendent power over the World. This has also been the stumbling block of
many taught in an higher School than that of Nature, the Jews, Mal. 2.17. 17.
ye say every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he
delights in them, and where is the God of judgment? Yea, and the observation
of the outward felicities of vice, and the oppressions of goodness, have caused
fretting commotions in the hearts of God's People; the Psalm. 73. is wholly
designed to answer this case. Jeremy, though fixed in the acknowledgment of
God's righteousness, would debate the reason of it with God, Jer. 12.1.
Righteous art thou, oh Lord, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments;
wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper, wherefore are all they happy that
deal very treacherously? thou have planted them, yea, they have taken root,
they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit. He perceiving it a universal case [
wherefore are all they happy, etc.] did not know how to reconcile it with the
righteousness of God. Nor Habbakkuk with the holiness of God. Hab. 1.14. [ thou
art of purer ejes than to behold iniquity; wherefore hold thou thy tongue,
when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he? In point of
God's goodness too, Job expostulates the case with God, Job 10.3. Is it good
unto thee that thou should oppress, that thou should despise the work of
thy hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked? You see upon the account
of holiness, righteousness, goodness, the three great Attributes of God, it
has been questioned by good men, and upon the account of his wisdom by the
wicked Jews.

1. Answer in general: Answ. 1.
Is it not an high presumption for ignorance to judge God's proceedings? In the
course of providence such things are done that men could not imagine could be
done without injustice; yet when the whole connection of their ends is
unravelled, they appear highly beautiful, and discover a glorious wisdom and
righteousness. If it had entered into the heart of man to think that God should
send his Son in a very low estate to die for sinners, would it not have been
judged an unjust and unreasonable act, to deliver up his Son for rebels, the
innocent for the criminals; to spare the offender, and punish the observer of
his Law? Yet when the design is revealed and acted, what an admirable
connection is there of justice, wisdom, mercy, and holiness, which men could
not conceive of? It will be known to be so at last in God's dealing with all
his members. We are incompetent Judges of the righteousness and wisdom of God,
unelss we were infinitely righteous and wise our selves; we must be God's, or
in another state, before we can understand the reasons of all God's actions. We
judge according to the law of sense and self, which are inferior to the rules
whereby God works. Judge nothing then before the time 1 Cor. 4.5.
. It is not a time for us to pass a judgment upon things. A false judgment is
easily made, when neither the Counsels of men's hearts, nor the particular Laws
of God's actions are known to us. In general it is certain, God does
righteously order his providence; he may see some inward corruptions in good
men to be demolished by afflictions; and some good moral affections, some
useful designs, or some services he employs wicked men in to be rewarded in
this life.

2. Secondly.
God is Sovereign of the World. He is sui juris; The Earth is his, and the
fullness thereof. may he not do what he will with his own Mat. 20.15.
? Who shall take upon them to control God, and prescribe Laws to him how to
deal with his Creatures? Why should afinite understanding prescribe measures
and methods to an infinite Majesty?

3. God is wise and just, Thirdly.
and knows how to distribute. If we question his providence, we question his
wisdom. Is it fit for us who are but of yesterday, and know nothing, to say to
an infinite wisdom, what do thou? and to direct the only wise God to a method
of his actions? His own wisdom will best direct him to the time when to punish
the insolence of the wicked, and relieve the miseries of his people: We see the
present dispensations, but are we able to understand the internal motives? May
there not be some sins of righteous men's Parents that he will visit upon their
Children, some virtues of their ancestors that he will reward even in their
wicked posterity? He may use wicked men as instruments in some service. It Is
part of his distributive Justice to reward them. They aim at these things to
their service, and he gratifies them according to their desires. Let not then
his righteousness be an argument against his providence; it is righteous with
God not to be in Arrears with them. Sometimes God gives them not to them as
rewards of any moral virtue, but puts power into their hands, that they may be
instruments of his Justice upon some offenders against him, Isa. 10.5. The
staff in the Assyrians hand was God's indignation.

4. Fourthly.
There is a necessity for some seeming inequality at least in order to the good
government of the world. Can all in any community of men be of an equal height?
A house has not beams and rafters of an equal bigness, some are greater, and
some less. The world is God's Family. It Is here as in a Family, all cannot have
the same Office, but they are divided according to the capacities of some
persons, and the necessities of others: Providence would not be so apparent in
the beauty of the world, if all men were alike in their stations. Where would
the beauty of the body be, if all the members had one Office and one immediate
End? Man would cease to be man, if every member had not some distinct work, and
an universal agreement in the common profit of the Body. All mankind is but one
great Body constituted of several Members, which have distinct Offices, but all
ordered to the good of the whole; the Apostle argues this excellently in a
parallel case of the diversities of gifts in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.19. If all
were one member, where were the body? v. 23.} those members of the body which
we think to be less honorable, upon those we bestow more abundant honor. v.
24. God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant honor to
that part which lackt. What harmony could there be, if all voices and sounds
were exactly the same in a consort? Who can be delighted with a Picture that
has no shadows? The afflictions of good men are a foyl to set off the beauty
of Gods providence in the world.

5. Fifthly.
Unequal dispensations do not argue carelessness. A father may give one child a
gayer Coat than he gives another, yet he extends his fatherly care and
tenderness over all: According to the several employments he puts his children
upon, he is at greater expense, and yet loves one as well as another, and makes
provision for all. As the Soul takes care of the lowest member, and
communicates Spirits to every part for their motions: So though God place some
in a higher, some in a lower condition, yet he takes care of all. God divides
to every man as he will 1 Cor. 12.11.
. Every man has a several share according to Gods pleasure, of a goodness in
the world, as well as of gifts in the Church.

6. Sixthly.
Yet upon due consideration the inequality will not appear so great as the
complaint of it. If the wants of one, and the enjoyment of another were weighed
in the balance, the Scales might not appear so uneven; we see such a man's
wealth; but do you understand his cares? A running sore may lie under a purple
Robe. Health, the salt of Blessings, as one calls it, is bestowed upon the
Labourer, when many that wallow in abundance, have those torturing diseases
which imbitter their pleasures. If some want those worldly ornaments which
others have, may they not have more wisdom than those that enjoy them, (the
noblest perfection of a rational creature?) Pro. 3.13, 14. The merchandise of
it is better than the merchandise of Silver, and the gain thereof than fine
gold Pro. 15.16.
. Pro. 15.16. better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great
treasure, and trouble therewith. As some are stripped of wealth and power, so
they are stripped of the encumbrances they bring with them. One has that
serenity and tranquillity of mind, which the cares and fears of others will not
suffer them to enjoy; and a grain of contentment is better than many pounds of
wealth. It Is not a desirable thing to be a great Prince, attended with as many
cares and fears as he has Subjects in his Empire. He made a true estimate of
greatness, that said he would not stoop to take up a Crown if it lay at his
feet. But more particularly to the parts of the case,

I. It is not well with bad men here.

1. Is it well with them who are tortured by their own lusts? What peace can
worldly things bestow upon a Soul filled with impurity? In 2 Cor. 7.1. Sin is
called filthiness; can it be well with them that have nasty Souls? Is it well
with them who are rackt by pride, stung with cares, gnawn with envy, distracted
by unsatiable desires, and torn in pieces by their own fears? Can it be well
with such who have a multitude of vipers in their breasts, sticking all their
stings into them, though the Sun shine, and the showers drop upon them? You are
the Spectators of their felicity, but do you understand their inward gripes?
Prove. 14.13. even in laughter the heart is sorrowful. Can silken Curtains, or
purple Clothes, confer an happiness upon those who have a mortal plague sore
poisoning their bodies, and are ready to expire? Sin is their plague, whatever
is their happiness 1 King. 8.38. Sin is called the plague of the heart.
. Their insolent lusts are a far greater misery than the possession of all the
Kingdoms in the World can be an happiness.

II. Is it well with them who have so great an account to make, and know not
how to make it? Those that enjoy much, are more in God's debt, and therefore
more accountable. The account of wicked men is the greater, because of their
abundance; and their unfitness to make that account is the greater, because of
their abuse. Would any reckon themselves happy to be called upon to give an
account of their Stewardship for Talents, and know not how to give a good
account of one farthing? Luke 16.2. give an account of thy stewardship.

III. Is it well with them who are the worse for what they have? Is it an
happiness to command others, and be more slaves to the worst of Creatures, than
any can be to them? The wicked man's well-spread Table sometimes proves his
snare Psalm. 5.22.
, and his destruction is bound up in his very prosperity, Pro. 1.32. and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Prosperity falling upon an unregenerate
heart, like the Sun and Rain upon bad ground, draws forth nothing but weeds and
vermin. Would you think it your happiness to be Masters of their concerns, and
slaves to their pride? Is a stubbornness against God so desirable a thing,
which is strengthened by those things in the hands of the wicked?

IV. Is it well with them who in the midst of their prosperity are reserved for
justice? Can that Traitor be accounted happy that is fed in Prison by the
Prince with better Dishes than many a loyal Subject has at his table, but only
to keep him alive for his Trial, and a public Example of Justice? God raises
some for greater falls: Miserable was the felicity of Pharaoh, to be raised up
by God for a Subject to show in him the power of his Wrath Exodus 9.16.
. It Is but a little time before they shall be cut down as grass, and wither as
the green herb, Psalm. 37.2. None would value the conditionof that Soldier who
leaping into a River to save a Kings Crown, and putting it upon his own head,
that he might be enabled to swim out with it, was rewarded for saving it, and
executed for wearing it. God rewards wicked men for their service, and
punishes them for their insolence.

2. Secondly.
Neither is it bad here with good men, if all be well considered. Other men's
judgment of a good man is frivolous; they cannot rightly judge of his state and
concerns, but he can make a judgment of theirs. 1 Cor. 2.15. A spiritual man
judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man. No man can make a sound
judgment and estimate of a righteous man's state in any condition, unless he
has had experience of the like in all the circumstances, the inward Comforts
as well as the outward Crosses. For,

I. Adversity cannot be called absolutely an evil, as prosperity cannot be
called absolutely a good. They are rather indifferent things, because they may
be used either for the honor or dishonor of God. As they are used for his
honor, they are good; and as used for his dishonor, they are evil. The only
absolutely bad thing in the world is sin, which cannot be in its own nature but
a dishonor to God. The only absolutely good thing in the world is holiness,
and a likeness to God, which cannot be in its own nature but for his glory. As
for all other things, I know no true satisfaction can be in them, but as they
are subservient to Gods honor, and give us an advantage for imitating some one
or other of his perfections. Crosses in the Scripture are not excluded from
those things we have a right to by Christ, when they may conduce to our good, 1
Cor. 3.22. Life and Death, things present, and things to come, are yours, and
you are Christ's. Since the revelation of the Gospel, I do not remember that any
such complaint against the Providence of God fell from any holy man in the New
Testament; for our Savior had given them another prospect of those things. The
holy men in the Old Testament comforted themselves against this Objection by
the end of the wicked which should happen, and the rod cease. Psalm. 73. Romans 8.
In the New Testament we are more comforted by the certain operation of crosses
to our good and spiritual advantage. Our Savior did not promise wealth and
honor to his followers, nor did he think it worth his pains of coming and
dying, to bestow such gifts upon his Children. He made Heaven their happiness,
and the Earth their Hell; the Cross was their badge here, and the Crown their
reward hereafter; they seemed not to be a purchase congruous to so great a
price of Blood. Was God's Providence to Christ the more to be questioned
because he was poor? Had he the less love to him because he was a man of
sorrows, even while he was a God of glory? Such groundless conceits should
never enter into Christians, who can never seriously take up Christ's Yoke
without a proviso of afflictions; who can never be God's Sons, without
expecting his corrections.

2. God never leaves good men so bare, but he provides for their necessity,
Psalm. 84.11. the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. If any thing be good, and upright, man
may expect in from God's providence; if it be not good, he should not desire
it. Howsoever grace, which is necessary for preparing thee for happiness; and
glory, which is necessary for fixing thee in it, he will be sure to give; we
have David's experience for it Psa. 37.5.
in the whole course of his life.

3. The little good men have, is better than the highest enjoyments of wicked
men. Ps. 37.16. a little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches
of many wicked; not better than many riches of the wicked, but better than the
riches of many wicked, better than all the treasures of the whole Mass of the
wicked world. Others have them in a providential way, good men in a gracious
way. Pro. 16.8. better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues
without right, without a Covenant right. Wicked prosperity is like a shadow
that glides away in a moment; whereas a righteous man's little is a part of
Christ's purchase, and part of that inheritance which shall endure for ever,
Psa. 37.18. their inheritance shall be for ever, i. e. God regards the state of
the righteous, whether good or evil, all that befalls them, God does all with a
respect to his everlasting inheritance. No man has worldly things without
their wings. And though the righteous have worldly things with their wings, yet
that love whereby they have them, has no wings ever to sly away from them; how
can those things be good to a man that can never taste them, nor God in them?

4. No righteous man would in his sober wits be willing to make an exchange of
his smartest afflictions for a wicked man's prosperity, with all the
circumstances attending it. It cannot therefore be bad with the righteous in
the worst condition. Would any man be ambitious of snares, that knows the
deceit of them? Can any but a mad man exchange Medicines for poisons? Is it not
more desirable to be upon a Dunghill with an intimate converse with God, than
upon a Throne without it? They gain a world in prosperity; a righteous man
gains his Soul by afflictions, and possesses it in patience; is the exchange of
a valuable consideration? God strips good men of the enjoyment of the World,
that he may wean them from the love of it; keeps them from Idolatry, by
removing the fuel of it; sends afflictions that he may not lose them, nor they
their Souls. Would any man exchange a great goodness laid up for him that fears
God, for a lesser goodness laid out upon them that are Enemies to him Psalm.
31.19.
?

Who would exchange a few outward comforts with God's promise, inward comforts
with assurance of Heaven, Godliness with contentment, a sweet and Spiritual
life, Soveraignity over himself and lusts, though attended with sufferings, for
the Government of the whole World?

5. It is not ill with the righteous in afflictions, because they have high
advantages by them. That cannot be absolutely evil, which conduces to a
greater good.

As, First, sensible experiments of the tender providence of God over them. If
the righteous had not afflictions in this life, God would lose the glory of his
providence, and they the sweetness in a gracious deliverance from them in ways
which make the affliction the sweeter, as well as the mercy; they would lose
the comfort of them in not having such sensible evidences of God's gracious
care.

The sweetness of the promises made for times of trouble, would never be
tasted. Psalm. 37.19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time; that is, they
shall be mightily encouraged and supported. God's people do best understand
God's strength, when they feel the smart of men's malice. 2 Timothy 4.17. [The Lord
stood with me, and strengthened me.] He had never felt so much of God's
strength, if he had not tasted much of man's wickedness in forsaking him, Psalm.
37.39. [he is their strength] when in times of trouble they experiment more of
his care in preserving them, and his strength in supporting them, than at other
times; Abundance of consolations are manifested in abundance of sufferings 2
Cor. 1.5. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14:
. A greater sense of joy and glory lights upon them in a sterm or persecutions.
Men see the sufferings of the godly, but they do not behold that inward peace
which composeth and delights their Souls, worth the whole Mass of the woulds
goodness, and pleasures of the unrighteous.

2. Inward improvements. Opportunities to manifest more love to God, more
dependence on him, the perfection of the Soul. 1 Timothy 5.5. Now she that is a
Widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in Supplications and
Prayers night and day; there is a ground of more exercise of trust in God, and
supplication to him. The poor and desolate have an advantage for the actual
exercise of those graces, which a prosperous condition wants: God changes the
metal by it; what was Lead and Iron, he makes come forth as Gold. Job 23.10.
when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold. Crosses and sufferings which
fit good men for special service here, and eternal happiness hereafter, can no
more be said to be evil, than the fire which refines the gold, and prepares it
for a Prince's use. If there were not such evils, what ground could you have to
exercise patience? what Heroic acts of faith could you put forth without
difficulties? how could you believe against hope, if you had not sometimes
something to contradict your hopes? And if a good man should have a confluence
of that which the ignorant and pedantical world calls happiness, he might
undervalue the pleasures of a better life, deface the beauty of his own soul,
and withdraw his love from the most gratifying, as well as the most glorious
object, unto that which is not worth the least grain of his affection.

3. Future glory. The great enquiry at the day of Christ's appearing, will be,
How good men bear their sufferings, what improvements they had; and the greater
their purity by them, the greater will be their praise and honor. 1 Pet. 1.7.
That the trial of your faith [viz. by manifold Temptations] may be found to
praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. For a good
improvement by them, they will have a Public praise from God's mouth, and a
Crown of Honor set upon their heads. Providence sends even light afflictions
as so many Artificers, to make the Crown more Massy, and more bright, 2 Cor.
4.17. [Works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.] They are
at work about a good man's Crown, while they make him smart. They prepare him
for heaven, and make it more grateful to him when he comes to possess it. A
Christians carriage in them prepares for greater degrees of Glory. Every stroke
does but more beautify the Crown.

6. Sufferings of good men for the Truth highly glorifies the Providence of
God. This is a matter of glory and honor, 1 Pet. 4.16. If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf.
They thereby bear a Testimony to the highest Act of providence that God ever
exercised, even the redemption of the world by the blood of his Son. And the
Church, which is the highest object of his Providence in the world, takes the
deeper root, and springs up the higher; the foundation of it was laid in the
blood of Christ, and the growth of it is furthered by the blood of Martyrs. The
carriage of the righteous in them, makes the Truth they profess more valued. It
enhanceth the excellency of Religion, and manifests it to be more amiable for
its beauty, than for its dowry; since they see it desirable by the sufferers,
not only without worldly enjoyments, but with the sharpest miseries. This
consideration has wrought upon many to embrace the Religion of the Sufferers.
If it reaches as far as death, they are but dispatched to their Fathers house,
and the day of their death is the day of their Coronation; and what evil is
there in all this?

To conclude, This Argument is stronger (upon the infallible righteousness of
God's nature) for a day of Reckoning after this life, than against Providence.
It Is a more rational conclusion, That God will have a time to justify the
righteousness and wisdom of his Providential Government, and repair the honor
of the righteous, oppressed by the injustice of the wicked. And indeed, unless
there be a retribution in another world, the question is unanswerrble, and all
the reason in the world knows not how to salve the Holiness and Righteousness
of God in his Providential Dispensations in this life; since we see here
Goodness unrewarded and debased to the dunghill, Vice glorying in impunity, and
ranting to the firmament. We cannot see how it can consist with the nature of
God's Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness, if there were not another life
wherein God will manifest his Righteousness in the punishing sin, and rewarding
goodness: For it is impossible that a God of infinite Justice should leave sin
unpunished, and Grace unrewarded here or hereafter. The Scripture gives us so
full an acount of a future state, that may satisfy all Christians in this
business.

The wicked rich man is in his Purple, and Lazarus in his rags; yet Abraham's
Bosom is prepared for the one, and an endless Hell for the other. Jeremy
resolves the case in his dispute with God about it, Jer. 12.3. Pull them out
like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter. They
are but fattening for the knife of justice; and the day will come when they
shall be consumed, like the fat of Lambs in the Sacrifice, which shall wholly
evaporate into smoke; so the Psalmist resolves it in Psalm. 37.20. a Psalm
written for the present case. God laughs at their security in a way of mockery,
Psalm. 37.13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.
God's day for the justification of his proceedings in the world, and the wicked
man's day for his own destruction, wherein they shall all be destroyed
together, Psalm. 37.38. The whole mass of them in one bundle. Who then will
charge God with unequal distributions at that day which is appointed for the
clearing up of his righteousness, which is here maskt in the world? who can be
fond of the State of the wicked? Who would be fond of a dead man's condition,
because he lies in State, whose Soul may be condemned, whilst his body with a
pompous solemnity is carried to the Grave; and both body and Soul joined
together at the resurrection, adjudged to eternal misery?

Q. 3. What has been said in this, will also answer another Question, Why God
does not immediately punish notorious offenders, since the best governments in
the world are such as call the violaters of the Law to a speedy account, to
keep up the honor of Justice? Thus the Epicures charge God with neglects of
providence, because if he does punish wicked men, it is later than is fit and
just; because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Eccles. 8.11.
Delay of Justice is an encouragement to Sin.

Answ. 1. This is an argument for Gods patience, none against his providence.
Should he make such quick work, what would become of the world? Could it have
held out to this day? If God had instantly taken revenge upon those that thus
disparage his providence, the framer of such an objection had not been alive.
No man is so perfectly good, but he might fall under the revenging stroke of
his sword, if he pleased to draw it. Suffer God to evidence his patience here,
since after the winding up of the World, he will have no time to manifest it.
God does indeed sometimes send the sharp arrow of some judgment upon a
notorious offender, to let him understand that he has not forgotten how to
govern; but he does not always do so, that his patience may be glorified in
bearing with his rebellious creature.

2. God is just in that wherein the question supposes him unjust. He suffers
wicked men to continue to be the plagues of the places where they live, and the
executioners of his Justice upon offenders against him, Psalm. 17.13. The wicked
are God's Sword. Jeremiah 47.6. Those that God would stir up against the
Philistines, are called the Sword of the Lord, Isa. 10.5. Ashur is said to be
the Rod of his anger; would it consist with his wisdom to drop the instruments
out of his hand, as soon as he begins to use them? To cast his Rods out of his
hand as soon as he takes them up? The rules of justice are as much unknown to
us, as the communications of his goodness to his people are unknown to the
world.

3. Let me ask such a one, whether he never injured another man? and whether he
would not think it very severe, if not unjust, that the offended person should
presently take revenge of him? If every man should do the like, how soon would
mankind be dispatched, and the World become a shambles, men running furiously to
one another destruction for the injuries they have mutually received? Do we
praise the lenity of parents to their Children, and dispraise the mercy of God,
because he does not presently use his right? Is then forbearance of revenge
accounted a virtue in a man, and shall it be an imperfection in God? With what
reason can we thus blame the eminent patience of God, which we have reason to
adore, and which every one of us are monuments of? The use is,

Use 1. Of information,

I. How unworthy and absurd a thing is it to deny Providence? Some of the
Heathens fancied, that God walked his Circuit in Heaven, or sat with folded
arms there, taking no cognizance of what was done in the World. Some indeed
upon some great emergencies have acknowledged the Mercies and Justice of God,
which are the two arms of his providence. The Barbarians, his justice, when
they saw a Viper leap upon Paul's hand, Act. 28.4. they say among themselves,
no doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. The Mariners in Jonah implored his mercy in
their distress at Sea; yet they generally attributed affairs to blind chance,
and worshipped Fortune as a Deity. For this vain conceit, the Psalmist calls
the Atheist fool, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
Potiphar acknowledged it; he saw that the Lord was with Joseph, and favored
his designs. Genesis 39.3. And his Master saw that the Lord was with him, and that
the Lord made all things that he did to prosper in his hand.

It will not be amiss to consider this; For the root of denial of providence is
in the hearts of the best men, especially under affliction. Asah was a holy
man; yet Psalm. 73.13. says he, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence. He had taken much pains with his heart, and had
been under much affliction. V. 14. [all the day long have I been plagued and
chastned every morning. And the consideration of this, that he should have so
much affliction with so much holiness, so strangely puzzled him, that he utters
that dreadful Speech, as if he had a mind to cast off all cares about the
worship of God, and sanctifying his heart, and repent of all that he had done
in that business; as much as to say, Had I been as very a villain as such, or
such a man, I might have prospered as well as they; but I was a fool to have
any fear of God.

Therefore we will consider, 1. The evil of denying Providence. 2. The grounds
of the denial of it by the heathen, which we shall find in our own hearts. 3.
The various ways wherein men practically deny providence.


1. The evil of denying it.

1. It gives a liberty to all sin. First.
It gives an occasion for an unbounded licentiousness; for what may not be done
where there is no government? The Jews tell us, Targum Hierosolymit. Mercer in
Genesis 4.7.
That the dispute between Cain and Abel was this. Cain said, because his
sacrifice was not accepted, that there was no Judge, no reward of good works,
or punishment of bad, which when Abel opposed Cain slew him; they ground it
upon the discourse of God with Cain, Genesis 4.7, 8.
v 7 which had been about his providence and acceptance of men, if they did
well, and punishment of men if they did ill; whence they gather, the discourse,
v. 8. Cain had with his brother, was about the same subject; for Cain talked
with Abel and upon that discourse rose up against him, and slew him. And his
discourse afterward with God, v 9. seems to favor it, am I my Brothers
keeper? Thou do say, thou art the governor of the World; it is not my
concern to look after him. Their conjecture is not improbable. If it were so,
we see how early this opinion began in the World; and what was the horrid
effect of it? the first sin, the first murder that we read of after the sin of
Adam. And what confusion would grow upon the entertainment of such a notion?

Indeed the Scripture every where places sin upon this root. Psalm. 10.11. [God
has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it.] He has turned his
back upon the World. This was the ground of the oppression of the poor by the
wicked which he mentions, v. 9, 10. So Isa. 26.10. ^ The wicked will not learn
righteousness, he will deal unjustly; the reason is, he will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord; he will not regard God's government of the world, though
his hand be lifted up to strike. There is no sin, but receives both its birth
and nourishment from this bitter root. Let the notion of providence be once
thrown out, or the belief of it faint, how will Ambition, Covetousness, neglect
of God, distrust, impatience, and all other bitter gourds grow up in a night?
It Is from this Topic all iniquity will draw arguments to encourage it self;
for nothing does so much discountenance those rising corruptions, and put them
out of heart, as an actuated belief, that God takes care of humane affairs.
Upon the want of this actuated knowledge God charges all the sin of Ephraim.
Hosea. 7.2. They consider Heb. they speak not to their hearts.
not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness. As if God were blind
and did not see or stupid and did not concern himself; or of a very frail
memory soon to forget.

2. It destroys all Religion. The first Foundation of all Religion is, first
the Being, Secondly the Goodness of God in the Government of the World. Heb.
11.6. he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and thas he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. He is the object of Religion, as he is the
Governor of the World. This denial would shut up Bibles and Temples, and bring
irreligious disorder into all Societies.

1. All Worship. He that has no design to govern, is supposed to expect no
homage; if he regards not his creatures, he cares for no worship from them. How
is it possible to persuade men to regard him for God, who takes no care of
them? Who will adore him, who regards no adoration?

2. Prayer. To what purpose should they beg his directions, implore his
assistance in their calamities, if he had no regard at all to his Creatures?
What favor can we expect from him who is regardless of dispensing any?

3. Praise. Who would make acknowledgments to one, from whom they never
received any favor, and has no mind to receive any acknowledgements from
them, because he takes no care of them? If the Deity have no relation to us,
how can we have relation to him? To what purpose will it be either to call upon
him, or praise him, which are the prime pieces of Religion, if he concern not
himself with us?

4. Dependence, Trust and Hope. What reason have we to commit our concerns to
him, and to depend upon him for relief? Hence the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.12.
The Gentiles were withone hope, and without God in the World. The reason they
were without hope, was because they were without God, they denied a settled
providence, and acknowledged a blind chance, and therefore could have no sound
hope; so some understand it of denial of God's government. It might well give
occasion to people to utter Pharaoh's Speech, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I
should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go. What is God that I should serve him? I have no such notion of a God
that governs the World. The regardlesness of his creature, disobligeth the
Creature from any service to him.

3. It is a high disparagement of God. To believe an impotent, ignorant,
negligent God, without care of his works, is as bad or worse than to believe no
God at all. The denial of his providence is made equal with the denial of God,
Psalm. 14.1. the fool has said in his heart there is no God. He denied God,
Elohim, which word notes God's providence. Not there is no Jehovah, which notes
his essence; he denied not God, quoad essentiam, but quoad providentiam,
whereupon the Psalmist dubbs the Atheist fool. It strips God of his judicial
power. How shall he judge his creatures, if he know not what they think, and
regards not what they do? How easy will it be for him to be imposed upon by
the fair pretenses, and lying excuses of men? It Is Diabolical. The Devil denies
not God's right to govern, but he denies God's actual government; for he says,
Luke. 4.6. the power and glory of the World is delivered unto him, and to
whomsoever, says he, I will, I give it. God had cast offall care of all
things, and made the Devil his Deputy. He that denies providence, denies most
of God's attributes, he denies at least the exercise of them; he denies his
Omniscience, which is the eye of Providence; Mercy and Justice, which are the
arms of it; Power, which is the life and motion of providence; Wisdom, which is
the rudder of providence, whereby it is steered; and Holiness, which is the
compass and rule of the motion of providence.

4. It is clearly against natural light. Socrates an Heathen could say,
Whosoever denied providence, did (...), was possessed with a Devil Montagne
against Seldom. p. 525.
. Should God create a man anew with a sound judgment, and bring him into the
World, when he should see the harmony, multitude, virtues and operations of all
Creatures, the stated times and seasons; must he not needs confess that some
invisible, unconceivable Wisdom did both frame, and does govern all the motions
of it? And it is a greater crime in any of us to deny providence, either in
opinion or practice, than it was or could have been in Heathens; because we
have not only that natural reason which they had, sufficient to convince us,
but supernatural revelation in the Scripture, wherein God has declared those
methods of his providence which reason could not arrive to. As to deny the
creation of the World, is a greater crime in a man that knows the Scripture,
than in a Heathen, because that has put it out of doubt. And the asserting of
this, being the end of all God's judgments in the World, Job 19.29.
Wrath brings the punishment of the Sword, that you may know there is a
judgment, i. e. providence; the denial of it is a sin against all past or
present judgments, which God has or does exercise. The Scripture frequently
declaring the reason of such and such judgments to be, that men may know that
the Lord is God.

2. The second thing is, Secondly.
the grounds of the denial of providence. This Atheism has been founded,

1. Upon an overweening conceit of men's own worths; when men saw themselves
frustrated of rewards they expected, and saw others that were instruments of
Tyranny and Lust, graced with the favors they thought due to their own virtue,
they ran into a conceit, that God did not mind the actions of men below. So
that it was pride, interest, self conceit, and opinion of merit, rather than
any well grounded reason introduced this part of Atheism into the World; for
upon any cross this opinion of merit swelled up into blasphemous speeches
against God. When we have any thoughts, (as we are apt to have) by our
religious acts to merit at God's hand, we act against the absoluteness of his
providence, as though God could be obliged to us by any other than his own
promise. Methinks Job has some spice of this in speaking so often of his own
integrity, as though God dealt injuriously with him in afflicting him. God
seems to charge him with it. Job 40.8. [Wilt thou also disannul my Judgment?
will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous?] As though in speaking so
much of his own integrity, and in complaining expressions, he would accuse God
of injustice, and condemn him as an unrighteous governor; and in Job's answer
you find no syllable or word of his integrity to God, but a self abhorrency,
Job 42.26. Wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. I doubt that from this
secret root arise those Speeches which we ordinarily have among men, what have
I done that God should so afflict me? Though in a serious way it is a useful
question tending to an enquiry into the sin that is the cause of it. But I
doubt ordinarily there is too much of a reflection upon God, as though they had
deserved other dealing at his hands. Take heed therefore of pride and conceits
of our own worth, we shall else be led by it to disparaging conceits of God,
which indeed are the roots of all actions contradictory to God's Will.

2. It is founded upon pedantical and sensual notions of God. As though it
might detract from his pleasure and delight, to look down upon this World; or,
as though it were a molestation of an infinite Power, to busy himself about
the care of sublunary things. They thought it unsuitable to the felicity of God,
that it would interrupt his pleasure, and make a breach upon his blessedness.
As though it were the felicity of a Prince not to take care of the Government
of his Kingdon, nor so much as provide for the well-being of his Children. I
doubt that from such, or as bad conceptions of God, may spring, ordinarily, our
distrust of God upon any distress. Take heed therefore of entertaining any
conceptions of God, but what the Scripture does furnish you with.

3. Or else, this sort of Atheism was ushered in by a stuttering conceit of the
Majesty of God. They thought it unbecoming the excellency of the divine Majesty
to descend to a regard of the petty things of the World; this seems to be the
fancy of them, Psalm. 37.11. How does God know? is there knowledge in the most
high? They think him too high to know, too high to consider. How unreasonable
is it to think God most high in place, and not in perfection; and if in
perfection, not in knowledge and discerning? They imagined of him as of a great
Prince, taking his pleasure upon the battlements of his palace, not beholding
the Worms upon on the ground; muffled with Clouds, as Job 22.13, 14 How does
God know? can he judge through the dark clouds? thick clouds are a covering to
him, that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of Heaven. We cannot indeed
have too high apprehensions of God's Majesty and Excellency: But we must take
heed of entertaining superstitious conceits of God, and such as are
dishonorable to him, or make the grandeur and ambition of men, the measures of
the greatness and Majesty of God. Upon this root sprung Superstition and
Idolatry, and the Worship of Demons, who according to the Heathens fancy, were
Mediators between God and men. And I doubt such a conceit might be the first
step to the introducing the Popish Saint-worship into the Christian World: and
this lies at the root of all our omissions of duty, or neglects of seeking God.
Let us therefore have raised thoughts of God's Majesty, and admiring thoughts
of his condescension, who notwithstanding his greatness, humbles himself to
behold what is done upon the Earth. The Psalmist sets a pattern for both, Psalm.
113.5, 6.

4. From their wishes upon any gripes of conscience. They found guilt staring
them in the face, and were willing to comfort themselves with the embraces of
this Doctrine, wherein they might find a security and ease to their prostituted
consciences, and unabounded liberty in the ways of sin. Those in Zephaniah,
were first settled upon their lees, and then to drive away all fears of
punishment, deny God's government. Zeph. 1.12. The Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil. A brave liberty for a City to be without a Magistrate,
a house without a Governor, a ship without a Pilot, exposed to the mercy of
winds and waves. A man to be without reason, that passion and lust should act
their pleasures; a Liberty that beasts themselves would not have, to be without
a Shepherd and one to take care of them. Such wishes certainly there are in men
upon a sense of guilt: they wish for their own security, there were no
providential eye to inspect them. Take heed therefore of guilt, which will draw
you to wish God deprived of the government of the World, and all those
attributes which qualify him for it. The readiness to entertain the motions of
Satan, rather than the motions of the Spirit, implies a willingness in them
that Satan might be the God of the World, who favors them in sin, rather than
the Creator who forbids it. But indeed the fears of conscience evidence a
secret belief, in men, of a just providence, whatever means they use to stifle
it; else why is man upon the commission of some notorious sinful act, afraid of
some evil hap to betide him? Why is he restless in himself? There is no sinner,
unless extremely hardened, but has some secret touch of conscience upon
notorious enormities: While the work of the Law is written in their heart,
their conscience will bear witness and accuse them Romans 2.14.
. In the most flagitious courses which the Apostle reckons up Romans 1 29, 30,
31, 32.
, they cannot put off the knowledge of the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, that is, worthy of death by the
judgment of God, which judgment is discovered in the Law of nature.

3. The third thing is, Thirdly.
The various ways wherein men parctically deny providence, or abuse it, or
contemn it.

1. When we will walk on in a way contrary to checks of providenes. When we
will run against the will of God manifested in his providence; we do deny his
government, and refuse subjection to him; when we will be peremptory in our
resolves against the declaration of God's will by his checks of providence, we
contend with him about the government of us and our actions. Such a dispute had
Pharaoh with God, notwithstanding all the checks by the plagues poored out upon
him; he would march against Israel to take them out of God's hand into his own
service again, Exodus 15.9. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I
will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my
sword, my hand shall destroy them. Here is the will of man vaunting against the
governor of the World, resolved to dispute God's Royalty with him in spite of
all the blastings of his designs, and the smart blows he had had from that
powerful arm, which cost him and his subjects their lives; they would not
understand till the taking off their wheels, but would run headlong into the
Red Sea. A remarkable example of this is in a good man, not so peremptory in
words, but in actions against the revelations of God's mind both by the Prophet
and his Providence. Jehosaphat had made a league with Ahab 2 Chronicles. 18.1, 2, 3.
, and God had ordered Micajah to acquaint him with the ill success of the
affair they went about, ver. 16, 19.
which Jehosaphat found true, for his own life was in danger, he was hardly
beset by the Enemy upon a mistake; ver. 31, 32.
he had an eminent answer of prayer, for upon his cry he had a quick return;
God engaged his providence over his enemies hearts for him, the Lord helped
him, ver. 31.
and God moved them to depart from him. And for his conjunction and continuance
in it against Mieajah's prophecy, God sends a Prophet to reprove him, 2 Chronicles.
19.2. should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord; he reproves him sharply for this
confederacy; yet Jehosaphat after he had a signal providence in delivering him
from another army, 2 Chronicles. 20.24. Yet after this he goes on in this way, 2 Chronicles. 20.35. after this, i. e. after a reproof by a Prophet, after ill success
in his league, after eminent care of God in his deliverance, after a signal
freeing him from a dangarous invasion in a miraculous way, he enters into a
league with Ahab's Son, as wicked as his Father, ver. 36. he joined himself
with him to make ships to go to Tarshish; and after that a third Prophet is
sent to reprove him, and the ships were broken, v. 37. Here is a remarkable
opposition to checks of providence, and manifest declarations of God's will, as
if he would be the Commander of the World instead of God. Abner's action is
much of the same kind, who would make the house of Saul strong against David,
tho he knew and was satisfied that God had promised the Kingdom to David.

2. In omissions of prayer. One reason to prove the fools denying God's
government of the world, is, that they call not upon the Lord. Psalm. 14.1, 4.
The Lord looked down from heaven to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God. It Is certainly either a denying of God's sufficiency to help us,
when we rather beg of every creature, than ask of God; or a charging him with a
want of providence, as though he had thrown off all care of worldly matters. 2
King 1.3. Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that you go to
enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? Seeking to any thing else with a neglect
of God, is a denying the care of God over his creature. Do we not in this case
make our selves our own governors and Lords, as though we could subsist
without him, or manage our own affairs without his assistance? If we did really
believe there was a watchful providence, and an infinite powerful goodness to
help us, he would hear from us oftener then he does. Certainly those who never
call upon him, disown his government of the world, and do not care whether he
regards the Earth or no. They think they can do what they please, without any
care of God over them. The restraining prayer is a casting off the fear of God.
Job 15.4. Thou casts off fear, why? and restrainest prayer before God. The
neglect of prayer arises from a conceit of the uprofitableness of it. Job
21.15. What profit should we have if we pray unto him? Which conceit must be
grounded upon a secret notion of God's carelessness of the world; such fruit
could not arise, but from that bitter root. But the Prophet Malachi plainly
expresses it, Mal. 3.14. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his ordinances? Whence did this arise, but from
a denial of providence, upon the observation of the outward happiness of the
wicked? ver. 15. And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wickedness, are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered. Sometimes
it rises from an apprehension that God in the way of his providence deals
unjustly with us. A good Prophet utters such a sinful speech in his passion, 2
King. 6.33. Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord
any longer?

3. When men will turn every stone to gain the favorable assistance of men in
their designs, and never address to God for his direction or blessing. When
they never desire God to move the hearts of those whose favor they court, as
though providence were an unuseful and unnecessary thing in the World. It was
the case of those Elihu speaks of, Job 35.9, 10. they cry out by reason of the
arm of the mighty, but none says, where is God my maker, who gives songs in
the night, etc. none in the midst of their oppressions and cries under them,
did consider either the power of God in the Creation, as he was their Maker,
nor his providence in the government of the World, as he raised up men from low
estates, and gave matter of cheerfulness even in a time of darkness. This was
the charge God by his Prophet brought against Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.7. (before the
text) Thou have relied on the King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy
God, herein thou have done foolishly, v. 9. where he sets a relyance on the
Creature, and a relyance on God in direct opposition. In several cases men do
thus deny and put a contempt on God, as the governor of the World; when we
will cast about to find out some creature resuge, rather than have recourse to
God for any supply of our necessities. Does not he slight his fathers care,
that will not seek to him in his distress? This was Asa's Sin. 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. The Jews
think, that one reason why Joseph continued two years in prison, was his
confiding too much upon the Butler's remembrance of him, and interest for his
deliverance, which they ground upon the request he makes to him, Genesis 40.14.
but think on me when it shall be well with thee, and show kindness to me, and
make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. I must confess
the expressions are very urgent, being so often repeated, and seems to carry a
greater considence at present in the arm of flesh, than in God. We do not read
that Joseph prayed so earnestly to God, though no doubt but being a good man he
did: Methinks the setting down his request with that repetition in the
Scripture, seems to intimate a probability of the Jews conceit. Or also when we
do seek to him, but it is out of a general belief of his providence and
sufficiency, not out of an actuated consideration; or when we seek to him with
colder affections than we seek to Creatures, as if we did half despair of his
ability or will to help us: as when a man thinks to get learning by the
sagacity of his own wit, his indefatigable industry, and never desires with any
ardent affection the blessing of God upon his endeavors. When we lean to our
own Wisdom, we distrust the providence of God, Pro. 3.5. trust in the Lord with
all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. Trust in God, and
leaning to our own wisdom, are opposed to one another as inconsistent; or when
a man has some great concern, suppose a suit at law, to think to carry his
cause by the favor of friends, the help of his money, the eloquence of his
advocate, and never interests God in his business: This is not to acknowledge
God in thy ways, which is the command, Pro. 6. in all thy ways acknowledge
him, as though our works were not in the hand of God, Eccles. 9.1. This is to
take them out of God's hand, and put them into the hands of men. To trust in
our wealth, it is to make God a dead and a stupid God, and disown his
providence in the bestowing it upon us. The Apostle seems to intimate this in
the opposition which he makes between uncertain riches and the living God 1 Timothy 6.17.
. These and many more actions suitable to them, are vertual denials of God's
superintendency, as though God had left off the government of the World to the
wits, or rather follies follies of men. These are to magnify the things we
seek to, above God, as the chief Authors of all our good. It Is to imagine him
less careful than man, more insufficient then man. It Is a departure from a full
fountain to a shallow stream; not to desire God's assistance, is either from
some check of conscience, that our business is sinful, that we dare not
interest him in it; or a disowning God's care, as if we could bide our counsels
from him, ( Isa. 29.15. Woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from
the Lord, and they say, who sees us? and who knows us?) an bring our
business to pass before he shall know of it; At least it is a slighting God's
government, since we will not engage God by prayer in the exercise of it on our
behalf, and disdain to acquaint him with our concerns. It Is a reflection upon
God's Wisdom to do so, which the Prophet mentions with a woe. Isa. 31.1, 2. Woe
to them that go down to Egypt for help, but they look not to the holy one of
Israel, yet he also is wise. It is a disparagement of God's providential
wisdom, not to look to him in our concerns, yea, and of his righteousness too,
they look not to the holy one of Israel. In this they neither regard his
Holiness nor his Wisdom. When we consult not with him upon emergent occasions,
we trust more to our own Wisdom, Counsel and Sufficiency, than to God's, and
set up our selves as our own Lords, and independent upon him, as though we
could manage things according to our pleasure.

4. When upon the receiving any good, they make a more grateful acknowledgment
to the instruments, than to God the principal Author of it. As if God had no
hand in bestowing those blessings upon them; as if the instruments had
dispossessed God of his governing providence, and engrost it in their own
hands. This men are guilty of, when they ascribe their Wealth to their own wit
and fortune; their health to their own care, or the Physician's skill; their
learning to their own industry; their prosperity to their friends or merits.
When men thus return their thank-offering to second causes, and ascribe to them
what is due to God, they give the glory of his providence to a miserable
creature. Thus was the foolish boasting of the Assyrian, Isa. 10.13, 14. By the
strength of my hand I have done this, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent, for I
have removed the bounds of the people, etc. It was Belshazzar's offense also,
Dan. 5 23. thou have lifted up thy self against the Lord of heaven, and praised
the Gods of silver, as though they were the authors of all thy greatness; so
Hab. 1.16. they sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drag, because
by them their portion is fat. Alluding to those that then worshipped their
warlike weapons, and the tools whereby they had got their wealth, in the place
of God, as the Heathen used to do Dought. Analect. Sacr. Ex curs 182.
. How base a usage is this of God, to rifle him of all his glory, and bestow it
upon the unworthiest instruments, inanimate creatures? It Is as high Idolatry as
that of the Heathens, in as much as it is a stripping God of the glory of his
providential care, though the object to which we direct our acknowledgments, is
not so mean as theirs which was a stock or stone. But is it not the same injury
to a person to rifle him of his goods to bestow it upon a beggar, as to give it
to a Prince? Amiraut de diverses religions.
It Is a depriving a man of his right: Yet, is not this ordinary? Do not men
ascribe more to the Physician that saves an eye in danger of being lost by a
defluxion, than to God who has given them both with the enjoyment of the light
of the Sun; yea more to the Medicine than to that God, who has a witness of
his Deity in every Drug? It Is as if the kindness a Prince shows to his
subjects, should be attributed to a Scullion in his Kitchen, rather than to
himself. This is to belly God and say, it is not he Ier. 5.12.
: It Is applicable to the case of mercies as well as afflictions and judgments,
of which it is properly meant. And this contempt is the greater by how much the
greater mercy we have received in a way of providence, Hos. 2.8. she did not
know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and
gold, which they prepared for Baal. She that had most reason to know, because
she had enjoyed so much; she that had experience how by a strong and mighty
hand I brought her out of Egypt into the Land now possessed by her; She would
not know that I gave her those good things she prepared for Baal. It would be a
natural consequent from this Scripture, that those that employ the good things
they enjoy upon their lusts, do deny the providential goodness of God in their
possession and enjoyment of them, because they prepare God's goodness for their
sinful pleasures, as though their own lusts had been the Authors of them; and
also their instruments, that receive too high and flattering thanks of this
nature, are much like Herod, that tickled himself with the Peoples applause,
that his voice was the voice of God, and not of man.

5. When we use indirect courses, and dishonest ways to gain wealth or honor.
This is to leave God, to seek relief at Hells gates, and adore the Devil's
providence above God's: When God does not answer us, like Saul we will go to
the witch of Endor, and have our ends by Hell, when Heaven refuses us. It Is a
convenanting with the Devil, and striking up a bargain and agreement with Hell,
and acknowledging Satan to be the God of the World. No man will doubt but in
express Covenants with the Devil, as Witches and Conjurers are reported to
make, that the Devil shall give them such knowledge, such wealth, or bring them
to such honor; it is no doubt, I say, but such do acknowledge the Devil the God
of the world, because they agree by articles to have those things conferred
upon them by Satan, which are only in the power of God absolutely to promise or
bestow. So when a man will commit Sin to gain the ends of his ambition or
covetousness, does he not implicitly covenant with the Devil who is the head
of sinners, and set up his sin in the place of God, because he hopes to attain
those things by sinful means which are only in the hand of God, and on whom he
only can have a dependence? This is the Devil's design out of an enmity to
providence. He tempted Christ to be his own Carver, thereby to put him upon a
distrust of his Father's care of him, Matt. 4.3. Command that these stones be
made bread, as though God could not provide for him; which design of the Devil
is manifest by our Savior's answer. This is to prostitute Providence to our
own lusts, and to pull it down from the government of the World, to be a Lacky
to our sinful pleasure; to use means which God does prohibit, is to set up Hell
to govern us, since God will not govern our affairs in answer to our greedy
desires. It Is to endeavor that by God's curse which we should only expect by
God's blessing: For when God has forbid sinful ways, severely threatened them,
perhaps cursed them in examples before our eyes, what is it but to say, that we
will rather believe God's curse will further us, than his blessing? It Is to
disparage his blessing, and prefer his curse; to slight his wisdom, and adore
our folly. When we go out of God's way, we go out of God's protection, we have
no Charter for the blessing of providence without that condition, Psalm. 37.3.
trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily
thou shall be fed; to do evil then is not to trust in God, or have any regard
to his providential care.

6. When we distrust God when there is no visible means. A distrust of God
renders him impotent, or false and mutable, or cruel and regardless, and what
not? We detract from his power, as if it depended upon creatures, or that he
were like an Artificer that could not act without his Tools: As if God were
tied to means, and were beholding to creatures for his operating power; as if
that God who created the World without instruments, could not providentially
apply himself to our particular exigencies without the help of some of his
creatures. If he cannot work without this or that means you did expect your
mercy by, it supposes that God has made the creature greater than himself,
and more necessary to thy well-being, than himself is; or else we conceit him
false or foolish, as if he had undertaken a task of government too hard for
him, as if he were grown weary of his labor, and must have some time to
recruit his strength; or as if he were unfaithful, not walking by rules of
unerring goodness; or if we acknowledge him wise, and able, and faithful, yet
it must then be a denial of his gracious tenderness, which is as great as his
power and wisdom, and a perfection equal with any of the rest. If his careing
for us be a principal argument to move us to cast our care upon him, as it is,
1 Pet. 5.7. casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you: Then if we
cast not our care upon him, it is a denial of his gracious care of us. This is
to imagine him a tenderer governor of beasts than men, as though our Savior
had spoke a palpable untruth, when he told us, not an hair of our heads does
fall without his leave; as if he regarded Sparrows only, and not his Children;
or else it implies that God cannot mind us in a crowd of business, in such
multitudes in the World, which he has to take care of. But certainly, as the
multitude of things does not hinder his knowledge of them, so neither do they
hinder his care. The arms of his goodness are as large to embrace all
creatures, as the eyes of his Omniscience are to behold them. From this root do
all our fears of the power of men grow, Isa. 51.12, 13. who art thou that art
afraid of a man that shall dye, etc. and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that
has stretched forth the heavens? etc Our forgetfulness at least, if not a
secret denial of God's Power in the works of Creation and Providence, ushers in
distrust of him, and that introduces a fear of man. If they that know his
name, will put their trust in him, Psalm: 9.10. for thou Lord, have not forsaken
them that seek thee; Then a distrust of him discovers an ignorance and
inconsideration of his name and his ways of working, and implies his forsaking
of his creature. He that trusts in any thing else besides God, denies all the
powerful operations of God, and conceives him not a strength sufficient for
him, Psalm. 52.7. That man does not make God his strength who trusts in the
abundance of his riches. How gross is it not to trust God under the very sense
of his powerful goodness, but question whether he can or will do this or that
for us? When we will have jealousies of him when he does compass us round about
with mercy, and encircle us with his beams; it is to question whether the
Summer-Sun will warm me, though it shine directly upon me, and I feel the vigor
of its beams upon my Body: much more base is this, then, to distrust him when
we have no means: What does this imply, but that he cares not what becomes of
his Children; that no advantage can be expected from him, that his intentions
toward us are not gracious, even whiles we feel him?

7. Stoutness under God's afflicting or merciful hand, is a denial or contempt
of providence. This was the aggravation of Belshazzars Sin, Dan. 5.23. and the
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not
glorified; he glorified not God in the way of his providence, but was playing
the Epicure, and was sacrilegiously quaffing in the vessels of the Temple when
the City was besieged; he seemed to dare the providence of God upon a
presumption that the City was impregnable by reason of Euphrates, and the
provision they had within their walls, which Xenophon says, was enough for
Twenty years; yet was taken that night when the handwriting was. And by how
much God's judgments have been more visible to us, and upon some well known by
us, or related to us, so much the greater is the contempt of his providential
government, as v. 22. and thou his Son Belshazzar have not humbled thy heart,
though thou knew all this, etc. he had known God's judgments upon his
Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar, a Domestic example of God's vindicating his
government of the World; and yet went in the same steps; so Jer. 5.3, 4. thou
have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made
their faces harder than a rock; what is the reason? the Prophet renders it, v.
4. they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of
their God. Correction calls for submission; but those like a Rock under God's
hand, were correction-proof, they would not consider the ways of God's
Providence, and the manner of them. It Is as if by our peevishness we would make
God weary of afflicting us, which is the worst case can happen. This is God's
complaint of the ten Tribes, Hos. 7.9. gray hairs are upon them, and they know
it not; strangers have devoured his strength, etc. There was a consumption of
their strength, the Assyrians and Egyptians to whom they gave gifts, had
drained their treasure, but they would not consider God as the Author, or
acknowledge whence their misery came, they would not seek God for all this, v.
10. It Is like a man's picking a pocket, or cutting a throat under the gallows in
contempt of Justice Jenkin.
; where as good men are both affected with, and remember God's judgments. Eber
called his Son Peleg, division, because in his days the Earth was divided;
that in the daily sight of his Son he might remember that sharp Providence in
scattering of the Babel builders. Judgments affect us when they are before our
eyes, as the Thunder and Plagues did Pharaoh; but when they are remoeved, men
return to their beloved ways, as though God had shot away all his arrows, and
was departed, to mind them no more. Take heed of this, it is a sin highly
provoking: God is so tender that his providence should be minded and improved,
that a sin of this nature he follows with his displeasure in this life at
least, Isa. 22.12, 13. And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to
weeping and mourning; and behold joy, and gladness, eating flesh and drinking
wire; let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. When God many judgment
shows himself to be Lord God of Hosts, and calls us to weeping, and we behave
our selves jollily in spite of his government, it is a sin he will remember,
and bind the guilt upon us, v. 14 and it was revealed in my ears by the Lord of
Hosts, suerly this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die.

8. Envy also is a denial of providence. To be sad at the temporal good, or the
gifts of another, as counting him unworthy of them; it is a reflection upon the
Author of those gifts, an accusing providence of an unjust or unwise
distribution Cajetan Summal. p. 428.
Since God may do what he will with his own, if our eye be evil, because God is
good, we entrench upon his Liberty, and deny him the disposal of his own goods,
as if God were but our Steward, and we his Lords. It Is a temper we are all
subject to, Psalm. 37.1. Fret no thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity. It Is peculiarly the product of
self-love, which affects the principality in the world, and particularly
affects the conduct of God in distributing his goods, that he must not give but
to whom they please. It arises indeed from a sense of our wants; but the
language of it is, God is unjust in his providence to me, because he bestows
not upon me that good which he gives to another. It Is such a sin that it seems
to be companion of our first parents, Pride, which was the cause of their fall.
They envied God a felicity by himself; for they would be like him, they would
he as Gods. Hence perhaps the Jews say, Cain denied the providence of God, as
envying his Brother, because God accepted Abel's sacrifice, and not his.
Jonah's passion arose from this pride, for fear he should be accounted a false
Prophet, whereupon he envies God the glory of his mercy, and the poor Ninivites
the advantage of it; he woul dhave God conform the way of his providence to his
pleasure and reputation. Indeed it is to envy God the honor of his p rovidence
in those gifts or good things another possesses, whereby he is instrumental to
glorify God, and advantage others. Thus we would direct God what instruments
he should employ, when no Artificer in his own Art would endure to be directed
by any ignorant person what tools he should use in his work.

9. Impatience under cross providence is a denial und contempt of God's
government. Men quarrel with God's revealed will, and therefore no wonder that
they quarrel with his providential will; whereby we deny him his right of
governing, and flight his actual exercise of his right. As if God were
accountable to us for his dispensations, and must have only a respect to us or
our humor in his government, Job 18.4. he tears himself in his anger; shall the
earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?
Must God alter the sense of his affairs according to our model and platform;
and because be does not observe our rules and methods, must we tear our selves
in anger? This is a secret cursing of God, and flying in his face, when we see
providence so cross, that there seems to be no help at any time either in
Heaven or Earth, Isa. 8.21, 22. they shall fret themselves, and curse their
king and their God, and look upwards, and they shall look unto the earth, and
behold trouble and darkness. Take heed of fretting at God's management of
things in the world, or thy own particular concerns; this may lead to a cursing
of God, and is indeed an initial secret swelling against him, and cursing of
him. Man is ambitions to become a God. Adam's posterity have in one sort or
other imitated him. This

1. Is a wrong to the Sovereignty of providence. 'Twas a good admonition of
Luther's to Melanctoa when he was troubled much about the affairs of the
Church, monendus est Philippus ut desinat esse rector mundi. By this temperawe
usurp God's place, and set our selves in his throne, we invade his supremacy by
desiring every thing to be at our beek; and are displeased with him, because he
does not put the reins of the worlds government into our hands. As if we would
command his will, and become his Sovereigns. It Is a striving with our Maker for
the superintendency, when we will sit Judge upon him, or censure his acts, and
presume to direct him. Isa. 45.9. Woe to him that strives with his Maker; shall
the clay say to him that fashions it, what make thou? or thy work, He has no
hands? How do men summon God to the bar of their interests, and expostulate
with him about his works, why he did not order them thus and thus; and if he
does so, to tell him he has no hand, no hand of providence in the World? The
design of that place is to stop such peevishness and invasions of God's right,
I will not have my Sovereign Will disputed, as if I were but the creatures
Servant; I am content you should ask of me things to come, v. 11. and pray to
me, but notwithstanding yet to submit to my pleasure without a peevish
endeavoring to wrest the Sovereignty out of my hand, and pull the Crown from
my head.

It Is a wrong to the goodness and righteousness of providence. It Is a charging
God with ill management, and an implicit language, that if we were the
commanders of providence, things should be managed more justly and righteously;
as it was Absalom's pretense in wishing to be the King of Israel in David's
stead, 2 Samuel 15.4. If patience be a giving God the honor of his
righteousnesess in his Judgments, Psalm. 191.75. I know, O Lord, that thy
judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me:
impatience must be a charge against God for unrighteousness in his judicial
proceedings, and a saying the way of the Lord is not equal, Ezekiel. 18.25. It Is
implied in that complaint, Isa. 58.2, 3. They ask of me the ordinances of
justice, etc. wherefore have we fasted and thou see not? wherefore have we
afflicted our Souls, and thou take no knowledge? We demand justice of thee,
since thou do nor seem to do that which is fit and righteous, in not
regarding us in our suits, and not bestowing that which we have fasted for. God
governs the World according to his will; our murmuring implies that God's will
is not the rule of righteousness. We affront the care of God toward his
Creatures, as if the products of our shallow reasons were more beautiful and
just than god's contrivances for us, who has higher and more glorious ends in
every thing, both for our selves and the world, of which we are members, and
for his own glory, to which we ought to subject our selves, when perhaps our
projects rend immediately to gratify some sensual or spiritual lust in us.
It Is the commendation the Holy Ghost gives of Job, Job 1.22. in all this Job
sinned not, neither charged God foolishly, as a Character peculiar to him;
implying that most men in the World, do, upon any emergency, charge God with
their crosses, as dealing unjustly with them, in inflicting punishment when
they think they have deserved rewards, Jeremiah is not innocent in this case,
Jerem. 20. 7 O Lord, thou have deceived me, and I was deceived, in the ill
success of his prophecy; as though an immense goodness would, and a Sovereign
power needed to deal in a fraudulent way with his Creatures to bring his ends
about.

3. It Is a wrong to the wisdom of Providence. We would degrade his O uniscience
and Wisdom, and sway him by our foolish and purblind dictates; it is as if we
would instruct him better in the management of the world, and direct him to a
reformation of his methods, Job 40.2. shall he that contends with the almighty,
instruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it: It Is a reproving God,
and reproofs imply a greater authority, or righteousness, or wisdom in the
person reproving; we reprove God, as if God should have consulted with us, and
asked our advice; it is to take upon us to be God's counselors, and to conclsude
the only wise God by our imperfect reason, Romans 11.34. Who has been his
counselor? It Is a secret boasting of some excellency in our selves, as if God
did not govern well, or we could govern better. Shall a silly passenger, that
understands not the use of the Compass, be angry that the skilful Pilot will
not steer the Vessel according to his pleasure? Must we give out our orders to
God, as though the Counsels of infinite wisdom must roll about according to the
conceits of our fancy? Is nto the language of our hearts in our fits of
impatience, as prodigiously proud against God's providence as the Speech of
that Monster was against the creation, who said, if he had been by God at the
Creation of the World, he could have directed him to a better platform; all
this and much more is vertually in this sin of impatience.

10. In charging our sins, and miscarriages by them, upon providence. In this
we contemn it. Some think Cain does so, Genesis 4.9 am I my brother's keeper? Thou
art the keeper and governor of the World, why did thou not hinder me from
killing my Brother? It Is certain the first man did so, Genesis 3.12. the woman
thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree; thy gift is the cause of my
sin and ruin. It Is as certain David laid the Sin of Vriah's murder at the door
of providence, 1 Samuel 11.25. when he heard that Vriah was dead, the Sword, soith
he, devours one as well as another. Man conjures up trouble to himself, when by
his folly he brings himself into sin, and from thence to misery, and then his
heart frets against the Lord, lays the blame both of his sin and following
mischiefs upon him. Pro. 19.3. the foolishness of man perverts his way, and his
heart frets against the Lord. There are many other ways wherein we deny or
slight providence.

1. When we do things with a respect to the pleasure of men more than of God.
As though God were careless both of himself and his own honor, and regarded
not the principles and ends of our actions.

2. In vain boasting and vaunting of our selves. As Benhaded would have such a
multitude of men in his army, as that there should not be dust enough in
Samaria to afford every man a handful 2. King. 20.10.
; wherein he swaggers with God, and vaunts as if he were the Governor of the
World; yet this man with his numerous Host was routed by a troop of Lacquies,
v. 15, 20. they are called the young men of the Princes. Such is the folly of
men against the orders of God, when they boast in their hearts that their house
shall continue for ever Psalm. 49.11.
.

3. Oppression. They slay the fatherless, and say, the God of Jacob shall not
regard it Psalm. 94.6, 7.
. Their denial of providence was the cause of their oppression of the poor; and
where this is found in any, it is an argument it arises principally from a
like cause; this is also made the cause why they eat up God's people as they
eat bread Psalm 14.1, 4.


4. Misinterpretations of providence.

Such cursed jealousies had the Jews of God, Numb. 14.3. and wherefore has the
Lord brought us into this land to fall by the sword? were it not better for us
to return into Egypt? As tho God in that mighty deliverance had cheated tem
with a design to destroy them in the wilderness, when one of those plagues
poured out upon Pharaouh being turned upon their heads, had destroyed them in
Egypt. So foolish are they to think that God would ruin them upon dry Land, who
might have drowned them as well as their enemies in the Red Sea: so
unreasonable is man in his dispates against god.

5. In limiting providence. In bounding it to time, manner to other
circumstances as they did, Psalm. 78.41. they limited the holy one of Israel,
for they remembered not his hand. As though God must manage every thing
according to the will of a simple Creature. It was a forgetfulness of
providence, at least, that was the cause of it.

The Second Use is of Comfort. Use 2.
As the justice and righteousness of God is the highest comfort to a good man,
since the Evangelical dispensation: In that he has to deal with a righteous
God, who can as soon deny himself as his righteousness. So it is none of the
meanest comforts, that we acknowledge and worship that God, who exercises
himself in a constant government of the World, and leaves not any thing to the
capriciousness of that which we call fortune and chance. What satisfaction can
any man in his sober wits have to live in a World cast off from all care of the
Creator of it? Wisdom without providence would make any man mad, and the
greatest advantage would be to be a stupid and senseless fool. Can there be any
worse News told to men than this, that let them be as religious as they will,
It was an excellent Speech of a Stoic, (...).
there is no eye above takes notice of it? What can be bitterer to a rational
man than that God should be careless of the World? What a door would be opened
by it for all sin in the wicked, and eispair in the godly? it is as great a
matter of joy to the godlly, that God reigns, as it is of terror to the wicked,
Psalm. 97.1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, Psalm. 99.1. The Lord
reigns, let the people tremble.

It Is a comfort, That,

1. Man is a special object of Providence. God provides for all creatures, even
those that are the works of his hands, much more for a man, who is more
peculiarly the work of his head, in whose creation he took Counsel, Genesis 1.92.
let us make man in our Image, after our likeness; and the work of his heart in
being made according to his Image, and intended as a subordinate end of his
whole creation next to the principal, that of God's glory; he is the preserver
of man and beast: of a man principally, of beasts in subserviency to man's good,
and preservation.

2. Hloy men, a more special object of it. God preserves and provides for all
things and all persons: But his eye is more peculiarly fixed upon those that
fear him, Psalm. 33.18. behold, the eye of the lord is upon them that fear him,
upon them that hope in his mercy; so fixed, as if he had no regard to any thing
else. If God has a care of man created after his own Image, though his Image
be depraved, much more of those wherein his Image is restored. If God loves
himself, he loves his Image and his works. A man loves the works which he has
made of some external matter, much more does a father love his Son, much more
does God love his own, and therefore will work their good, and dispose of them
well. God exercises a special providence over the actions of a good man, as
well as his person, Psalm. 37.23. the steps of a good man are ordered by the
Lord, and he delights in his wyas; it is a special, because a delightful
providence, he delights in his way. How highly may it cheer a man to be in
covenant, with that God, which rules the world, and has all things at his
beck, to be under not only the care of his wisdom, but of his goodness? The
Governor of the World, being such an only friend, will do him no hurt, being
such an only Father will order all things to his good out of a Fatherly
affection; he is the Worlds Sovereign, but a good man's Father: He rules the
Heavens and the Earth, but he loves his holy ones. Other things are the objects
of his providence, and a good man is the end of it. For his eyes run to and fro
throughout the whole earth to show himself strong for him whose heart is
perfect toward him.

3. Hence it will follow, that the Spirits of good men have sufficient grounds
to bear up in their innocent sufferings and storms in the World. Innocent
sufferings; There is a righteous Governor, who orders all, and will reward
them for their pains, as well as their service, Heb. 6.10. for God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love; there is one that presides
in the World, who sees all their calamities, and cannot be mistaken in their
cause, who has as much power and wisdom, as will to help them. It would be an
affliction indeed, if there were no sovereign power to whom they might make
their moan in their distress, to whom they might ease their consciences, if
there were no Governor to whom they might offer up their petitions.

In the storms they meet with in the world. How does the presence of a skilful
Pilot in a weather-beaten Ship cheer the hearts of the fearful Passengers? What
a dread would it be to them to have the vessel wherein their lives and all are
concerned, left to the fury of Winds and Waves, without an able hand to manage
it? God has a bridle to check the passions of men, to marshal them according
to his pleasure; they are all but his instruments in the government, not the
Lords of it: God can lay a Plot with more wisdom for a good man's safety, than
the Enemy can for his destruction; he can countermine their Plots with more
power than they can execute them; he can out-wit their craft, overpower their
strength, and turn their designed cruelty against them, as a knife into their
own breasts.

4. Hence follows a certain security against a good man's want. If God take care
of the hairs, the ornamental superfluities, why should we doubt his care of our
necessary supply? If he be the guardian of our hairs which fall off without our
sense of their departure, shall he be careless of us when we are at a pinch for
our all? Will God reach out his care to Beasts, and deny it to his Children?
What would you judge of that Father, who should feed his Servants and starve
his Sons? He supplies his Enemies, and has he no bowels for his Frindes? The
very unjust as well as the just are enlightened by his Sun, and refresht by his
rain; and shall he not have a providence for those who have a special interest
in that Mediator, whose interposition kept up those standing mercies after our
forfeiture of them by sin? If he bless with those blessings, those who are the
objects of his curse; will he not bless those that are in his special favor
with them, so far as they may prove blessings to them? Psalm. 34.10. the young
Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord, shall not want
any good thing, v. 9. for there is no want to them that fear him. A good man
shall have what he needs, not always what he thinks he needs. Providence
intends the supply of our necessities, not of our desires; he will satisfy our
wants, but not our wantonness. When a thing is not needful, a man cannot
properly be said to want it; when it is needful, a good man shall not be
without it; what is not bestowed upon us, may not be so beautiful at that time
wherein we desire it, for every thing is beautiful in its season Eccles. 9.11.
. He that did not want God's kindness to renew him, shall never want God's
kindness to supply him; his hand shall not be wanting to give, where his heart
has been so large in working. Others live that have an interest only in common
providence, but good men have providence cabinetted in a promise, and assured
to them by a deed of covenant-conveyance; he was a provider before, he has
made himself now your Debtor. You might pray for his providential care, before
with a common faith, now with a more special expostulation: For in his promise
he has given a good man the key of the Chest of his providence, because it is
the promise of this life, and that which is to come 1 Timothy 4.8.
; of this life, not to our desires, but necessities; of the life to come to
both, wherein they shall have whatsoever they can want, and whatsoever they can
desire.

Again consider, God does exercise a more special providence over men, as
clothed with miserable circumstances, and therefore among his other Titles,
this is one, to be a helper of the Fatherless Psalm. 10.14.
. It Is the argument the Church used to express her return to God, Hos. 14.3.
for in thee the fatherless find mercy. Now what greater comfort is there than
this, that there is one presides in the world, who is so wise, he cannot be
mistaken; so faithful he cannot deceive; so pitiful he cannot neglect his
people; and so powerful, that he can make stones even to be turned into bread,
if he please?

Further, take this for a comfortable consideration,

God does not govern the World only by his will as an absolute Monarch, but by
his wisdom and goodness at a tender Father. It Is not his greatest pleasure to
show his Sovereign power, or his unconceivable wisdom, but his immense
goodness, to which he makes the other attributes subservient. What was God's
end in creating, is his end in governing, which was the communication and
diffusion of his goodness; we may be sure from hence, that God will do nothing
but for the best, his wisdom appointing it with the highest reason, and his
goodness ordering it to the most gracious end; and because he is the highest
good, he does not only will good, but the best good in every thing he acts.

What greater comfort can there be, than that we are under the care of an
infallible unwearied and righteous Governor? infallible because of his infinite
Wisdom, unwearied because of his incomprehensible Omnipotency, and righteous
because of his unbounded Goodness and Holiness.

3. Use of Exhortation.

The duties arising from hence, will run as a thread through the web of our
whole lives, and all the motions of them. This Doctrine has an influence upon
our whole course; there is nothing we meet with, but is an act of providence;
and there is no act of providence, but calls for some particular duty. Is there
any good we want? we must seek it at his hands, we must depend upon him for it,
we must prescribe no methods to him, but leave the conduct of it to his own
wisdom. Is it a cross providence, and contrary to our desires and expectations?
Murmur not at it. Is it afflictive and troublesome? Submit to it. Is it either
good or bad, and present, we must study to understand it: is it a good and
present? give God the glory of it.

1. Seek every thing you need at the hands of God. It Is not only the
skilfulness of the Pilot, but a favorable gale from Heaven, which must conduct
the Ship to the intended port. As his providence is the foundation, so it is
the encouragement of all prayer. The end of the Lords prayer is, for thine is
the kingdom, the power and the glory: the providential Kingdom belongs to God,
Power he has to manage it, and his glory is the end of all; seek to him
therefore for the exercise of his power in thy concerns, and for his directing
them to his glory in his providential administrations. Every one of our days,
and both the mercy and the misery of them, depend upon him, Pro. 27.1. thou
know not what a day may bring forth. But God foresees all events; have
recourse the refore to his care for every very day success. What are our
contrivances without the leave and blessing of providence? Like the bubbles
blown up from a nut-shell, easily broken by the next puff. Our labor will be
as fruitless as Peter's with all his toil, and catch nothing, till God speaks
the word, and sends the fish into our net Luke 5 5.
. The way of man is not in himself Jer. 10.13.
. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walks, to direct his steps. Dangers are not within the reach of our eye to
foresee, nor within the compass of our power to prevent. Humane prudence may
lay the platform, and God's power blast the execution, when it seems to be
grown up nearest to maturity. Hezekiah was happy in his affairs, because he was
assisted by God; Ahaz unhappy, because he is deserted by God. If we would have
a Clock go well, we must look chiefly to the motions of the chief Wheel; a
failure in that, makes an error in all the rest: nothing can terminate it is
motion to our benefit without providence. Colored glass can reflect no beams
without the Sun's light, nor fruits be ripened without its influence. Our
dependence on God is greater than theirs on the Sun, God lets men play with
their own wit and strength, and come to the brink of execution of their
designs, and then blows upon them, that they may know there is a God in the
Earth. Pythagoras could say, it was (...) a ridiculous thing, to seek that
which is brave and virtuous any where else than of God Jamblich^ vita Pithag.
lib 1. cap 18. p. 89
. Cyrus is a brave pattern, who is mentioned in Scripture, and represented by
Xenophon calling upon God when he was first chosen General; and in his Speech
to his Captains to encourage them to hope for a good success of the expedition,
Xenophon (...). lib (...). p. 23.
tells them they might expect it, because I have begun with God, which you
know, says he, is my custom, not only when I attempt great matters, but also
the (...) things of lesser concernment. The seeking of God should be the
prologue to all our affairs; we are enjoined first to pray, and then determine,
Job 22.27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, thou shall also decree a thing,
and it shall be established unto thee. The interessing Providence in our
concerns, is the high way to success. The reason we miscarry, is because we
consult not God, but determine without him; and then we have no reason to
complain of him for not prospering our way, when we never commended our affairs
to his conduct. It has been the practice of holy men. Nehemiah first
petitioned God before he would use his interest in the Kings favor, Nehem.
2.4. then the King said unto me, for what do thou make request? So I prayed
to the God of Heaven, and I said unto the King, etc. So Abraham's Steward puts
up his request to God, before he would put the business he came upon, in
execution, Genesis 24.12. David frequently in particular cases, 1 Samuel 23.9. 2 Samuel 2.1. 2 Samuel 19.23. God only does what he pleases in Heaven and in Earth;
He only can blese us, he only can blast us. Shall we be careless in any
undertaking, whether we have his favor or no? It Is a ridiculous madness to
resolve to do any thing without God, without whose assistance and preserving of
us, we had not been able to make that resolution.

2. Trust Providence. To trust God when our Warehouses and Bags are full, and
our Tables spread, is no hard thing, but to trust him, when our purses are
empty, but a handful of meal and a cruse of Oil left, and all ways of relief
stopped, herein lies the wisdom of a Christians grace. Yet none are exempted from
this duty; all are bound to acknowledge their trust in him by the daily prayer
for daily bread; even those that have it in their Cupboards as well as those
that want it; The greatest Prince, as well as the meanest beggar. Whatever your
wants are, want not faith, and you cannot want supplies. It Is the want of this
binds up his hand from doing great works for his Creatures: The more we trust
him, the more he concerns himself in our affairs. The more we trust our selves,
the more he delights to cross us; for he has denounced such an one cursed that
makes Flesh his arm Jor. 17.5.
, though it be the best flesh in the world, because it is a departing from the
Lord. No wonder then that God departs from us, and carries away his blessing
with him. While we trust our selves, we do but trouble our selves, and know not
how to reconcile our varions reasons for hopes and fars; but the committing our
way to the Lord, renders our minds calm and composed, Prove. 16.3. commit thy
works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be astablished. Thou shall have no
more of those quarrelling disturbing thoughts, what the success shall be.

1. Trust providence in the greatest extremities. He brings us into straits,
that he may see the exercise of our faith Zech. 3.12. I will leave in the midst
of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the
Lord. When we are most desolate, we have most need of this exercise, and have
the fittest season to practice it: he is always our refuge and our strength,
but in time of trouble a present help, Psalm. 46.1. Daniel's new advancement by
Belshazzar but a day before the City was taken by the Enemy Dan. 5.29.
, the King slain, and (no doubt) many of his Nobility, and those that were
nearest in Authority with him, it being the interest of the Enemy to dispatch
them, was a danger; yet God by ways not expressed, preserved Daniel, and gave
him favor with the Conqueror. God sometimes leads his people into great
dangers, that they may see and acknowledge his hand in their preservation.
Daniel had not had so signal an experience of Gods care of him, had he been in
the lower condition he was in before his new preserment. God's eye is always
upon them that fear him; not to keep distress from them, but to quicken them in
it, and give them as it were a new life from the dead, Psalm. 33.18, 19. To
deliver their Soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. God brings us
into straits, that we may have more lively experiments of his tenderness in his
seasonable relief: If he be angry, he will repent himself for his Servants,
when he sees their power is gone; because then the glory of his providence is
appropriated to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.36, 39. See now that I, even I am he, and
there is no God with me, I kill, and I make alive. No Creature can have any
pretense to share in it; He delights thereby to blow up both our affections to
him, and admirations of him, and store up in us a treasure of experiments to
encourage our trusting in him in the like straits. We should therefore repose
our selves in God in a desert, as well as in the Cities; with as much faith
among Savage beasts, as in the best company of the most sociable men Durant de
Tentat. p. 168.
. And answer the greatest strait with Abraham's Speech to Isaac, God will
provide. For we have to do with a God who is bound up to no means, is at no
expense in miraculous succors, who delights to perfect his strength in the
Creatures weakness. We have to do with a God, who only knows what may further
our good, and accordingly orders it; what may hinder it, and therefore prevents
it. He can set all causes in such a posture, as shall conspire together as one
link to bring about success, and make even contrary motions meet in one
gracious end; as the Rivers which run from North and South, the contrary
quarters of the world, agree in the surges of one Sea. Though providence may
seem to cross one another, they shall never cross his word and promise, which
he has magnified above all his name. And his Providence is but a servant to
his Truth.

2. Trust it in the way of means. Though we are sure God has decreed the
certain event of such a thing, yet we must not encourage our idleness, but our
diligence. Though Moses was assured of the victory, when Amalek came armed
against him, yet he commands Joshua to draw up the valiant men into a body,
himself goes to the Mount to pray, and is as diligent in the use of all means,
as if he had been ignorant of God's purpose, and had rather suspected the rout
of his own than his Enemies forces. Neither does Joshua afterward, though
secured by promise in his conquest of Canaan, omit any part of the duty of a
wise and watchful General, he sends spies, disciplines his forces, besieges
Cities, and contrives stratagems. Providence directs us by means; not to use
them, is to tempt our Guardian; where it intends any great thing for our good,
it opens a door, and puts such circumstances into our hands, as we may use
without the breach of any Command, or the neglect of our own duty. God could
have secured Christ from Herod's sury, by a miraculous stroke from Heaven upon
his Enemy; but he orders Joseph and Mary's flight into Egypt as a means of his
preservation. God rebukes Moses for praying, and not using the means in
continuing the Peoples march, Exodus 14.15. Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak
unto the children of Israel, that they go forwards. To use means without
respect to God, is proudly to contemn him; to depend upon God without the use
of means, is irreligiously to tempt him; in both we abuse his providence; In
the one we disobey him in not using the means he has appointed; in the other,
presumptuously impose upon him for the encouragement of our laziness. Diligence
on our part, and the blessing on God's, Solomon joins together, Prove. 10.4. The
hand of the diligent makes rich; but v. 22. The blessing of the Lord makes
rich. So Eccles. 9.1. Our works are in the hand of God; our works, but God's
blessing; God's blessing, but not without our works. It was the practice of
good men. Jacob wrestles with God to divert his Brother's fury, yet sends a
Present to his Brother to appease him Genesis 32.9, 13.
. David trusts in the name of the Lord his God in his duel with Goliath, but not
without his sling: Our labor should rather be more vigorous than more faint,
when we are assured of the blessing of providence by the infallibility of the
promise.

3. Trust providence in the way of the precept. Let not any reliance upon an
ordinary providence induce you into any way contrary to the command. Dan. 1.8,
9, 10, etc but Daniel purpojed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the Kings meat.
Daniel had many inducements from an appearance of providence to eat the Kings
meat, his necessity of a compliance in his captivity, probability of preferment
by learning the wisdom of the Country, whereby he might both have advanced
himself, and assisted his Contrymen, the greatness of the consideration for
a Captive to be fed from the Kings Table, the ingratitude he might be accused
of, for despising so kind a treatment; but none of these things moved him
against a command; because the Law of God forbad it, he would not eat of the
King's meat. Daniel might have argued, I may wind my self into the King's
favor, do the Church of God a great service by my interest in him, which may
be dashed in pieces by my refusal of this kindness; but none of these things
wrought upon him. No providence wherein we have seeming circumstances of
glorifying God, must lead us out of the way of duty; this is to rob God one way
to pay him another. God brought Daniel's ends about, he finds favor with the
Governor, his request is granted, the success is answerable, and all those
ends attained, which he might in a sinful way by an ill construction of
providence have proposed to himself, all which he might have missed of, had he
run on in a carnal manner. This, this is the way to success, Psalm. 37.5. Commit
thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and be shall bring it to pass. Commit
thy way to the guidance of his providence, with an obedience to his precept,
and reliance on his promise, and refer all success in it to God. If we set up
our golden Calves made of our own earrings, our wit and strength, and carnal
prudence, because God seems to neglect us, our fate may be the same with
theirs, and the very dust of our demolisht Calf may be as bitter Spice in our
drink as it was in theirs.

4. Trust him solely without prescribing any methods to him. Leave him to his
wise choice, wait upon him because he is a God of judgment Isa 30.28.
, who goes judiciously to work, and can best time the executions of his will.
The wise God observes particular periods of time, for doing his great works.
John 2.4. my hour is not yet come, woman, what have I to do with thee? Which
man is no competent Judge of: I will do this miracle, but the season is not yet
come wherein it will be most beautiful. God has as much wisdom to pitch the
time of performance of his promise, as he had mercy at first to make it. How
presumptuous would it be for the shallow world, a thing worse than nothing, and
vanity, to prescribe rules to the Creator? Much more for a single person, a
little Atom of dust, infinitely worse than nothing, and vanity, to do it. Since
we had no hand in Creating the world or our selves, let us not presume to
direct God in the government of it, Job 38.4. Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare if thou have understanding? Would it not be a
disparagement to God to stoop to thy foolish desires, yea? would you not your
selves have a lower conceit of him, if he should degrade his wisdom to the
wrong biass of your blind reason?

Thirdly, Submit to providence. It Is God's right to govern the World, and
dispose of his Creature; it is his glory in heaven to do what he will Psalm 115
3. But our God is in the Heaven, he has done what soever he pleased.
; let us not by our unsubmissive carriage deprive him of the same Glory on
earth; he brings to pass his will by ways the Creature cannot understand. It Is
the wisest speech in that medley of fooleries, the Turkish Alcoran Deus
triumphat in sua causa, etc.
. We must walk by the rule of reason which God has placed in us for our guide;
yet if Providence brings to pass any other event contrary to our rational
expectations, because it is a clear evidence of his will, we must acquiesce. As
when a Traveller has two ways to come to his journeys end, the one safe, the
other dangerous, reason persuades him to choose the safest way, wherein he falls
among thieves; now having used his reason, which in that case was to be his
director, he must acquiesce: God's Providence brings forth an event, which he
could not without violence to his reason avoid. And therefore it is a great
vanity, when a man has resolved the most probable way in a business, and fails
in it, to torment himself; because though our consultations depended upon our
selves, yet the issues of them are solely in the hand of God. It concerns us
therefore to submit to Gods disposal of us and our affairs, since nothing can
come to pass but by the will of God effecting it, or permitting it. If the fall
of a Sparrow is not without his Will Matthew. 10.29.
, much less can the greater events which befall men the nobler Creatures, be
without the same concurrence of Gods pleasure; therefore submit. For,

1. Whatsoever God does, he does wisely. His acts are not sudden and rash, but
acts of Counsel; not taken up upon the present posture of things, but the
resolves of Eternity. As he is the highest wisdom, so all his acts relish of
it, and he guides his will by Counsel, Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things after
the counsel of his own will.} If God took Counsel in Creating the World, much
more in laying a platform of government, much more in the act of government;
for men can frame models of government, that can never reduce them into
practice. Now God being infinitely wise, and his will infinitely good, it must
needs be that goodness and wisdom are the rules whereby he directs himself in
his actions in the world. And what greater motive can there be to persuade our
submission, than Wisdom and Goodness transacting all things? Gods counsel being
the firmest, as well as the wisest, it is a folly both ways to resist it.

2. God discovers his mind to us by providence. Every work of God being the
result of his Counsel, when we see it actually brought forth into the World,
what else does it discover to us, but that Counsel and Will of his? Every
single providence has a language wherein Gods mind is signified, much more a
train and contexture of them, Luke 7.22. tell John what things you have seen
and heard, how that the blend see, the lame walk, the leapers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised to life, to the poor the gospel is preached. Our
Savior informs John's Disciples from acts of providence; he gives him no other
answer, but turns him over to interpret and construe his works in the case.
Providence therefore must not be resisted, when Gods mind in it is discovered:
It Is disingenuous to act against his pleasure and manifest mind; it is the
Devils sin. Aaron when he lost his two Sons, in so judicial a manner by Fire
from Heaven, yet held his peace Levit 10 1, 2, 3.
; because God had declared his mind positively, I will be glorified. It Is
dangerous to resist the mind of God, for the word of his providence shall
prosper in spite of Men and Devils, Isa. 55.11. My word that goes forth of my
mouth, shall not return unto me void, it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it; and therefore a resisting of it is termed (...), a fighting against
God, by Gamaliel, no great friend to the Church, Acts. 5.38, 39.

4. Murmur not at providence. Though we do not clearly resist it, if there be a
repining submission, it is a partial opposition to the Will of God. We might as
well murmur at God's creation, as at his providence, for that is as arbitrary
as this; he is under no Law but his own righteous will: we should therefore
leave the government of the world to God's wisdom, as we acknowledge the frame
of it to be an act of his power. If God should manage his ways according to
our prescriptions, what satisfction would God have, what satisfaction would the
world have? He might be unjust to himself, and unjust to others. Your own
complaints would not be stilled, when you should feel the smart of your own
Counsels; yet if they were, what satisfaction could there be to the complaints
of others, whose interests and therefore judgments and desires lie cross to
yours? Man is a cross Creature. The Isarelites exclaimed to God against
Pharaoh; and when the Scene was changed, they did no less murmur against Moses
in the wilderness. They were as troublesome when they were delivered, as when
they were afflicted. In Egypt they would have their liberty, and in the
Wilderness their stomachs turn, and they long for the Onyons and Garlic,
though attended with their former slavery. Let God govern the World according
to his own Wisdom and Will, till all mankind can agree in one method to offer
to him, and that I think will never be, though the world should last forever.
Murmur not therefore; whatsoever is done in the world, is the work of a wise
agent, who acts for the perfection of the whole universe; and why should I
murmur at that which promotes the common happiness and perfection, that being
better and more desirable, than the perfection of any one particular person?
Must a Lutinist break all his strings, because one is out of tune? And must God
change his course, because things are out of order with one man, though in
regard of divine providence things are not out of order in themselves, or
without any care, for God is a God of order? This temper will hinder our
prayers; With what face can we pray to that God whose wisdom we thus repine at?
If God does exercise a providence in the World, why do we murmur? if he does
not take care of those things, why do we pray to him? it is a contradiction. It
also hinders us from giving God the glory, and our selves the comfortable sight
of his providence. God may have taken something from us, which is the matter of
our sorrow, and given another thing to us, which might be the matter of our
joy. Jacob lost a joint, and got a blessing Genesis 32.29, 31.
: What advantage can it be to murmur? Can all your cries stop the motions of
the Heavens, when a storm reaches you? Can your clamours make the Clouds move
the faster, or persuade the showers from drenching us? Murmuring at any
afflictive providence, is the way to make the Rod smarter in it self, and
sharper to us.

5. Study providence. It Is a part of Atheism not to think the acts of God in
the World worth our serious thoughts. And if you would know the meaning of his
administrations, grow up in the fear of God, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him. God is highly angry with those that mind him
not, Psalm. 28.5. because they regard not the operation of his hands, he shall
destroy them, and not build them up: He shall utterly root them out.

1. Study providence universally. The darkest; God brings order out of the
Worlds confusion, even as he framed a beautiful Heaven and Earth out of a rude
Mass. The terriblest; these offer something worth our observation; the dreadful
providence of God makes Sodom an example to after ages. Jude 7. They are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, etc. The
smallest; God is a wise agent, and so the least of his actions are significant.
There is nothing superfluous in those acts, we account the meanest; or to act
vainly and lightly, argues imperfection, which cannot be attributed to God. The
wisdom of God may be much seen in those providence the blind World counts
small; as a little picture is often times of more value, and has more of the
workman's skill than a larger which an ignorant person might prize at a higher
rate; the Lilies, Flowers, Sparrows, our Savior raises excellent observations
from.

2. Regularly. By the Word; compare providence and the promise together. God's
manner of administrations, and the meaning of them, is understood by the word,
Psalm. 77.13. Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary. By Faith; we many times
correct our sense by reason, when we look through a blew or green glass, and
see all things blew or green; though our sense represents them so, yet our
reason discovers the mistake; Why should we not correct reason by faith? Indeed
our purblind reason stands in as much need of a regulation by faith, as our
deceitful sense does of a regulation by reason. We may often observe in the
Gospel, that the holy Chest taking notice of the particular circumstances in
the bringing Christ into the World, and in the course of his life, often has
those expressions, as it was written; that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.
There is not a providence happens in the World, but there are some general
rules in the World, whereby we may apprehend the meaning of it. From God's
former work discovered in his word, we may trace his present footsteps:
Observe the timings of providence wherein the beauty of it appears, since God
has made every thing beautiful in its time.

3. Entirely. View them in their connection. A harsh touch single would not be
pleasing, but may rarely affect in consort: The providence of God bear a just
proportion to one another, and are beautiful in their entire Scheme; but when
regarded apart, we shall come far short of a delightful understanding of them.
As in a piece of Arras folded up, and afterward particularly opened, we see
the hand or foot of a man, the branch of a tree, or if we look on the outside,
we see nothing but knots and threads, and uncouth shapes that we know not what
to make of; but when it is fully opened, and we have the whole Web before us,
we see what Histories and pleasing characters are interwoven in it. View them
in their end; there is no true judgment to be made of a thing in motion, unless
we have a right prospect of the end to which it tends. Many things which may
seem terrible in their motion, may be excellent in their end. Providence is
crowned by the end of it. Asaph was much troubled about the prosperity of the
wicked, and affliction of the Godly, but he was well satisfied when he
understood their end, which was the end of Providence too, Psalm. 73.16, 17.
When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me, until I went into the
Sanctuary, then understood I their end. Moses his Rod was a Serpent in its
motion upon the ground; but when taken up, it was a Rod again to work miracles.
God set us a pattern for this in the Creation. He views the Creatures as they
came into being, and pronounced them good; he takes a review of them afterward
in their whole frame, and the subordination of them to one another, and the
ends he had destined them to, and then pronounces them very good. The merciful
providence of God if singly looked upon, will appear good, but if reviewed in
the whole web, and the end of them, will commence very good in our
apprehensions.

4. Calmly. Take heed of passion in this study; that is a mist before the eye
of the mind. Sensual pleasures also disturb and stifle the noble operations of
the intellective part, and all improving thoughts of Gods providence, Isa.
5.12. And the harp and the viol and wine are in their feasts, but they regard
not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operations of his bands; All
thoughts of them are choked by the pleasures of sense. Passions and sensual
pleasures are like flying clouds in the night, interposing themselves between
the stars and our eyes, that we cannot observe the motions of them. Turbulent
passions or Swinish pleasures prevailing, obscure the providence of God. Our
own humor and interest we often make the measures of our judgment of
providence: Shimei when Absalom rebels against his father, looks no further
than his own interest, and therefore interprets it as a judgment of God in
revenging the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. The Lord has returned upon thee
all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have reigned. Therefore
the Spirit of God takes particular notice that he was of the house of Saul, v.
5. when indeed this judgment was quite another thing, for David's sin in the
matter of Vriah was written in the forehead of it.

5. Seriously. It Is not an easy work; for the causes of things are hid as the
seminal virtues in plaints, not visible till they manifest themselves.
Providence is God's Lanthorn in many affairs, if we do not follow it close, we
may be left in the dark, and lose our way. With much Prayer; For we cannot of
our selves find out the reason of them; being shallow Creatures, we cannot find
out those infinite wise methods God observes in the managing of them; but if we
seriously set to work, and seek God in it, God may inform us, and make them
intelligible to us. Though a man may not be able of himself to find out the
frame and motions of an Engine, yet when the Artificer has explained the work,
discovered the intent of the Fabric, it may be easily understood. If it be
dark, whilst you seriously muse on it, God may send forth a light into you, and
give you an understanding of it, Mat. 2.20. Joseph thought of those things, and
whilst he thought on them, the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream;
God made them known to him. The Israelites saw God's acts in the bulk of them,
but Moses saw his way and the manner how he wrought them, Psalm. 103.7. He made
known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the Children of Israel. Moses had
more converse with God than they, and therefore was admitted in to his secrets.

6. Holily. With a design to conform to that duty providence calls for. Our
motions should be according to the providence of God, when we understand the
intent of them. There is a call of providence, Isa. 22.12. In that day the Lord
called to weeping and mourning; Sometimes to sorrow, sometimes to joy. If it be
a providence to discover our sin, let us comply with it by humiliation; if it
be to further our grace, suit it by lively and fresh actings. As the sap in
plants descends with the Sun's declination, and ascends at the return of the
Sun from the Tropic; there are several graces to be exercised upon several
acts of providence; either public to the Church and Nation, or particular to
our own persons. Sometimes faith, sometimes joy, sometimes patience, sometimes
sorrow for sin. There are spiritual lessons in every providence; for it does
not only offer something to be understood, but something to be practiced, Mark
10.15. A Child is brought to Christ, and Christ from thence teaches them a
lesson of humility. Luke 13.1, 2, 3. When Christ discourses of that sad
providence of the blood of the Galileans, and the Tower of Siloa, he puts them
upon the exercise of repentance. The Ruler enquired the time when his Son began
to recover, that his faith in Christ might be confirmed, for upon that
circumstance it did much hang; and in doubtful cases after a serious study of
it, and thou know not which way to determine, consider what makes most for
God's glory and thy spiritual good, for that is the end of all. Let us
therefore study providence; not as Children do Histories, to know what men were
in the World, or to please their fancy only; but as wise men, to understand the
motions of States, and the intrigues of Counsels; to enrich them with a
knowledge whereby they may be serviceable to their Country. So let us enquire
into the Providence of God to understand the mind of God, the interest of the
Church, the wisdom and kindness of God and our own duty in comormity thereunto.

6. Ascribe the glory of every providence to God. Abraham. Steward petitioned
God at the beginning of his business, Genesis 24.12. and he blesses God at the
success of it, ver. 26, 27. We must not thank the tools which are used in the
making an engine, and ascribe unto them what we owe to the Workmans skill: Men
is but the instrument, God's Wisdom is the Artist. Let us therefore return the
Glory of all where it is most rightly placed. We may see the difference between
Rachel and Leah in this respect; when Rachel had a Son by her maid Bilhah, she
ascribes it to God's care, and calls his name Dan, which signifies judging,
Genesis 30.6. God has judged me, and heard my voice. That the very Name might put
her in remembrance of the kindness of God in answering her prayer. And the next
Napthali, she esteems as the fruit of prayer, verse. 8. Whereas Leah takes no
notice of God, but vaunts of the multitude of her Children, verse. 11 be hold a
troop comes. She imposes the name of Gad upon them, which also signifies
fortune or good luck. And the next Asher, verse. 13. which is fortunate or
blessed. And we find Leah of the same mind afterward, ver. 17. It is said God
hearkened unto her, so that her Son Issachar was an answer of Prayer; but she
ascribes it to a lower cause which had moved God; because she had given her
maid to her Husband, verse 18. Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but to thy name
be the glory.

Doct. 2. All the motions of providence in the World are ultimately for the
good of the Church; of those whose heart is perfect toward him. Providence
follows the rule of Scripture. Whatsoever was written, was written for the
Churches comfort Romans 15.4.
. Whatsoever is acted in order to any thing written, is acted for the Churches
good. All the providence of God in the World are conformable to his
declarations in his word. All former providence were ultimately in order to
the bringing a Mediator into the World, and for the glory of him; then surely
all the providence of God shall be in order to the perfecting the glory of
Christ in that mystical body, whereof Christ is head, and wherein his affection
and his Glory are so much concerned. See the Proof of this by a Scripture or
two. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as
keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. Not one path, but [all] the works and
motions; not one particular act or passage of providence, but the whole tract
of his proceedings; not only those which are more smooth and pleasant, but
those which are more rugged and bitter. All [mercy and truth] suitable to that
affection he bears in his heart to them, and suitable to the declaration of that
affection he has made in his promise. There is a contexture and a friendly
connection of kindness and faithfulness in every one of them. They both kiss and
embrace each other in every motion of God toward them. As mercy made the
Covenant, so truth shall perform it And there shall be as much mercy as truth
in all Gods actings toward those that that keep it, Romans 8 28. We know that
all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose; [ we know, we do not conjecture or guess so,
but we have an infallible assurance of it. [All things] even the most
frightful, and so those that have in respect of sense, nothing but Gall and
Wormwood in them; [work together] they all conspire with an admirable harmony
and unanimous consent for a Christian's good. One particular act may seem to
work to the harm of the Church, as one particular act may work to the good of
wicked men: but the whole series and frame of things combine together for the
good of those that are affectionate to him. Both the Lance that makes us bleed,
and the plaster which refreshes the Wounds. Both the griping purges and the
warming Cordials combine together for the Patients cure [to them who are called
according to his purpose.] Here the Apostle renders a reason of this position;
because they are called not only in the general amongst the rest of the world,
to whom the Gospel comes; but they are such that were in Gods purpose and
counsel from Eternity to save, and therefore resolved to incline their will to
Faith in Christ. Therefore all his other Counsels about the affairs of the
world shall be for their good. Another reason of this, the Apostle intimates
verse. 27. The spirit makes intercession for the saints according to the will of
God. The intercessions of the Spirit which are also according to Gods will and
purpose, will not be fruitless in the main end, which both the intercessions of
the Spirit and purpose of God, and the will and desires of the Saints do aim
at, which is their good. Indeed where any is the object of this grand purpose
of God, he is the object of God's infinite and innumerable thoughts, Psalm.
40.5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and
thy thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee; if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.
The Psalmist seems to intimate that in all the wonderful works which God has
done, his thoughts are toward his people. He thinks of them in all his actions;
and those thoughts are infinite, and cannot be numbered, and reckoned up by any
Creature. He seems to restrain the thoughts of God to his people in all those
works of wonder which he does in the World, and which others are the Subjects
of: But his thoughts or purposes and intentions in all (for the word signifies
purposes too) are chiefly, next to his own glory, directed toward his people,
those that trust in him, which verse. 4. he had pronounced blessed. They run in
his mind as if his heart was set upon them, and none but them.

Here I shall premise two things as the groundwork of what follows.

1. God certainly in all his actions has some end; that is without question,
because he is a wise agent; to act vainly and lightly is an evidence of
imperfection, which cannot be ascribed to the only wise God. The Wheels of
Providence are full of Eyes Ezekiel. 1.18.
. There is motion, and a knowledge of the end of that motion. And Jesus Christ,
who is Gods Deputy in the providential government, has Seven Eyes, as well as
Seven Horns Revel. 5.6.
a perfect strength, and a perfect knowledge how to use that strength, and to
what end to use it. Seven being the number of perfection in Scripture.

2. That certainly is Gods end which his heart is most set upon, and that which
is last in execution. What does God do at the folding up of the World, but
perfect his people, and welcome them into Glory? Therefore God principally next
to himself, loves his Church. The whole Earth is his, but the Church is his
treasure, Ex. 19.5. If you will keep my Covenant, then shall you be a peculiar
treasure unto me above all people, for all the Earth is mine; Segullah such a
treasure, that a Man, a King will entrust in no hands but his own; all the
Earth is mine, is not a reason why the Church was his treasure, but an
incentive of thankfulness, that when the whole Earth was his, and lay before
him, and there were many people that he might have chosen and loved before
them, yet he pitched upon them to make them his choicest treasure. And when the
blessed God has pitched upon a people, and made them his treasure, what he
does for them, is with his whole heart, and with his whole Soul, Jer. 32 41,
42. speaking of making an everlasting Covenant, he adds, yea I will rejoice
over them to do them good, etc. assuredly with my whole heart, and with my
whole Soul: As though God minded nothing else but those people he had made an
everlasting Covenant with; which is the highest security, and most pregnant
expression of his affection that can be given to any, not to give them a parcel
or moiety of his heart, but the whole infinite entire piece, and to engage it
all with the greatest delight in doing good to them. That infinite heart of
God, and all the contrivances and workings of it, center in the Churches
welfare. The World is a Wilderness, but the Church is a Garden. If he water the
Wilderness, will he not much more dress his Garden? If the flights of Birds be
observed by him, shall not also the particular concernments of the Church? He
has a repository for them and all that belong to them; He has a book of Life
for their Names Luke 10.20.
, a book of Record for their members Psalm. 139.16.
, a Note-book for their Speeches, Mal. 3.16. A book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord; and a book of providence for their
preservation, Exodus 32.32. In the prosecution of this, I shall show 1. That it
is so de facto, First.
and has been so. 2. Secondly.
That according to the state of things and Gods Economy, it must be so. 3. The
improvement of it, Thirdly.
By way of Use.


1. First.
That all providence is for the good of the Church de facto, and has been so.

1. Reason first.
It will appear by an enumeration of things.

First, All good things.

Secondly, All bad things are for their good.

First, All good things.

I. The World. II. Gifts and common graces of men in the World. III. Angels.
I. The World, First.
The whole World was made and ordained for the good of the Church next to the
glory of God. This will appear in three things.

I. The continuance of the World is for their sakes. God would have destroyed
the World because of the ignorance and wickedness of it before this time, but
he overlooked it all, and had respect to the times of Christ, and the
publishing faith in him, and repentance, Act. 17.30. And the times of this
ignorance God winked at, God overlooked (...)
; he looked not so upon them, as to be provoked to destroy the world; but his
eyes were fixed on the times of Christianity; therefore would not take notice
in the extremity of his justice of the wickedness of those foregoing ages.
Believers are the Salt of the Earth Mat. 5.13.
, which makes the World savoury to God, and keeps it from corrupting. It Is
meant not only of the Apostles, but of Christ's Disciples, of all Christians;
for to them was that Sermon made, v. 1. If the Salt have lost his savor, if
the Salt be corrupted, and Christianity overthrown in the World, wherewith
shall the World be salted? how can it be kept from corruption? If they that
persecuted the Prophets before you in Judea, (which is sometimes called the
Earth in Scripture) cannot relish you, and find nothing grateful to their
Palates in your Doctrine and Conversation, wherewith shall they be salted? How
shall they be preserved from corruption? The Land will be good for nothing but
to be given as a prey to the Romans to be trod under their feet, as being cast
out of Gods protection. They are the foundation of the world, Pro. 10.25. the
righteous are an everlasting foundation. Maimonides understands it thus, that
the World stands for the righteous sakes. When God had Noah and his Family
lodged in the Ark, he cares not what deluge and destruction he brings upon the
rest of the World. When he had conducted Lot out of Sodom, he brings down that
dreadful storm of fire. He cares for no place, Grotius on the place.
no nor for the whole World any longer than whilst his people are there, or he
has some to bring in, in time. For the meanest believer is of more worth than
a world; therefore when God has gathered all together, he will set fire upon
this frame of the Creation: For what was the end of Christ's coming and dying,
but to gather all things together in one? Ephesians. 1.10. That in the dispensation
of the fullness of time he might gather together in one all things in Christ.
When Christ has summed up all together, he has attained his end. And to what
purpose then can we imagine God should continue the World any longer? for his
delight is not simply in the World, but in the Saints there. Psalm. 16.3. But to
the Saints that are in the Earth, in whom is all my delight, not in the Earth,
but in the Saints there, which are the only excellent things in it, which
Christ speaks (of whom that Psalm is meant) who knew well what was the object
of his Fathers pleasure. The sweet savor God smelt in Noah's sacrifice, was
the occasion of God's declaration for the Worlds standing, Genesis 8.21. and the
Lord said in his heart, I will not curse the ground any more for man's sake.
That he would no more smite it with a totally destroying judgment. It was his
respect to Christ represented in that sacrifice, and to the faith and grace of
Noah the sacrificer. What Savor could an infinitely pure spirit smell in the
blood and flames of beasts?

2. The course of natural things is for the good of the Church, or particular
members of it. God makes articles of agreement with the Beasts and Fowls, whose
nature is raging and ravenous, and binds them in sure bonds for the performance
of those articles, Hosea 2.18. And in that day will I make a Covenant for them
with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the
creeping things of the ground, and will make them to lie down safely. As upon
our sin God can arm them against us; so upon our obedience he can make them
serviceable even against their natures; as if he had made a Covenant with them,
and they had both the reason and virtue to observe it. I do not remember any
instance in Scripture, that God went out of the usual tract of his providence,
and acted in an extraordinary manner, but where his people were one way or
other concerned. It was for Joshua's and the Israelites sake that the Sun was
arrested to stand still in the Valley of Ajalon, that they might have light
enough to defeat their Enemies, and pursue their victory Josh. 10.12, 13.
. The Sea shall against its natural course stand in heaps like walls of brass
to assist the Israelites escape Exodus 14.22.
. The fire is restrained in the operation of its nature, even whilst it retains
its burning quality, when the lives of the three valiant believing Children are
in danger Dan. 6.22.
. The mouths of Lions are muzled, when the safety of his beloved Daniel is
concerned Dan. 6.22.
. And the shadow goes back upon the Dial for Hezekiah's sake 2 King 20.11.
. When God would at any time deliver his people, He can muster up Lightnings
and Thunders for their assistance 1 Samuel 7.10.
; He can draw all the Regiments of Heaven into battel-array, and arm the stars
to fight against Sisera, when Isreal's condition needs it; and make even the
lowest Creatures to list themselves as Auxiliaries in the service. God has nor
a displeasure with senseless Creatures, neither is transported with strains of
sury against such objects, when he alters their natural course. Hab. 3.8. Was
the Lord displeased against the Rivers, was thy wrath against the Sea, that
thou did ride upon thy Horses, and Chariots of Salvation? No, but he made
those Creatures the Horses and Chariots to speed assistance and salvation to
his people, which the Psalmist elegantly describes, Psalm. 114. All Creatures
are his Host, and that God that created them, has still the Sovereign command
over them, and can imbody them in an Army to serve his purpose for the
deliverance of his people, as he did against Pharaoh.

3. The interest of Nations is ordered as is most for the Churches good He
orders both the course of natural things, and of civil affairs, for their
interest. He alters the state of things, and changes Governors and
Governments for the sake of his people. For these causes God sent Elisha to
Crown Jehu King, 2 King. 9.6, 7. I have anointed thee King over the people of
the Lord, etc. that I may avenge the blood of my Servants the Prophets, and the
blood of all the servants of the Lord at the hand of Jezabel. For the sakes of
the Godly in that Nation, and the revenging the blood of the Prophets which had
been shed, was he raised up by the Lord. He sent such judgments upon Egypt,
that it was as much the interest of that Nation to let Israel go, as it was
before to keep them their vassals. God orders the interest and affairs of
Nations for those ends; and according to this disposition of affairs, Christ
times his intercessions for his Church. The Angels had been sent out to view
the state of the World, and found it in peace, Zech. 1.11. behold, all the
Earth sits still, and is at rest; there had been Wars in Artaxarexes and Xerxes
his time, but in the time of Darius, that part of the World had an universal
peace, which was the fittest time for the restoration of the Jews, and building
the Temple; because it could not be built, but by the Kings cost, whose
treasure in the time of War was expended another way; nor would it consist with
their policy to restore the Jews to their government at such a time when they
had Wars with the Neighbor parts of Egypt. See how God orders the state of the
World in subserviency to his gracious intentions toward his Church. The time
of the Jewish captivity was now out according to the promise of God, and God
gives that part of the World a general peace, that the restoration of the
Jews, and the rebuilding of the Temple might be facilitated, and the truth of
his promise in their deliverance accomplished. Upon the news of this general
peace in that part of the World, Christ expostulates with God for the
restoration of Jerusalem, verse. 12. How long, O Lord, will thou not have mercy
on Jerusalem, and on the cities of Judeah, against which thou have had
indignation these threescore and ten years? The time of the Captivity
determined by God, was now expired. The first reformation in Germany was backed
by reason of state as it was then ordered; it being the interest of many
Princes of that Country to countenance Luther's Doctrine, for the putting a
stop to the growing greatness of Charles the fifth, who had evident designs to
enslave them. I might mention many more; only by the way let me advise those
that have an inclination to read histories of former transactions, to which men
naturally are addicted, to make this your end, to observe the strange
providence of God in the World, and how admirably he has made them
subservient to the interest of the Church; which will be the most profitable
way of reading them, whereby they will not only satisfy your curiosity, but
establish your Christianity. Calvin understands that place, Deuteronomy. 32.8. He sets
the bounds of the people according to the number of the Children of Israel,
that in the whole ordering of the state of the World, God proposes this as his
end to consult for the good of his people, and his care extends to the rest
only in order to them; and though they are but a small number, yet he orders
his whole government of the Worlds affairs as may best tend to their Salvation.
Therefore God sets the people bounds, or enlarges them according as they may
be serviceable one way or other to this end. And the reason is rendered, v. 9.
For the Lords portion is his people, and Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.
Therefore God orders all the rest of the World in subserviency to the
maintaining and improving his portion and inheritance.

2. As the World, Secondly.
so the gifts and common graces of men in the world are for the good of the
Church, which is a great argument for providence in general; since there is
nothing so considerable in government as the disposing of places to men
according to their particular endowments and abilities for them. And the
bestowing such gists upon men, is none of the meanest argument for Gods
providential government of the World. As,

1. The gifts of good men. The gifts conferred upon Paul were deposited in him
not only to be possessed by him, but used and laid out for the good of the
Church, Col. 1.25. Whereof I am made a Minister according to the dispensation
of God which is given to me for you: The manifestation of the Spirit to any man
is given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. And this is the great end for which men
should seek to excel, viz. for the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor 14.12. For as
much as you are zealous of Spirtual gifts, seek that you may excel to the
edifying of the Church.

2. The gists and common graces of bad men. There is something that is amiable
in men, though they have not grace. As in Stones, Plants and Flowers, though
they have not sense, there is something grateful in them, as color and smell,
etc. And all those things that are lovely in men, are for the Churches good,
the best life, and the worst death, things present, let who will be the
possessor, all things between Life and Death are for the good of Believers,
because they are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or
the world, i.e. [Whether the gifts of the prime lights in the Church, or the
common gifts of the world] are all yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. God is the dispencer of them, Christ is the Governor of them, and all
for your sakes. As the medicinable qualities of waters are not for the good of
themselves, but the accommodation of the indigencies of men. By the common
works of the Spirit God does keep his children from suffering much evil in the
World. For it cannot be supposed, that the Spirit, whose mission is principally
for the Church, should give such gifts out of love to men which hate him, and
are not the objects of his eternal purpose; but he has some other ends indoing
it, which is the advantage of his Church and people: and this God causes by the
preaching of the Gospel, which when it works gracious works in some, produces
common works in others for the good of those gracious ones. As a seed of corn
has straw, husks, and chaff come up with it, which are shelters to that little
seed which lies in the midst; so in the preaching of the Gospel there are some
husks come up among natural men, which God makes to be shelters to the Church
as those common works, and restraining men through the knowledge of Christ. God
gives gifts to them, not out of love to them, but love to his Church. As Nurses
of great men's Children are fed with better meat than the other Servants, not
out of any particular personal respect to them, but to their office, that the
milk whereby the child is nourished, may be the sweeter and wholesomer; were it
not for that Relation, she must be content with the Diet allowed to the rest of
the Servants. Some stinking plants may have medicinal virtues which the
Physician extracts for the cure of a disease, and flings the rest upon the
Dunghill. God bestows such qualities upon men otherwise unsavory to him, which
he draws forth upon several occasions for the good of those that are more
peculiarly under his care, and then casts them away. These gifts are indeed the
ruin of bad men, because of their pride, but the Churches advantage in regard
of their excellency, and are often as profitable to others, as dangerous to
themselves. As all that good which is in plants and animals is for the good of
man; so all the gifts of natural men are for the Churches good, for they are
for that end as the principal next the glory of God, because every inferior
thing is ordained to something superior as its end. Plants are ordained for the
nourishment of Beasts, and both Plants and Beasts for Men. The inferior men for
the service of higher, and all for the community; yet still there is a higher
end beyond those, viz. the glory of God, to which they are ultimately ordained,
which is so connected with the Churches good, that what serves one, serves the
other.

3. Angels, the top Creatures in the Creation, are ordered for the good of the
Church. If the Stars are not Ciphers in the World only to be gazed upon, but
have their influences both upon Plants and Animals; As the Sun in impregnating
the Earth, and enlivening the Plants, and assisting the growth of fruits for
the good of mankind: If the stars have those natural influences upon the
sensible world, the Angels which are the morning-stars, have no less interest
as instruments in the government of it. The Heathens had such a notion of
Demons working those things which were done in the world, but according to the
will and order of the supreme God. The Angels are called Watchers, Dan. 4.13. a
Watcher and an holy one, verse. 17. this is by the decree of the watchers, and
the demand by the word of the holy ones: they watch for Gods orders, and watch
for Gods honor, and the Churches good. There are orders of state among them;
for we read of their decree; it is called their decree ministerially, as they
execute it, By way of approbation. By way of Authority.
approbative as they subcribe to the equity and goodness of it. As the Saints
are said to judge the world not authoritative as in commission with Christ, but
as they approve of Christ's sentence. They seem to request those things of God
which may make for his glory, and they decree among themselves what is fit to
be presented to God in order to his glory. They cannot endure that men should
trample upon Gods authority, despoil him of his right, and tread down his
inheritance; and therefore they send such requests to God to act so as men may
acknowledge him and his govenment, to the intent that the living may know that
the most high rules in the kingdoms of men. Their care therefore must be for
the Chuch, since God rules all things in order to that, and since that is Gods
portion and inheritance; so that as they have a care of Gods glory, they must
also have a care of Gods portion and his peculiar treasure. Exodus 25 1.
The inward part of the Temple was to be adorned with Cherubims, to note the
speceial attendance of the holy Angels in the assemblies of the Saints. As evil
Angels plot against the Church, Trap. on Numb. p. 58.
so good Angels project for it. Though in the Scripture we find Angels
sometimes employed in affairs of common providence, and doing good to them that
are not of the Church; as one is sent to comfort Hagar, and relieve Ishmael
upon his cry, though he had scoffed at Isaac the heir of the covenant, when he
was in Abraham's Family Genesis 21.17.
; yet for the most part they were employed in the concerns of some of his
special Servants. Angels thrust Lot out of Sodom Genesis 19.15, 16.
. An Angel stopped the Lions mouths when Daniel was in the Den, Dan 6.18. My God
has sent his angel, and has shut the lions mouths. God emploies Angels in the
preserving and ruining of Empires, which is clear in the prophecy of Daniel,
and some understand, Isa. 10.34. And lebanon shall fall by a mighty one, of an
Angel. As the Soul sends forth a multitude of Spirits swiftly into the nerves
for the supply of the lowest member, which run thither upon the least motion:
So do the Angels which are Gods Ministers, run at the appointment of God, and
are employed in all the wheels of providence. The Spirit of the living
Creatures was in the wheels of providence Ezekiel. 1.20.
.

1. The highest orders among them are not exempted from being officers for the
Church. Though they are called Gods Angels in respect of their immediate
attendance on God; yet they are called man's Angels in respect of the service
they do for them, Matthew. 18.10. Their angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in Heaven. They are not the ordinary sort of Angels only which
attend upon those little ones, upon young converts, humble Souls, those little
ones in the Kingdom of Heaven; but they are the highest Courtiers there, such
as see the face of God, and stand before him. A King has many Servants; but
not every Servant, only the chief of the Nobility stand before him; so they are
not Angels of the meanest order and rank in Heaven, that are ordered to attend
the lowest Christian. The Apostle makes no doubt of this, Heb. 1.14. are they
not all ministering Spirits [there is no question but they are] sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation? He asserts confidently that
not one of them is blotted out of the List for this employment. Are they not
all? none are exempted from the service of God, so none are exempted from the
end of that service, which is the good of Believers. They are Gods servants,
but for the Churches good, for them which shall be heirs, [ are they not all?]
it is irrational to deny it. And they are sent forth, every one of them has
his commission signed by God for this purpose, and not only for the Church in
general, but for every member in particular [ for the heirs of salvation.] And
not only for them which are already called and enrolled, but for them who shall
be called, whose names are written in the book of Gods election [ who shall be
heirs.] And they are not only faintly sent as if they might go if they will;
but they have a strict charge to look after them well, not in one or two of
their works or ways, but in all, Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge
over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, to bear thee up in their hands, lest
thou dash thy foot against a stone; they are to use all their strength to this
purpose, to bear them up in their hands. As the elder Children are appointed by
Parents to have a care of the younger in their works and motions, and to use
both their wisdom and strength for them. The Angels are a guard to secure them
here, and at last to convey them to their fathers house, Luke 16.22. When a man
is in favor with a Prince, all the Courtiers will be observant of him.

2. Armies of them are employed upon this occasion. There are great multidudes
of them, as Bildad speaks, Job 25.3. Is there any number of his armies? that
is, of his Angels: when Joel speaks of the heathens gathering together;
thither, says he, Lord, cause thy mighty ones to come down Joel 3.11.
. A whole squadron of them shall attend upon a gracious man according to the
circumstances he is involved in. Genesis 32. 1, 2. And Jacob went on his way, and
the Angels of God met him, and when Jacob saw them, he said, this is Gods host.
Regiments of Angels, enough to make up an Army (for so Jacob terms them) me
thim upon the way to secure him from his Brother Esau, and to encourage him in
his journey. So some interpret, 2 Samuel 5.24. the sound of a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees. The sign of the marching of a Brigade of Angels, with
the Lord in the head of them for the discomfiture of David's enemies, then
shall the Lord go out before thee to smite the host of the philistines. And this
they do not of their own heads, but by the pleasure of God, not only by a bare
will, but a delight, Psalm. 103.21. Bless the Lord allye his hosts, ye ministers
of his that do his pleasure. (...) his choicest pleasure, he delights to see
this his Militia upon action.

3. Christ has the government of them to this end, for his Church. Angels are
all put in subjection to him, Heb. 2.7, 8. In that he put all in subjection
under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. He is exalted above all
principality and power; God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be the head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. all things, even
principalities and powers, are put under his feet, to be commissioned and
influenced by him for the good of his Church Ezekiel. 1.12. Whither the Spirit was
to go, they went.
; they are ordered by the Spirit of Christ to this purpose, Zech. 1.10. Those
are they whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the earth. They are
his faithful messengers dispatched into the World by him, as scouts and spies to
take notice of the state of the World, and to give him intelligence, and an
exact account of affairs; and v. 11. they give an account to Christ. Christ is
the Head and General of them, Col. 2.10. They are his Host, always in a
warlike posture, with Christ in the Head of them, Zech. 1.8. upon their Horses,
which notes readiness to move, and speed in motion: And as an Host they are
said to pitch their tents round about them that fear him; and are in a
continual conflict with the evil Angels to prevent their designs in the behalf
of Christ, whom they acknowledge as their head by their worship of him Heb. 1.6.
. Christ orders them to take care to seal his Servants in the foreheads, that
they may be preserved in the storms which shall happen in the World at the time
of the ruin of the Romish Papacy, Revel. 7.2, 3. An Angel comes that had the
seal of the living God (commission of God) saying, hurt not the earth, nor the
sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the Servants of our God in the
foreheads.

4. The great actions which have been done in the World, or shall be done for
the Church, are performed by them. Angels were sent as expresses by God with
his great decrees concerning the revolutions of times Dan. 7.16. Dan. 8.16. And
I heard a man's voice which called and said, Gabriel, make this man to
understand the vision.
. An Angel was sent to Daniel with the message of a Redeemer, and the clearest
prophecy of Christ, which the Jews are not able to answer to this day, which
they most startle at. Part of the discovery of the Revelation to John, which is
as a standing Almanac to the Church, was made us by an Angel Dan. 9.21. Revel.
10.8, 9. Revel. 22.8, 9.
. And when by the course of time those turnings are to happen in the World, the
Angels must have their share of service in them. The Trumpets are sounded by
Angels, and the Vials which are filled with the causes of such alterations, are
poured out by the hands of Angels. Some indeed by the Angels there mentioned,
understand the visible instruments of reformation, not excluding the Angels who
are the invisible Ministers in the affairs of the World Lightfoot. Temple.
Chap. 38. p. 253, 256.
.

5. They engage in this work for the Church with delight. They act as Gods
Ministers in his providence with a unanimous consent Ezekiel. 1.9. Their wings
were joined one to another.
. So that they perform their office with the same swiftness, and with the same
affection, without emulation to go one before another, which makes many actions
succeed ill among men; but they go hand in hand. They do it with affection;
both in respect of the kind disposition of their natures, and as they are
fellow members of the same body, for they are parts of the Church, and of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. Ye are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, and therefore act out of affection to that which is a part of their
body, as well as out of obedience to their head. They do it in respect of their
own improvement too, and increase of their knowledge (which is the desire of all
intellectual Creatures.) For they complete their understandings by the sight of
the methods of infinite wisdom in the perfecting his gracious designs. And it
is Gods intent that they should grow in the knowledge of his great mystery by
their employment, Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and
powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of
God, i. e. By the gracious works of God toward the Church, and in the behalf
of it, for the security and growth of the Church, and in the executions of
those decrees which as instruments they are employed in. For I do not
understand, how it can be meant of the knowledge of Christ, for of that they
know more than the Church below can acquaint them with; for without question
they have a clear insight into the offices of Christ who is their Head, and
whom they are ordered to worship. They understand the aim of his death, and
resurrection, and can better explain the dark predictions of Scripture, than
purblind man can. But by observing the Methods which God uses in the
accomplishment of them, they become more intelligent, and commence Masters of
knowledge in a higher degree, which it is probable is one reason of their joy,
when they see Gods infinite Wisdom and Grace in the conversion of a sinner:
without affection to them, and their employment about them, they could not
rejoice so much. And their rejoicing in their first bringing in to God, argues
their joy in all their employments, which concerns their welfare.

2. As all good things, Secondly.
so all bad things are ordered by providence for the good of the church. That
which in its own nature is an injury, by Gods ordering puts on the nature of a
mercy; and what is poison in it self, by the Almighty art becomes a Sovereign
medicine. Are Gods dispensations in their own nature destructive? that wise
Physician knows how to make poisons work the effect of purges. Are they sharp?
It is to humble and purge the Church. As shadows serve to set out the pictures,
so the darkest passages of providence are made by God to commend the beauty of
those glorious things he works for his Church: We may see this in, 1. Bad
persons. As,

1. The Devil. God manageth him for his own glory, and the strengthening of
Believers Math. 8.31, 32.
. The Devils desired to enter into the herd of swine, with an intent, probably,
not only to destroy the swine, but to incense the Gadarenes against him, out of
whom they had been cast, to do him some considerable mischief. But what is the
issue? As they discover their malice, so they inhance the value of Christ's
kindness to the distressed man, whom he had freed from this tyranny: Hereby
also was the Law of God justified, in commanding the Jews to abstain from
Swines flesh, which the Gadarenes being Apostate Jews had broken; he magnified
his own power in the routing such a number of unclean Spirits, which had not
been so conspicuous in the turning them out of one man, had not this regiment
discoveed themselves among the Swine, and brought such a loss upon the
Gadarenes; whereby as they showed their own strength and malice, so they
discovered occasionally the greatness of Christ's charity, and his power over
them; so that in granting the malicious petition of this exasperated Legion,
the Law of God is justified, our Saviors love glorified, his power manifested,
and a foundation laid for the gaining Proselytes in that Country, (to which
purpose he left the man he had cured Luke 8.39.
,) and to strengthen the faith of those poor Believers which then followed him.
God makes use of the Devils by the Sovereignty of providence, to bring about
ends unknown to themselves for all their wisdom. The malice of the Devil
against Job has rendered him a standing miracle of patience for ever They are
the rulers of the darkness of this world Ephesians. 6.12.
, not of the light of the World; they are the rulers of the wicked, and the
scullions of the Saints to scour and cleanse them. They are the rulers of the
World, but subordinate to serve the providence of God; wherein God declares his
wisdom by serving himself of the worst of his Enemies. The Devil thought he had
brought a total destruction upon mankind, when he persuaded our first Parents
to eat of the forbidden fruit: but the only wise God ordered it to bring about
a greater glory to himself, and a more firm stability to his people, in
introducing an everlasting covenant which could not be broken, and establishing
their happiness upon surer terms than it was settled in Paradise. And
afterward in filling the heart of Judas to betray Christ, and the hearts of
the Jews to crucify him. Even by that way whereby the thought to hinder the
good of mankind, he occasionally promotes their perpetual redemption. And I do
not much question but those very principles which the Devil had distilled into
the gentile World of shedding human blood in sacrisices for expiation of guilt;
and the Gods conversing with men in humane shapes, and the imagination of the
intercession of Demons for them; the first out of rage against mankind, and
both that and the other to induce them to Idolatry, might facilitate the
entertainment of Christ as the great expiatory sacrifice, and the receiving of
him as the Sun of God, though in an humane shape, and the belief of his
intercession. God over-reaches the Devil, and makes him instrumental for good,
where he designs hurt and mischief.

2. Wicked men. All the wicked in the midst of the Church are for the good of
it, either for the exercise of their grace, or security of their persons, or
interest, Pro. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his enemies
to be at peace with him. Sometimes he will incline their hearts intentionally
to favor, or order even their actions against them to procure their peace,
contrary to their intentions. Sometimes God makes them his Sword to cut his
people, sometimes Physic to purge them, sometimes Fire to melt and refine
them, sometime hedges to preserve them, sometimes a ransom to redeem them Pro.
^5.18.
. A Traveller makes use of the mettle of a headstrong Horse to carry him to
his journeys end. That wind which would overturn a little Boat, the skilful
Pilot makes use of to drive his Ship into the Harbor, and the Husbandman to
cleanse his Corn from the Chaff. Though the ends of the workers, viz. God and
wicked men, are different, yet the end of the work is but one, which is ordered
by Gods Sovereign pleasure. It was promised in the promise of the Gospel to the
Gentiles, Genesis 9.27. God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents
of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall allure Japhet, the Gentiles
of Europe to dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan the head of the cursed
posterity, shall be Servants to the Church beside their will, and sometimes
against it by an overruling hand. And Christ has bought them to be his
Servants, 2 Pet. 2.1. denying the Lord that bought them, and therefore has the
disposing of them, whether they voluntarily give up themselves to him or no. He
is a Lord by purchase over them, who own him not as a Savior. The hatred of
the Churches enemies sometimes conduces more to her good, than the affections
of all her worldly Friends. Now this appears,

1. In furthering the Gospel. Helvicus contra Judaeos.
The Jews, who speak not of Christ among themselves, but with opprobrious
terms, have been the exact preservers of the Old Testament, even to the very
number of the letters; wherein Christians have sufficient to confirm them in
the belief of Christ's being the Messiah, and unanswerable arguments against
their adversaries; Whereupon St Austin terms them capsarious Ecclesiae, such
that carry the Books of the Children of great men after them to School. When
the Authority of the Revelation was anciently questioned, the Church of Rome
was instrumental to keep it in the number of the Canonical books, not thinking
they should find their own Church so plainly Deciphered in it, to be the mother
of abominations. To this we may refer the action of Ptolemy Philadelphus King
of Egypt, in causing the Scripture to be translated about three hundred years
before the coming of Christ; through which the Nations Jackson vol. 1. Fol. p.
62.
might better discern (as it were through a prospective glass) the new star of
Jacob which was shortly to arise: No doubt but many of the Gentiles by
comparing the old Scripture Prophecies, which they now could read in the Greek
language, might be more easily induced to an embracing the Gospel, and
acknowledging Christ to be the Messiah, when it came to be divulged among them.
Herod is the cause of the consultation about the place of Christ's birth; not
for any good will he had to him, wham he intended to murder, but God makes use
of this to clear up the truth of the prophecy concerning Bethlehem, the plane
of his birth, Mat 2.5, 6. Out of thee shall come a governor that shall rule my
people Israel. And they certainly were not very good, who preached Christ out
of envy, and propagated the Gospel, wherein Paul rejoiced, not in their sin,
but in the providential fruit of it, Phil. 1.15, 18. some indeed preach Christ
even of envy and strife, what then! Notwithstanding every way, whether in
pretense or truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice.

2. In furthering the temporal good of the Church;

1. In its preservation. Wicked men are often serviceable to the Church, as the
filthy Raven was to holy Elijah, or as the Lion which would have devoured
Sampson, is a storehouse to provide him food; for in his hunger he finds a
table spread in the belly of his Enemy. Pharoah's design was to destroy Israel,
and the Daughter of that irreconcilable Enemy, is directed by God to preserve
Moses, who was to be the ruin of her family, the destruction of the Fgyptian
glory, and the Deliverer of the Church. She saves him out of charity, and God
out of a wise design; She by his Education in the Egyptian learning, fits him
for the Court, and God for the deliverance of his Church. Egypt had corn to
relieve first Abraham Genesis 12.10.
, afterward Jacob in a time of famine; the only family wherein the Church of
God was then bound up. Herod lies in wait for Christ's destruction; and Egypt,
the most Idolatrous Country in the world, and an ancient Enemy to Gods Church,
affords him shelter. God makes Moab to hide his outcasts, and be their covert
from the face of the spoiler Isa. 16.3, 4.
. Some think, Gods design in sending Jonah to Nineveh, to work so remarkable a
change by repentance, was to soften some of their hearts, and the hearts of
their posterity to deal more tenderly with those gracious Israelites, who in
the captivity of the ten Tribes, some years after, should be their guests. God
making thereby provision for his own people in that common judgment which
should come upon the Nation. This God does sometimes by reviving the law of
Nature, and the common sentiments of Religion in the hearts of natural men;
whereby their own consciences bearing witness to the innocence and excellency
of the church of God, put them upon thoughts for its security. Sometimes it is
above their own Sphere, and besides their own intentions. The Whale which
swallowed Jonah, intended him as a morsel to quell his hunger, but proves his
security, and disgorgeth him upon the shore: The understand their own aim but
not the design of God. The Leech that sucks the Patients blood, knows not the
Chyrurgions design, who uses it for the cure of a disease. Sometimes their
rage proves their own ruin, and the Churches safety; as the Leech bursts it
self sometimes, and saves the patient. The very Earth, whereby is meant the
carnal world; is said to help the Woman the Church, by swallowing up the flood
which the Dragon casts out of this mouth against her Rov. 12.10.
. Just as the old rags were the instruments whereby Jeremiah was drawn out of
the Dungeon

2. In the advancement of the Church, or persons eminent. Abner had a Plot for
bringing Israel to David's Scepter, which concurred both with Gods purpose and
promises, but sprung from an ill cause, a disdain to be checked by Ishbosheth,
though his King, for an unjustifiable act, for having too much familiarity with
one of Saul's Concubines 2 Samuel 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
. And from this animosity he contrives the de posing of Ishbosheth and the
exaltation of David, yet dissembles the ground, and pretends the promise of God
to David, v. 18. for the Lord has spoken of David, By the hand of my servant
David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines. He is
the first Engine that moves in this business, and by him and his correspondents
after his death, v. 17. the business is brought about by Gods overruling hand,
wherein Gods promise is accomplished, and David a type of Christ, and the great
Champion for the Church against its enemies round about, is advanced. Very
remarkable is the advancement of Mordecai, in order to the advancing the Jews
as well as preserving them, when the necks of all the visible Church God had in
the World, were upon the block. Haman ignorantly is the cause of this
preferment of Mordecai, and at that time too, when he came to petition for his
death, Esther 6.4. He was come to speak to the king to hang Mordecai upon the
gallows, which he had prepared for him: The King asks him, what should be done
to the man whom the King delights to honor, v. 16. He imagines that the Kings
question did respect himself, lays out a Scheme of what honor he was ambitious
of, v. 8, 9. which was by the King designed for Mordecai, and Haman made the
Herald to proclaim him: Here Haman, not only a wicked man in himself, but the
greatest Enemy Mordecai and the whole Church of God had, is made unwittingly an
instrument to exalt Mordecai, and in him the whole Church of God.

3. In enriching the Church, or some persons in it, whereby it may become more
serviceable to God. How wonderful was it, that when the Israelites were
abominated by the Egyptians, God should so order their hearts, that the
Egyptians should lend them Gold and Jewels Exodus 12.35, 36.
, and dismiss them with wealth as well as safety; and not so much as one person
molest them, till they arrived at the Red Sea? The very gain and honor of the
Enemies is sometimes consecrated to the Lord of the whole Earth, Micah 4.13.
Arise and thresh, oh daughter of Sion, I will make thy horn Iron, and thou
shall beat in pieces many people, and I will consecrate their gain unto the
Lord, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth: This was when many
Nations were gathered against Sion, v. 11. The wealth of the Sinner is laid up
for the just, Pro. 13.22. And God sometimes makes the wicked unwittingly to
themselves, in their carking, be the factors for good men, into whose lap
providence pours the fruit of their labor. God gave Cyrus the spoils of
Babylon, and the treasures of Croesus, to enable him to furnish the Jews with
materials for building the Temple, Isa. 45.3, 4.
45.3, 4 and I will give thee the treasure of darkness, and hidden riches of
secret places, (speaking of Cyrus) that thou may know, that I the Lord which
call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel, for Jacob my servants sake, etc.
That he might acknowledge him the God of Israel, and lay his wealth out in the
service of God, and the service of Jacob his servant.

2. As bad persons, so bad things are ordered to the good of the church,
whether they be sinful evils, or afflictive.

1. Sin.

1. A man's own sin. Onesimus runs from his Master, and finds a spiritual
Father; his being a runnagate, is the occasion of his being a convert By flying
from his Master, he becomes a Brother in the Lord Phil. 10 12, 16.
, What Joseph's brethren sinfully intended for revenge against their brother,
and security from their Fathers checks, (who acquainted Jacob with their
miscarriages) God ordered for the preservation of them who were the only
visible Church in the World. Their sin against their Brother contrary both to
their intentions and expectations, became the means of their safety. God makes
the remainders of sin in a good man, an occasion to exercise his grace,
discover his strength, and show his loyalty to God.

2. Other men's sins. That might be in Sarah but a beady passion, for hearing
her Son mocked By Ishmael, that made her so desirous to have the bondwoman and
her son thrust out Genesis 21.10.
, but God makes use of it to make a separation between Isaac the heir of the
Covenant, and Ishmael, that he might not be corrupted by any evil example from
him: God orders Abraham to hearken to her voice, because in Isaac his seed
should be called ver. 12.
. And the revengeful threatening of Esau was the occasion of Jacob's flight,
whereby he was hindered from marrying with any of the people of the Land by whom
he might have been induced to Idolatry Genesis 2.7.3.46.
. Why should we mistrust that God that can make use of the Lusts of men to
bring about his own gracious purposes?

2. Commotions in the World. There is the eye of God, that eye which runs to
and fro throughout the whole Earth in the Wheels of worldly motions, even in
the most dreadful providence in the World, that stare upon men with a grim
countenance Ezekiel. 1.18. their wings were dreadful, and their wings were full of
eyes.
. All the overturnings in the World are subservient to the Churches interest,
though they are not visibly so, unless diligently attended Broughton on Revel.
13. Sect. 177.
. God orders the confusions of the world, and is in the midst of the tumults of
the people, Psalm. 29.10, 11. The Lord sits upon the flood, yea the Lord sits
King for ever, the Lord will give sirength to his people, the Lord will bless
his people with peace. He sits upon the flood as a Charioteer in his Chariot,
guiding it with holy and merciful intentions to his people, to give them both
strength and peace in the midst of them, and as the issue of them. By Water and
Floods is frequently meant tumults and confusions in the World. If it were not
so, why would our Savior encourage his Disciples and all their Successors in
the same profession, to lift up their heads when they hear of wars, if their
redemption Luk 21.25, 26, 27, 28.
were not designed by God in them? they are all testimonies of the nearer
approaches of Christ in power and glory to judge the Earth, and glorify his
people. Gods great end in the shaking of Nations, is the performing those
gracious promises to his Church which yet remain unaccomplisht: These
earthquakes in the world, will bring Heaven to the Church. The great
revolutions in the Eastern part of the world, the ruin of the Babylonian
Empire, the erecting the Persian, and all the means whereby it was brought
about, God ordered, God foretold, God directed for Jacobs service. Cyrus led by
ambition, levies an army against Eabylon; yet though he was a ravenous Bird, he
was to execute the Counsel of God, Isa. 46.11. calling a ravenous bird from the
east, the man that executes my Counsel, to be an instrument for the delivery
of the captived Jews, and the restorer of the ruined Temple. He had called him
out by name to make a great revolution of the World. He foretold by his Prophet
Isaiah many years before, the means he should use in the siege of Babylon to
attain the victory, the very dividing Euphrates, which was the great confidence
of the Babylonians. Isa. 44.27. that say to the deep, be dry, and I will dry up
the rivers; whereby it was as it were dried up for them to pass over; the very
opening of the gates, Isa. 45.1. and the gates shall not be shut; the
Babylonians in a presumptuous security had left them open, thinking it
impossible the City could be taken, because of the River Euphrates, I will go
before thee, and make the crooked places straight; and what was the end of that
great revolution and motion in that part of the World? See Isa. 45.4. For Jacob
my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name:
This prophecy was when Jerusalem and the Temple were standing-God casts about
long before his people needs, for their welfare in the great revolutions and
changes of the World. In Isa. 44.28. that says of Cyrus, he is my shepherd,
and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be
built, and to the temple, thy foundation shall be laid. Cyrus had no knowledge
of this end of God; though thou have not known me, Isa. 45 4, 5. twice
repeated. Cyrus did not know God, neither did he know Gods end; he acts his own
purposes, and is acted by God to higher purposes than he understood. In all the
siftings of Nations, and sifting the Church among the Nations, as Corn is
sifted in a Sieve, God designs not the destruction of his people, but the
cleansing them, the separating the flower from the bran.

3. Destroying judgments, yea, and the very curses sometimes are turned into
blessings.

Destroying judgments. The desolation of the Jews was not only in order to the
fulfilling gods truth in his threatenings, but useful for the great Gospel
design; the fall of the Jews was the calling of the Gentiles, Romans 11.11, 12.
Through their fall Salvation is come unto the gentiles: And also their fall and
dispersion among the Gentiles, was prophesied of as the occasion of their
return to God, Ezekiel, 20.36, 37. Like as I pleaded with your Fathers in the
Wilderness, so will I plead with you, and cause you to pass under the rod, and
bring you into the bond of the Covenant; when they are in the Wilderness of
Captivity, then God shall plead with them, and make them to pass under the rod
of propriety, and bring them into Covenant. The like also is prophesied of that
Captivity of the ten Tribes to this day not known where they are, Hos. 2.14.
The time of Gods speaking kindly to her, should be in the Wilderness. and then
I will give her the valley of Achor for a door of hope. No question but god
has performed his promise, and brought many of the posterity of the ten Tribes
into the Church, among the Mass of the Gentiles, among whom they were dispersed.

Curses, sometimes as God orders them, prove blessings. The curse of inspired
Jacob upon Levi Genesis 49.7. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel; I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel.
, was the advantage both of Levi and the Israelites; that they were dispersed
among the several Tribes without any universal cohabitation as the rest, was a
curse: But that they should be the instructiors of the people in the matters of
the Law, was an honor God put upon the head of that Tribe, and a public
blessing to the people.

4. Divisions in the Church. One would think this of all other things should
shake the foundation of it; yet God orders even these to the good of the
Church. Paul and Barnabas, two great Apostles, fell out Acts 15.36, 37, 38, 39,
etc.
. the contention comes to be very sharp, a thing naturally of very ill
consequence, in two of the prime guides of Christianity, and at the laying the
first foundation of it; but the Gospel gains ground: One sails to Cyprus, and
the other travels into Syria. Perhaps had not this quarrel been between them,
and they thus disjoynted from one another, some of those poor Souls had never,
or at least not so soon heard of the Gospel-mercy.

5. Persecutions. These naturally tend to the dissolution and utter extirpation
of it, but God orders them otherwise. God does often lay the Scene of his
amazing providence in very dismal afflictions: As the Limner first puts on the
dusky colors, on which he intends to draw the portraiture of some illustrious
beauty. The Oppression of Israel immediately before their Deliverance, was the
dusky color whereupon God drew those gracious lines of their Salvation from
Egypt, the pattern of all the after Deliverances of the Church in all Ages, and
a Type of our Spiritual Redemption by Christ. The Humiliation, Persecution and
Death of the Son of God, was the dusky color upon which God drew that amazing
piece of Divine Love and Wisdom in man's salvation, which the eyes of Saints and
Angels will be fixed on with ravishing admirations to all Eternity. All
Afflictions in the World, which God does exercise the Church with, are parts of
his Providence, and like mournful Notes in Music, which make the melody of the
Tune more pleasant, and set off those sweeter Aires which follow upon them.
Afflictions here, cause the joys of Heaven to appear more glorious in the eyes
of glorified Saints. The Persecutions of the Martyrs did but highten their
Graces, send them to the place of Rest, and enlarge their Robes of Glory. God
many times saves his People by sufferings, and brings them to the shore upon
the planks of a broken ship, and makes that which was the occasion of their
loss, to be a means of their safety: they sometimes evidence that which they
would destroy. Herod's Murdering the Children to destroy him that was born King
of the Jews, made his Birth more Conspicuous in the World: Snuffing the Candle
makes it burn the clearer.

They sometimes make,

1. To the improvement of the Church. One of the sorest Judgments God brought
upon the Jewish Church, is expressly asserted by God to be for their good; Jer.
24.5. speaking of the Captived Jews, Whom I have sent out of this place into
the Land of the Chaldeans for their good. The Chaldeans had overrun their
Land, carried them Captives, made them Slaves, destroyed the Temple; yet God
tells them this was for their good; when there was no present appearance of any
good in it. It should be good in respect of Gods Favor toward them, which
retired to return with the greater force; ver. 6. I will set mine eyes upon
them for good, I will build them and not pull them down: God would give them a
more durable settlement. In respect also of that frame of heart they should
have toward God; their knowledge of him, and cleaving to him: ver. 7. I will
give them a heart to know me, and they shall return to me with their whole
heart: God had but a moiety of their hearts before, but then he should have the
whole. And indeed it was remarkably for their good; for they who before were
addicted to Idolatry, were never guilty of the same sin after: And God kept
them from being drawn away to it by the example and solicitation of those among
whom they were. The Church grows by tears, and withers by smiles. Gods Vine
thrives the better for pruning. God makes our Persecutions fit us for that for
which we are persecuted. As Saul by his persecution of David for the Title God
had given him to the Kingdom, made him fitter to succed him in the Throne, and
manage the Government. God uses persecutors as lances, which whiles they wound
us, let out the purulent and oppressive matter; and makes them instruments of
his Providence to work out his Peoples Happiness, and thus makes the very wrath
of man to be an occasion of his Peoples Praise; Psalm. 76.10. The wrath of man
shall praise thee. God does in this as a Father deals with his Son, sends him
to a sharp school, that he may be Trained up in Learning.

2. In the increase of the church. The Jews Crucified our Savior to diminish
the multitude of his followers, and by this means the number is increased. The
whole World runs after him by that means they used to stop their Course; which
Christ fore told, that when he was lifted up, he should draw all men after him;
And that a grain of Corn brings not forth more seed, unless it be cast into the
ground, and dye.

1. In the increase of it within its own bounds. When the Israelites were most
oppressed in Egypt, the more they multiplied Exodus 1.20.
. When the Dragons fury did most swell against the Woman, she brought forth a
Man child Rev. 12.1, 3 4
. When the Roman Empire was at the highest, and was most enflamed with Anger
against the Christians: When the Learning of the Philosophers, the Witchcrafts
of Heretics, the Power of the Emperors, and the Strength of the whole World
was set against them, the Christians grew more flourishing and unmerous by
those very means which were used to destroy them. Not only a new succession of
Saints sprung up from the Martyrs Ashes, but their Flames were the occasion of
warming some so much with a heavenly fire, that some persecutors have become
Preachers. Their very bonds for the Truth have sometimes a seminal Virtue in
them to beget men to Faith in Christ. Phil. 1.12. The things which have
happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the gospel.

2. In the increase of it in other parts. Paul's Prison made his Preaching
Famous in Rome, and was an occasion of bringing Christianity into Nero's Court,
that Monster of Mankind Phil. 1.13.
; one might have looked for Saints in Hell as soon: Phil. 4.22
his bonds were as great a confirmation of the Truth of his Doctrine, as his
Eloquence. When Saul made havoc of the Church, and by that storm dispersed the
Christians, they like so many grains of Corn seattered in serveral parts of a
greater Field, produced the greater Harvest. Acts 8.3, 4. therefore they that
were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word. As Clouds scattered
by the Winds, they Rained down the Gospel in several Quarters. The Jews when
scattered in their several slights, did scatter among the Heathen the Notions
of the true Religion. When they shall go down to Egypt to secure themselves
from Senacheribs Invasion, they shall be a means to make many Converts among
that Idolatrous Nation. Isa. 19.18. In that day (the day of the Jews Trouble)
shall five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the Language of Canaan, and swear
to the Lord of hosts: so one expounds it, but I rather think it meant of the
times of the Gospel. The flight of the Israelites shall be the occasion of some
Egyptians Conversion. A poor Slave in Naamans Family was an occasion both of
the cure of his Body, and of that of his Soul; 2 Kings 5.2, 3, 17. So much for
the first Reason, drawn from an enumeration of things.

2. Reason; To prove that all Providence is for the good of the Church; is,
Secondly.
Because God has sometimes preferred Mercy to the Church, and Care of it,
above his own concernments of Justice. He values his mercy to them, above his
Justice upon his Enemies. He consults their safety before he brings ruin upon
the Wicked, whose sins are full. He first prepared the ark for Noah, and sees
him lodged in it, before he begins to shower down destruction upon the World. He
has sometimes punished a Nation more for their Offenses against his People,
than their Sins against himself. Amalek was guilty of many Idolatries and other
sins against God; but God charge none of them upon them, but their malicious
hindering the Israelites in their March to Canaan, 1 Samuel 15.2. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for
him in the way when he came up from Egypt. He shows his love to them, and how
much he values them, that when he is acting Justice, and pouring out his Wrath,
when he is (as it were) cutting and slashing on all sides, and is in fury with
wicked Men, he has nothing but sweetness and tenderness toward his own. Amos
9.9, 10. in the sifting of Israel and the Nations, Not the least grain shall
fall upon the earth. All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword. While
he thunders out his Fury upon wicked Men, he has his Eyes upon the least grain
of the true Israel. What would it be for God, when he is raising the Glory of
his Justice upon the People that have provoked him, not to regard the
concernments of this, or that, or many sincere Souls, but put no stop to his
Fury? Yet he does, not a grain shall perish. He is more desirous to hear of the
preservation and welfare of a few Righteous, than of the just Punishment of the
Wicked wherein his Justice is gloriously interessed, The Man clothed with
Linen, that was to mark the Mourners, returned to God, and gave an account
that he had done according to his Command; Ezekiel 9.11.
the other five, which were to kill, returned not to give any account of their
severe and sharp proceeding. The Angels that held the four Winds of the Earth,
Rev. 7.1. which some understand of Wars and Commotions in the World for the
overthrow of the Romish power, were ordered not to let the Winds go, till the
servants of God were sealed in their Foreheads.

3. Reason; God takes particular notice of the meanest of his people, Thirdly.
and mightily condescends to them, much more of the Church. It Is strange to
consider, that the Scripture mentions none of those great Potentates among the
Heathen, but either as they were instruments of his Peoples good, or executions
of his Justice upon them, or subjects of his Peoples Triumph. Cyrus and Darius
are mentioned as their friends: Nebuchadnezzar, and Senacherib, and others, as
Gods instruments in scourging them Genesis 14.9, 10.
. Chedorlaomer and the other Kings with him as they were the subjects of
Abraham's Valor and Triumph. He takes no notice of the Names of any in his
Word, but upon such Accounts: Cyrus and Nebuchadnezzar had done, no doubt, many
actions before, but none taken notice of but those. But he takes notice of the
meanest wherein was Grace, and the meanest of their concerns and actions. Rivet
in Genesis exercite. 129.
He mentions in his Word Jacob's Flocks, etc. things of no great moment; the
actions, speeches, gestures of his People, to show how his Providence wrought
for them, and how much he is concerned in the least of their Affairs. But the
great Empires of the World, their Original and Progress, and the magnified
Founders of them, he speaks not of, but as they have some relation or other to
his People. As we love to use the names of our Friends, so does God love the
relish of the names of his servants. The name of Noah is repeated several
times, as the Jews observe Genesis 7. Genesis 8.
. The Spirit of God loves the very mention of their names: he delights to dwell
upon the Catalogue of their names. The Scripture uses to reckon the Genealogies
of wicked Men in short characters. Cains Generation is numbered in haste, as if
God had no care at all of them Genesis 7.17, 18.
, he puts them off with a kind of, etc. But he insists much upon the Generation
of the Godly. Seths Posterity are written in a larger scroul, and more legible
hand Genesis 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.
, with the number of the years which they lived; which in Cains Posterity there
is no notice taken of. His whole Respect, his Heart, his Eye, his All is fixed
upon them. And Christ himself stands more astonished, and wondering at the Faith
of the Centurian, the importunity of the Canaanitish Woman; condescends to them
to grant them what they would have. You never find him taking notice of the
Learning of the Rabbis, the Magnificence of Herod, or the glorious Building of
the Temple. See how condescending God is, to work a Miracle for the support and
strengthening of a weak Faith, and the peevish distrust of his people. Gideons
Faith was weak, yet how compassionate is God toward him Judge. 6.36. etc. He
would have one time the Fleece dry, another time wet. God condescends to him in
all.
in ordering his Providence as Gideon would have it, without upbraiding him;
just as a tender Mother cherishes a weak Child. And this Miracle was in order
to the Churches Deliverance from a present oppressive Enemy. Certainly when we
find God taking care, and ordering even the very Pins, Snuffers and Basins of
the Temple, the place of his Worship, as well as the more stately Ornaments of
it; we may say, does his Care extend to the meanest Utensils in his Temple, and
not much more to the Worshippers in it? Does he give order for the
Candlesticks, and will he not have much more care of the lights in them? His
care to the least, implies his care of the greatest too. In a building, the
little stones must be well laid as well as the greatest. Every Believer is a
stone in the Spiritual building.

4 Reason, Fourthly.
God reveals often to his people what he will do in the world, as if he seemed
to ask their advice; and therefore surely all his providence shall work for
their good. God would not surely acquaint them, and advise with them what he
should do, did he intend to do any thing to their hurt. There is not any thing
in the heart of Christ wherein the Church is concerned, but he does reveal it
to them, John 15.5. I have called you friends; for all things I have heard of
my Father, I have made known to you; he discovered all to them, the ends of his
coming, his Fathers love, his death and resurrection, what he would do after
his ascension, the progress of his affairs, and the glory of Heaven, and the
end of all. John must be the Penman of the Revelation, which concerned the
future state of the Church in all ages. Joseph must know the interpretation of
dreams in order to the Churches preservation. Moses must be acquainted with
Gods methods in the Israelites deliverance, with the Egyptians ruin. Dan 10,
11, 16.20
Daniel must know the future state of the Eastern parts of the world; he must
know the turnings of the times, and the end of the World. It Is to Noah and none
else, that he immediately discovers his intended destruction of the World. And
all those revelations ended in his peoples advantage; nay, he does not only
reveal, but, as it were, consult with him in his affairs. God does as it were
unbosom himself to Abraham, as one friend to another, as it were, advises with
him concerning his intention on Sodom, Genesis 18.17. And the Lord said, shall I
hide from Abraham the thing which I do? i. e. I will by no means do it, it will
not consist with my Love and Friendship to him, to hide any thing from him. And
see the reason of it, v. 18. seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great
and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him. It
was first his great affection to him, because he had advanced him, and promised
that a Mighty Nation should spring out of his Loins. And he had not withheld
from him the secret of giving the Messiah, which was a universal blessing, and
so many ages were to run out before it was to be accomplished; he had discovered
to him his acts of mercy, and therefore would not hide from him his acts of
justice; he would know his mind in it, and what he thought of it. And you know
the story, how God regulated himself by Abraham's prayer, and denied him
nothing, till Abraham left off suing any more. It would make one conjecture,
that if Abraham had proceeded farther, he had quite diverted the judgment from
Sodom. And when the Israelites had provoked God by a Golden Calf, he would not
do any thing against them, till he had consulted Moses, and therefore lays the
whole case before him, and seeks to take him off from pleading with the Lord,
and promising to make of him a great Nation Exodus 32.9, 10. and the Lord said
to Moses, I have seen this people, and behold it is a stiff-necked people, now
therefore let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them.
, and in such terms, that one would wonder at. Now therefore let me alone. As
if God did fear Moses's interposition would prevent him and dissuade him from
it. Do not you stand in the way; my wrath will cool if you interpose your self;
as much as to say, God could not do it unless Moses gave his consent: Moses
would not be quiet, but pleads the providence of God which had been all for
them, the promise of God made to Abraham concerning them. And he would not
leave, till God repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people, v.
14. If Angels, as Calvin says, are Gods counselors in Heaven, Believers are
(as it were) his Counselors on Earth.

5. God has given the choicest things he has to his people. He has given his
Law. The Church is the Sphere wherein the light of the Gospel is fixed, and
wherein it shines, from whence its beams do dart out to others. Isa 2.3. out of
Sion shall go forth the law. The oracles of God, the great things of the Law,
as it is phrased, Hosea 8.12. his Covenant, and the counsel of his will, are
entrusted with the Church. Now this being a mercy which exceeds all other
things in the World, is therefore comprehensive of all other, as the greater
comprehends the lesser. And the Psalmist considers it as the top-stone of all
blessings; for after summing up the Providence of God, he shows how God had
distinguished Jacob by more eminent marks of his favor. Psalm. 147.29, 30. He
shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has
not dealt so with any Nation; he has not left so rich a Legacy to any, or
given any so much of his heart. Others are ordered by the word of his power,
(for that is meant by word in the foregoing verse); but Jacob has the word of
his grace too. And this being the choicest piece of affection which God has
shown to the Church, implies the making all lesser providence subservient to
it. The Church, wherein God has laid up his Gospel, and those Souls which are
as the Ark wherein God has deposited his Law, shall be shadowed with the wings
of his merciful providence, in a perpetual succession of all true blessings.
All the providence of God are to preserve his Law in the World; his severest
judgments are to quicken up the law of nature in men that know no other, (...)
the Law of his Gospel in men that (...) under it. And he has given Ch^^^ (...)
Church, and thereby has given in earnest, that still their good shall be
promoted: It Is not to be thought, that God will spare any thing else, when he
has given them his Son.

The Second thing. It must needs be that all providence are for the good of
the Church. Secondly.


1. All the providence of God is for the glorifying his grace in Christ. First.
The whole Economy or dispensation of the fullness of time to the latter ages
of the World, is for the gathering all things together in him, Ephesians. 1.10. that
in the dispensation of the fullness of time he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on earth, even in
him. In him as their head. This was the design in all his dispensations, both
before his coming, and since, ever since the promise made to Adam, though it be
more manifest in the latter Age. This the Apostle represents as the main
purpose of God, v. 9. This was the mystery of his will, which according to his
good pleasure he had purposed in himself, that is, purposed in himself, as a
thing he was mightily pleased with; and ver. 11. says he, (...) works all
things after, or (...), according to the counsel of his own will, or of that
purpose which he had purposed in himself, to gather all things in one, in
Christ. All the things that God acts, are referred to this as their end, and
ordered by this Counsel as their rule. As it was the design of Gods providence
to make way for Christ's entrance into the World, and all the prophecies in the
old Testament tended to the discovery of it; so since the coming of Christ, the
end of all is to advance him in respect of his headship, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things
to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. God
would advance Christ to the highest pitch, v. 21. far above all principality
and power, both in this world, and in the world to come; and there is still a
fullness wanting to Christ to complete him, not only a personal fullness, but a
fullness belonging to him as a Head, which is the advancement God designs him.
He is already advanced above all principality and power. He is already given as
a Head to the Church; but the compleatness of it is not till all his members be
perfected, to which all his providence in the world does ultimately tend:
Therefore if the design of God be to honor Christ, and if the spiritual
happiness of the Church be part of that Glory and fullness of Christ, it must
needs be carried on by God, else he will want part of his compleatness as a
Head: But this shall not be wanting, since, as all things are squared according
to that Counsel of glorifying Christ as Head, so all things are acted for
believers by that power whereby he raised Christ from the grave to be their
Head, which power is the Copy according to which all acts which respect the
Church, are framed, v 19. and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward, who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him up from the dead. God intended the good of
the Church in this very act of glorifying Christ, for he is made the head over
all things to the Church. As if God then had prescribed him that order, that
the glory he gave him should be also managed for the Churches interest. Christ
is Lord of the rest of the World, but Head of the Church: All things are under
his feet, but are not his members; He is Head over all things to the Church,
and therefore to every member of the Church, the least as well as the greatest;
and to the whole Church, even that part of it which is on Earth, as well as
that part which is in Heaven, who are completed. This Church is the fullness of
Christ, he would be bodyless without it: therefore since Christ will be a head
without a body, if the Church be not preserved; in order to the preservation of
it, all things must necessarily concur by the wise disposal of affairs.
Therefore since they are traveling to be where their head is, he having the
government of the world, will make all things contribute assistance to them in
their journey; that Christ may have that compleatness of glory, which God
intends him. He expressly tells his Father, John 17.10. that he is glorified in
his people John 17.10. And I am glorified in them.
. And at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, the Kingdoms of this world are to
become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever
and ever Revel. 11.15
. Now since all the motions in the world, are, that the Kingdoms of the world
may become the Kingdoms of his Christ, pecenliarly his, as a being anointed
King by hm: It must needs be, that all things must be subservient one time or
other to this end, was rein the good of his people does consist; otherwise they
would not bless God so highly for it as they do*. Revel 11.17.
We give thee thanks, O Lord God almighty, because thou have taken to thee thy
great power, and have reigned. And where there is a resistance of this glory of
Christ, it is a natural effect of that decree whereby Christ is constituted
King, that the resisters should be broken in pieces, and dashed like a Potters
vessel, Psalm. 2.6, 9. and the issue of all is the blessedness of those that put
their trust in him, v. 12. The care that God has of Christ and the Church in
the types of them, seems to be equal. The Ark, which was a type of Christ, and
the Table of shewbread a figure of the Church, had three coverings, whereas
all the rest of the Vessels, etc. belonging to the cerimonial part had but two
Numb. 4.5, 6, 7, 8.
; On the Ark there was the vail and covering of badgers skins, and a covering
of blew: On the Table of shewbread there was a cloth of Blew, a cloth of
Scarlet, and a covering of badgers skins. God orders as much for the security
of the Church, as for the security of Christ; therefore the same things that
tend to the glorifying of Christ, shall tend to the advantage of the Church.

2. God has given the power of the providential administration of things to
Christ to this very end, for the good of the Church. If God had constituted him
Head over all things to the Church, can there be any doubt but that he will
manage the Government for that which is the principal end of his Government,
which he has shed his Blood for, and which is chiefly intended by God who
appointed him?

1. All power of government is given to Christ. Matthew. 11.27. All things are
delivered to me of my Father. And the Father judges no man, but has committed
all judgment to the son; Joh. 5.22. that is, the whole Government and
Administration of Affairs. It Is not to be understood of the last Judgment, for
then it would be a limitation of that word all; not that the Father lays aside
all care of things, but as the Father discovers himself only in him, so he
governs things only by him. All this power was committed to him upon his
interposition after the Fall of Man: He was made Lord and Christ, that is,
anointed by God to the Government of the World. For upon the Fall, God as a
Rector, had overturned all; Man could not with any Comfort have treated with
the Father, had not Christ stepped in and pleaded for the Creation; whereupon God
commits all judgment to the Son, that he might temper it. It was by Christ as a
covenanting Mediator, that the Earth was established Isa. 49.8.
. He had this Government Anciently, and it was confirmed to him upon his death;
Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person, and upholding all things by the word of his power. Calvin understands
the first word not only of the Deity of Christ, but of the discovery the Father
made of himself in and through him as Mediator. The latter words some
understand both of his Providential and Mediatory Kingdom: by the word of his
power, this, say some, is referred to the Father, whose image Christ is, as
ating by a delegated Authority and Commission from his Father: others, to
Christ; as, that Christ upholds or bears up all things by his own powerful
word. Calvin thinks both may be taken, but embraces the second as being more
generally received.

I may offer, whether it may not be meant also, of the powerful interposit ion
of Christ as Mediator; whose interest in God was so great, that he kept up the
World by his powerful Intercession, when all was forfeited; and God put it upon
that interposition, into his hands as heir of all things; (who having a hand
with him in Creation, understood both the Rights of God, and the Duty of the
Creature) upon the condition of purging sin by his Death, which he did, and
thereupon went to Heaven to take Possession of the Government, at the right
hand of God; sat down, took his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
as due to him by Covenant and Articles agreed on between them. I know nothing
at present against such an interpretation of the words; but I will not contend
about it. All this honor was confirmed unto him upon his Death. For having
performed the Condition requisite on his part, God deputes him and intrusts him
with the Government of things, that he might order all things so, as to see the
full Travel of his Soul.

2. All this power was intended by God for this End, the good of the Church. As
God appointed Christ a Priest for his Church to sacrifice for them, a Prophet
to teach them; so the other Office of King is conferred upon him for the same
end, the advantage of the Church. God acquaints us of this End, aimed at by him
in the Promise of the Government to him. Jer. 33.15, 16. In those days, and at
that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up to David, and he
shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land; what is the end? In those
days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely. He should execute
Judgment, that is, Administer the Government for the salvation of Judah, and
security of Jerusalem. It was his Office both to build the Temple, and to bear
the Glory, and to Rule upon his Throne; to be a Priest upon his Throne, to Rule
as King and Priest, Zech. 6.12, 13. He shall build the temple of the Lord, even
he shall build the temple of the Lord. The erecting a Church is the sole work
of Christ by Gods appointment. And he was to bear up the Glory of it. He should
rule to this End; for the Counsel of peace shall be between them both. If by [
both] be meant, the Lord, and the Man whose name is the Branch; it then chiefly
aims at our Reconciliation, as wrought by Covenant between them If by [ both]
be meant the two Offices of King and Priest, and that the counsel of Peace be
between them; it will extend to all the Blessings of the Church, to the good
and Glory of the Church, which is the fruit of his Kingly, as well as the first
Reconciliation was the fruit of his Priestly Office. By Peace, in Scripture, is
meant the confluence of all Blessings; so that the intent of God in bestowing
those Offices upon Christ, and so great a Rule, was for the good and advantage
of that Church or Temple, which he appointed him only to build. And in Isaiah
11.9. where the Prophecy of the Government of Christ is, the End is expressed to
be, that none should hurt or destroy in all his holy mountain. And certainly,
since God set him at his right hand, and confirmed this power unto him, after
he had purged our sins; it was certainly out of the high value God had for him,
and therefore must be the intent of God, that he should govern all things in
reference to the design of that death, and for the good of those, whose sins he
had by himself purged. For the possessing this Government, was the very end why
Christ died and rose again; Romans 14.9. For to this end Christ both died and
rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of dead and living. If this were
Christ's End in dying and rising, it was his Fathers End too, who appointed him
to Death, and raised him by his mighty power. And since he was delivered for
our offenses, and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. The Government
he is invested with, being Lord of the dead and of the living, must be for the
sakes of those for whom he was delivered, and for whom he rose. His Regal
power, which was one end of his Death, cannot cross the other main end, the
constituting a church, and carrying on the good of them that believe. The
Government being in the hands not of God as Creator, but in and through the
hands of a Mediator, and that Mediator which both died and rose again
peculiarly for them; therefore it cannot in the least be for their hurt but
advantage. The whole management of Christ's Kingly Office in relation to the
Church, is prescribed unto Christ by God. God reveals to him what shall be done
in the World, what acts he shall perform for the Church, and gives him a
History of all that was to be done upon the stage, together with an order to
communicate it unto his Servants, Revel. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God gave unto him, to show unto his Servants [to be communicated to the
whole Church] things that must shortly come to pass. Whether this Revelation
was made to the human nature of Christ at his incarnation, as Tirinus thinks,
or rather upon his ascension, is not material; The whole Scheme of what was to
be done in the World, is revealed here by God to Christ: And you find all the
motions in the World, relating to the Church, and the end of all, is the good
of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

3. All power thus given, and intended for this end, is actually administered by
Christ for this end. Christ as the head of the Church, does like a natural
head: It never sees, nor hears, nor exercises any act of sense only for it
self, but for the good of the whole Body: The eye watches for the body, the
Tongue speaks for it, the understanding contrives for it; every part of the
head is active for the whole body. Now Christ as head is more bound to act for
the Church militant, than for the Church triumphant; because the greatest part
of his work for the Church triumphant, viz. the bringing them to Heaven, is
already performed. And they are above the reach of all things in the World, and
all the actions and motions in the world cannot touch or disorder them. But the
command of God concerning the other part behind, is not yet performed, and even
they are the members of Christ, as well as those in Heaven. The Apostle Col.
1.16, 17, 18.
seems to refer both Christ's creation, and the preservation of things to this
title of headship. All things were created by him and for him, and by him all
things consist, and he is the head of the body the Church, and therefore the
conservation and government of all things shall be subservient to the Church,
which is the body of this governing Head. The chief seat Christ's Sovereignty is
the Church, Psalm. 2.6. yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: And he
stands upon Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1. The Church is the proper Seat and Metropolis
of his Empire, the Royal Chamber of this Great King. All the conquests of
Princes redound to the advantage of that place where they fix their Residence.
He is King of the World, but for the sake of Sion. Christ did manage this
charge anciently for his People; when Joshuah had passed over Jordan, and first
entered upon the conquest of Canaan, he sees a man over against him with a
sword drawn in his hand; Joshua 5.13, 14. And Joshua said unto him, Art thou
for us, or for our adversaries? and he said, Nay, but as Captain of the hosts
of the Lord am I now come. This was Christ that came armed for his People,
according to his charge, as their Captain and General. It was not an Angel,
because Joshua worshipped him; ver. 14. An Angel did not use to receive any
Worship from Men; and he accepts the Worship, and commands him to loose his
shoe from his foot, for the place whereon he stood was holy; ver. 15. And the
same Person, Josh. 6.2. is called Jehovah; and there he gives him orders how he
should manage his War. Christ came here to direct his People in their concerns;
He employs his Wisdom for his Church, as well as his other excellencies. He is
called a Counselor Isa. 9.6.
; it is one of the great Letters in his Name: and this, as the rest there
mentioned, has a relation to the Church. For unto us a Child is born, unto us
a Son is given. And the first use he makes of his Power, after the confirmation
of it to us, upon his Resurrection, is for the Church; Matthew. 28.18. All power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth; all Authoritative Power over Angels,
and the affairs of the World; Go you therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World. He
commands the Apostles to gather a Church among all Nations; and does, by Virtue
of this Authority committed to him, promise his Presence with them, in all such
services they should do to this End, even to the end of the World. He promises
his Spirit and his Providential Presence; as his Power should endure to the end
of the World, so the exercise of it for this End should run Parallel with the
continuance of it; There should be no alteration or change in this great end of
his, as long as the World lasts. How can Christ be with them, and that to the
end of the world, if all the parts of his providential government were not
ordered to serve this end, the good of the Church? For the Church is the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. that fills all in all places,
all in all actions and motions, for the good of his Church, which is his body.

3. God in the church discovers the glory of all his attributes. Thirdly
It Is in a man's house, where his riches and state is seen: It Is in the Church
God makes himself known in his excellency more than in all the world besides.
Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel, in Salem also
is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. It Is in his Church he does
manifest his power: It Is called therefore a glorious high throne, Jer. 17.12. a
glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary. Kings
use to display all their Glory and Majesty upon their Thrones; in this sense
Heaven is called Gods Throne, Isa. 60.1. because the prospect of the Heavens
affords us discoveries of the wisdom and power of God, more than in any other
visible thing, both in their essence, magnitude and motion: So is there a
greater discovery of Gods attributes in the Church (which is also styled Heaven
in Scripture) than in the whole World besides: There it is that the Angels look
to learn more of the Wisdom of God than they understood before Ephesians. 3.10.
. It Is there the day of his power dawns, Psalm. 110.3. It Is there his Saints see
his power and his glory, Psalm. 63.2. the Sanctuary is called the firmament of
his power, Psalm. 150.1. The glory of Gods attributes is centered in Christ in a
higher manner than in the creation, and in that work did excel themselves in
what they had done in the framing of the world; and the Church being the glory
of Christ, all those attributes which are glorified in Christ, do in and
through him shine forth more clearly upon the Church, than upon any other part
of the world. He styles himself their Creator, as much as the Creator of the
whole frame of Heaven and Earth, Isa. 43.15. I am the Lord, your holy one, the
Creator of Israel, your King. As though all the attributes of God, his Power in
Creation, his Holiness in redemption, were designed for none else but them. And
indeed by virtue of the Covenant, they are to be so; for if God be their God,
then all of God is theirs. What wisdom, power, sufficiency, grace, and kindness
he has, is principally for them. If God he their God, it is in their concerns
he will glorify himself as a God, in the manifestation of all his perfections.
This cannot be without the ordering all providence for their advantage.

4. There is a peculiar relation of God and Christ to the Church; Fourthly.
upon which account this Doctrien must needs be true. God is set out in all
relations to manifest his great care of his people. He is a Father to provide
for them Isa. 68.5.
. A Mother to suckle them Isa. 49.15.
. Chrit is a Husband to love and protect them Ephesians. 5.29.
. A Brother to counsel them John 20.17.
: And when all these Relations meet in one and the same person, the result of
it must be very strong. Any one relation where there is affetion, is a great
security; but here all the relations are twisted together with the highest
affections of them in God to the Church. A Father will order all for the good
of his child; a Mother for her Infant; a Husband for his Wife; and one kind
Brother for another; So does God for his People; and what soever those
Relations bind Men to on Earth, in respect of Care, Love and Faithfulness, that
is God to his Church. The Church has that Relation to God, which none in the
World have besides. They are his Jewels, therefore he will keep them; they are
his Children, therefore he will spare them Mal. 3.17.
. They shall have protection from him as they are his Jewels, and compassion
from him as they are his Sons. The Church is Christ's Flesh, as dear to him as
our flesh, is to us; as much his as our flesh is ours. Ephesians. 5.29. No man hates
his own flesh, but nourishes it, as Christ does his Church. No man can have a
higher value for hsi own flesh, than Christ has for his Church. The Church, as
Tertullian speaks, is nothing else but Christus explicatus, Christ unfolded;
and as considered in union with Christ, is called Christ; 1 Cor. 12.12. It Is
the Apple of his eye; Zech. 2.8. A tender and beloved part. The Church is
Christ's Spouse; the contract is made, the Espousals shall be at the last Day,
the Members are picked out one by one to be presented to the Lamb at last as a
Glorious Bride for him, Rev. 21.2.

And all Gods dealings with them in the World, are but preparations of them for
that State. Upon the making of the Match, God promises a communion of Goods;
Hos. 2.20. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, which is a fruit
of Marriage, the Wife being invested in her Husbands Estate. When God has
given the blood of his Son for the Church, he will not deny her the service of
the Creatures, but Jointure her in that as one part of her Dowry. In that day
will I hear the heavens, etc. ver. 21. In what day? in the day of betrothing,
in the day of the Evangelical Administration; when the contract shall be made
between me and my Church. Heavens, Earth, Corn, Wine, and Oil; the voice and
motions of all Creatures are for Jezreel, which signifies the seed of God. This
great Prince he has a care of all his subjects, somore peculiarly of his
Spouse and Princess, which is his seed too; and all Creatures shall be her
Servants. This Fatherly Relation and Affection is strong and pure, not as the
love which acts an ambitious man to Ambition, or a covetous man to Wealth,
which respects nothing but the grasping and possessing the Objects they dote
upon, and have nothing of love for the Objects themselves, therefore deserves
not the name of Love. But it is the love of a Father, whose love is pure
toward his children; He seeks their good as his own.

Consider these two things.

1. God has a peculiar love to his very Relation, and often mentions it with
delight, as if he loved to hear the sound of it in his own Lips: Cant. 8.12. My
vineyard which is mine, is before me. Me, My, Mine. The Church is always under
his Eye, seated in his Affection; and God is pleased with his propriety in
them. God never calls the World, My World, though he created it; sometimes he
says, the Earth is mine, but it is either to check the presumptions of Men,
who ascribe that to themselves which is due to the first Cause; Or to encourage
his People in the expectation of Deliverance, because all things in the Earth
are at his beck: Or to show his own sufficiency, without the services of his
people; as when he says, th eEarth is mine and the fullness thereof: but it is
never mentioned in such a way, as to discover any pleasure he has in the
Relation between him and it, simply considered; but My Vineyard, My People, My
Children, My Jewels, My Sanctuary, very often. So much does God esteem his
Propriety in them.

2. This Relation is prevalent with God in the highest Emergencies and
Distresses of his People. The very consideration that they are his People,
kindles his Affection, and enlivens his Strength for them. Isa. 63.8. And he
said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not lie; so he was their
Savior. God is brought in, as one that had heard the cries of his Church, and
had not been moved; but when he recollects himself, and considers that they
were his People, and that he was in a special manner related to them, he became
their Savior; He could no longer bear it, but stirs up himself to relieve
them. Nay, it has so strong an influence upon him, htat if this Note be often
sounded in his Ears, it does as it were change his Voice; and when he seems to
have a mind to cast them off, he cannot. When Israel had offended by erecting
and worshipping a golden Calf, he calls them no more his People, but Moses
People; Exodus 32.7. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, for thy
people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted
themselves. As though God had not been concerned in this Miraculous conduct out
of Egypt; And ver. 9. this people; as if he had had no interest in them, but
particularizes them with disdain. God had here discarded them, and turned them
over upon Moses's hands, as if he would have no longer any thing to do with
them; but Moses in Prayer turns them upon God again, and would not own them as
his, but pleads that they were God's proper Goods; ver. 11. Lord why does thy
wrath wax hot against thy people, which htou have brought forth out of the land
of Egypt? And ver. 12. again thy People; and God at last resumes his former
Notes, ver, 14. And the Lord repented him of the evil he thought to do unto his
people. Now they are Gods People again; the repetition of this Relation, is a
powerful Rhetorique to persuade him to own them again, which he had cashiered
and turned off.

5. The whole interest of God in the World lies in his Church and People.
Fisthly.
He sees little of himself in any part of the corrupted World, but only in
them. It Is in the Church he has put his Name; It Is there he sees his Image,
and therefore places his love there; and shall all this signify nothing? Shall
the Governor of the World let things go contrary to his own interest? They are
like to him in that which is one of his greatest perfections, viz his Holiness;
which gives him a greater interest in them. It Is his Interest that is opposed,
by an opposition to the Church. All the hatred any bear, it grows from the
inward root of enmity against God himself; Psalm. 44.22. Yeae, for thy sake are
we killed all the day long. God surely will concern himself in the Churches
interest, since it is his own. His Interest lies,

1. In the persons of his People. It Is his Inheritance Isa. 19. last
. It is his Portion Deuteronomy. 32.9.
. Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance. Every part of an inheritance, and a portion, does as particularly
belong to the owner, as the whole. Every part of the ground which belongs to
the Inheritance, is the Heirs, as well as the whole Field. He will not suffer
the World, which is but the work of his hands, to lay waste his Church which is
his proper inheritance It Is his Treasure; and where a man's treasure is, there
is his heart; and where Gods Treasure is, there is Gods heart.

2. In the services and actions of the Church. If the Church should be
destroyed, whom has God to love and imitate him, and to show forth his Glory?
If the Candlestick is broken, what is sit to hold out the light to the World?
He has none in the World besides, that do intentionally mind his Honor, that
take pleasure in glorifying his Name, and writing after his Copy, and observing
his Works. And will it stand with his interest to govern things contrary to
theirs, which is really his own?

When God had made the World, and pronounced it good, what would it have
signified, if he had not brought in man as his Rent-gatherer, and the Collector
of his Tribute, to return it to him? And what would Man signify? since the
corrupted World embezles that which is Gods Right, and turns it to its own use;
if God had not some honest stewards, who faithfully act for him, and give him
the Glory of his Works? And God will spare them as a man spares his own Son
that serves him. God has no voluntary service in the World but from them;
therefore he is more interessed in their good, than in the good of the whole
World besides. The services of the Church, are all the delight God has in the
World; Hos. 9.10. I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, I saw your
fathers as the first ripe in the figtree at her first time. They are as the
refreshing Wine and Grapes, as the delicious fruit of the first ripe Figs;
wherewith a weary Traveller recruits his Spirits after a long and tyring
journey. And God has a greater delight in the fruit he receives from the
Church, than in it simply as it is his inheritance; for no inheritance is
valued but for the fruit and revenue it yields; and therefore God orders all
his blackest providence in the World, like dark clouds to be the watering pots
of this his Garden; that the Fruit and Flowers of it may be brought to
maturity, which yield him so much pleasure and honor. God only is acknowledged
by them and in them, as the Jews were bound to acknowledge God the Author of
their mercies, by presenting the first fruits of their increase to God. And
Believers are called so, Rev. 14.4. These were redeemed from among men, being
the first fruits to God and the Lamb. It Is by and in them that God has the
acknowledgment of all his mercies and blessings to the World.

6. Sixthly.
It cannot be but all the providence of God shall work to the good of his
Church, if we consider the affections of God.

1. His love. What has God in the World as an object to bestow his affections
upon, and communicate the rays of his love unto, since he created it, but his
Church? The men of the World hate him: He can see nothing amiable in them; for
what was first lovely, they have defaced and blotted out; but the Church has
Gods comeliness put upon her, Ezekiel. 16.14. it was perfect through my comeliness
which I had put upon thee, says the Lord God; and he did not lay those
glorious colors upon her, to manage his government, or any part of it, against
her, to deface her. Besides their loveliness which is conferred upon them by
God, they have a love to God, and no man will act against those whom he thinks
to be his friends. God being purus actus, there being nothing but purity and
activity in God, his love must be the purest and highest love, the most
vigorous and glowing: As fire which sets all other Bodies, so this all other
powers in the World in motion for them. God cannot love them, but he must wish
all good to them, and do all good for them; for his love is not a lazy love,
but has its raptures and tenderness, and his affection is twisted with his
Almighty Power to work that good for them, which in their present condition in
the world they are capable of. Now it is certain God loves his Church: For,

1. He carries them in his hand Deuteronomy. 33.3.
, and that not in a loose manner to be cast out, but they are engraven upon the
palms of his hands Isa. 49.16.
, that he cannot open his hand to bestow a blessing upon any person, but the
picture of his Church does dart in his eye. God alludes to the Rings wherein
men engrave the image of those that are dear to them. And the Jews did in their
captivity engrave the Effigies of their City Jerusalem upon their Rings, that
they might not forget it Sanctius in Isa. 49.16.
. If his eye be always upon the Church, his thoughts can never be off it in all
his works.

2. He loves the very gates and outworks. Psalm. 87.2. the Lord loves the gates
af Sion. He loves a Cottage where a Church is, more than the stately Palaces of
Princes. The gates were the places where they consulted together, and gave
judgment upon affairs: God loved the assemblies of his Saints, because of the
truths revealed, the ordinances adminstred, the worship presented to him.

3. Nay one Saint is more valued by him than the whole World of the wicked. God
is the God of all Creatures, but peculiarly the God of Abraham, and of his
seed. One Abraham is more deeply rooted in his heart, than all the World; and
he does more entitle himself the God of Abraham, than the God of the whole
World; for in that style he speaks to Isaac, Genesis 26.24. I am the God of
Abraham thy Father, much more the God of Israel; The God of the whole Church,
of which Abraham was but a member, though the Father of the faithful, and a
Feoffee of the Covenant. God has a greater value for one sincere Soul, than
for a whole City. He saves a Lot, and burns a Sodom: Yea, than for a whole
World, he drowns a World, and preserves a Noah. He secures his Jewels, whilst
he flings away the pebbles.

4. He loves them so, that he overlooks their crabbed and perverse
misconstructions of his providence. When the Israelites had jealous thoughts of
him, and of Moses his instrument, when they saw that mighty Egyptian Army just
at their heels, and themselves cooped up between Mountains, Forts and Waters,
God does not upon this provoking murmuring draw up his cloudy Pillar to Heaven,
but puts it in the rear of them, when before it had marched in the van Exodus
14.19.
, and wedgeth himself in between them, and Pharaoh's enraged host, to show,
that they should as soon sheath their swords in his heart, as in their bowels;
and if they could strike them, it should be through his own Deity, which was
the highest expression of his affection: And though they often murmured against
his providence after they were landed on the shore, yet he left them not to
shift for themselves, but bore them all the way in his arms, as a Father does
his Child Deuteronomy. 1.31.
; and, bare them like an Eagle upon his Wings Deuteronomy. 32.11.
. and God loves them magnificently and royally, Hos. 14 4 I will love them
freely Hosea. 14.4. (...) Sept (...)
without any doubting, without any reluctance. I will love thee without any
repugnancy in my heart, to draw me back from thee; for mine anger is turned
away, as the streams of a River, quite another way. Now all this considered,
can the Governor of the World, the King of Saints, act any thing against his
own affections? Yea, will he not make all things subservient to them whom he
loves?

2. His Delight. See what an inundation of sweetning joy there was in him, for
which he had not Terms of Expression to suit the narrow apprehensions of Men;
Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy over
thee with singing. He seems in his expression to know no measure of his delight
in the Church, and no end of it; I will rejoice over thee with joy: Joy
sparkles up fresh after joy: It Is his rest where his Soul and all that is
within him centers it self with infinite contentment. Joy over thee with
finging; A Joy that blossoms into Triumph. Never had any such charming
transports in the company of any he most affected, as God has in his Church;
he does so delight in the graces of his People, that he delights to mention
them. He twice mentions Enochs walking with him Genesis 5.22, 24.
. And certainly God cannot but delight in it more than in the World, because it
is a fruit of greater pains than the Creation of the World. The World was
created in the space of six days by a Word; the Erecting a Church has cost
God more Pains and Time. Before the Church of the Jews could be settled, he had
both a contest with the Peevishness of his People, and the Malice of their
Enemies. And his own Son must bleed and dye, before the Church of the Gentiles
could be fixed. Men delight in that which has cost them much Pains, and a
great Price. God has been at too much Pains, and Christ at too great a Price,
to have small delight in the Church; will he then let wild Beasts break the
Hedges, and tread down the fruit of it? shall not all things be ordered to the
good of that which is the Object of his greatest delight in the World?

7. Seventhly.
The presence of God in his Church will make all providence tend to the good of
it.

It would be an idle useless Presence, if it were not operative for their good.
The Lord is there, is the very name of the Gospel Church Esa. 48.35.
; what would it signify if it were an useless Presence? Christ stands upon
Mount Sion, his Throne is in the Church, when the great things in the World
shall be acted for the Ruin, of Antichrist Revel. 14.1.
. Gods Presence in his Church, is the Glory and Defense of it; As the presence
of the King is the Glory of the Court, Zech. 2.5, For I, says the Lord, will
be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of
her. Her presence is a Covenant-presence. Isa. 41.10. Fear not, I am with thee;
be not dismayed, for I am thy God: whence follows Strength, Help and Support; I
will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee, with the
right hand of my Righteousness: that is, with my Righteous Power, with my power
engaged to thee in a Righteous Covenant. His Presence and Providence in the
World, is in a way of Absolute Dominion; but in his Church, in a way of Federal
Relation. He is the God of Israel, and God to Israel, or for Israel 1 Chro.
17.24.
; yea, and a God in the midst of Israel. Every one of them sufficient
engagements to protect Israel, and provide for Israel, and govern every thing
for Isreal's good. God is under an Oath to do good to srael; will he violate his
Oath? tear his Seal? break his Covenant, who never broke his League with any of
his people yet?

8. A Eighthly.
The Prayers of the Church have a might force with God to this end. God is
entitled a God hearing Prayer; and what prayers should God hear, if not the
prayers of his Church, which aim at Gods Glory in their own good? Though the
prayers of the Church may in some particular fail, yet in general they do not;
because they submit their desires to the Will of God, which always works what
is best for them.

When God would do any mighty work in the World, he stirs up his people to pray
for it; and their prayers by his own appointment have a mighty influence upon
the Government of the World: For when they come before him in behalf of the
Church in general, he does indulge them a greater liberty and boldness, and as
it were a kind of Authority over him, than upon other occasions of their own:
Isa. 45.11. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his maker, ask of
me things to come, concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands
command you me. God would be more positively, considently, and familiarly dealt
with, about the concerns of his sons, though they were things to come to pass
in after Ages. And indeed the prayers of the Church have a powerful and
invisible efficacy on the great actions and overturnings which are in the
World. The Being of the World is maintained by them from sinking, according to
the Jews saying, sine stationibus non subsisteret mundus; (standing in prayer
was their usual prayer-gesture.) And that they have actually such a force, is
evident, Rev. 8.3, 4. An Angel has a golden Censer with Incense, to offer it
with the prayers of the Saints, upon the Altar which was before the Throne. And
ver. 5. the Censer wherein their prayers were offered, was filled with the fire
of the Altar, and cast into the Earth; and there were Voices, Thundrings,
Lightnings, and Earthquakes. When the prayers of the Saints were offered to
God, and ascended upon before him, that is, (were very pleasing to him:) The
issue is, the Angel fills the Censer with fire of the Altar, and thereby causes
great commotions and alterations in the World; signifying, that the great
changes of the World are an answer unto those prayers which are offered unto
God; for fire is taken from that altar upon which they were offered, and flung
into the World. And it must needs be that the prayers of the Church should have
an influence on the government of the World.

1. Because God has a mighty delight in the prayers of his people. The prayer
of the upright is his delight, and he loves to hear the Churches voice, Cant.
2.14. O my dove, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice; [Chaldee] thy
voice is sweet in prayer. In the times of the Gospel God promises that the
offerings of Judah and Jerusalem should be pleasant to him, Mal. 3.4. When
Christ shall sit as a refiner, v. 3. what is the issue of those prayers, v. 5.
I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
sorcerers, etc. Prayer awakes providence to judge the Enemies of the Church. A
Parent delights, not in the bare crying, or the voice of his Child simply
considered in it self, but in the significations and effects of it. He delights
in the matter of their prayers, it being so agreeable to his own heart and
will, and in the sense they have of the sufferings of the whole body.

2. Because Prayer is nothing else but a pleading of Gods promises. Unto this
they are directed by that Spirit which knows the mind of God, and Marshals
their petitions according to his will. Now as God turns his own decrees and
purposes concerning his Church into promises to them, so the Church turns those
promises into prayers for them: So that promises being for the good of the
Church, and there being an exact harmony between those promises and the
Churches prayers, all those providence which are the issue of those promises,
and the answer of the Churches prayers, must needs be for the Churches good.

3. Because there are united supplications and pleadings both in Heaven and
Earth; all the hands of the whole Family in Heaven and Earth are concerning in
their petitions.

1. Christ intercedes for the Church, who always desires mercy and deliverance
for them in the appointed time, Zech. 1.12. How long will thou not have mercy
on Jerusalem? and the issue is always gracious: For, v. 13. God answers him
with good and comfortable words; and thereupon Carpenters are raised to cut off
the horns which had scattered Judah, v. 20.

2. Angels in all probability plead for the Church, as we have already heard:
It Is likely they offer and present that to God which makes for his glory, and
that is the good of the Church. Angels surely desire that which their head
does, who is Zech. 1.12.
described as one of their own order, and called an Angel. Do they rejoice at
the repentance of a sinner, and do they not likewise triumph at the happiness
of the Church, which is part of that Family they are of? And we know, that the
greatness of our joy is suited to the measure of our desires; where our joy is
most triumphant, it implies that our desires before were most vehement.

3. Glorified Saints are not surely behind. The rich man in the Parable desired
his Friend on Earth might not come into that place of torment Luke 16.28.
If there be so much charity in Hell, can there be less in Heaven? If he
desired it, that by the presence of his cmpanions in sin, his own torments
might not be increased; Do not the Saints in Heaven desire the presence of the
whole Church, that their happiness in that of the whole body may be completed?
If the Head Christ be not complete without the body, the members of the body
cannot be complete without one another. The souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, cry under the Altar for vengeance on them that dwell on the
Earth, as Revel. 6.9, and 10. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Will not their
kindness to their fellow members, be as strong as their justice? And their love
for the good of their Friends draw out their prayers as well as their desire of
vengeance on their Enemies? Why may they not as well pray for us, as we praise
God for them? Had they not some likeness to their great Master whilst they were
on Earth? and shall they not be more like to him now they ae in Heaven, and
behold his face, and feel all the stirrings of his heart? And if they have no
sense at all of the Churches sufferings, how shall they be like to him who
has? As their bodies shall be like the glorious body of Christ at the
resurrection, are not their Souls now like his glorious Soul? merciful, and
compassionate, and sympathizing in all the afflictions of the Church? and can
this be without some breathings for a full completing of the Churches freedom?
Are such desires and pleas any hindrance to their present happiness? It Is so
far from that, that it does rather further their glory, which cannot be
complete, as the glory of Christ, as head, is not mounted to the highest pitch
of glory, till his mystical body be all gathered in, and lodged with him. If it
be thus, will God do any thing prejudicial to the Church, and contrary to the
combined desires of all those that are so ner him? If God does sometimes stir
up himself upon the supplication of one man, grant an order upon his petition
according to his mind, and if the prayers of one faithful Moses, or Elias, or
Samuel, have such a kind of Almighty power in them, much more is the jovnt
force of so many prayers twisted together.

Use. 1. USE.
For information. Is it so, that all providence is for the good of the Church?
Then,

1. God will always have a Church in the World, he will have some to serve
him. The whole course of his providence being designed for it; As long as the
world, which is the object of his providence, does endure, he will have a
Church. God would otherwise lose the end of the motion of his eyes The Text.
, the operation of his providence, since it is to show himself strong for the
Church and every member of it. As long as the candle and light of the Gospel
burns and shines, God will have a candlestick to set the candle in Cham. les
trais verit. live. 3. cap. 1. p. 16.
. His great design in making a World, was not to have a Sun, Moon and Stars,
but a Church, a company of men that might ear his mark, and honor him, to whom
he might speak, and extend his grace abroad, which he was so full of within. As
a Limner, who would draw an excellent draught, draws his design in the midst of
the cloth, and fills the void places with clouds and land skips, and other
fancies at his pleasure, which communicate some beauty and luster to the work:
But that was not the principal design of the workman. That Redeemer which bears
the Church upon his heart, will create a stability for it; it is a part of his
Priestly Office to have a care of the Lamps: It Is one of his Titles to be he
that walks in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks Revel. 2, 1.
. Priests under the Law were to look to the grant Candlestick in the Temple,
supply the Lamps with Oil, and make them clean Levit. 24.3, 4. Chap. 27.20.
Chap. 30.8.
. The Church indeed may be eclipsed, but not extinguished; if it be not
conspicuous on the mountain, yet it shall be hid in the Wilderness. There shall
be sprinklings of professors among all people. God will leaven the places where
they are, into Christianity, and cause them to fructify and grow up in purity
and glory: Micah 5.7.
And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from
the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waits
for the Sons of men. Is tarries not for man. It attends not the power of man,
the precepts of man, or inventions of man; but whose descent is from Heaven,
and is carried on, not by human power, but by the divine Spirit and providence:
It shall be firmer than all worldy power, and the strongest Kings, Isa. 2.2.
And the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established upon the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills. Above mountains and Hills, to
which sometimes the powers of the World are compared, Zeth. 4.7.
Zech. 4.7. That providence which gave the Church at first a footing in the
world upon a weak foundation to outward appearance, in spite of Men and
Devils, will preserve it, and not suffer it to be blown up; he will shadow the
Church with his wings in a perpetual succession of the choicest mercies.

2. God will in the greatest exigencies find out means for the protection of
his Church. This will be till his providence be at an end. When God has
removed one instrument of his Churches protection, he has his choice of his
Churches protection, he has his choice of others, whom he can raise and spirit
for his work. When those upon whom the Churches hopes hang, are taken off; he
can raise things that are unlikely, to supply the place. As the Lutenist
accidentally had a Grasshopper leap upon his instrument, to supply by its noise
the place of a string which had newly cracked, whereby his Music was continued
without interruption. God can Spirit men against their own natural fears. It
was very improbable, that Nicodeus, one of a fearful disposition, who came to
our Savior by night for fear of the Jews, should have the courage to assert
his cause in the face of a whole Council of Pharisees, contriving his death;
and at present blunt the edge of their malice, though we read of none at that
time in the Council to second him Joh. 7.50, 51.
: The holy Ghost takes particular notice that it was he that came to Jesus by
night.

Joseph of Arimathea, whose name we meet not with in any of the Catalogues of
his Desciples, till the time of his death, then appears boldly to beg the body
of Jesus of Pilate. God will never want instruments for the preserving that
Church, which he owns as his. It Is observed by some, that God so ordered it,
that the same day, that Pelagius the great poysoner of the Christian Doctrine
was born in Britain; Austin the most famous defender of the truth was born in
Africa; That the horn, which pushed the truth, should no sooner appear, but the
Carpenter to cut it off, should be provided too. As it is observed where
poisons grow, Antidotes grow near them by the indulgent provisiof the God of
Nature.

As there is the Wisdom of the Serpent against the Church, so there is the
Wisdom of God for it. Gods goodness upon his Church in former Ages is not all
laid out: He has his stores still, neither is his Wisdom non-plust, nor his
Power weakened, neither is he, nor can he be weary of his care.

3. The Church shall in the end prove Victorious against all its Adversaries,
or Providence must miss of its Aim. The Church is compared to an Olive Tree,
Hos. 14.6. In respect of beauty, his Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree. It is
so also in respect of Victory. Olive Branches were used in Triumph. God is on
the Churches side, and he is stronger than the strongest, and wiser than the
wisest, and higher than the highest. Jesus Christ is the Churches Head and
General: Christ the Head watches for the good of the Church, the Body. He must
be destroyed before the Church can. There is a mighty Arm, which though it may
for a time seem withered, will in the end be stretched out, and get it self the
victory. Whilst Christ is in the Ship, it may be tosted, but it shall not be
sunk. It may be beaten down, but like a Ball to rebound the higher. The young
Tree that is shaken by the wind, may lose some leaves, and some fruit too, but
the root gets greater strength, and strikes it self deeper into the Earth, and
makes the Branches more capable of a rich return of Fruit the following year.
The Churches Stature is compared to a Palm Tree Cant. 7.7.
which cannot be deprest by by the weights which hang upon it, but rises the
higher. God uses the same method in the Churches. as in Christ's advancement.
Our Saviors Death was necessary to his Glory Luk 24.26.
And the Churches affliction sometimes to its exaltation. A Nation may lose
some Battlels, and yet be victorious: The Church may have many a cross, but in
the end will surmount all difficulties: Though Judgments and Apostacies may be
great in a Nation, yet God will have a care of his own Plants Isa. 4.12, 13.
. There shall be a tenth. It shall return, the Holy seed shall be the substance
thereof: As a Tree in Winter which seems dead, but its juice shall revive into
rich and generout Blossoms. The Ark shall float above the waters. Babylon shall
fall, the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Sion. Men may as well stop the rising of
the Sun in its mounting to the Meridian, Bridle in the Tide of the Ocean, as
hinder the current of an Almighty Providence.

4. The interest of Nations is to bear a respect to the Church, and countenance
the Worship of God in it. This is to concur with Gods main end, and imitate him
in his Providential Administrations. Gods people, (whatever their Enemies
suggest to the contrary) are a Blessing in the midst of a Land Isa. 19.24.
; their interest is greater than the interest of all the World besides; though
they be but a handful, their fruit shall shake like Lebonon Psalm 72.16.
Broughtn on Dan. 10 20.
. The neglect of Religion is the Ruin of Nations, It Is observed that Cyrus was
slain in the War in Sci thia, a little after he neglected the building of the
Temple of Jerusalem which he had begun. Those Persian Kings Reigned the
longest, that favored the Jews in that and their other just requests: God
Honored or disgraced them as they were kind or cruel to his People. And when
any act for the good of his people, they shall not be without their Reward.
When Cyrus should let the Jemish Captives go free without Ransom, he should be
no loser by it. God would give him the labor of Egypt, the Merchandise of
Ethiopia, and the strength of the Sabeans into his hand for the price of his
Peoples Delivery Isa. 45.13, 14.
; those Nations which should favor them in the times of their persecutions and
Flights, and give them shelter in their Countries, should thrive and prosper by
the blessing of God upon them. If Moab give entertainment to the flying
Israelites in the time of the Invasion of Salmanassar; God will preserve their
Land that the Spoyler shall not enter into the Consines of it, and they shall
have Kings and Judges under the protection of the House of David; i. e. under
the Kings of Israel, (as some understand it Isa. 16.4, 5.
.) Saints are the Guardians of the Places where they live, their Prayers have a
greater insluence than the wisest Counsels or the mightiest Force*. 2 Kings
2.12,
And Elisha cried, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof. The Chaldee paraphraseth thus. Thou art better of Israel by
thy Prayers, than Chariots and Horsemen. This is the Elogy of one single
Prophet; what influence then has the whole Church of God in a place? The whole
world is the better for the Church of God. The Chaldee Paraphrase has a notion
upon that, Psalm 22.3. But thou art holy, oh thou that inhabitest the Praises
of Israel: Thou that establishest the World for the Praises of Israel. God has
nothing to do in the World but the saving his People: When that is once done,
he will put an end to this Frame of things: When he has gathered his Wheat
into his Garner, he will burn up the Chaff. His People are the Spirit and
Quintessence of the World: When this is extracted, the rest are flung upon the
Dung hill, as a Caput Mortuum.

5. We may see hence the ground of most of the Judgments in the World. Men by
their rage against the Church, will not acknowledge God's Government of the
World for the Churches good: Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 59.13. Consume
them in wrath, consume them that they may net be, and let them know that God
rules in Jacob unto the ends of the Earth. The Church is the Seat of his
Government, and from thence he extends it to the utermost parts of the Earth.
In Jacob he rules, and for the sake of Jacob he orders his Government to the
ends of the Earth: The not acknowledging this, brings wrathful Consumptions
upon men: And it is also the end of his Judgments, to make men know it It Is
likely enough the four Kings Gen 14.9.
. might have gone clear away with all their Booty, had not they laid their
singers upon Lot: But when they would pack him up among the rest, they did but
solicit their own Ruin, and arm the Almighty God against tham. God did not
think any of the People worth the mention, verse 11. only Lot, a righteous
person, verse. 12. he is named as having Gods eye only upon him. And when
Abraham returns from the Victory, v. 16. the rest of the delivered Captives are
mentioned in the bulk, Lot only in particular. As though all that had been
done, had been done by God only for Lots sake. They might have preserved the
whole Prey to themselves, had it not been for this Jewel too precious in Gods
account for their Custody. And the fearful Curse that God pronounced against
the Ammonite and Moabite, that they should not come into the Congregation for
ten Generations, though any of them turned Proselytes, was because they came
nor out with so much as Bread and Water to meet the Israelites, and because
they hired Balaam to Curse them. The utter wasting of Nations and Kingdoms is
because they will not serve the interest of God in his People. Deuteronomy. 23.3.4.
Isa. 60.12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish,
yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted: God will bring an utter Consumption
upon those people that refuse to love them, much more upon those that hate them.

6. What esteem then should there be of the Godly in the World? The Providence
of God, being chiefly for the good of his people, cannot well fall upon them
but some drops will fall upon those involved with them in a common interest.
When the Corn and Wine and Oil hear Jezreel (the Seed of God) and the Earth
hears the Corn, and the Heavens hear the Earth, and God hears the Heavens Hos.
20 21, 22,
: When their supplications come up to the great Superintendent of the World;
many of the Wicked will fare the better for that Providence which is given only
in answer to Jezreels Prayer: God causes his Sun to shine upon the unjust, upon
them, not for their sakes. When Nebuchadnezzar issued out that unjust order for
the slaying the Chaldeans for not performing an impossible command in telling
him the Dream he had forgotten, Daniel was sought out to undergo the same fate:
Dan. 2.12.
Yet by his Wisdom God bends the heart of Arioch the Executioner of this Decree
to stay his hand. Daniel goes to the King, God stays Nebuchadnezzars Fury and
moves his heart to give them time. The Providence is chiefly intended for the
preservation of Daniel and his godly Companions, but the rest of the wise men
have the Benefit of it. As the water with which a man waters his choicest
Plants and Flowers in his Garden, is intended only for them, yet some falling
off from those Flowers, refreshes the Weeds that grow under them. If God had
not had such flowers as Daniel and his Companions, the Weeds in Chaldea had
been plucked up. Yet the ungrateful World takes no notice of the benefits they
receive from this Salt of the Earth, which preserves them, and to whom they are
all so much beholding. Lot had been the occasion of restoring Zoar from
Captivity, as I mentioned before, for the inhabitants of that City were engaged
with those of Sodom in the Fight against the four Kings. Gen 14.8
And the King of Bela, the same is Zoar. And perhaps were carried Captives with
the rest of their Neighbors: And it had been saved from the Flames which fell
upon Sodom merely by Lots prayer, Genesis 19.21. See I have accepted thee
concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this City for the which thou
have spoken. Yet he found them a surly people, and was requited with a rude
reception notwithstanding his kindness, verse 30. He went up out of Zoar, for
he feared to dwell in Zoar: It was not likely he was so distrustful of God that
he should overthrow it, when he had absolutely promised him the contrary:
Therefore most likely for some churlish threatenings from them: Nay, Sodom it
self was beholding to him for a sinall respite of the Judgment intended against
them. For God tells him he could do nothing till he were come thither Genesis 19.
. And it was so, for Lot was entered into Zoar before a drop of Brimstone and
Fire was rained down upon Sodom Ver. 23, 24.
. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom; when? when Lot was entered into Zear. This
good the Wicked World get by Gods People is so evident, that sometimes wicked
men cannot but take notice of it. Laban, a selfish Idolater, was sensible of
it, Genesis 30.27. I have found by experience that the Lord has blessed me for
thy sake. It was a Lesson so legible, that he might have learned it sooner than
in fourteen years. The Church is the chief object of preservation, wicked men
are preserved for their sakes; as Dung is preserved, not for its own sake, but
for the manuring a fruitful field, and Thorns in the Hedge are preserved for
the Gardens sake.

7. It Is then a very foolish thing for any to contend against the welfare of
Gods People. It Is to strive against an Almighty and unwearied Providence. Men
may indeed sometimes be suffered by God for holy ends to have their Wills, in
some measure upon the Church, but not altogether: They must first depose him
from his Throne, blind his eyes, or hold his Arm. It Is as foolish as if a worm
should design to dig down a Mountain, or Chaff to Marshal it self in
Battel-array against the Wind, or for a poor Fly to stop the motion of a
Millstone.

1. It Is foolish, Because it is exceeding sinful. What is done against the
Church, is rather done against God, than against her; Since all her
Constitution, Worship, Observances, are directed to God as their ultimate end;
so that to endeavor to destroy the Church, is to deny God a Worship, deprive
him of his Sanctuary, break open his House, Ravish his Spouse, cut off Christ's
Body, rob him of his Jewels, and will be so interpreted by God at the last,
upon the scanning of things. If the Church be Gods house, the Enemies shall
answer for every Invasion, every forcible Entry, for the breaking down the
Gates and Bars of it, God will sue them at last for dilapidations.

2. Very unsuccessful. Shall God be afraid of the multitudes and power of Men?
No more than a Lion, or a young Lion roaring after his Prey, when a multitude
of shepherds are called forth against him, shall he be afraid of their voice,
or abase himself for their noise Isa. 31.4.
. Noise and Clamor is all they can do, and that not long: The fierceness of the
Lion quickly scatters them. The Associations, and men's girding themselves
against the Church, is but a preparation to their own Ruin, Isa. 8.9.
Associate your selves together, oh ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces,
three times repeated. Your Counsels, says he, shall not stand against that
presence of God that is with us, For God is with us

3. It is very Destructive too. God will not always be still and refrain
himself: he seems to do so for a while; but when he does arise, he will destroy
and devour at once Isa. 42.14.
, he will make but one morsel of them. When God is angry with his people, and
gives them into the hands of men to execute his Justice upon them, and punish
them, he will even punish those enemies for their Cruelty, and going beyond
their commission, in satisfying there own immoderate Passions upon them. Upon
this account God threatens Babylon, Isa. 47.6. I was wroth with my People, I
have polluted mine Inheritance, and given them into thy hand, thou did show
them no mercy. Whereupon God threatens them afterward, etc. so Zech. 1.15. God
was sore displeased with the Heathen, for when he was but a little displeased
with his people, they helped forward the affliction.

Use. 2. Is for Comfort.

If all the Providence of God be for the good of the Church; If his eyes run to
and fro to show himself strong for them; it affords matter of great comfort.
His Providence is continual for them,*, Zech. 4.
he has seven pipes to convey kindness to them, as well as seven Lamps whereby
to discern their streights. His Providence is as vast as his Omniscience: The
number of Pipes belonging to the Candlestick of the Church is exact according
to the number of Lamps. The Churches Misery cannot be hid from Gods eye, let it
be in what part of the Earth soever, for his eyes run to and fro throughout the
whole Earth, and his sight excites his strength. Upon the sight of their
distressed condition, he watches only for the fittest opportunity to show
himself strong for them. And when that opportunity comes, he is speedy in the
Deliverance of them, Psalm. 18.10. He rode upon a cherub, and did fly, yea, he
did fly upon the wings of the wind. He does not only ride upon a Cherub, but
fly. His wings are nothing but wind, which has the quickest and the strongest
motion, which moves the greatest bodies, and turns down all before it. What is
for the good of the whole, has an influence upon every member of the Body.

1. It Is comfort in Duties, and special Services. Nothing shall be wanting for
encouragement to Duty and success in it, when God calls any to it, since all
his Providence is for the good of the Church. Let there be but sincerity on our
parts, in our attempts of service upon Gods call, and we need not fear a want
of Providence on Gods part: God never calls any to serve his Church in
anystation, but he does both Spirit and encourage them. God has in his common
Providence suited the nature of every Creature to that place in which he has
set it in the World: and will he not much more in his special Providence suit
every one to that place he calls them to, for the service of his Church? He did
not forsake Christ in redeeming his Church, neither will he forsake any in
assisting his Church. When Joseph of Arimathea would boldly demand the body of
our Savior, Providence made the way plain before him, he meets with no check,
neither from Pilate nor the Priests Mat. 27.58. Mark. 15.43.
.

2. In meanness and lowness. It Is one and the same God that rules the affairs
of the whole World, of the Church and of every particular Member of it. As it
is the same Soul that informs the whole Body, the meanest Member as well as
that which is most excellent. Not the meanest sincere Christian but is under
Gods eye for good. The Spirit acts and animates every Member in the Church, the
weakest as well as the most towering Christian. Baruch was but the Prophet
Jeremy's Amanuensis or Scribe, and Servant to Jeremy, (who was no great man in
the World himself) yet God takes notice so of his Service, that he would
particularly provide for him, and commands Jeremy in a way of Prophecy to tell
him as much, Jer. 45.5. I will bring evil upon all flesh, but thy life will I
give unto thee for a prey whithersoever thou go.

3. In the greatect Judgments upon others. In an Epidemical Judgment upon the
whole Nation of the Jews, God would have a special care of Baruch. If he should
cast his people far off among the Heathen, and scatter them among the
Countries, yet even there he would be a little Sanctuary unto them. His own
presence should supply the want of a Temple; so he is pleased to express
himself Ezekiel. 11.16.
; but how is it possible the great God can be but a little Sanctuary? His eye
is upon them to see their dangers, and his hand upon them to secure them for
it. His Promise shall shield them, and his Wings shall cover them Psalm. 91.4.
. While he has indignation, he has a secret Chamber for their security Isa.
26.20.
. An Almighty shadow, under which they may abide Psalm. 91.1.
. In times of the most devouring danger, he has a Seal to set upon their
foreheads as a mark of his special Protection. We never have so much experience
of Gods care and strength, as in times of Trouble, Psalm. 37.39. He is their
strength in time of trouble. He is a friend, who is as able as willing, and as
willing as able to help them, whose watchfulness over them is as much above
their apprehension, as it is above their merits.

4. In the greatest extremities wherein his people may be, there are promises
of comfort Isa. 43 2.
. Both in overflowing waters, and scorching fires, he will be with them. His
Providence shall attend his Promise, and his Truth shall be their Shield and
Buckler, Psalm. 91.4. That surely is a sufficient support; Christ thought it so,
when he only said to his Disciples, it is I, be not afraid John 6.17, 18.
. What though there be a Storm, a darkness and trouble? it is I am he. The
darkness of the night troubles not the Pilot whilst he has his Compass to
steer by. If all his providence be for the good of them that fear him, he can
never want means to bring them out of trouble, because he is always actually
exercised in governing that which is for their good; and till he sees it fit to
deliver them, he will be with them. Great Mercies succeed the sharpest
Afflictions. Jer. 30.5, 6, 7. etc.
. When there should be a voice of trembling, and men with their hands upon
their Loins as women in Travel, and paleness in their faces, from the excess of
their fears: In that day God would break the Yoke from them, and they should
serve the Lord their God, and David their King. Though the night be never so
dark, yet it is certain the Sun will rise and disperse its light next morning,
and one time or other show it self in its brightness. We have no reason to
despond in great extremities, since he can think us into safety, Psalm. 40.17.
Lord think on me; much more look us into it; his thoughts and his eyes move
together.

5. In fear of wants. The power of the Governor of the World cannot be doubted.
His love, as little as it seems, fince it has moved him to prepare Heaven to
entertain his people at the end of their Journey, will not be wanting to
provide accommodation for them upon the way, since all things both good and bad
are at his beck, and under the government of his gracious Wisdom. His eyes run
to and fro through the whole Earth, not only to defend them in dangers, but
supply them in wants: for his strength is showed both ways. Does he
providentially regard them that have no respect for him, and will he not employ
his power for, and extend his care to them that adore and love him, and keep up
his honor in the World? He will not surely be regardless of the afflictions of
his Creatures, His people are not only his Creatures but his new Creatures,
their bodies are not only created by him, but redeemed by his Son. The purchase
of the Redeemer is joined to the Providence of the Creator. If he took care of
you when he might have damned you for your sins, will he not much more since
you are Believers in Christ? And he cannot damn you Believing, unless he
renounce his Sons Mediation, and his own Promise. A natural man provides for
his own, much more a Righteous man, Prove. 19.22. A good man leaves an
inheritance to his children, much more the God of Righteousness, a God who has
his eye always upon them. His eye will affect his heart, and his heart spirit
the hand of his Power to relieve. He has prepared of his goodness for the
poor, Psalm. 68.10.

6. It Is comfort in the low estate of the Church at any t i am. Gods eye is upon
his Church, even whilst he seems to have forsaken them. If he seem to be
departed, it is but in some other part of the Earth, to show himself strong for
them; where ever his eye is fixed in any part of the World, his Church has his
heart, and his Churches relief is his end. Though the Church may sometimes lie
among the Pots, in adirty condition, yet there is a time of Resurrection, when
God will restore it to its true glory, and make it as white as a Dove with its
Silver Wings Psalm. 68.13
. The Sun is not always obscured by a thick Cloud, but will be freed from the
darkness of it. God will judge his peole, and repent himself concerning his
servants Psalm 135.14. (...) Comfort himself.
: It Is a comfort to God to deliver his People, and he will do it in such a
Season when it shall be most comfortable, to his Glory and their Hearts. The
very name Jerusalem, some derive from Jireh Salem, God will provide in Salem.
The new Jerusalem is the title given to Gods Church, Rev. 1. and is still the
object of his Providence, and he will provide for it at a pinch, Genesis 22.14.
Jehovah Jireh. God will raise up the honor and beauty of his Church. Great men
shall be servants to it, and employ their strength for it, when God shall have
mercy on it Isa. 60.10, 11, 12.
: Yea, the Learning and knowledge of the world shall contribute to the building
of it, v. 13. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine
tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary. It shall be
called the city of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of Israel, that she may
know that the Lord is her Savior, and her Redeemer the mighty one of Jacob. As
Christ rose in his Natural, so he will in his Spiritual Body. If Christ when
dead could not be kept from Rising, Christ now living shall not be hindered from
raising and helping his Church. His own Glory is linked with his Peoples
security; and though he may not be moved for any thing in them because of
thehir sinfulness; he will for his own name, because of its Excellency Ezekiel 36.
, Ezekiel. 36.22. I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for my holy
names sake. As Sorrows increased upon the Israelites, the nearer their
Deliverance approached.

Because this Method of God is the greatest startling even to good men, let us
consider this a little; that God does, and why God does leave his Church to
extremities before he does deliver it.

Take the Resolution of this in some propositions.

1. It Is indeed Gods usual method to loave the Chuch to extremity before he
does command help. You never heard of any eminent Deliverance of the Church but
was ushered in by some amazing distress. The Israelites were not saved till
they were put in between Sea, Hills and Forts, that their Destruction was
inevitable unless Heaven relieved them. Pharaoh resolves to have his will, and
God resolves to have his; but he lets him come with his whole Force and open
mouth at the Israelites backs, and then makes the Waters his Sepulcher.
Constantine the man-child in the revelation, was preceded by Dioclesian the
sharpest Persecutor. When his People are at a loss, it is his usual tme to do
his greatest works for them. God had promised Christ many ages, and yet no
appearance of him; still Promise after Promise, and no Performance, Psalm. 40.8.
It was then [(...) come] yet many hundred years rolled away, and no sight of
him yet. Captivity and affliction and no Redeemer; but when the World was
overrun with Idolatry, the Jews oppressed by the Romans, the Scepter departed
from Judah, Herod an Edomite, and stranger King, and scarce any Faith left,
then, then he comes. The World will be in much the like case at his next
coming, Luke. 18.8. When the son of man comes, shall he find faith in the
earth? there shall be faintings, despondency, unbelief of his Promise, as
though he had cast off all care of his Churches concerns. It Is not meant of a
Justifying Faith, but a Faith in that particular Promise of his coming. The
Faith of the Israelites must needs begin to flag, when they saw their Males
murdered by the Egyptians; could they believe the Propagation of the Seed of
Abraham, when murder took off the Infants, and Labor and Age would in time,
the old ones? Whilst their Children were preserved, the Promise might easily be
believed. But consider, this was but just before their deliverance; like a
violent Crisis before Recovery. He does then judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants, when he sees their power is gone, and there is none
shut up or left Deuteronomy. 32.36.
; He does so for the wicked many times; when the affliction of Idolatrous
Israel was bitter, when there was not any shut up, nor an left, nor any helper
for Israel, then he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the Son of Joash 2 King
14.26, 27.
. He does so with private persons; Peter might have been delivered by God's
Power out of Prison, when he was first sent thither; but God thought it fittest
for him to lie in Chains, and free him but the night before his intended
Execution Acts 12.6, 7.
. Lot had his Goods rifled and carried away Captive before God stirred up
Abraham to rescue him. When the hand of the wicked lies heaviest upon the heads
of the Righteous, and writings the most mournful sighs from them, when they are
needy, and the wicked securely puffing at them, as though they had brought them
to so low a condition as to blow them away with a blast, now says God will I
arise, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the
needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him at safety from him that
puffs at him. Now, rhis is the time I watched for, as fittest for my own
Glory, and their safety. Then God disappoints them, when they seem to have got
to the Goal with the Ball at their foot.

Secondly. God hereby does glorify himself. He then discovers that there is
nothing too high for his power to check nothing too subtle for his Wisdom to
disappoint, nothing too low for his love to embrace. That is the season wherein
his Mercy will be most prized, his Power most admired, his Wisdom most adored,
and his Justice most cleared. God lets the concerns of his Church go backward
that he may bring them on with more Glory to himself, and satisfaction to his
creature. God will divide the benefit and the honor between himself and the
creature: He will have the whole Glory, and his creature shall have the
sensible advantage. They shall enjoy Salvation, there is their benefit; but not
by Sword or Bow, but by the Lord their God Hos. 17. (...)
. Saved they should be, but in such a way wherein the honor of God might most
appear without any mixture of the Creature.

1. God glorifies his Power. His eyes run to and fro to show himself strong. He
will then pitch upon such a season when his strength may appear most
illustrious, and none else have any pretense to claim an equal strength with
him. A time of extremity is the fittest opportunity for this. When his power
cannot be clouded by any interposition of the creature for challenging a share
in it. The greater the malice against the Church, the weaker the Churches
ability to help it self, the more glorious is the power of God magnified in
deliverance; little dangers are not so suitable for the triumph of an infinite
strength. As God let Christ lie three daves in the Grave, that his Resurrection
might be known to be the fruit of Divine power; for the same end he lets his
mystical Body lie in the same condition. Had God brought Israel out of Egypt in
the time of the Kings that were friends to them from a kindly remembrance of
Joseph, there had been no character of a Divine power, though there had been of
a divine truth apparent in the case; but he set apart that time for their
deliverance when he was to contest with the mightiest opposition from the whole
body of the Egyptian Nation, who had forgot Joseph their great Benefactor. Had
nto the Disciples been in a great Storm ready to be cast away, and Christ
asleep, till they were in extremity; they had not seen such Isa. 33.7, 8. etc.
visible marks of the extensiveness of their Masters power. When the hearts of
the strong men fainted, when the Assyrians would not hear the Ambassadors of
Peace, when they had broke their former Covenant, resolved to invade the Land,
when their Calamity and despair had arrested all their hopes, Now, when all
things are in such a deplorable state, will I arise says the Lord, now will I
be exalted, now will I lift up my self. God was not asleep or unconcerned, but
he sat still, watching for such a season. Now, is three times repeated. The
Psalmist gives us a Record of this in his particular case. When the waters of
his affliction were many, the Enemy strong, and too strong for him, their
strength edged with an intense hatred, then God appears to be his stay, and
prevents them in the day of his Calamity, Psalm. 18.16, 17, 18. God lets his
Enemies be too strong for him, that he might appear his only stay, without any
mixture of David's strength in the case. When the Jews thrust Christ out of
Nazareth, led him to the Brow of the Hill, and were ready to cast him down,
then, and not till then, he frees himself out of their hands, and disappoints
the effects of their rage. As Christ dealt thus for him self, so he deals for
his Church in all Ages.

2. God glorifies his Wisdom. His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole
earth to show himself strong; it is not a bare strength that God would show, or
such a Power which we call in man a brutish valor, without wit or skill; but to
show his strength with his Wisdom, when all his other Attributes may be
glorified with that of his Power. When all worldly helps are departed, we can
as little ascribe our security to our own wisdom and industry, as to our own
strength and power. The Physicians skill is best evidenced in mastering a
desperate Disease. He will bring the Councils of the Heathen to naught Psalm.
33.10.
. He will let them counsel, he will let them devise and carry on their Councils
near to Execution, that he may show, that is the strength of Hell is no match
for his power, so the craft of Satan is no mate for his Wisdom. But he raises
the Trophies of his Wisdom upon the subtle devices of his Enemies.

3. God glorifies his Care and Compassion. When his people are nearest
crushing, God is nearest preserving. Gods Mercy is greatest when his Saints
Misery is deepest; when Sion is as an outcast, it shall be taken into Gods
protection, Jer. 30.16, 17. I will heal thee of thy Wounds because they called
thee an Outcast, saying, this is Sion whom no man seeks after. When none stood
up to plead for her, when her Lovers she depended on had forgotten and forsaken
her; when they thought her cast out of the care of any creature, the Creator
would take her up. When the ruin was inevitable as to man, their preservation
was most regarded by God. Had God stopped Pharaoh as his first March by raising
some Mutiny in his Army, his mercy to his people as well as his power against
his Enemies had not been so conspicuous. The more desperate things are, the
fitter subject for the advancement of Gods kindness. Had God conducted the
Israelites through a rich and fruitful Country, it would have obscured the
glory of his care of them, which was more signal in directing them through a
Barren Desert, crowded with fiery Serpents, without Bread to nourish them, or
Water to cool them, wherein he manifested himself to be both their Caterer and
Physician. Moses was never more peculiarly under Gods protection, no not when
he had the whole Guard of Israel about him in the Wilderness, than when his
Mother had exposed him to the River forlorn, in a pitched Ark, and forsaken by
his Sister, who stood a loof off to see how Providence would conduct him. When
Laban was possessed with Fury against Jacob, God countermands it, and issues
out his own order to him, how he should behave himself toward his Son Genesis
31.24, 29.
. God times his kindness, so that it may appear to be nothing else but Grace,
Grace with a Witness; that his people may be able to understand the very
particularities of it, Isa. 30.18. therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious unto you: He leaves them therefore for a while to the will of their
enemies, verse 17. At the rebuke of five shall you flee till you be left as a
beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign upon a hill: Never is
Salvation sweeter, and Mercy better relisht, than when it snatches us out of
the teeth of danger. God would have his mercy valued, and it is fit it should.
And when is a Calm more grateful than after the bitterest Storm, attended with
the highest despair? Gods mercy in sparing Isaac after the knife was at his
throat, was more welcome and more delicious both to Father and Son, than if God
had revealed his intent to Abraham in the three days Journey to the Mount
Moriah. But God suspending his Soul in bitterness all that time prepared his
heart for the valuation of that mercy. When humane help forsakes us, God most
embraces us, Psalm. 27.10. When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord
will take me up.

4. God glorifies his Righteousness and Justice. There is a measure of
wickedness God stays for, which will be an object of his Justice without
exception. When the measure of a peoples Covetousness is come, then their end
is come, and God will fill them with men as with Caterpillars, and they shall
lift up a shout against them Jer. 51.13, 14.
. Hereby God clears the Justice of his proceedings, that he exercised patience
so long; that things were come to that pass, that either his People or his
Enemies must be destroyed. As the case was with the Israelites, had not God
marvellously appeared, every man of them had been cut off or reduced to
Slavery. The Dye was cast, either the Egyptians or the Israelites must be
defeated: either God must appear for his Church, or none would be left in the
World to profess him. In such a case the Justice of God is more
unexceptionable: No man has any semblance for complaining of him. For he struck
not till the safety of his Adversaries was inconsistent with his own Honor and
Interest in the World. When men come to such a height, as to slight, and
resolve to break the laws of God, then is the time for the Honor of his
Righteousness in his own institutions, to vex them in his sore displeasure,
Psalm. 2.3, 5. Then shall be speak to them in his wrath, and vex them, etc.
When? When they resolve to cost away his hands and cords from them, ver. 2. He
is forced to rise then, when men make void his Law, and tread down the Honor
of it: When they would not have God to have a standing Law in the World, or a
people to profess him, Psalm. 119.126. It Is time for the Lord to work, for they
have made void thy Law. When the Grapes of Wickedness are thus fully ripe, then
is Gods time for the honor of his Justice to cast them into the Wine press of
his Wrath Rev. 14 19, 20.
. This is Gods set time when he may glorify, without any exception, his Justice
in punishing his enemies sins, his Wisdom in defeating his enemies Plots, his
power in destroying his enemies stength, and his mercy in relieving his Peoples
wants.

Thirdly, Such extremities and dellverance in them are most advantageous for
his People.

1. It being a season to improve and know their interest. Men do not usually
seek to God, or at least earnestly as when they are in distress; the time of
the tempest was the time of the Disciples praying to Christ: The Israelits, you
scarce find them calling upon God but in times of danger and distress; hereby
God doth-incourage and give an argument for Prayer. The Psalmist uses the
extremity of the Church often as an Argument to move God to pity, Psalm. 123.3.
Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us, for we are exceedingly filled
with contempt. We are glutted with contempt, as low as low can be. So Psalm.
44.23, 24. Awake, why sleep thou? O Lord, arise, cast us not off for ever,
our soul is bowed to the dust. That is the most successful time for Prayer
which is the time of the stirring of Gods Bowels. He has been a strength to
the Poor, a strength to the Needy in his Distress, a refuge from the Storm, a
shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against
the Wall Isa. 25.4.
. They in such a time find how considerable their interest is with God, when
upon their Prayer they shall find relief suitable to every kind of danger they
are in: The Spirit of Prayer upon the Church is but the Presage of their
Adsaries ruin. When God seeks to destroy the Nations that come against
Herusalem, he will pour upon the Inhabitants of it, a spirit of Grace and of
Supplication, Zech. 12.9 And in that day I will seek to destroy all the Nations
that come against Jerusalem, and I will pour upon the house of David, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirii of Grace and of supplication. This time of
extremity, when all their hands fail, should edge the Churches prayers. Our
great Intercessor seems in this case to set us a pattern, Zech. 1.12. O Lord of
Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy upon Jerusalem? [(...) single by it
self, not in an affix] When all the Earth sits still and is at rest,
unconcerned in the affairs of thy Church, if thou will not have mercy on them
in this strait, who shall relieve them; none else have any mind to it; then
issue out comfortable words to the Angel from the mouth of God. This is an
advantage of extremity, it sets Christ a pleading, and the Church on praying.

2. As a season for acting Faith at present, and an encouragement of relyance
upon him in future straits. As a season for acting Faith at present. Our
Savior lets Lazarus dye and stink in the Grave, before he raised him, that he
might both confirm Faith in his Disciples hearts, and settle it in the hearts
of some of the Jews John 11 15.45.
. I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent that ye may
believe. What, let Lazaus die, one that he loved, one so strongly pleaded for
by two Sisters, that he loved too, and solicited upon his friendship to
relieve him, v. 3. Behold he whom thou love is sick; and our Savior glad he
was not there to prevent it; yes, not glad of Lazarus his extremity, nor of the
Churches; But of the opportunity to give them greater ground of Faith and
encouragement to trust him. The Churches Faith is Gods Glory: He that has many
things to trust to, is in suspense which he should take hold of: But when there
is but one left, with what greediness will he clasp about that? God cuts down
worldly props, that we might make him our stay. How will the Church in
extremity recollect all the deliverances of it in former ages, and put them up
in pleas to God, for a renewal of his wonted kindness and new successions of
deliverance, whereby God gets the glory of his former work, and his Church the
present comfort in renewing fiducial acts upon him? How does Jehosaphat put God
in mind of his gracious assistance acted some ages before, when he was in a
straight, by the Invasion of a powerful Army! 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Art not thou our
God that did drive out the Inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel?
v. 12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee: Never are the
Churches eyes so fixed upon God; never Gods eyes so sixed upon the Church, as
in times of their distress. Then there is a sweet Communion with, and
recounting of all their former friendships. The Church then throws it self
wholly upon God: Its prosperity is but like a troubled Sea, its distress is the
time of its rest. So Asa, when assaulted by a million of men under Zerah, the
Ethi^pian, how does he throw himself and the whole weight of his concerns upon
the hands of God, and makes his Cause Gods? 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Help us, O Lord our
God, for we rest on thee; oh Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail
against thee. And there is an encouragement also in the deliverance for future
Faith. It gives a ground fro future Faith from the riches of the present
experience. In such distress there is the highest experience of God, and hope
is the fruit of experience; How apt are we to believe God in other straits,
when we have had assistance (like they that dreamed) come unexpectedly upon us?
God overthrew Pharaoh's Host in the Red Sea, when they were upon the heels of
the affrighted Israelites, and ready to crush them, but God gave them to be
meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness Psalm. 74.14.
, as a standing excellent dish to feed their hopes for all future deliverances
upon their trust in God. And indeed that deliverance was an earnest of their
perpetual security, by special Providence in any succeeding trouble. And God
often gives them a particular charge to remember that deliverance with a
practical remembrance, to still their Fear, and support their Faith, Deuteronomy.
7.18. Thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember what the Lord
thy God did unto Pharaoh, and to all the Egyptians. He would have them remember
it as a Covenantmercy, what the lord thy God did, thy God in Covenant; not what
the Lord did barely by an arm of Power, but what he did by a vastness of
affection, and as a God of truth and firmness in his Covenant.

3. In sitting them by the extremity for a holy reception of the Mercy intended.

God keeps up the distress of the Church to expel self-considence. Trust in
earthly things is the great check of Gods Kindness. We hardly forsake this
temper, till we are forsaken by all those things we confide in. Times of
extremity make us more humble, and humility like the Plow, fits us for the seed
of Mercy. The Gardeners digging up the clods is but to prepare the earth for
the receiving and nourshing some excellent Plants he intends to put into its
Womb. There is a certain set time for Gods great actions. He lets the powers of
darkness have their hour, and God will take his hour, Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall
arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is
come. He has a set time for the discovery of his mercy, and he will not stay a
jot beyond it. What is this time? v. 9. etc. When they eat ashes like Bread,
and mingle their drink with weeping. When they are most humbled; and when the
servants of God have most affection to the Church When their humble and ardent
affections are strong, even to the ruin and rubbish of it; when they have a
mighty desire and longing for the reparation of it, as the Jews in Captivity
had for the very dust of the Temple, ver. 14. For thy Servants take pleasure in
her Stones, and favor the dust thereof. For, there, notes it to be a reason
why the set time was judged by them to be come. That is Gods set time, when the
Church is most believing, most humble, most affectionate to Gods interest in
it, and most sincere. Without Faith we are not fit to desire mercy; without
humility we are not fit to receive it, without affection we are not fit to
value it, without sincerity we are not fit to improve it. Times of extremity
contribute to the growth and exercise of those qualifications.

4. In securing them against future Streights. For Gods disappointing Enemies
when they think themselves sure of all, is the highest discouragement to them,
and those of the like temper to renew the like attempts; but if they do, it is
an evidence they shall meet with the like success; It Is the highest vexation to
see their projects diverted, when they have lighted their match, and are ready
to give fire. Men may better take notice how God loves his people, when he
apprehends their adversaries in the very Pinnacle of their Pride, and slings
them down from the Mount of their hopes. It does not only dash the present
designs, but dishearten future attempts. The Egyptians after their overthrow at
the Bed Sea never attempted to disturb them in their journey in the Wilderness.
It was a Bridle to all their enemies, except Amalek, upon whose Country they
traveled in the Wilderness, when it was the interest of State in all those
Nations to rout that swarm of People that must have some Seat to dwell in; and
every Nation might justly fear to be dispossessed by them; yet we read of no
League among those Nations bordering upon the Wilderness, such a terror did God
strike into them by that relief he gave his People in their extremity at the
Red Sea; whereby he provided for their future security in their whole Journey.
It was this metled the hearts of the Gibeonites, one of the Nations of Canaan,
and brought them to a submission to Joshua as the sentiment of all their
Neighbors, Josh. 9.9. We are come because of the name of the Lord thy God, for
we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt. And for this and
other reasons it may be, that the times before the Churches last deliverance
shall be sharper than any before; which our Savior intimates, Matt. 24.21. For
then there shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of
the world, no nor ever shall be. In Discoursing his Disciples of the troubles
at the destruction of Jerusalem, which was a type of the trouble preceding the
end of the World, he adds a discourse of what shall be at the end of the World,
in the last attempt of the enemies of the Church, for ver. 29. he says
immediately after the tribulatin of those days, he speaks of his coming in the
Clouds of Heaven with great power and glory. And also in the Revelation, Rev.
16.18. And there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon
the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. This perhaps at the pouring
out of the seventh Vial may concern the Christian Church as well as the
Antichristian Party. But the reason why it may be sharper just before that last
deliverance than it was in former ages, may be because it is the last effort
the enemy shall make; the last demonstration of Gods power and wisdom for, and
care of his Church, and of Justice upon his enemies in such cases. The last
season for their multiplying their cries, and acting their Faith for such a
concern.

3. Us. of Exhortation. If it be so, that the Providence of God is chiefly
designed for the good of the Church;

First, Fear not the Enemies of the Church. It Is a wrong to God. Fear of Man is
always attended with a forgetfulness of God, Isa. 51.12, 13. I, even I am he
that comfort you, who art thou that art afraid of a man that shall dye, and
of the Son of Man that shall be made as Grass, and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker, who has stretched forth the heavens, etc. It Is to value the power of
Grass above the power of the Creator, as though that had more ability to hurt,
than God to help. As if men were as strong as Mountains, and God as weak as a
Bulrush. It Is a wrong to his Truth; has he not comforted you in his Promise?
What Creature should then deject you? It Is a wrong to his Mercy; is he not the
Lord thy Maker? Calvin refers this to Regeneration, and not Creation. Has he
not renewed you by his Spirit, and will he not protect you by his strength? and
that you may not question his power, look up to the Heavens which he has
stretched out, and the foundations of the Earth which he has laid: And is that
Arm which has done such mighty works too weak to defend that work which is
choicer in his eye than either the extended Heaven, or the established Earth?
We vilify God, and defile his Glory, when our fear of man's power stifles our
Faith in God, Isa. 8.12, 13. Neither fear you their fear, nor be afraid:
sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear. Let the wicked
fear the Assyrians, and engage in confederacies against them, but let your eyes
be lifted up to me and my Providence. God will either turn away the mouth of
the Cannon from the Church, or arm it against the shot; either preserve it from
a danger, protect it in it, or sanctify it to the Church, and who need fear a
Sword in a fathers hand?

1. Will you fear man, who have a God to secure you? The Church belongs to God,
not to man, as a just propriety. Isa. 43.1. Fear not, for I have redeemed thee,
I have called thee by my name, thou art mine; when thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee, etc. Thou art mine, not man's. Thou art mine, I am
thine. I will be with thee as thine, I will secure thee as mine. Is my
Creating, is my forming, is my redeeming thee to no purpose? I will not secure
you from trouble; but surely my redemption of you, the propriety I have in you,
should secure you from fears in those troubles. None shall hurt you whilst I
have power to defend you. God with us, if well considered and believed, is
sufficient to still those fears which have the greatest outward objects for
their encouragement, Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? If God be our strength to support us, why should the
weakness of dust and ashes scare us? Alliance to great men, and Protection of
Princes, prop up men's hearts against the fears of others; and shall alliance to
God be of a weaker efficacy? A Arram in Epist lib. 1. c. 9.
Heathen could so argue that knew nothing of Redemption. Let the Counsels of
Enemies be crafty Psalm. 83.3.
, yet they consult against Gods hidden ones, hidden by God whilst Plotted
against by men: who would fear the stratagems of men, whilst protected in an
impregnable Tower? God hides, when men are ready to seize the Prey. How did the
Angel protect a sincere, trembling Lot against the invasion of a whole City,
and secured his person whilst he blinded his enemies eyes that they could not
find the door! Instruments cannot design more maliciously than Christ watches
over them affectionately. Christ has his Eye to see your works and danger,
where Satan has his Thorn. Rev. 2.13.


2. Will you fear man, who have a God to watch over their motions? What
counsels can prevail where God intends to overruled their resolves? There is no
place so close as to keep private resolutions from his knowledge. This was the
thought of those Statesmen against whom the Prophet Isaiah thunders, Isa.
29.15, 16. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and
their works are in the dark; surely your turning of things upside down shall be
esteemed as the Potters Clay Their Counsels were as well known to him as the
Potters clay is to the Potter, which he can either frame into a vessel, or
fling away into the Mass from whence he took it. God has not despoyled himself
of his Government; nor will devolve his right upon any men to dispose of his
concerns. When men think to act so secretly as though they framed themselves,
as though Gods eye were not upon them; He will watch and trace all their
Motions, and make them insignificant to their purposes. Satan himself, the
slyest and subtilest agent, is too open to God to hide his Councils from him.
Never fear man till the whole combined Polices of Hell can control the
resolves of Heaven. Till God wants Omniscience to dive into their secrets,
skill to defeat their Councils, and an arm to abate their power.

3. Will you fear men or devils who have a God to restrain them?

The great Dragon and General of the Serpents Seed is under a binding power,
who can bind him not only a thousand fears, out a thousand Ages Rev. 20.2.
. Have his Seed more force to resist Almightiness than their Captain? The
Prophet speaking of the Assyrians threatening Jerusalem, and the confusion in
some Cities for fear of them, yet, says he, he shall remain at Nob, a City of
the Levites, not far from Jerusalem, where he might have a full Prospect of the
City. He shall but shake his hand, he shall not gripe it in his Talons; He
shall show his teeth, but not bite; snarl, but not worry, Isa. 10.32. God will
let out so much of the enemies wrath as may answer his gracious ends to the
Church in purging o^ them, but the remainder of Wrath, which remains in their
hearts for the Churches Destruction, he will restrain Psalm. 76.9, 10.
. As a Physician weighs out so much as may curb the Disease, not kill the
Pacient. The Chain of Providence controuls the Power of Satan, when it does not
change his desires. The Egyptians Will against the Israelites was strong, but
his power was weak. Might and Power is only in the hand of God, who Reigus over
all, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. And God will exert so much of Power to bridle the
inclinations of Nature in the wicked for the good of his people. He will give
them so much line as may serve his holy purposes, but not so much as shall
prejudice the Churches standing. A Staff is not capable of giving a smart blow
without the force of the hand that holds it. Wicked men are no more than a
staff in Gods hand, Isaiah 10.5. The rod of my anger, the staff in their hand
is my indignation; be can either strike with it, or break it in pieces. The
Staff is still in the hand of God, and can do no more than what his merciful
Arm moves it to; as he can restrain it, so he can divert it. What should we
fear those whose hearts are in Gods hands, whose enmity is under Gods
restraint, who can change their fury into favor, or at least bridle it as he
does the Waves of the Sea? No Enemies shot can exceed Gods Commission. God
often laughs when men Plot, and disappoints when they begin to act. Sometimes
he makes them act contrary to their intentions. Balaam comes to curse the
People, and God turns his tongue to bless them, which if guided by his own
heart, would have poured out execrations upon them Numb. 23.7, 8.
. God puts the words into his mouth, but not in his heart, v. 5. and makes him
bless that which his heart hates.

4. Will you fear them who have a God to ruin them? Though the Beast in the
Revelations has seven heads, a reaching Wisdom; and ten horn, a mighty power
Rev. 17.3.
, (both the numbers of seven, and ten, being numbers of perfection in
Scripture) yet with all his Wisdom and Strength he shall tumble down to
Destruction, they can no more resist Gods power than blustering Winds or raging
Waves can cross his Will. When the enemies of the Church are in Combination,
like Thorns full of prickles folded together, then shall they be consumed like
stubble that is dry. Nahum 1.10. God loves to defeat Pride, Exodus 18.11. In the
thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them. God waits but the time of
their swelling to make them burst. Absalom kills his Brother, withdraws the
people from their obedience to the King, stirs them up to revolt, enters
Jerusalem in his Fathers absence, pollutes his Concubines, engages in designs
against his life, raises an Army against him; who would not say David was in
extremity, and Absalom alone prospering in his designs? but when Absalom comes
to open force, God arises, an Oak catches him, his Mule forsakes him, and Joab
dispatches him. Senacherib had prospered in his Conquest of Judea, taken many
strong Towns laid siege to Jerusalem, sollicites the People to revolt,
blasphemes the God of Heaven, and then an Angel comes and makes a dreadful
slaughter in a night, and he returning to his own Country is killed by his own
Sons 2 Kings 19 7, 35, 36, 37.
. God Arrows shall never miss their mark, and he has more than one to strike
into the hearts of his enemies, Psalm. 18.14. He sent out his arrows and
scattered them. What reason then to fear even multitudes, who can never be too
strong for that God who gave them that little strength they have?

Secondly, The second Duty to which we are exhorted. If all Gods Providence
tend to the good of his Church and People,

2. Then censure not God in his dark Providence. As we are often too hasty, in
our desires for mercy, and are not content to stay Gods Time, so we are too
hasty in making constructions of Providence, and will not stay Gods leisure of
informing us. When God seems at the beginning of every Providence to speak the
same language as Christ did to Peter in washing his feet, John 13.7. What I do,
thou know not now, but thou shall know hereaster: The Instruments are
visible, the action sensible, but the inward meaning still lies obscured from
our view. We are too short sighted to apprehend and judge of Gods Works: Man
cannot understand his own way Prove. 20.24.
; much less the ways of an insinite God. Gods Judgments are a great deep Psalm.
36.6.
we may sooner sathom the Deepest part in the Sea, understand all the turnings
of those subcertancan passages, lave out the Ocean with a spoon, or suck in
into our Bellies that great mass of waters, than understand the ways of God
with our shallow brains. He makes darkness his Pavilion: He is sometimes very
obscure in his ways. Neither the greatness of his Means, nor the wisdom of his
workings can be fully apprehended by men. We have sense to feel the effects,
but not heads to understand the reasons and authods of the Divine Government.
Eccles. 3.11. No man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to
the end. Though a man may see the beginning of Gods works, yet is he able to
walk understandingly along with Divine Wisdom in every step it takes? will he
not lose the tract often before it comes to an end? It Is not the face but the
back parts of Providence which we behold; why then should we usurp an authority
beyond our ability, and make our selves Gods Judges; as if infinite Wisdom and
Power were bounded within the narrow compass of our purblind Reasons? His ways
are beyond our tracing, and his Councils too high for our short measures. Since
therefore God satisfies the Righteousness of his own Will, let us submit our
curiosity to his Wisdom, and forbear our Censures of that exact righteousness
and superlative wisdom which we cannot comprehend.

1. Therefore, First, six this into your minds, that God is righteous, wise and
good in every thing. Good, therefore nothing can be hurtful to his People:
Righteous, therefore nothing Unjust: Wise, therefore nothing to vain. Our
injurious thoughts of him make us so uncharitable toward him, and greater
Censurers of his righteous ways, than we are of men's wicked actions. Clouds and
Darkness are about him: our eye cannot pierce through his darkness, or see the
frame of his counsels; yet let these Principles be kept as the Center, that
Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne Psalm. 9.2.
. He is righteous in his darkness, wise in his cloudiness; though his Judgments
are unsearchable to us, and his ways past finding out, by our most industrious
inquisitions; and a depth of knowledge and wisdom there is in them too deep for
us to measure Romans 9.33.
. God was always Righteous, Wise, and Good, he is the same still: Though the
motions of the Planets b e contrary, yet the Sphere where they are fixed, the
natures wherewith they were created, are the same still. Though the Providence
of God have various motions, yet the Spring of his Counsel the Rule of his
Goodness, the Eye of his Wisdom, the Arm of his Power are not altered: He acts
by the same Rule, disposes by the same Wisdom, orders according to the same
Righteousness; he is unchangeable in the midst of the changeable effects of
Providence. The Sun is the same body, which admits of no inward alteration,
keeps exactly its own motion, though its appearances are sometimes ruddy,
sometimes clear, its heat sometimes more faint, at another time more scorching,
its distance sometimes nearer, sometimes farther off. He must be very ignorant
that thinks the object upon which we look through a Prisme or Trigonal Glass
change their colors as often as they are represented so, in the various
turnings of the Glass. You see the undulations and wavings of a Clain which
hangs perpendicularly, one part moves this way, and another that way, but the
hand that holds it, or the beam to which it is fastened is firm and steady.

2. Distinguish between preparations to the main work, and the perfection of
the work; between the motions of Gods eyes, and the discovery of his strength,
his eyes move before his Power. The neglect of this was the cause of the
Israelites uncharitable Censures of the kindness of God: they interpret Gods
reducing them into the Straits near the Red Sea, a design for their
destruction, which was but the preparation for their complete deliverance, in a
way most glorious to God, and most comfortable and advantageous to themselves.

He that knows not the use of the Grape, Morn. de verit. Rel. Christian. cap.
12. p. 210, 211.
would foolishly censure a man who should fling them into a Winepress, and
squeeze them into mash, which is but a preparation of them to afford that
generous liquor which was the end of their growth. God treads his Grapes in a
Wine press, to draw from thence a delicate Wine, and preserve the juice for his
own use, which would else wither upon the stalk, and dry up to nothing. We
judge not the Hosbandman angry with his ground for tearing it with his Plow,
nor censure an Artificer for hewing his Stones, or beating his Iron, but expect
patiently the issue of the design. Why should we not pay the same respect to
God which we do to men in their Arts; since we are less capable of being Judges
of his incomprehensible Wisdom, than of the skill of our fellow Creatures? God
in his cross Providence prepares the Church for fruitfulness whilst he Plows
it. He may seem to be digging up the Bowels of the Church, while he is only
preparing to lay the foundation in Sion for the raising a noble structure; and
in what shape soever he appears in his preparations, he will in his perfection
of it appear in glory, Psalm. 102.16. When the Lord shall build up Sion, he
shall appear in glory, and evidence that he was restoring, whilst we thought
him destroying; and healing, whilst we thought him wounding. As God has settled
a gradual Progress in his works of Creation, so by degrees he brings his
everlasting Counsels to perfection. The seasons of the year are not jumbled
together, but orderly succeed one another; and the coldness of the Winter is
but a preparation for a seasonable Spring, and a Summer-Harvest. We do not
unrighteously accuse God of disorder in his common works, why should we do it
in his special works of Providence? we do not disparage the Musicians skill for
the jarring and unintelligble touches in the tuning Instrument, but rather wait
for the Lesson he intends to play: If we stay for Gods fuller Touches of this
great Instrument of the World in the way of his Providence, it will, like
David's Harp, chase away that evil Spirit from us which is now too apt to
censure him.

3. Fix not your eye only upon the sensible operations of providenee, but the
ultimate end. As in a Watch the various wheels have different motions, yet all
subservient to one end, to tell the true hour of the day, and the motion of the
Sun; so are all the Providence of God. Should any have been preserved in the
Deluge upon some high mountain, who had not known the design of the Ark, and
had seen it floating upon such a Mass of Waters, he would have judged the
People in it in a deplorable condition, and have concluded that it would have
broke against a Mountain, or been overturned by the Waves; yet that was Noah's
preservative. Had any of us been with Christ, and acknowledged him the Savior
of the World, and yet seen him Crucified in such a manner by men, and judged
only by that; what wise and what just constructeion should we have made of that
Providence? much the same as some of his Disciples did, Luke 24.21. We trusted
that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel. But the whole design is
spoiled, we were fools, and he an Impostor. Yet this which seemed to be the
ruin of Redemption, was the necessary highway to it by Gods constitution. No
other way was it to be procured, ver. 26. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to have entered into his Glory? His entrance into Glory to
perfect our Salvation, was the end of the sensible suffering, wherein he laid
the foundation. As they charge Christ with imposture, not considering the end,
so do we God with unrighteousness, when we consider not his aim. The end both
beautifies and crowns the work; The remarks of Gods Glory in the Creation are
better drawn from the ends of the Creatures and their joint subserviency to
them, than from any one single piece of the Creation. We must not only consider
the present end, but the remote end, because God in his Providence toward his
Church has his end for after times. God acts for ends at a great distance from
us, which may not be completed till we are dead and rotten. How can we judge
of that which respects a thing so remote from us, unless we view it in that
Relation? Gods aims in former Providence were things to come, his aims in
present Providence are things to come. As the matter of the Churches Prayers,
so the objects of Gods Providence are things to come, Isa. 45.11. Ask me of
things to come, concerning my sons. The matter of their Prayers then were, that
God would order all things for the coming of the Messiah. The matter of the
Churches Prayer now is, that God would order all things for the perfecting the
Messiah in his mystical Body. The whole frame of Providence is for one entire
design. It Is one entire Book with seven Seals Rev. 5.1.
. The beginning of a Book, as well as the middle, has relation to the end. The
design of Gods Book of Providence is but one in all the seven Seals and periods
of time.

4. Consider not only one single act of Providence, but the whole scheme to
make a conclusion. The motions of his eyes are various, but all end in
discoveries of his strength. Men do not argue from one single proposition, but
draw the conclusion from several propositions knit together. It Is by such a
Spritual Logic we are to make our conclusions from the ways of Providence. As
in the reading Scripture, Burges of justification, part. 2. Sermon. 2. p 12.
if we take not the whole Period, we may make not only nonsense, but Blaspehmy,
as in that of the Palmist, Thau art not a God that has pleasure in
unrighteousness. If a man should read only, thou art not a God, and make a full
stop there, it would be blasphemy; but reading the whole verse, it is excellent
sense, and an honorable declaration of Gods holiness. Such Errors will be
committed in reading the Books of Providence, if we fix our eyes only in one
place, and make a full stop where God has not made any. We judge not of a
Picture by the first daught, but the last lines; not by one shadow or color,
but by the whole composure. The Wisdom of God is best judged of by the view of
the harmony of Providence, The single threads of Providence may seem very weak,
or knotty and uneven, and seem to administer just occasion of Censure; but will
it not as much raise the admiration to see them all woven into a curious piece
of branched work? Consider therefore Gods ways of working; but fully judge
nothing, till the conclusion, for that is to judge before the time. Judge not
then of Providence at the first appearance, God may so lose the glory of his
work, and vou the comfort.

Thirdly. The third Duty. Inquire into providence, and interpreat all public
providence by this Rule. We must search into it, though we are not able to
find out all the reasons of it. What can be a braver study than that which is
the object of Gods eternal counsel? We are conformed to God in our Wills, when
we have the same ends in our motions; and we are conformed to God in our
understandings, when we have the same object of our thoughts. Some Providence
have their interpretation written in their foreheads, we may run and read, such
as his sifna Judgments in the World, which express the very sin for which they
are inflicted; others are wrapped up in a harder shell and more covers, and
therefore more labor is necessary to reach the kernel; some are too high for
our knowledge, none for our enquiry. It Is our duty to seek after God, though we
can never arrive to a perfect know ledge of him. Job 1.7. Can thou by
searching find out God; can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? He
prohibits not the searching, though he asserts the impossibility of finding him
out to perfection. What has God given us faculties for, but to search after
him? and we must not do it to satisfy our curiosity, but to increase our
knowledge, and consequently our admiration of his wise and powerful care.
Diligence must be used too. Our first thoughts about things of concernment, are
usually confused; so are our first sights of Providence. Providence is a great
deep, deep things are not seen without stooping down. We must (...) as the
Angels do when they search into the things of the Gospel 1 Pet. 1.12.
. But let this aim of God at the good of his Church be the rule of your
interpretation Without this compass to steer our judgments by, we may both lose
and rack our selves in the Wilderness of Providence, and fortify our natural
Atheism and Ignorance instead of our Faith. I must confess the study of
Providence is in some respect more difficult than in the former Ages of the
World, because God seems to manage things in the Church more by his Wisdom than
Power, which is not so intelligible by man as the sensible effects of his
strength. That attribute he manifested most in Miraculous ways, and the visible
Ministry of Angels, as we read in Scripture stories; now he employs his Wisdom
more in ordering second causes in ordinary ways to his own high, merciful, and
just ends. Yet since the discovering of Christ God has given us a rule whereby
we may discern much of his Wisdom in the knowledge of his end. As the knowledge
of Christ removes the Veil from the Scripture in our reading of it 2 Cor. 3.14,
15, 16.
The same Veil remains in the reading of the Old Testament, which Veil is done
away in Christ, (which Veil is still upon the Jews) and makes us understand
those parts of the Old Testament, which otherwise would be utterly obscure; so
in the reading the Books of Providence, the knowledge of this end of God in
them, will help us to understand the meaning of that which otherwise would
nonplus the Reason of man. He that knows the end of one that is making a
Watch, will not wonder at his framing small wheels, and filing little pins; but
he that understands nothing of the design, would count it ridiculous for a man
so to trifle away his time. Without the knowledge of this end, we shall expose
our selves to miserable mistakes. As Plutarch mistook the cause of the ceasing
of Oracles, ascribing it to the change of the nature of the Soil, not affording
those exhalations as formerly; or the death of the Demons which gave those
Oracles. He had judged otherwise, had be known or believed the rising of a
higher power, the Sun of Righteousness in the World, who imposed silence upon
those Angels of darkness; the most famous Oracles in the World ceasing about
the time of Christ. To imagine to interpret the motions of Providence without a
knowledge of Christ, and the design of God for his Church, is as vain as to
imagine we can paint a sound, or understand a color by our smell. Correct
Sense by Reason in this work, and Reason by Faith. To what end has God
prescribed Faith to succor us in the weakness of Reason, if it had been
capable to understand his ways without it, and if we make no use of it upon
such occasions.

Fourthly, A fourth Duty. Consider the former Providence God has wrought for
the Church in the past Ages. Let him not lose the present glory of his past
works, Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the Generation to come; and the
People which shall be created shall Praise the Lord. Even for that work of his
which is written to be done in former Ages. God loves to have his former works
read and pleaded. It Is a keeping a standing praise of him in the World. We have
had the benefit of them, it is fit God should have the glory of them, from us
as well as from those who immediately enjoyed them. Our good was bo und up in
every former preservation of the Church. If the Candlestick had been broken,
where had the Candle been? Had the Church been destroyed, how could the Gospel
have been transmitted to us? Let the Duty we owe to Gods Glory, engage us to a
consideration of them; and the benefit we have had by them also, incite us. We
usually forget not things that are strange, nor things that are profitable; His
works of old have been works of Wonder in themselves, and profitable to us. To
what end are the Praises of God discovered to the Generations to come, but that
they should reflect those Praises to Heaven again, and convey them down to the
Generations following; Psalm. 78.4. Showing to the Generation to come the
Praises of the Lord.

1. This will help us in our inquiries into present Providence.

There is a beautiful connection between former and latter Providence; they are
but several links of one Chain. The Principle and End is the same. That God
from whence they come, that Christ to which they tend, is the same yesterday,
to day and for ever. What god does now is but a Copy of what he pouttrayed in
his word as done in former ages; There are the same characters of Wildom upon
both; The same goodness, the same design in both. The Births of Providence are
all of a like temper and disposition. We cannot miss of the understanding of
them, if we compare them with the ancient Copies: For God is in the Generation
of the Righreous the same God still. God is the same, his ends are the same,
the events will be the same.

2. It will support our Faith. The reason of our diffidence of God in the cause
of the Church, is the forgetfulness of his forwer appearances for her. O! if we
did remember his former goodness, we should not be soready to doubt of his
future care. This was the Psalmists care in his despondencies, and in his
overwhelming troubles of Spirit, Psalm. 77.9. Harh Gob forgotten to be gracious?
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? but verse 19. He concludes it his
infirmity, and resolves upon a review of the Records or Gods ancient works for
his People, and the years of the right hand of the most High, those times
wherein he declared his Power and his glory, and so proceeds to the top of all
their deliverances, viz. that out of Egypt. Does Gods Wisdom decay, or his
Power grow feeble? Is not his Interest the same? Is he not a God still like
himself? Is not his glory as dear to him as before? Has he cast off his
affection to his own name? Why should not he then do the same works, since he
has the same concern? God himself to encourage us calls them to our
remembrance, Isa. 50.2. Is my hand shortened that I cannot redeem? or have I no
Power to Deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I do dry up the Sea, I make the Rivers a
Wilderness, etc. Am not I the same God that dried up the Sea, that wrought
those ancient wonders which amazed the World? what does your distrust signisie
but the impair of my Power? Rouse up your selves to a consideration of them:
And thence gather fresh supplies to strengthen you in your present dependence
upon me. He puts us in mind of them, because we are apt to forget them. Genesis
15.6. When it is said Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was accounted to him
for Righteousness. God answered him, v. 7. I am the Lord that brought thee out
of Ur of the Chaldees, keep up thy Faith, and to that end, remember what I did
for thee before in calling thee; cast thy eye upon that place whence I
delivered thee; either from the Idolatries of the place, or the persecution he
was in for the true Worship of God. And as God puts him in mind of his Mercy he
had shown to him before, for the encouragement of his Faith; so the people of
God have made use of them to this end. Goliah's Sword was counted by David the
fittest for his defense in his flight, because it had been a Monument of Gods
former deliverance of him, 1 Samuel 21.9. When he asks for a sword or Spear,
Abimelech said, the Sword of Golian whom thou stewest, is here. And David said,
there is none like that, give it me. How hastily he catches at it! There is
none like that Sword that has so signal a mercy writ upon it. That very Sword
will not only desend me against my enemies, but guard my Faith against those
Temptations that would invade it. This encouragement of Faith and Hope is the
end of God in his transmission of the records of his former Providence to us,
Psalm. 78 6, 7. That the Generation to come might know them, and declare them to
their Children; From one posterity to another, that they might set their hope
in God.

3. It will enliven our Prayer.

It Is a mighty Plea in Prayer. How often does David urge it? Thou have been my
help, thou have delivered my Soul from Death, will thou not deliver my feet
from falling? And in the Churches concerns too. 1 Chronicles. 16. 11, 12. Seek the
Lord and hie Strength, seek his face continually: remember the mavelous works
that he has done. A reflection upon what God has done, should be joined with
our desires of what we would have God to do for us. When Moses was praying upon
the top, while Israel was fighting with Amalek. at the foot of the hill, he had
the Rod of God in his hand, Exodus 17.9. That miraculous Rod which had amazed
Pharaoh, whose motion Summoned all the Plagues upon him. That Rod which had
split the Sea for their passage, broached the Rock for their thirst, and had
been instrumental in many Miracles: certainly Moses showed this Rod to God, and
pleaded all those wonderful deliverances God had wrought instrumentally by it.
No doubt but he carried it with him to show to God for a Plea, as well as to the
Israelites to spirit their Resolutions against their Enemies.

4. It will prevent much Sin.

A forget fullness of his former works is one cause of our present provocations.
It was so in the case of the Israelites sin, Psalm. 106.7. They remembered not
the multitude of his mercies, but provoked thee at the Sea, even at the Red
Sea: they had lost the memory of so many Miracles in Egypt, and which
aggravated their Sin, they provoked him at the Sea, at the red Sea; they
provoked him under a present indigency, as as well as against former mercy:
they provoked him in that place of straits where all the powers on Earth could
not have relieved them, had Heaven neglected them. The provocation you may see,
Exodus 14.11, 12. Which sprang from a forgetfulness of his kindness so lately
showed to them. How apt are we to forget old Mercies, when we are so naturally
apt to blot out of our memories mercies newly received? If this were well
considered by men, it would prevent their enterprises against the Church, and
consequently their shame and Ruin. Are there Records of any who have hardened
themselves against God and prospered Job 9 4.
? How might in that reflection be seen the frustrations of Counsels, disgracing
of attempts, showers of Fury and Vengeance from Heaven upon the heads of such?
The reason why the wonderful works of God were to be made known to posterity,
was that they might not be as their Fathers, as Stubborn and Rebellious
Generation Psalm 7 8 6 8.
of men; if they did consider those transactions of God in and for his Church,
they could no more think to stop the breath of perpetual powerful Providence,
than to bridle in a Storm, or stop the motion of the Sun. To conclud this. Gods
Providential Judgments ments are to be remembered: though they are for the
punishment of the age that feel them, they are also for the instruction of the
age which succeeds them, tell (...) number, be as exact as in your accounts,
wherein you take notice of every number, minute and cipher. The works of
Providence as well as the Doctrine of God, are parts of a Child's Catechism;
they are to keep up the consideration of them in themselves, and hand them in
instruction to their Children.

Fifthly, The fifth Duty. Act faith on Gods Providence.

Times of trouble should be times of confidence; fixedness of heart on God,
would prevent fears of heart, Psalm. 11.2.7. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, how? trusting in the Lord: his heart is
established, they shall not be moved. Otherwise without it, we shall be as
light as a Cork moved with every blast of evil tidings, our hopes will swim or
sink according to the news we hear. Providence would seem to sleep, unless
Faith and Prayer awakened it. The Disciples had but little Faith in their
Masters account, yet that little Faith awakened him in a Storm, and he relieved
them. Unbelief only does discourage God from showing his power in taking our
parts. Every one will walk in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name
of the Lord our God for ever and ever, Micah 4.5. Heathens will trust in their
Idols, and shall not we in that God that lives for ever? Have we any reason to
have a less esteem of our confidence in God, than Heathens had of, and in their
Idols? We should do our duty, which is Faith and Hope, and leave God to do his
work, which is mercy and kindness. By unbelief we deny his providence,
disparage his Wisdom, and strip him of his power. We have none else to trust,
no creature can order any thing for the Churches good without Gods Commission
and direction. What should we trust him for? For that wherein his glory is
concerned, which is more worth to him than all the World besides. Trust him
most when instruments fail. God takes them off sometimes, to show that he needs
not any, and to have our confidence rightly placed on him, which staggered
before between him and the Creature.

1. All the Godly formerly did act Faith on a less foundation. The Godly
Patriarchs who lived eight or nine hundred years, depended upon providence that
long time; and shall not we for seventy years, the usual term of man's life!
They had Promises to support them, we have not only the same Promise but the
Performances of them too. They had Providence; we have the same and more, all
upon Recordin Scripture, all since the Canon of Scripture was closed,
whatsoever God has remarkably done for his people in all ages. Adam had but
one promise, and but little experience of Gods Providence, yet no doubt trusted
in him. We have a multitude of Promises not only pronounced, but sealed,
confirmed by many repetitions, which are fresh obligations laid by God upon
himself. The experience of all the Providence of God toward his Church for
above five thousand years; and shall our Faith stagger when upon us are come
the ends of the World? does it become us to have our Obligations to Faith so
strong, and our Exercise of it so weak? The Promise of Christ Isa. 7 14.
that a Virgin should bring forth a Son, was thought by God a sufficient
security to support their confidence in him against the fury of their enemies;
It being a greater wonder that a Virgin without loss of her Virginity should
bring forth a Son, than the routing of an Host of Enemies. Is not then the
performance of this, Gods actual sending his Son to us through the Womb of a
Virgin, a higher ground of considence for the Churches success in every thing
else, than barely the Promise could be? All creatures in danger have a natural
confidence in God, He is the confidence of all the ends of the Earth; but the
Churches confidence may be mere firmly placed in him, because he is
particularly the God of their Salvation, Psalm. 65 5. By terrible things, in
Righteousness, will thou answer us, O God of our Salvation, who art the
cenfidence of all the ends of the Earth.

2. It Is your only way to have mercy for the Church and for your selves.

If he take pleasure in them that hope in his mercy, as it is in Psalm. 147.11.
He will take pleasure to relieve them, He will strengthen the bars of their
gates, verse 13. If he take pleasure in them that hope in his mercy, then the
stronger and more lively their hope is, the more intense is Gods pleasure in
them. If they do not hope in his Mercy, he has no pleasure in them, and no
delight to them. He has a goodness laid up for them that fear him, and he will
lay it out too for them that trust in him. Psalm. 31.15. O how great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men? It Is laid up for
all that fear him, but it is wrought for them that trust in him. It is
manifested upon special acts of trust and reliance, and wrought before the sons
of men. Those that own God publicly in a way of reliance, God will own them
publicly in a way of kindness. Faith is the key that unlocks the Cabinet of
special Providence. Those eyes which move about all the World, are fixed upon
those that trust in him, Psalm. 33.28. The eye of the Lord is upon them that
hope in his Mercy.

The sixth Duty, Wait upon God in the way of his Providence. Wait upon him as
he is a faithful Creator 1 Pe 4.19.
; much more since the title of being our Redeemer is added to that of our
Creator, which strengthens his Relation to us. Not to wait, disparageth his
care, bounds his power, or reflects upon his Wisdom: as if he had stripped
himself of his immense goodness, and forgot both his Promise and his People; as
if he had cancelled the Covenant, and given up his whole interest to the Lusts
of men. Wait in the saddest appearances. The Hour of Christ's death was dismal
in the World, and darkness was upon the Earth; a miraculous Eclipse of the Sun,
taken notice of by the very Heathens; yet were we never nearer to happiness
than in that dreadful time when our Savior was most dyed in his own Blood. The
Sanguine Complexion of the Eveningsky is a presage of a fair succeeding
Morning; so, many times is the red Vesture of the Church.

1. Wait upon him obedientially.

Commit your souls to God, but in well doing 1 Pet. 4.19.
. Use no indirect means; a contempt of the precept cannot consist with Faith in
either Promise or Providence. The obeying part is ours, the governing part is
Gods, Prove. 23.17. Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of
the Lord all the day long, for surely there is an end, and thine expectation
shall not be cut off. God will govern all the day, but we must fear him all the
day. When fear on our part, attends Government on Gods part, there will be an
end of our carnal fears, and a good issue of our hopes. The greatest
deliverances of his Church have been when his People has stood still. Exodus
14.13. As that deliverance was a type of all future ones, and a ground of
Faith, so the carriage God enjoined was a rule to his people in all future
straights. It Is against the Laws of Gods Government for those listed in his
Service to stir without order. The Law is our standing Rule of Duty. Providence
cannot be a standing visible Rule, because of the variety and seeming crosness
of it sometimes to our apprehensions. Do not presume to lead God, but be led by
him: It Is our safety to follow him, it is our sin and danger to presume to be
his Directors. We may lose our selves when we are our own blind guides, and
fall into a ditch; but when we follow God, he has wisdom to foresee the
Precipices we may stumble into, and goodness to divert us from them. By
interposing carnal devices, men may perhaps have their ends, but with little
comfort, perhaps much bitterness to themselves. Jacob by his hasty using his
own and his mothers sinful project for the Blessing, got it indeed, but a cross
too, for he was a man of Sorrows all his days. By waiting in Gods way, we shall
have our ends with more sweetness, because purely a fruit of Gods care and
goodness.

2. Wait patiently. How often are our Spirits troubled about future events, and
afraid of the evil which threatens us, as if we were in pain for God, and in
doubt of his wise Conduct Think not Gods time too long. He waits as much for a
fit opportunity to show his Mercy as you can wait for the enjoyment of it, Isa.
13.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you; blessed
are all they that wait for him. It Is a part of our blessedness to wait for God,
since it is a part of Gods kindness to wait for a fit season to be gracious to
us. It Is not for us to prescribe Rules to God, but follow the Rules he
prescribes to us. He has freely made his Promise, let him be Master of his own
time to make it good. He will show as much Wisdom in accomplishing, as he did
mercy in declaring it. God can do things in a moment, but it is his wisdom to
take time, that his people may have time to exercise their trust, their hope,
and their patience. He will take time in the ways of his providence as well as
he did in the works of Creation. He allotted six days to that which he could
have framed in a minute. He is Judge of what is needful for us, and when it is
needful for us. If God should give us that, which is a mercy in its own nature,
many times when we desire it, it might not be a mercy. If we will trust the
skill of his Wisdom for the best season, it cannot but be a mercy, for he will
give it us with his onw glory and grace wrapped up in it, which will make it
sweeter to himself when his Wisdom is honored, and sweeter to us when our good
is promoted. Gods methods appear in the end both wiser and better than our
frames. Infinite goodness aims more at our welfare, than our shallow self-love;
and infinite wisdom can conduct things to our welfare better than our
short-sighted skill He that knows all the moments of time, knows best how to
time his actions. As God staid for a fullness of time to bring the great
Redemption by Christ into the World; so he stays for a fullness of time to bring
all the great consequences and appendices of it unto his Church. Every thing is
beautiful in his time. In its own time, in Gods time, not in ours Eccles. 3.11.
.

2. Wait constantly. Though the Wheels of providence seem sometimes to stand
still Ezekiel. 1.21.
, and God seems to put a period to the care of his Church; yet let not us
neglect our duty. Wait a while, and the Wheels will be put upon their former
rolling. Some particular passages of Providence may trouble us for a while, but
in the issue God may answer our desires above our expectations, and thereby
confute our fears. His Providence are sometimes like Rivers that run under
ground, out of sight; but will rise again with a delightful Stream, with some
new Medicinal quality, contracted from the Earth by the way. Joseph, a
Prisoner, waits upon God for his Liberty, and God gives him freedom with
preferment. God can bring about his Peoples safety by unexpected ways. Who
would have imagined before, that his own Dream should make him a Captive, and
Pharaohs Dream make him a Favorite? The chief Butler remembers him not, till
Pharaoh was in an exigency, and the divining skill of the Wise men of Egypt
confounded. Joseph lost nothing by waiting upon God, who made so many
circumstances concur to promote his Honor. Wait therefore upon him in the
sorest afflictions. The Church is only afflicted in Mercy, but the Enemies of
it are pulled up by the roots, Jer. 30.11. I am with thee to save thee; though
I make a full end of the Nations whither I have scattered thee, yet I will not
make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure. God deals with his
People as a Father, who corrects to reform, not to destroy; but with his
enemies he deals as a Judge. God's Providence, like Moses's Rod, may seem
sometimes a devouring Serpent, but it is to convince the Egyptians, and deliver
the Israelites.

4. Wait in the use of lawful means for preservation. Not to use means, is to
slight his Providence, not to trust it. It seems not to consist with the wisdom
of God to order things always so as to be necessitated to put forth an
extraordinary power in things which his creatures by a common Providence can
naturally accomplish. God saves by natural means; when they will not serve the
turn, he will save by supernatural. God chose an Ark to preserve Noah in. He
did not want supernatural means for his preservation. He might have catched him
up in a Cloud, and continued him there till the drying up of the waters. Noah
does not dispute the business with God, but prepares an Ark according to his
order, and he was righteous in his obedience, as well as in his trust. God
would not preserve our Savior by a Miracle, when ordinary means would serve
the turn. He commands Joseph by his Angel to flee into Egypt with the Child
Matt. 2.13.
. Joseph desires not God to preserve him by an extraordinary power, to save his
pains of traveling; he submits to Gods order, and God quickly clears the way
for his return. Indeed sometimes the wheels of Providence are lifted up from
the Earth, and do not go in the ordinary tracts Ezekiel 1.19.
; but Miracles must be left to Gods Pleasure; for us to desire them, is to
tempt our great Governor.

The Seventh Duty. Pray for the Church.

It Is an encouragement that our Suit in this case will not be denied. The
desire of the Churches welfare is conformable to his Counsel, which shall stand
notwithstanding the Devices of men. Prove. 19.21.
His counsel in particular concerns of men shall stand, much more is the
stability of his counsel for the church. He is a God hearing Prayer in a way of
common Providence, and a God hearing Prayer in a way of special attention,
Psalm. 61.1. Hear my cry, O God, attend unto my Prayer. David desires that God
would hear him, as more particularly concerned in his case. He is so in the
concerns of his Church. Will he hear an Ishmael crying for himself, and young
Lions roaring for their Prey; and stop his Ears to the voice of his own Spirit
in his People, pleading for the Church, dearer to him than the whole mass of
Nature? We have greater Arguments to use, than in any other case. The Relation
the Church has to God; The affection God has to the Church. Lazarus whom thou
love is sick, was Martha's argument to Christ. What greater encouragement to
our Petitions, than Gods affection, than Gods Relation? God loves to have our
affection comply with his. God loves others the better for soliciting its
welfare. Moses had the greatest manifestation of Gods Love after he he had
prayed for the Israelites Exodus 32.32.
, though in a case of sin; and presently after in Exodus 33.11. God speaks with
him face to face, as a man speaks to his friend; and in the same chapter, and
the beginning of Exodus 34. God shows him his glory as much as he was capable to
bear. Daniel was a great Petitioner for the Church Dan 9.3, 21. Dan. 10.2, 5.
. He was Gods great favorite upon that account, and had the clearest and
highest Revelations made to him of the course of Providence in the World.

The eighth Duty. When you receive any mercy for the church in answer of
prayer, give God the glory of it.

The variety of his Providence gives us matter for new songs and compositions.
Psalm. 149.1
What Volleys of joyful shouts! What Hallelujahs to God do we find upon the
Ruin of Antichrist! Rev. 19.1, 2, 3. God calls for Praise out of the Throne, v.
5. and the Church returns it, v. 6, 7. It Is God rides upon the Cherub, it is God
that sits upon the wings of the Wind, Psalm. 18 10
it is God who is in all Instruments to quicken their motions, and direct them
to their scope.

The Ninth Duty. Imitate God in his affection to the Church.

Christ did what he did for the good of his Church: God does what he does for
the advantage of the Church. Let the same mind be in us that was in Christ; let
the same end be ours which is the end of God. Thus we shall be like our
Creator, thus we shall be like our Governor, thus we shall be like our
Redeemer. Men take it kindly from others that love those they have a respect
for. God loves all that love his people, and blesses them that bless them, Genesis
12.3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee.

The Tenth Duty. Look after sincerity before God.

It Is for the security of such that God shows himself strong. No man that fully
believes and understands this Doctrine, but should be glad to be of that happy
Society, that Assembly of the firstborn, who are under the care of a watchful
eye, and the mighty power of the God of the whole Earth. When God chose Israel,
the very strangers should for their own Interest join with them Isa. 14.1
. And to such as take hold of his Covenant he Promises to give a name in his
house that shall not be cut off Isa. 56.4, 5.
. Yea, even to the Sons of the Strangers that should join themselves to the
Lord. v. 6. Let this encourage us to Christianity. God never encouraged men to
be Christians by promises of Worldly greatness, but by Promises of a constant
care of them for their happiness, by Promises of making all things work
together for their good. If God will show himself strong for those that are
perfect in heart toward him, then he has no strength for those that are
unsound and false in heart toward him. No man has an interest in his special
Providence without Faith. The Power, Knowledge, Wisdom, of God, are all set
against him. Though the whole World be in commotions, the earth be removed, and
the Mountains cast into the depths of the Sea, there is no ground of fear to
Faith; but what Buckler against them has Unbelief and Hypocrisy? What
security against Wrath can Riches give you? What defense against his power can
your Potsherd strength afford you? It was not for Jobs wealth that God made his
boasts of him, but for his sincerity, Job 1.8. Have thou considered my Servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man?
And for the want of this, he loathes a World. Labor therefore for sincerity
toward God; beg it of God. Get the evidence of it, and preserve it.

FINIS
Books Printed and sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market.
THE Works of the late learned divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. being several
discourses upon the Existence and Attributes of God. Vol. 1. to which is Added
his Discourse of Divine Providence, Fol. The Works of the late learned Divine
Stephen Charnock. B. D. being several discourses upon various Divine subjects.
vol. 2. Fol. Some Prison Meditations and directions on severael subjects. viz
on the fall of Man, The sufferings of Christ, Repentance and Faith, Reprof and
Counsel, The holy Scriptures, Prayer, Love to Mankind, sincerity, the vanity of
the World, the benefit of afflictions, Heaven and Hell. By Samuel Young.
Minister of the Gospel. Small 8vo. The Morning Exercise at Cripplegate of
several Cases of Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in
Quarto. A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Criplegatr, or several more
Cases of Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4 to Speculum
Theolegiae in Christo: or a View of some Divine Truths, whch are either
practically exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may be
reasonably deduced from thence; by Edward Polhil of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire; in
4 to. Precious Faith considered, in its nature, working and growth; by Edward
Polhil, Esquire, etc. in, 4 to. The Court of the Gentiles, in four parts, by
Theophilus Gale, in 4 to. Geography Rectified: or a Description of the World,
in all its Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes,
Forts; Their Ancient and present Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories,
Customs, Governments, etc. And also their Commodities, Coins, Weights and
Measures, compared with those of London: Illustrated with above Sixty new Maps.
The whole work performed according to the accurate Discoveries of Modern
Authors, in 4 to. The right use of an Estate briefly directed and urged in a
Sermon lately preached to a Person of Quality, upon his coming to Age, by Tho.
Dorrington, in 4 to. Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ
and Believers considered in its Resemblances Bonds, Seals, Privileges and
Marks, by Edward Polhil, Esquire, in Octavo. De causa Dei: Or a Vindication of
the Common Doctrine of the Protestant Divines, concerning Predetermination (i.
e.) the interest of God, as the first Cause, in all Actions, as such, of all
Rational creatures) from the invidious consequences with which it is burdened
by Mr. John How, in a late Letter of postscript of God's Prescience, in 8 vo.
The Spiritual Remembrancer: or a brief Discourse of those who attend upon
Preaching the Gospel, by Samuel Wills, in 8 vo. Poesews Graecae Medulla; in qua
continentur Insignioris Poetarum Graecorum gnome, versus Proverbiales, and
Epigrammata quaedam selecta, and in memoriae subsidium Alphabetice-disposita;
cum versione latina in usum Scholarum; per Johannem Langston, in 8 vo. Poems in
two Parts; first, an Interlocutory Discourse concerning the Creation, Fall, and
Recovery of Man. Secondly, a Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting Soul, by
Sammuel Slater, in 8 vo. A Renunciation of several Popish Doctrines, because
contrary to the Doctrine of Faith of the Church of England, by R. R. B. D. in 8
vo. Armatura Dei: Or a Preparation for suffering in an evil day: showing how
Christians are to bear suffering, and what Graces are requisite thereunto;
suited for all good Christians in this present time, by Edward Polhil, of
Burwash in Sussex, Esquire, in 8 vo. A Practical Gammar: Or the easiest and
shortest way to initiate young Children in the Latin tongue, by the help
whereof, a Child of seven years old may learn more of the Grounds of that
Language in three Months, than is ordinarily learnt in a years space by those
of a greater age in a Common Grammar School. Published for the use of those
that love not to be tedious. To which are added Tables of Mr. Walker's
Particles; by the assistance whereof, young Scholars may be better enabled to
peruse that excellent and most useful Treatise, by J. Philomath, Master of a
Freeschool, in 8 vo.

