Religion is made a Covering
For every wicked and Rebelious thing,
Errors are hid here on the right and left
Rebelion, Idolitry, and Theft,
Plunders, and Rapins, Whordoms, Fornications,
Dissimulations, Flateries, and Invasions,
By Time, this Cloak is worn from of their Back
So their's discovered many a Knavish Knack.

Religion

(...)

persecution

(...)

Disasimulatio

Discord Mutany

Robelion

Plunder

Rapine

Fornication

Whordomes

Cruelty

Invasion

Intrusion

A good Contone welths Man

To the Hon house of Commons. the high court of Parliament

woodcut

The Dissembling SCOT Set forth in his COVLOVRS OR A VINDICATION OF Lieu. Col.
John Lilburn and Others.

From those Aspersions cast upon them by David Brown in his idle pamphlet
directed to the Supreme Authority of England the Parliament assembled, and
presented to curry favor with them when Lilburn was fined in 7000 li. and
sentenced to be banished out of Enland, Scotland and Ireland, etc.

Deuteronom. 25.17, 18, 19. Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when
ye were come out of Egypt.

How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of you, all that were
feeble behind thee, when thou wast fainted and weary, and be feared not God.

Therefore, etc.

Written by SAMVEL CHIDLEY.

AND Printed to satisfy all his Friends. 1652.

A VINDICATION OF Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURNE, and others.
DAvid Brown the Pamphleteer, who undertaketh to teach men to write in six
hours, is one whom LIEUT. COL. JOHN LILBORN, and my self, with diverse others
whom he maliciously inveighs against, have releived, or else he and his Family
might have perished (for ought I know,) And since he was delivered unto Satan,
for his wicked and notorious lies, and dissimulations, the devil in whose
hands he is, has stirred him up to be more envious and malicious then ever,
that he may be transformed more perfectly in to his own image, Who walks to
and fro like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, and persecuting the
Church who is clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, and unto whose feet the
Law of God is a light, making war with the remnant of her seed who keep the
testimony of God, and the faith of Jesus. And his malice is principally bent
against those who are most conscientious and precious in the eyes of the Lord,
as may appear in the story of holy Job, who was greatly afflicted on every
side, both in his Person, Name and Estate, but in due time God vindicated his
reputation before all men, and did bless his latter end more then his
beginning, and so if we mark the end of such perfect and upright persons,
behold it is peace, but the wicked is like the raging Sea foaming out mire and
dirt, mere mire and dirt; somewhat like to the dirty Pamphlet of David Brown
the Scottishman, the Frontis-peece whereof, seems to insinuate to the simple
honest Reader, as if LIEUT. COL. JOHN LILBORNE, my self, and Mr. Musgrave were
prodigious Conspirators, and bloody Petitioners, but he that reads the Pamphlet
may perceive that he has no such thing against us, blessed be God: But the sum
of it is, A remembrance to put the Parliament in mind of the discovery which he
made of a Malignant Petition, wherein he complains that he was not rewarded
for the said Discovery, and styles himself and his Family, the Parliaments
Remembrancers, so his whole Petitionary Remonstrance is a begging business for
maintenance, and protection from Arrests.

Surely he thought that now, now was the time for him to strike while the iron
was hot, and that now the Parliament were necessitated to hear and receive his
counsel and to regard him, and reward him, seeing he had taken upon him now, in
the heat of all the business to be their Advocate, and to plead their cause
against poor Lilborne who was down, and therefore according to the Proverb,
down with him, but its well that neither the Parliament nor Sir Arthur
Hesilrige stand in need of the untempered mortar, of such unskilful Daubers,
to maintain their Bulwarks against the Levellers, I hope rather then they will
countenance such revengefull spirits, they will feed their Enemy when he is
hungry, and give him drink when he is thirsty; for the Parliament of themselves
are very mild to their Enemies, if not provoked against them by some others.

It may be that this Pamphleteir thought that rather then he would want work,
he would set himself on work, if the Devil will find him tools: but as
Christ would not have such Advocates to confess that he was the Son of God,
but commanded the Devils to hold their peace; So its better for the Parliament
to silence such Babblers, then to suffer themselves to be so disgraced, by
having their praise set forth in scurrillous Pamplets, such as this Authors,
who not knowing which way to be revenged of me, for doing my duty in the Church
of which I am (and he was) a Member, he laboreth to make me as odious as he can
to the world, and to the State, and at the time of Lilbornes sad sentence,
charge me in chief, with him and diverse others in general in his Pamphlet to
the Parliament, with falsenesse, manifold calumniations, corrupt practices,
unjust dealings, deceit, fraud, ambition, covetousnes, and selfe-seeking, and
unjust Levelling; and though he charge diverse others with me, yet he has not
named them, no more does he come to particulars to show wherein we are as he
charge us. And truly though I hope well for my Neighbors, yet I believe for
my self: And if I thought it expedient to Vindicate my self from the title of
Leveller, I would tell this false Accuser, that if I am a Leveller, I am no
Leveller of the Valleys, but a Leveller of the MOUNTAINS, that the way of Jesus
Christ may be prepared, that all flesh may see the salvation of our God, and
this was the design of John the Baptist, and I hope no honest man will be
offended with me for this manner of Levelling, nor account it unjust, But Herod
heard John the Baptist gladly, but at last he cut off his head, and so he
levelled the honest Leveller. Moreover I am so far from levelling the Laws,
That if the Parliament would put in practice their Legislative power, and cast
aside all the Laws of the Land, the Laws excepted which they have no power to
abolish, and yield obedience to those good Laws and none but such, they may sit
long enough for me, I would not be forward to seek a new Representative, but a
true Representative; But oh! Where shall we find men of courage, fearing God
and hating covetousness? therefore my opinion is, its better to have and to
hold these that we have, then have worse, the Proverb is, Seldom comes a
better, But when the Land does mend, I would have this Parliament end, and not
till then. So far am I from unjust Levelling, that I would not pull an old
house over mine head, but prepare sufficient materials to build up another,
that should be rather better then worse then the former, and to have a care
what I do, for Solomon says, He that rolleth a stone it shall fall upon him,
and he that breaks a hedge, a Serpent shall bite him. Concerning LIEU.COL.
JOHN LILBURNE, I have known the man a long time, even from the time of his
sufferings by the blody Bishops, and as he was an instrumental means to pull
them from their seats, so was he the main Instrument to rent in pieces Regal
Tyranny, and the whole House of Lords, which works were long attempted, and
many onsets and repulses before the business could be brought to that
desirable perfection which was long sought for, with labor and watching, and
weariness, and hazard of life, and expense of blood and treasure, and at
length the business was accomplished by the Army and Parliament.

And now I must say this on the behalf of Lieu. Col. Chidley's charity to
Lilburn.
Lilburn, that whatsoever the matter is now, unless he be much altered from
what he was, his nature is so good that he is not a man given to complain,
but where the shoe wringeth him; if men will let him alone, he will let them
alone, and in his dealings in the world he has been very punctual, neither
can I tax him with any corrupt practices, or unjust dealings, I have found him
a plain, blunt, down right honest man; he will play above board, and he that
plays with him shall have fair quarter: He is not of such a revengefull
spirit to take his Adversary at advantages, and when he is down and at the
weakest to tread upon him: And concerning ambition, doubtless, he has seemed
to me as if he were prodigal of his own life, and blood, and strength, and
liberty, and all that was dear to him for the good of this Commonwealth: He was
an instrument under God, that kept the Parliament from immediate destruction,
for he defended them with his sword from Lunsfords Crew, Lilburnes ambition.
so it seems to me all along as if he had been ambitious for Knocks, for a
Prison, a Dungeon, a Pillory, a Whip, a Gagge, yea, and death it self, and yet
he is alive at this day, though he has sought to loose it, yet has he found
it: And touching covetousness, I hope he is free, I have known him to be
liberal, and to be willing to spend and be spent for others when he has
wanted it himself, and I am sure he is no Churl, but ready to do good to his
ability; And had he been as Mr. Brown charge him, a Selfe-Seeker, crafty and
deceitful, he might have feathered his nest ten times better then he has done,
but he was like a candle lighted, accommodating others, and consuming himself:
Yea, he who declares himself in Print against Lilburn, has received of him
diverse great sums of money, but Lilburn complained that he could not get Brown
to come to an account with him, though he often desired it, so false was he to
him, as he was to the poor of our Church, and I know not that he has
preferred any of us to any estate, much less a great estate, as he braggeth.

Indeed once I employed him to copy out a Letter, because it should be in his
handwriting, and not in mine, and an ordinary Scrivener would have done it for
six pence, but I thought it was better to employ a brother in fellowship, then
a stranger to write for me, and the truth is, I have done him no wrong, unless
it were dropping in his hands pieces of gold and silver, which wrong he could,
and did pocket up, and I could never get it to this day; no more could my
mother get hers, which he came in a deceitful way, and borrowed, and never
paid, and it may be she is the woman he speaks of in his Pamphlet, though he
charge her with nothing; and if so, I must say that she has done more good
for the Commonwealth in one quarter of a year, then he has done, or, it may
be, will do all his life time, for God has made her an instrument to destroy
the Forelorne hope, and totally to rout all the forces of Mr. Edwards, that
great Champion for the Church of England, as may appear by her works extant
in Print.

And concerning Mr. MUSGRAVE, he is known to be a very honest Gentleman, and
one that was an Agent for his County, and performed his trust with diligence,
and faithfulness, and stood to his tacklings to the last, and though he were
imprisoned wrongfully, in due time God released him by means of the Army, when
they came to London. The man is a man of good parts, having been bred up in the
Law from his youth, and also he is versed in the Scripture, which is best of
all; and had he but the abilities of Lilburne in expressing himself, and that
strength of memory withal, he would confound the Lawyers. But indeed, I have
thought him somewhat too harsh to the Parliament men, and thought that if he
dealt more mildly with them, and with more humility, his words would be more
acceptable unto them; but I have known it a frequent thing with him when I
have walked with him in the streets, he would make no more to reprove a
Parliament man, or an Officer of the Army, then I would of reproving my servant.

As concerning the rest of the persons whom Mr. Brown inveighes against, though
he name no man, yet I partly guess whom he means, and what it is that
distastes him, because that they would not give him money for printing the
whimses of his own brain, and such crotchets as they were ashamed of. Indeed
if he had kept to their rules, and directions, and printed nothing, nor no more
of a sort then they gave him order to print, nor foysted in his own tedious
stuff to the disparagement of that party of which he was a wise one, in his
own conceit, then he might have expected wages for his work. But when LIEU.
COL. LILBURNE had written a matter, and delivered it to him to print, and money
to discharge the Printers; he would be stealing and foysting in some mad stuff
or other, of his own, that would make honest Lilburne very much vex and chafe,
and then he would put it out again, and send him again to undo what he had
inserted.

And as touching the private contributions, the Accuser speaks of charging me
to be their Treasurer, I neither did unjustly dispose thereof, nor enrich my
self thereby, but am out of purse, and had I the money in my hand again, I
would not pay it out contrary to the order of those who entrusted me, who were
moral honest men, and so long as they did the things that were right, I joined
with them, and wherein I thought they were wrong, I would not sign to any of
their Petitions, till I were satisfied, much less print any idle projects, as
this Pamphleteer alleges; and so when they made inquisition for the blood of
one that was shot to death at Ware, I would not subscribe it; because I
disowned the Title; but I told the House when I was examined at the Bar, that
although I subscribed not the Petition, yet I owned the Petition, so far as
FROM THE LATTER END OF THE TITLE, TO THE END OF THE PETITION. The Title was THE
SUPREME AUTHORITY, and at that time, THE PARLIAMENT owned THE KING, and HOUSE
OF LORDS, and were distasted at such as styled them, The Supreme Authority, as
savouring of levelling, yet notwithstanding I was committed to the Gate House,
but afterward when the Army had conquered the King and his party, purged the
House, and owned THE PARLIAMENT for the SUPREME AUTHORITY, and that the House
of Commons threw down the House of Lords, then I knew that they were the
Supreme Authority, and have owned them ever since, and have done them faithful
service, and offices of love in endeavoring to make reconciliation betwixt
party and party; and to persuade them that they may sit down quietly under
this present Government, and it is well known what pains and labor I
bestowed to make a handsome composure, and I did not altogether fail of my
desires and expectation. But in this business of Sir. Arthur Hesleriges I meddled
not having had matters of more public concernment to be exercised in, and
thinking that Lilburne had such to assist him who were more skillful in the Law
of England then my self.

Whereas the accuser says, that Printing has been our chiefest weapon, and
by that occasion, that we have great correspondency with Printers, and some of
us ready to print what we please against them.

I answer, that my judgment is not for printing of heresy or blasphemy, or
matter of scandal, or a lie, but only the truth, and I hold it one of the
greatest abuses of the Commonwealth, that so many lying foolish Pamphlets have
been, and are suffered to go abroad; surely the Printers have much to answer
for at the day of judgment, seeing for every idle word which a man shall
speak, he must answer for at the day of Judgment, so far am I from holding a
correspondence with them, that I pronounce the judgments of God against them,
saying, Woe unto you Printers, for you have much to answer for: I have been
more careful what I print, then what I write or speak, because if a man print
an Impression of fifteen hundred books, peradventure they may be spread to
15000. persons, and leven them all, and its (in a manner) impossible to recall
them; Now whosoever reads the last lease of this our Accusers Pamphlet, will
have occasion to think the man not to be of very deep judgment, for though
the Press is free for all men both knaves and fools, as well as wise men,
provided they put their names to it, and the Printer his name, which is too
large a latitude (as I humbly conceive) Yet our Accuser would have the
Parliaments order to print against us, and lays down a positive Law, as if
he and his family were a high Commission; or Spanish Inquisition, yea and
worse; viz. that whatsoever Queries they shall propound to us, if we answer
them not within the space of three months and a day, shall be held thenceforth
as confessed; But if the Parliament should condescend to his base proposition,
we would not enslave our selves to such a tyrannical Law, for we have learned
of a wiser, not to answer a fool according to his folly; nevertheless our
Accuser before he knew whether we would inslave our selves to his base
proposition, he promised with his family the like base conditions against
themselves, so they have made themselves slaves by promise, but he craveth the
equal benefit of the Press, competent means of subsistence, and moneys to
Printers, but I hope the Parliament will not put, but rather wrest the sword
out of such mad men's hands, and will not afford the like benefit to slaves by
promise, as to those who have not made any such obligation, nor cast away the
Commonwealths money to them, or their Printers, unless it were for a better
purpose then to propagate that hateful sin of sowing strife amongst brethren.

But above all persons, this Accuser has a great fling at me, and yet his
sling-stones are but as stubble, but his madness is because he was cast out of
the Church, as may appear by his Pamphlet; herein he acts the Dragons part,
who was exceeding wrath after he saw he was cast out of Heaven, and therefore
though the Heavens are called to rejoice, yet a woe is pronounced to the Earth
and the Inhabitants thereof, For the devil is come down unto you, having
great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time.

Whereas he says I was most justly by the direction of the Trustees, expulsed
both from my Office and lodgings at Worcester house, for deceitful dealing and
unjust Levelling in Civil matters there, against many both poor and rich; I
deny that there was, or is any such thing against me, surely, if there had been
any such thing the Trustees would have told me so; I deny not, but through
their unadvisednes there was very many complaints, which is a usual thing with
the poorer sort, to murmur against those who have dealings with them, For their
debts, not being paid by the Trustees according to their Bonds, caused poverty,
and their poverty murmuring, But the Lord stilleth the raging Seas, and
troublous murmurings of the people. Who can say since I came into Worcester
house, that I have done the thing that is unjust, and prove it? if the Trustees
had been as forward to have protected me, as I them, from the Clamours of the
rude People, things would have been carried well: And I know not that the
Trustees have given any such directions, as he says, to expulse me from my
Office and Lodgings. Indeed I did depart from my Lodgings for another cause,
and touching my Office, I was Receiver of all the Debenters, and the time was
expired which is limited by the last Act. And ever since I have faithfully
followed the business of the Commonwealth, for which I deserve my Salary
still; and if the Trustees pay it not, I have so much confidence in their
Superiors, that I shall have every penny. I have been a faithful servant to
the Commonwealth from the beginning, and have performed my place without
extorting of Bribes, according to the universal disease that is inbred amongst
almost all Clerks, that make not the Word of God their rule.

But the hardest measures of reproaches I have received from Religious persons,
who differ from me in matters fundamental, they hopeing that the reproaches
which they heap upon me, will cause my spiritual testimony concerning the
truth of God, wherein I am their opposer, not to be received or believed; and
this is Satan's policy: I could name men but I reserve it for another time, and
one in special, a superior servant of the Trustees, whose mouth against me is
like a GRAVE, and his throat an open Sepulcher; and it rose from a controversy
concerning the term Our Lord God, which I would not put in my Conveyances, but
the Lord Christ, for said I, How old do you make your Lord God, but 1650!
whereas my Lord God has been from all eternity, and he is the Head of Christ,
so I being called in question by his means by the Trustees for putting in
Christ instead of our Lord in the new Debenters, I made Answer, that I had not
derogated from the Act, and I cleared my self from those aspersions, which he
that informed against me cast upon me, and professed my faith in the eternal
God, and in his son Jesus Christ my Lord, and after sent them for further
resolution some of my Printed Papers which are as follows.

From the Office of the Register for Debenters, at Worcester-house.
WHereas diverse persons have at sundry times questioned what is my meaning to
write these words Errors excepted in their duplicates signed in this Office:
Hereby is meant not only all miscasting of the Sums, Over-chargings and
Under-chargings, either on the one hand, or on the other, tending to the
prejudice of the Debtor or Creditor, loss of the benefit of their Arrears, by
any unjust sentence, Oversights in Receipts, if any be, Unequal deductions of,
or unjust chargings with Free Quarter, Mistakes in Letters of Attorney,
Debenters, and Assignments, in the date, names or sums, Counterfeit Debenters,
and Assignments; all which the Auditor is to see to rectify, but also all
profane, and vain bablings, and mis-applications of the grace of God, Defender
of the Faith, etc, and such like phrases, frequent in Letters of Administration
and Assignments, contradictory to the principal parts of the late Engagement.

But whereas it may be objected; why I receive such things wherein are errors I
answer, I except against all the errors, and receive them in to cancel them,
according to Order, that the Owners of them may have new Debenters, for the
old, in the nature of Bonds and Bills, not for any errors, but for that sum or
those sums of money due unto them excepting against the maintaining of Chaplins,
as they are Chaplins; as I have frequently expressed and given under my hand, a
confiderable scruple of a cautious conscience.

But because many who know not what the power of godliness is, will count me
too captious and curious, and always finding fault, will say, I have some
exceptions against the new Debenters, delivered from this Office, I answer,
that setting the idolatrous impressions in the Seals a side, I have none at
all, unless it be the Printers mistake in some part of them, omiting a word,
and putting the year of our Lord 1651. instead of the year of Christ 1651. For
in humility it is conceived, that this word [our Lord] is too high and too holy
for all to whom the new Debenters do belong: For it is questionable, whether
they have an interest in the Lord, whom they call their Lord, but rather many of
them are of their Father the Devil, whose works they do; yet they have their
portion in this life; and in equity, what is due upon Debenters, must be paid
off to the Original Creditors, as the States Servants, and not as the Lords
Servants without a visible demonstration thereof; for a believing Master may
have an unbeleeving Servant, and he is not to oppress him by keeping back his
wages, for that is a cursed thing; and it is the note of a wicked man, to
borrow and not to pay, but righteous men are merciful men, and so full of
rationality as to love their enemies, to bless them that curse them, to pray
for them that persecute them and dispightfully use them, and to owe nothing to
any man, but love: If Christians owe any thing to a Heathen, or a Jew, or any
other who acknowledges not Christ to be his Lord, yet I see no reason, that
that Jew, Heathen or Unbeleever should be deprived of his right by any man
whatsoever.

Yet I could wish that this whole Army might expel their dross. and in
respect of sanctification be made as white as snow in Salmon, then we might
well expect the Almighty to scatter Kings by it, their hattels would be still
victorious and their end glorious. As touching the victory which God has given
them in subduing the common enemy, it is not for their righteousness, but
because of the wickenesse of those profane, blood-thirsty, implacable enemies
of his, whom he has subdued before them; therefore the Lord puts them away
as dross, as its feared be will do these after a while, unless they cease to
do evil, and learn to do well, till which time Christ is not visibly and
properly their Lord, neither are they his people, notwithstanding their
victories, for Gods prerogative Royal is sometimes to go beyond his ordinary
dispensations: but my advice unto them is, to lead sanctified lives, so they
may truly say, the Lord is their Lord.

Ye Soldiers, Omit not your duty, do violence to no man, be content with your
wages, and my endeavors and prayers shall be for you, And truly Sirs, my
hearts desire is, that you may have your Arrears, Why should you not? you have
dearly earned it, its the price of your blood. As for those who have perished
already for want of what was their due, which should have supported them, the
rich men must answer for it, who are called to weep and howl for the miseries
which are coming upon them, for the bread of the needy is the life of the
poor, and he that defraudeth him of it, is a murderer, and the Lord says,
thou shall take no ransom for the life of him who is guilty of death, but he
shall surely be put to death at the mouth of two or three witnesses. What I
have said in conscience to God, and in love to you, I desire you to take it in
good part, for I am

Your real friend and servant, SAMUEL CHIDLEY. To all persons herein concerned
particularly.

FINIS.

