A CHRISTIAN PLEA FOR INFANTS BAPTISM.

OR A CONFVTATION OF some things written by A. R. in his Treatise, entitled,
The second part of the vanity and Childishness of Infants BAPTISM.

In the Answer whereof, The lawfulness of Infants Baptism is defended, and
the Arguments against it disproved, by sufficient grounds and forcible reasons,
drawn from the sweet fountains of holy Scripture.

S. C.

Deuteronomy. 4.37. Because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed.

Jer. 30.20. Their Children also shall be as aforetime.

Isa. 65.23. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth in fear: for they
are the seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.

Acts 2.39. The promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are
a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. and are to be sold by Ben. Allen in
Popes-head-Alley. 1643.

A CONFVTATION OF SOME things written by A. R. in h^s Treatise, entitled, The
second part of the vanity and Childishness of Infants Baptism. In the Answer
whereof, The lawfulness of Infants Baptism is defended, and the Arguments
against it disproved, by sufficient grounds and forcible reasons, drawn from
the sweet fountains of holy Scripture.
Mr. ARS
YOur former Treatise (entitled, The vanity of Childish Baptism) being
answered, I (according to my promise made unto you in that answer Page 28. lin.
31, 32.
) do now proceed to answer this your other Treatise (which you have entitled,
The second part of the vanity and Childishnes of Infants Baptism.) And (I
conceive) it is the Treatise whereof you spoke in your vanity of Childish
Baptism Page 29. lin. 30, 31, 32.
, wherein you say, that the grounds which Seperates and some others urge for
the baptizing of Infants, should be answered.

And here (in the beginning of this your second part) you say, Page 1.
Having formerly treated of the Baptism of the national Church, you have now
thought it meet likewise to consider the grounds upon which the separated, and
some other Churches do baptize their Infants, which (you say) are from
several places of Scripture. But in answer to your first Treatise ( page 27.
line 26, 27, 28, 29.) I there tell you, that these [some others] besides
Seperates, I know not who they are, and if they are not separated from the
unclean thing, they are still unclean.

And though such may bring good grounds for baptizing of Infants, from several
places of Scripture; yet they cannot bring good grounds to warrant any Churches
to baptize, that are not separated from Idolatry, and do not cleave unto
Christ in purity, in his visible way of worship.

But those that are so separated indeed, may [very justly] allege Scripture to
justify what they do in things of this nature, for of all Churches and people
in the world, they are the most holy and sincere, yea and cleave closest to the
Rule. And they in baptizing their Infants, do that whereunto they are bound by
the Covenant, which both they and their holy seed are under.

Whereas you say, the grounds are from several places of Scripture, especially
these five, which you promise to examine in order.

I answer; I know not what five you mean, for you have not so plainly
distinguished them, whereby we may know how (in your book) to find them. But
(it may be) you have not done it of set purpose, but through some oversight;
for (in page 3. li. 16.) you speak of a second [argument] from [places] and (in
page 3. lin. 39.) you speak of a third [argument] (from 1 Cor. 7.14) The fourth
(in page 12. lin. 40.) is expressed to be the fourth Scripture. As (in page 1.)
Act. 2.39. is declared to be the first. But (in page 18. lin. 2.) you speak of
a fifth [argument.]

Now by this your disorderly manner of proceeding, it appears that you do not
perform what you promised (in page 1.) where you say, the grounds are from
several places of [Scripture] especially the [five,] which you there promise
to examine in order.

THe first (you say) is that in Act. 2.39. The promise is to you and your
children. But this Text (you say) is to no purpose in the point.

To which I reply, that this your bare affirmation will not bear the least
weight in the balance of Gods Sanctuary: for this promise spoken of by Peter,
is the promise of eternal life, and all those who are heirs of this promise,
are the right Subjects of Baptism Act. 10.47.
. But the Infants of believers are heirs of this promise; for so the tener of
the whole Scripture declares: There is no place of Scripture which describes
the blessedness of the parents, but it also includes their Infants; yea in
this place Act. 2.39. where believers children are mentioned, their Infants are
meant. As shall be more clearly proved in answer to your next objections
following. And this being prooved, it follows that they are the right
subjects of Baptism.

But you say, it is not there said of Infants, but to your Children, not
promises, but promise.

To which I reply, that this your Answer is of no weight, for Infants are
Children as well being young as old, and this great promise of God, includes
promises: for though Gods great promise (in general) be but one, yet in
particular it is diverse.

But seeing you say, it is worthy enquiry to know what is meant by you and your
Children, I will (by Gods assistance) prove unto you, that it is meant of
believers and their Infants. Consider therefore that the Apostle does not only
distinguish them from their parents, by the title Children, and also from those
afar off; But he likewise declares them to be those children to whom the
promise appertains as well as to the parents themselves: which does plainly
show that it ought not to be understood, as if it were spoken of [all] their
Children (both godly and wicked) but of all those Children who do not
degenerate from the steps of their holy parents; which sin of Apostacy, (or
degeneration) you cannot justly lay to the charge of believers Infants, who
never sinned actually Mr. Spilsbury says, the word co^demns none, but with
respect to actual sin. See his Treat. of Bap. page 11 lin. 30.
: It is a sure truth, that the sins of the parents being forgiven, the Lord
will not impute the same unto their Infants Sin remitted, is not imputed,
unless it be acted again.
. Original sin (I say) takes no more hold on the Infants, then on their
parents, and touching actual sin, they are as clear as their parents Exodus
20.6.
. But the like cannot be said of [all] their children of ripe years Ezekiel.
18.10, 11, 12, 13.
.

Wherefore it plainly appears, that the promise is made generally to all the
infants of the faithful, howbeit not to all their Children, but only to such
as abide in the steps of their righteous parents, amongst which holy children,
the infants of believing parents are not the smallest number.

Seeing then that the application of the promise of life and salvation,
belongs to the infants of believing parents, as really as to the parents
themselves, or any other of their children. It is evident that they have right
to Baptism. Wherefore this text which you said, is to no purpose in the point,
you may see to be of great weight concerning the point, and this will clearly
appear unto you (I hope) by that time you have weighed it well.

Consider, (I pray you) how that these converts upon the preaching of Peter,
were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the other Apostles, Men
and brethren, what shall we do? When the Apostle Peter saw that they were
come thus far, he bid them repent, which does not argue but that they repented
before (for they were pricked in their hearts) but now Peter urged them to
manifest their repentance, and shows them how they should by faith rest upon
the promise of God and he does not limit it to [a] promise only, but says
[The] promise is to you and to your Children (namely,) the chiefest promise [a
remedy answerable to their disease Isa 61. 2^ Act. 2 v^r. 2^.
.]

And though the promise was made unto them, and to their children, Ezekiel. 18
10.13.
yet if any of their children were a whoremonger, or Idolater, or a Rayl^r, or
a drunkard, or the like; the promise appertained not unto him. 1 Cor 6 9, 10,
11. Rev. 21 8.
Therefore by Children, he does not here intend all their Children, both good
and bad; for then impenitent persons and true Saints have share and share-like
in the heavenly riches; which were blasphemy Rev. 2.9.
so to affirm, that such Ismalites, or Edomites (though the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh) should have right or interest to the promise or seal
thereof; but as this promise is holy, so it appertains and is to be applied
only to those who ought to be judged holy persons, Isa. 4.3.
in Covenant with God, having the righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed unto
them: Now that the infants of believing parents are in Gods Covenant, and are
made righteous by Jesus Christ, is proved ( in the answer Page 8. 21, 22, 23,
24, etc.
to your first part) and may further appear unto you by the former
considerations, which I have here related, therefore let those premises there,
and these here, be discreetly weighed, and then it will evidently appear, that
this promise mentioned (in Act. 2.39.) appertains to the infants of believing
parents, as well as to the parents themselves, though some of the Children of
believing parents have no greater a share in this gracious promise then the
infants of both unbeleeving parents.

Your next words are these; A R Page 1. Page 2.
In both these we shall be satisfied if we look back into the former part of
the Chapter, where when the gifts of the holy Ghost were given forth upon the
120. and they speaking in diverse tongues, and the Jews thereupon, some
marveiling, some mocking, and saying, they were full of new wine, ver. 13.
Peter hereupon stands up and speaks to the Jews thus; These men are not drunk
as ye suppose, but this is that which is spoken by the Prophet Joel, that in
the last day, (says God) I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and daughters shall prophecy, etc. ver. 15, 16, 17. And immediately when
he had thus spoken, he preached unto them Jesus Christ, whom they had
murdered, and whom though dead and buried, yet God had raised up, and who
b^ing by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of his Father the
promise of the holy Ghost, had shed forth this which they did see and hear,
ver. 33. As if Peter should have said to the Jews thus; We are not filled
with Wine as ye suppose, but are filled with the Spirit, promised to our
fathers long since, that should be powered forth in these our days, and that
their sons and their daughters should prophecy, which is now fulfilled upon
us their sons and daughters, and may be also powered out upon you and your
Children, to make you all prophecy and speak with tongues as we do: for you
and your Children are all the sons and daughters of the Jews, etc.

I answer. All which you have said here, is able to give no satisfaction,
concerning the matter in hand; for as much as (though you have cited some
verses which you thought would make for your advantage) yet you have omitted,
ver. 21. which is most material and pertinent to our present purpose.
Moreover, you have not done well in taking upon you to be the Apostle Peter's
spokesman (or interpreter of his meaning) before you had minded his Speech
better, then it appears you have done; for we read not that the Apostle
Peter told them, that they and their Children should (or might) all propheci^,
and sp^ake with tongues (as he and some others did) much less does he yield
such a fained reason (to wit) because they were the sons and daughters of the
Jews, etc. as you would import he did; which does not sound according to
truth. But this indeed you ought to have minded that (in the Text alleged)
there is something else of greater weight and consequence, then the bare
prophe^ying or speaking with tongues See Act. 2 39. compared with ver. 21.
, for whereas the Apostle says, [The] promise] he speaks of that which is
general to every believer, both young and old The truth of this appears from
the express words of the holy Ghost? Act 2 39. The promise is to [you] and to
[you Children] and to [^ll] that are afar off [even as many as the Lord our God
shall call] But to speak with tongues and prophecy, is not common to every
believer. Therefore this promise (which appertains generally to [all] Saints)
is something else then the bare prophesying, or speaking with tongues. We know
that God can make open wicked men to prophecy, and the Beasts of the field to
speak with tongues, without giving them any promise of Eternal life [as may
appear unto you by the story of Balaam and his ass Numb. 22. and 23. and 24.
and 31.8.
] whom we must not therefore rank with the sons and daughters Jude 11. Rev.
2.14.
(mentioned in Joel Joel. 2.28.
) or with the holy Children (mentioned in Act. 2.39.) for then by the same
Rule, false Prophets, and unreasonable creatures must be baptized; which to
think would be very absurd. Wherefore it evidently appears, that this promise
is a promise of something else then a bare prophesying, or speaking with
tongues.

Consider (I pray you) that Eternal life is that which appertains to
believers only Joh. 3.36.
, and is distributed to every one of them Ioh. 6.35.51.54.57, 58. Ioh. 10.28,
^0.
, but so is not Prophesying, or speaking with tongues 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30.
. This promise of Eternal life was made to Adam, and all the members of Gods
visible Church then See Genesis 3. compared with Cap 4.16. and Cap. 5.
, and established with Abraham and his seed in their Generations Genesis 17.7.
; and this heavenly and Evangelicall promise, is here repeated by Peter Act.
2.21.
, and applied to all believers and their seed Ver. 39.
.

And though we should be furnished with the external gifts of the holy Gh^st;
and evidently perceive the devils to be subject unto us, through the name of
Christ, and see Satan fall down as lightning from heaven; at the sight
whereof we might have cause to rejoice! yet we have more cause of joy, that
our names are written in the Lambs book of life Luke 10.17, 18, 19, 20.
.

This eternal life, is a life above all lives, and to be desired above all
things in the world, and the promise of this eternal life, Peter applies to
believing men, and women, and their holy seed. And though in the same promise
is included diverse things, which God distributeth unto some of his Saints, and
not to other some, yet the chief thing promised is life and salvation through
Jesus Christ (whereof all Saints are partakers) without which all the
prophecies and tongues in the world will avail us nothing.

And though the infants of believers be not capable to prophecy, or speak
with tongues, yet I doubt not but they are holy 1 Cor. 7.14.
. Jeremiah Ier. 1.5.
and John Baptist, were sanctified by the holy Spirit [in the womb Luke 1.15.
] and seeing that believers have the like precious faith 2 Pet. 1.1.
, they have also the like precious privileges Rev. 22.14. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
Ephesians. 2.13. and 3.6.8. Rom 10.12.
.

Whereas you say, Page 2. lin. 24.
So then by this time we may see what is meant by the promise (to wit) the
gift of the holy Ghost.

I answer; It cannot appear any thing at all the more for this your
exposition, neither does it yet appear that you understand the meaning of the
holy Ghost in this place; for if you did, I think you could distinguish
between the external gifts of the holy Ghost, and the promise of eternal
life. Consider therefore how that Peter's application of the promise] is a
reason which he yields of his former speech; and you (says he) shall rec^ive
the gift of the holy Ghost: [for] (or because) the promise is to you, and to
your Childrens etc. What promise is that? Even the promise of salvation and
redemption, spoken of in Joel 2.32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be delivered: for in mount Zion,
and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said and in the remnant
whom the Lord shall call. Compare with this the words of Peter. ^ct. 2.21.39.
and it will evidently appear that this promise (spoken of in Act. 2. ver. 39.)
is the promise of salvation. Joel says, And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be delivered Joel 2.32.
: And Peter rehearsing this promise) says, ( Act. 2. ver. 21.) And it shall
come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved. Act. 2.39.
Joel (in application of the promise) says; For in mount Zion, Romans 10.13.
and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the
remnant whom the Lord shall call Peter (in application of the promise) says,
(to those Converts which were pricked in their hearts and asked counsel of the
Apostles what they should do) The promise (says he) is to you and to your
Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call.

I beseech you, weigh the Sentences; He does not say; Whosoever shall call upon
the name of the Lord, shall prophecy and speak with tongues: This is not [the]
medicine which was applied to heal the wounded-broken-hearted-soules,
converted at his Sermon: But he speaks of that which is of a higher nature,
he applies a more effectual and special medicine unto them, a more singular
cordial: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. And
this is that which the Apostle Paul so much insisteth upon, Romans 10. where in
the relation, interpretation, application, and prosecution of (his text in)
Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. he shows wherein the weight of the Saints glory and
happiness consists, Romans 10. ver. 6. Romans 10. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
The righteousness of faith (says he) speaks on this wise: Say not in thine
heart, Who shall a^cend into heaven? that is, to bring [Christ downe] from
above: ver. 7. Or who shall descend into the deep? (that is) to bring [up
Christ.] again from the dead: ver. 8. But what says it? The word is nigh thee
even in thy mouth, and in thine heart, (that is) the word of faith which we
preach: ver. 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be [saved:] ver. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and with the mouth Confession is made unto [salvation:] ver. 11. For the
Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him [shall not be ashamed: 1 Pet. 2.6,
7. Isa. 28.16.
] ver. 12. For there is no difference between the Jew, and the Greek: for the
same Lord over all is [rich] unto all that call upon him. And in ver. 13. he
shows further wherein this riches consists; For (says he) whosoever shall
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

In consideration of these things, we may safely conclude; that the promise
mentioned in Act. 2.39. is the same promise mentioned in Joel 2.32. and Act.
2.21. and Romans 10.13. Even the promise of eternal life and salvation by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

But peradventure it will seem strange unto some, that the infants of
believers should be thought to be in the state of salvation, or to have the
righteousness of faith, or to be confessors of Jesus Christ, or believers, or
invocaters of his name, considering that they cannot manifest the same actually
in their own persons. But we ought to note, that all these things are theirs
by imputation; it is imputed unto them as if they had done the same in their
own persons. Wherefore the Lord gave them the sign Genesis 17.11.
and seal Romans 4.11.
of the righteousness of faith, which does really demonstrate unto us, that
the infants of believers, have the righteousness of faith imputatively;
otherwise the Lord would not have given them such a sign, whereby to
distinguish them from those who were not in Covenant with him, and had not this
righteousness upon them. And touching their confession of Christ, all the Jews
infants, as they grew up to be capable, were to confess Christ; according to
this saying of the righteousness of faith, which spoke on this wise Romans 10.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
; Say not, who shall ascend into heaven, to bring Christ down from above, etc.
And seeing God usually gives names unto persons according to their nature,
state, and condition Genesis 22.28. Rev. 3.12. and 11.8.
, the infants of the believing Jews having the name of Jews rightly
attributed unto them, they were Jews (that is, Confessors) though they could
not actually confess: and the like may be said for their invocation (or
calling upon the name of God;) So it appears that the infants of the Jews
had such a holy state and condition upon them, that the visible imputation Heb.
7.9, 10.
of holy actions, was conferred upon them, though they could not act the same.
And the very like may be said concerning the infants of believing parents now;
And seeing that salvation appertains to the infants of believers Luke 18.15,
16, 17.
, the righteousness of faith is imputed unto them Mat. 16.16.
; and therefore they ought to receive the sign and seal of the same
righteousness; for we are to account that Jesus Christ (our righteousness) is a
Savior [in a special manner] unto all those who ought to be judged righteous
persons in Covenant with him; and ought not to be accounted to have the guilt
of original sin, but that they have it pardoned and done away through him.

But the infants of believing parents ought to be judged righteous persons in
Covenant with Christ, and ought not to be esteemed to have the guilt of
original sin; but that they have it pardoned, and done away through him, (as
has been proved before.)

Therefore we are to account that Jesus Christ (our righteousness) is a Savior
unto them in a special manner, See Mat. 1.21.
as well as to their parents.

It is certain, that the rarest Saint in the world, though he profess and
confess never so much, yet he (being one of Adams posterity) has original
sin from the hour of his birth, to the time of his death, yea and before his
birth, he was conceived in sin; So David says of himself, Lo in iniquity,
(was I painfully brought forth) and in sin my mother conceived me, Psalm. 51.5.
But herein consists the Saints happiness, that all their sins are remitted
Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6.
through Jesus Christ; so that the Lord will not remember their sins, nor
impute the same unto them; he counts them not guilty; he saves his people
from their sins; therefore is he called Jesus Mat. 1.21.
; So David says, that with Jehovah is bountiful mercy, and plentiful
redemption. And he will redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. Psalm. 130.7,
8. Now whereas it is said, He shall save [his people] from their sins; He
will redeem [Israel] out of [all] his iniquities. Hereby is meant, all the
sins of all his people (in Covenant with him) both young and old, both great
and small. So David says, Psalm. 115.12, 13, 14, 15. The Lord has been
mindful, of us, he will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel: He will
bless the house of Aaron: He will bless them that fear the Lord; both small
and great. The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.
You are blessed of the Lord, which has made Heaven and Earth. And so (in Isa.
44.3.) the Lord says to Israel, I will power my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring. And (in Isa. 45.25.) In the Lord shall [all]
the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. By [all] the seed of Israel,
he does not mean Apostates, for they are not counted for the seed Romans 9.8.
; but this justification, and glorifi^ation, is promised only to those that
abide in the Lord Jesus Joh. 15.4, 5.6.10.
; and so continue in his Church; But the seed of the faithful [in their
infancy:] cannot justly be said to depart from Christ, to aberate from his
Commandments; to Apostate or degenerate from that h avenly state, wherein the
Lord of his mercy has planted them; therefore they are (as well in infancy as
after) to be accounted holy, ^p^^i^uall, and i^ the new Covenant, in the very
promise of Eternal life, and freed from the wrath of God and curses of the
law, and under grace and mercy through Jesus Christ our Lord; therefore it is
apparent, that the Lord imputes them righteous though him; so then they are
righteous by imputation; they are believers and Co^fessors imputatively, yea,
and all the graces of God are theirs by imputation; and this favor and
benediction, is not only extended to the infants of the believing Jews Jer.
30.20.
, but also ^o the infants of the b^leeving Gentiles; There is [no d fference
Romans 10 12.
] (says the Apostle Paul) their riches are equal, they are all on in Christ
Gal. 3.28.
; God is their God, and Christ is their Savior in a special manner; He
justifies the circumcision and uncircumcision by his righteousness Romans 4.8.
; This righteous servant justifies many Isa. 53.11.
; He pardons the iniquities of all that abide 1 Ioh. 3, 5, 6.
in his Covenant.

And seeing that the believing Jews, and the believing Gentiles, have equal
privileges Isa. 56.
: As the infants of the believing J^wes were, and are in the Covenant of God
with their parents Genesis 17.7. Psalm. 11.^.
; so are the infants of believing Gentiles Exodus 12.48. Romans 11.12.15, 16.17
20.23, 24.
; for, Jesus Christ is the same to day as he was yesterday, and so is he for
ever Heb. 13.8.
. God is the same God over all, and therefore rich unto all that call upon him
Romans 10 12
And seeing he is the same God, rich unto all that call upon him. Believing
Gentiles have the same privileges for their seed, as the believing Jews had
and have for their seed; so that though their infants are all sinners Rom
5.12.13, 14. etc.
originally, yet by the free grace of God they are justifica Ver. 20.21.
; their transgression is forgiven, and their sin is covered, and therefore
they are all blessed, both small and great Psalm. 115.13
, buds Isa. 65.23.
and blossoms. Blessed Jer. 1. Psalm. 22.10, 11 and 71.6.17.18. Mar. 10.13
14.15, 16. Rev. 14.^3. Psalm. 100.5. 2 Samuel 12.23.
in their conception; blessed in their birth, blessed in their life, and
blessed at their death; remaining still [in the Covenant,] branches Psalm.
80.1.1^
of Gods holy Vine. In the Lord shall all this blessed seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory: Note, he does not limit it to [some] only, but
extends it to [all] not one person of them is exempted; for, though they be
all sinners by nature, yet by grace they are saved, not of themselves, but it
is the gift of God, who has said, as he lives, that he desires not the death
of a sinner; neither shall the son die for the fathers iniquity, but every
one shall bear his own iniquity Ezekiel. 18.
. Shall every one bear his own iniquity? Then the iniquity of the righteous
parents (that is remitted) is not visibly imputed to any of their children, [in
their infancy.] Therefore those infants are to be accounted righteous; For the
m r^y of Jehovah is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him,
and his righteousness unto childrens children, to such as keep his Covenant,
etc. Psalm. 103.17, 18.

For to say, that the sin of the parent that is remitted, is imputed to his
child [that never sinned actually,] is an arguing that the son shall die for
the father; yea, and for the sins of the righteous father! A flat
contradiction both of the Scripture, and Reason it self.

But it may be, some will say, that the best believers on earth do sin daily;
yea and that in their best actions; Shall all these sins be remitted, and not
be imputed, considering, that sin is daily committed by them?

Ans. If they sin, they have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2.
; and through him, the believing parents, who die d^i^y unto s^nne; have their
sins so quelled, and crushed, that there is no power in the same whereby to
condemn them; for as the Brazen Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, so is
Jesus Christ lifted up for them Ioh. 3.14, 15.
, so that the fiery Messengers of Satan, though they sting them, yet cannot
destroy their souls; and this being remitted to the par^nts, and to all
believers, shall not be imputed to them; because still upon the renewing of
sin, they renew their repentance, and so do cut the cords of sin, by godly
sorrow 2 Cor 7.10, 11.
; But a wicked person that is not penitent, has the iniquities of his
[fathers] imputed unto him; and his mothers sin is not blotted out; all this
is remembered with the Lord continually Psalm. 109 14, 15.
, and laid upon the sinner that is not justified by Jesus Christ; But the
infants of believers (as has been observed before) are from under the guilt of
original sin; their parents sin is not imputed unto them; but both the
original sin and actual sin is fully remitted; and the infants cannot be
taxed with actual sin; they are clear, they never acted sin. Wherefore by
all this it appears that the Lord spoke not in vain, when he bid the
parents; choose life, that both they and their seed might live; for though God
visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children to the third and
fourth generation of those that ^^te him, yet he shows mercy to thousands of
those that love him and keep his Commandments Exodus 20.5, 6
.

Seeing then it is so apparent that the infants of believers are freely
justified and saved by Jesus Christ through his righteousness, they are under
this promise mentioned by Peter, Act. 2.39. And therefore are to have Baptism
(the seal of the same promise) administered upon them. And this conclusion is
agreeable to your own position, A. R. second part, page 6. lin. 37, 38, 39.
(which is,) that that which avails to justification, does (according to the
rule) avail to Baptism, etc.

Whereas you further say Page 2. lin. ^0.
, that by children are meant sons and daughters, which [should] prophecy.
This I deny not; But that it is only meant of them, I do deny; for, all are
not Prophets 1 Cor. 12.29
. Jeremia was not a Prophet till God called him. And though he was not set
about the work, till he was capable to understand, and apprehend Ier. 1.6.10,
11, 12, 17, 18.
, yet he was sanctified in the womb, and therefore the promise appertained
unto him then, before he could prophecy; even so the promise is really made to
the infants of the faithful, though they can neither prophecy, nor speak
with tongues. Wherefore it appears (by what has been said in answer unto
you) that your argument is quite overthrown, and the drift thereof has no
weight in it to edify the soul, nor any strength to prove what you undertook
Page 2. lin. 21.
, (namely) that by children, no infants are meant in this place of Acts 2.39.

And although it be said, that the promise is to their children, yet you deny
that the Text speaks of their children in Covenant Line 41.
, by saying, that this objection (that these children were in Covenant) has no
color of footing in the Text; for proof whereof you bring your own former
speeches Line 42.
, and add for further demonstration, saying Page 3. lin. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
, that first the promise is made equally to them, and to their children, and to
them that are afar off. But these which are afar off, are not within the
Covenant by the promise until they believe the same.

To which I answer; that if it be not meant of their children in Covenant, then
is it meant of their children out of Covenant! But you should know, that those
who are out of Covenant, are not within the promise of life and salvation! None
have right unto the tree of Life, but those that are in Covenant with God Rev.
21.7, 8. and 22.14, 15.
, and those that abide not in Christ, they have no part in him or his Ioh. 15.6.
. But the infants of believers are in Christ, and in the promise; and God is
faithful 1 These. 5.24.
, and therefore will not break his promise with those whom he has effectually
called to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ.

And it appears by the Apostle Peter's words, that these children (mentioned
in Act. 2.39.) were such whom in visibilitie the Lord had so called in Christ
Jesus; for the Apostle speaks of them in the time present, The promise [is]
to you (says he) and to your children: but when he speaks of those afar off,
he has relation wholly to the future time, saying, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God [shall] call. And so by this he showed
that God would be a God unto all those whom he so calls.

Now this calling, I do not understand to be a bare publication of the Gospel,
or general invitation, which appertains unto all Mar. 15.15. 2 Timothy 1.9.
; but such a calling which is appropriated unto those whom the Lord accepts
in the Covenant of the Gospel, and fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ. That
the infants of believers have fellowship with Jesus Christ, is evident; Suffer
them, says Christ, to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven Luke 18.15, 16, 17.
. Seeing then that they are declared to be in Jesus Christ, who is made a Isa.
42, 6, 7.
Covenant to the people; they are not out of Covenant, no more then the infants
of Abraham, to whom the Lord spoke, saying, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed, etc. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after
thee in their generations Genesis 17.10.
.

By all this it appears, that we have no ground to deny that the Scripture
speaks of their children in Covenant, neither are we to dream that the
promise appertains to all sorts, or is visibly made equally to visible
believers, and visible unbeleevers also; for though in Gods secret account,
visible unbeleevers may be accounted as visible believers are, and have the
promise reserved for them by God in the secret intention and unalterable
resolution of his sacred Majesty, who will afterward manifest it visibly to
appertain unto them in his appointed time; yet (these unbeleevers) the mean
while [in our account, and in their own account,] are not to be esteemed heirs
of the promise, or elect vessels of mercy, so long as they are not in the
Covenant; for none are to be esteemed as the children of life, but those that
are visibly in Jesus Christ; for whose sake life is promised to those that
choose life, and also to their seed Deuteronomy. 29.2.
.

Secondly (you say) If they were in the Covenant, Page 3. line 6.
by having this promise made to them, then were they of the new Covenant and
Church of the Gospel, for there were no other people to be accounted in
Covenant with God, save those which be of this Church, but those were not of
this Church, but they were afterward added thereunto, (as appears ver. 41.)
and therefore were not of it before, and consequently notwithstanding the
promise, being so to them and their children yet neither they nor their
children were of the Covenant nor Church, until they did believe, although
they were Jews, and so the children of faithful Abraham.

Ans. Here, I think, you are mistaken, for you would infer that these were
not in the new Covenant, before they were baptized and added to the particular
Church; but then by the same rule, we may think, that the Apostles baptized
and admitted into Church Fellowship, (...)
those who were out of the new Covenant, and that those Converts (mentioned in
Act. 2.39.) were out of the new Covenant, when they ha^ gladly received the
Word, for as touching their Baptism, and audition to the Church, the Scripture
denotes the same, as distinct from the rest which went before. But you should
know, (...)
that none ought to be baptized before they are in Covenant with God; Wherefore
if these aforesaid, were not in Covenant with God, before they were baptized
and added, as aforesaid, then they were first added, and were afterward
baptized, and afterward entered into Covenant with God, which disorderly
proceeding is not according to the Rule of Jesus Christ. (...)


Moreover, If it be admitted, that persons must be first added to the
particular Church, before they are to be baptized (which thing I dare not
affirm.) But suppose it were so, yet (I say) it cannot be proved that persons
are not in the new Covenant, till they are joined to the particular Church, for
all those that are out of the new Covenant, are not fit matter for it. But that
these Converts (mentioned in Act. 2.) were in the new Covenant before they were
baptiz^d, is apparent by their conversion and repentance; and that the blessed
promise of God in the free pardon of their sins, was rightly applied unto
them, and their seed, and this is the new Covenant, That God will be our God,
See Genesis 17.7. Rev. 21.3.
and we shall be his people, and that he will be merciful unto us, in
forgiving us all our iniquities, etc. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. And so David says, O
bl^ss^d is he whose transgr^ssion is pardoned, and whose sin is covered. O,
blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Psalm. 32.1, 2.
And Paul explaineth it to be a Righteousness imputed [without workes] Romans
4.6. And that this righteousness of faith is visibly imputed to the infants of
believers (as has been heretofore) is clear from Act. 2.39. compared with
other Scriptures, and therefore I conclude, they are believers imputatively,
and in the new Covenant, and ought to be baptized.

Now that persons are in the promise or new Covenant visibly before they have
faith, I suppose, no well informed Christian will affirm. But to say, that
true visible believers, though unbaptized, are not in the new Covenant, till
they be baptized and added, as before specified, it shows a great deal of
ignorance, (at the best) in him that so affirms.

NExt, you say, Their second Argument is from those places which speak^ of
baptizing whole households.

To which I answer. It is certain that diverse places of Scripture speak of
baptizing whole households. And it would argue weakness and presumption in us to
affirm that there were no infants in those famili^s, except we could prove
the same; which if there were none, it makes nothing against the baptizing of
infants. I hope we are not ignorant (at least we are admonished not to be
ignorant) that God baptized the children of Israel in the Sea; 1 Cor. 10 1, 2.
in which act he really declared who are the right subjects of Baptism,
namely, Believing parents, and their infants with them, Jews and Prosolytes;
such as were the right subjects of Circumcision Genesis 7.9.14. Exodus 12.48, 49.
: And if we do discreetly weigh the great and general Commission of Jesus
Christ (given when he ascended upon high) it will give great light to this
point; for it declares that all Nations were commanded to be made Disciples
and those that were made Disciples of Christ, he commanded to be baptized, so
soon as it appeared that the Application of the Gospel appertained unto them;
Go, (says Christ) teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc Mat. 28.18.
. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be
damned Mar. 16.15, 16.
. Now I hope you will not deny infants to be part of the Nations, or to be
part of the number of Creatures spoken of here, for whom an immortal state is
prepared; for it is a sure truth, that they are reasonable creatures, and
comprehended in these words [Every Creature.] Consider then how that the purest
infants of the holiest parents are by nature the children of wrath, Conceived
in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, and have Original sin cleaving
unto them till their change come, (I mean, till the time of their death or
dissolution) and are by nature enemies against God, so deeply stained with
sin, that nothing in the world is effectual to cleanse them therefrom Psalm.
49 7, 8, 9.
, but the crimson blood of their crucified Savior; natural corruption from
their conception, Rev. 1.5.
is inherent in them, and cannot be subdued but by the free grace of God. Now
to say, that God has not ordained sufficient means Mr Spil^^ury s^^^h, ^h^t
the W^^^ of God shows that he has elected persons to the means as well as to
the end. being the way unto the s^^^e. And that was the Adoption of sons, and
to be call^ and justified ^y believing in Jesus Christ. See his Treatise of
Ba^. page 3. lin. 41, 42, 43, 44.
for their recovery, is in effect to cast them all down to hell, and so to
hodwinke ^he eyes of Charity, (and s^ to place them with dog^^^ and
whoremongers without) or else to judge they are saved without the means and
that they so enter into the kingdom of ^^aven, even without Ch is it! without
sait^! without ^^lin^s! ^ea without r^generation! which to affirm is contrary
unto the Scripture; for Christ J sus is the only way, and door of entrance
to God the Father. He is the ladder of life, by which all the Saints must
ascend unto their mansion-houses. Christ is the only light, who gives light
unto all that abide in him. Who being the brightn^s of his Fathers glory, and
the expr^sse Image of his person, freely distributeth those gifts which he has
freely received of his Father, and does not in the least lessen the Saints
privileges, but in his rich mercy bestows his rich gifts upon his Saints for
their good and benefit, though by nature they are rebellious unto him. Thou
have (says David) received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, that
the Lord God might dwell among them Psalm. 68.18.
: for as much then as the Lord Jesus has received gifts for the rebellious,
that God might dwell amongst them, and that the infants of believers are
rebellious by nature; Surely God never ordained (though they die in their
infancy) that they should be saved without the gifts there spoken of, which
are necessary for them, and therefore we must confess, that they are the
creatures, comprehended in the general Commission, given by Jesus Christ, when
he ascended up on high, when he said, Go teach all nations, baptizing them,
etc. Go p^^ach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, etc. Hereby is meant that the general offer of the
Go p^l should be tendered to all, and that those rebellious persons who were
content to subj ct themselves unto the yoke of Jesus Christ, should have the
Go^^^l app^yed unto them, and also the seal of the Cov^nant thereof; and so
all bel^eving parents, and their infants, though reb^llious by nature, should
all receive the same precious pri^il^^ges and p^^rogatives as were granted to
Abraham and his infa^ts in whom the Lord did Evangelically declare that all the
families of the earth should be blessed Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8, 9.
; Genesis 17. Exodus 12.48.
and ^o this Christ Jesus alluded when he applied the Gospel to Zacheus his
family, house or household, saying, This day is salvation come to this house,
for so much as he also is the son of Abraham: For the Son of man is come to
seek and to save that which was lost Luk 19, 9, 10.
. And this was written for our sakes Romans 4.23, 24.
; To the intent that we should know that every believer is the child of
Abraham Gal. 3.7.
and that every believing parent, has the same precious privileges, as Isaac
had Genesis 17. Isa 56.
; and his Infants the same precious privileges, as Isaacs infants had Isa.
22.23, 24 Psalm. 112.1, 2.
, who though they were by nature the Children of wrath, yet by grace they were
the Children of God, in his Covenant Genesis 17.7.
, and his Church Exodus 12 48.
; Children of the promise, counted for the l^^d Romans 9.8. Genesis ^1.1^.
, and called by his name.

Whereas you say, because there may be infants in the household, that thence
they conclude, that infants may be baptized.

I ans. I never did hear any so conclude, from this bare argument (or may be)
which you have here specified.

But to this argument you make answer, that there might be no infants there.

To which I reply, that there might be infants there; for who should control
(or forbid) the parents from keeping their own Children, as well in infancy,
as after?

Whereas you say, your Negative is as good as their Affirmative; What
affirmative do you mean? and who are the persons you here intend? If you mean
the bare conclusion from infants being in the household, that therefore infants
may be baptized; I think such an Affirmative is somewhat like your Negative,
though it be not the same; but peradventure those [some others] you mention
besides Seperates, were the authors hereof.

But to make your Negative as good [and more probable] then their Affirmative,
which you say is without any proof, you add these words, For it is said, Act.
18 8. That Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord,
with all his household, and that many of the Corinthians hearing it, believed
and were baptized. And it is said of the Jailer, who was baptized and all his,
Act. 16.32. That Paul and Sylas first preached the Word unto him, and to all
that were in his house. And in the 33. verse, it is said, that he with all his
household believed in God. So then (say you) it is plain, that they first
believed, and then were baptized; and although it be barely spoken of Paul's
bapti^ing the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. And of the baptizing of Lydia
and her household, Act. 16.15. yet it cannot reasonably be imagined but that he
did baptize these according to the Commission, and as he did baptize the Jailer
and his house, which was first preaching to them, and bringing him and all his
house to the faith, as is evident by the Text; and those other places which are
more silent, must be expounded and understo^d by this which is more plain, and
not this by those.

To which I answer, that all this which you have here rehearsed, does not prove
the thing for which you brought it (to wit) that your Negative is as good and
more probable then their Affirmative; I pray you, tell me, Does any of these
Scriptures tell you that there was no Infants in these families? or that
(according to your former Conclusion) it is more probable, there was none, then
that there was any? Surely such a thing cannot be gathered from any tittle of
Scripture, or necessary consequence therefrom; neither do these Scriptures,
alleged by you, nor your following Conclusion from thence, which you have here
set down, contradict the Baptism of Infants in the least, wherefore it will
not serve your turn, to vindicate what you have said before in opposition of
the truth.

That which we ought seriously to mind, is that the infants of believing
parents, are blessed with their faithful parents Isa. 65.23.
. Their iniquities are forgiven, and their sins are covered Psalm. 32.1, 2.
, and the Lord imputes righteousness unto them [without works Romans 4.6.
] (as has been proved before See page 3.4.6 to page 14. See page 15, 16, 17.
.) Wherefore we may safely conclude, that all those infants which were then in
these families, or any other (if they were the infants of one or both believing
parents) the application of the Gospel belonged unto them, and therefore the
Apostles in preaching life and salvation (and applying the promises) unto the
parents, did also apply the promises unto their infants, according to the
practice of God himself, who did not visibly separate between the believing
parents and their infants, but graciously accepted of them in his Covenant; And
when he preached the Gospel to the parents, never did exclude, but ever did
include their infants with them. And to the intent that all b^leeving parents
might be encouraged to trust in him and rely upon him for the accomplishment
of his gracious promises, which he made unto them and their Infants. The holy
and blessed God repeated the same diverse times, yea, and sundry times, at one
and the same instant; as in Genesis 17. I will (says God to Abraham) make my
Covenant between me and thee, and thou shall be a father of a multitude of
Nations, etc Genesis 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. See also ver. 19.21.
. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee
in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant. To be a God unto thee, and
to thy seed after thee, and (again he says) I will be their God. Note here
how often in this one place and at this one time, he repeateth his Covenant,
hereby to take away all doubts and suspicious objections, (which might happen
(through Satan's temptations) to arise in the hearts of any of his people,
against the large extent and sufficiency of the same Covenant,) he binds it
up with weighty words, and sentences of great consequence; yea and for further
confirmation of his peoples faith (in believing the firmness of his promises,
and the largeness of his Covenant) he annexed a visible sign and seal
thereof, to the intent that they might not forget his Covenant: And as
believing Gentiles and their infants were taken into Covenant with God then, so
they were to submit unto his ordinances, amongst which this same Circumcision
(the sign of his Covenant Genesis 17.11.
, and seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.11.
) was one, which was given unto them to observe throughout their generations:
for this see Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And in Exodus 12.48 49. The Lord there
declares unto his people Israel, saying; And when a stranger shall sojourne
with thee, and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males be
circum^ised, and then let him come near and keep it, and he shall be as one
that is borne in the Land; for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. One
law shall be to him that is home-borne, and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among you. By this we may see, that the Proselytes and their seed, had equal
precious privileges with the Jews, and their seed. And so the Jews infants
and the infants of believing Gentiles then were not as those who were without
God in the world, but were joynt-heires of the same precious promises, they had
visible right, by virtue of the Covenant, to all the ordinances of God, then
present, or now to come, and were to be partakers thereof, as they had
capabilitie to receive the same, even according to the requiring of the
Scripture. There is much then to be considered in this, that the infants of
believers were admitted to be members of the visible Church (and to receive the
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, together with other
privileges) before Christ was manifested in the flesh; for Jesus Christ came
not to take any privileges from them, but gave them as great (if not greater)
in stead thereof. Let us not think that he came into the world to take from
them the types, and to bereave them both of substances and types; But rather
let us conclude, that for as much as the Son of God (whose delight was with
the sons of men Prove. 8.31.
, before he was made the son of man) is wisdom and truth it self, he came
not to deceive the least members of his beloved Spouse, of the least happiness
or bl^ssednesse, which they formerly by right rec^ived and enjoyed from him.
Now it was a blessedness^ unto Gods peop e for the Lord to gave unto them
outward visible signs, for the confirmation of their faith. But Circumcision
of Infants, was an outward visible sig^e given un^o his people from God, for
the confi^mation ^f their faith G^n ^7.11. R^m. ^.11.
: Therefore it was a blessedness^ unto them to enjoy it, amongst other
blessings, and blessed privileges.

It being then a bless^dnes for the infants of believers to be admitted m^mbers
of Gods visible Church, and so to have (by virtue of his Covenant) a visible
right to all Gods ordinances, and to partake of them, according as they were
capable (I mean in respect of a natural capabilitie) if the same privil^dges
are not granted (by God) to the g^neratio^ of the faithful now, it seems
that God unloadeth his people of the blessings which he has formerly bestowed
upon them, which to affirm is contrary to the Scripture, Psalm. 68.19. where
David speaking of the gifts which Christ should give unto the R^belli^us,
says, Bl ssed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with bl^ssings, even the God
of our salvation, Selah. Seeing then that it was such a bless^dness^ for the
believing parents, to have their infants in Gods Covenant with themselves, and
to receive the sign thereof, for confirmation of their faith, and seeing that
God daily loadeth his people with bl^ssings, then surely it cannot reasonably
be imagined that God has unloaded his people of these excellent blessings, for
as much as he is always one and the same. Seeing then that believing Jews and
Gentiles, and their infants jointly, had this blessedness, they have the same
blessedness now; their privileges are not lessened by the coming of Christ;
for he came not for any such intent and purpose, but he came to confirm the
promises made with the fathers: therefore was Jesus Christ a Minister of the
Circumcision for the truth of God, and so to confirm the promises made with
the fathers Romans 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
, by fu^filling them; So all the promises in him are yea and Amen. And this was
done also, that the Gentiles might glorify God for his m^rci^; as it is
written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and ^^ng
unto thy Name. And again he says, Rejoice ye^ G^^tiles with his people. And
again; Praise Jehovah all ye Gentiles. Laud him all ye p^^ple; for his mercy
is mighty toward us, and the faithfuln^sse of Jehova^ e^^ureth for ever.
Psalm. 117. And again Esay^s says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles trust.
And David says in Psalm. 22 28, 29 31. All the ends of the earth shall
remember, and turn to Jehovah, and all families of the Heathens shall do
worship before th^e, for to Jeho^ah partaines the kingd^me; and he is Ruler
among the Na^ions, etc. A s^ed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the
Lord f^r a generation. Observe how the Scriptures here do set forth the
excellent ben^fits which appertain to a^^ the Saints in general, and to the
holy families in particular, under the flourishing time of the Gospel. Here is
great occasion for the ^aints to glorifi^, to magnify, to confess, to praise,
and to laud the great God of heaven and earth, who has so far magnified his
word, so strongly confirmed his promises made unto the fathers, and has so
largely extended his Gospel-pri^iledges unto them, and to their seed: Their
seed are in the blessing; It shall (says David) be accounted unto the Lord for
a generation. Weigh these sentences, and compare the same with Genesis 17 10 where
the Lord said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant, thou and thy seed
after thee in their generations. And so it is said here in Psalm. 22. that a
seed shall serve him. Now to serve him indeed, is to keep his Covenant, and
those that keep his Covenant are obedient to his laws and ordinances, which he
prescribes; And as Abraham and his seed then were accounted of before the
Lord, so are the believing Gentiles and their seed now; they are counted before
the Lord for a generation: for time was when they were not accounted before the
Lord for a generation, no reckoning was made of the Nations, they were without
Christ, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.
being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world; (mistake me
not, I do not say, that the believing Gentiles (or Proselytes) or their
infants were without Christ, or without God in the world, when God took them in
his Covenant, be it far from me so to think! for these visible Saints were no
further off then the believing Jews See Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Exodus
12.48.
;) But the Apostle declares that such aliens as were then without God in the
world; Now God of his rich mercy has called them unto him by repentance; and
now God calling them his people, who were not his people, and m^king them of
Lions, Lambs, bringing them into subjection to his laws, and to the obedience
of his faith, they are holy and spiritual, 1 Cor. 7.14.
and accounted as precious as Abraham and his infants were; for these Gentiles,
who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ; Ephesians. 2.13, 14.
And he has accepted of them jointly into his service, giving them the
blessing of Abraham Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8.14.
and his posterity, accounting of them before him, as a holy generation Psalm.
22.30. 1 Cor. 7.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 1.5, 6. Isa. 19.18. etc.
; Whereas before they were visibly of no account, of no estimation in the sight
of God, or his people. But God of his rich mercy made them rich, yea (in
general) equally rich with the Jews in respect both of external and
internal precious privileges. The same God over all, (says the Apostle) is
rich unto all that call upon him Rom 20.12. Rev. 22.14.
; their riches are not lessened (or diminished) one jot, they are equailized
with the riches of the Jews; let them be bond or free, male or female, they
are all one in Christ Gal. 3.28.
, Abraham's seed; like Zacheus Ver. 29. Luke 19.
, and heirs according to promise Gal. 3.29.
, fellow-heires, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise by the
Gospel Ephesians 3.6.
: The children of the promis^ as Isaac was Gal 4 28.
, Blessed with their faithful father Abraham Gal. 3.9.
: grafted into the same stock, and olive tree and root, from whence the
unbeleeving Jews for unbelief were cut off Romans 11.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
; and these believers the Apostle concludes are blessed by God the Father with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Ephesians. 1.3.
; and therefore I see no reason why the believing parents now (though Gentiles)
should not have the like precious privileges for their seed in infancy as
their brethren and Countrymen had in former time for their seed Genesis 17.11, 12,
13. Exodus 12.48.
in infancy; Yea, considering that the infants of believers now are able to
do, as good, great, faithful, and acceptable service, as the infants of
believers in the time of the Law; and that these are as capable of Baptism
[this passive Ordinance,] as those were of Circumcision [that passive
Ordinance,] which was no more passive then this, and was the forerunner of
this; and both that and this being in one general^ institution, and one and the
same in effect Col. 2 11, 12
; we may safely believe and justly conclude, that the Saints infants ought to
be baptized; as formerly they were Circumcised; yea, and for as much as the
Apostles themselves (speaking generally of baptizing whole households Act.
16.15. 1 Cor 1 16.33
;) never once make mention of the exempting of any of their infants; (though it
be a matter of so great concernment,) how then shall we reject them? And
considering that in the Scripture, by the speech of an house, family, or
household, infants are also employed therein Genesis 17.23.9 10.12. and 30.25.30.
and 45.10 11.18, 19 and 46 5, 6, 7. Exodus 1.1. Number. 3.15.39 Psalm. 115.12, 13,
14. Luke 19.9. Prove 31.15. 1 Timothy 5.8.
, (and seeing Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision.) If infants should
not have been baptized, as formerly they were circum^ised, sure the Apostles,
in speaking generally of baptizing households, would not (without exception of
infants) have used such terms as are set down in the old and new Testament,
to include infants. Considering that then the Apostles had a just occasion to
exclude their infants in express words, if any such thing should have been
done. If holy infants should have been thrust out from being members of the
visible Church, and from having their spiritual privileges, as they have had
heretofore; Surely, we should have found some tittle of it in the New
Testament; but there is not the least show of it, from whence we may draw any
just consequence, for dismissing them from being members of the visible Church
of Christ Mr, Spilsbery says it is a truth that the Church of the New
Testament consists both of Jews and Gentiles, and admits of all that believe
and rejects none. And for the Gentiles Infants being in the same body as well
as the Jews infants, this (says he) I believe both alike. For this see his
treatise of bapt. p. 11.
, and having their spiritual privileges, as they have had heretofore.

Consider thoroughly, the words of Peter, how at the very preaching the Gospel
of Repentance to the parents, in the application thereof, he did not bar out,
but expressly mentions their children; and if we do but seriously weigh the
Text, and compare it with other places of Scripture, which set forth the
blessedness of the children with the parents, we may well conceive that it is
meant of holy infants (as has been formerly observed:) And as I plead for none
to be baptized before they do believe, so I plead for none to have the Gospel
applied unto them, before they have faith by imputation, and that is to be
judged by some visible rule out of Gods Word; But, the infants of believers
have faith by imputatio^ (as is proved before) therefore (in this
consideration) they are believers, holy, and spiritual 1 Cor. 7.14.
, and therefore the Gospel may be lawfully applied unto them Mar. 10, 13, 16.
Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. Luke 18.15, 16, 17 See Luke 1.76.
; and What lets water, that these may not be baptized, which have received
the holy Spirit as well as we Acts 10.47.
; As for actual profession, or verbal demonstration of faith, God has not
required the children of believers to perform in their own persons, in the
time of their infancy; which thing though they are not able to do, yet they
are in the faith of Christ, and shall certainly be saved, though they die in
their infancy; for God will be no more wanting unto them, then to their
parents Isa. 22.24. Heb. 13.8.
.

It is to be minded, that God (baptizing 1 Cor. 10.1, 2
many families Ex. 12.21.37.41. Ps. 77.17, 19, 20
) did not exempt such children from the parents, but baptized those persons
that passed through the Sea, both men, women, and children, young and old. And
so in the midst of their afflictions, by this Oracle, gave these faithful
Heb. 11.29.
persons a glimpse of that which should be in the days of the Messiah, where
one element, and passive ordinance, should be general for all his precious
Saints, both young and old. So the Apostles baptizing many families, did not
omit their infants; neither can we find in all the New Testament, that ever
the infants of the faithful are exempted, in express words, nor can it be
gathered by necessary consequence. The Apostle Peter makes the Baptism in the
Arc equivolent with our Baptism now 1 Pet 3.20, 21.
; And Paul declared that he would not have the believing Corinthians ignorant 1
Cor. 10.1, 2
, that God baptized his Church then, which consisted of many families, in which
there were many infants, who were the approoved subjects of Circumcision Exodus
12.48. Jos. 5.2, 5, 7.
, and of that Baptism then; And therefore Baptism now, being a [generall]
ordinance, [yea and always [more generall] in the administration, then
Circumcision ever was] yea, and it being given to all the visible members of
Christ's body Mat. 28.19, Mar. 16.16.
, (amongst whom the infants of believing parents are no small number Zach. 8.5.
Luke 18.15, 16, 17. Isa. 22.24.
,) they ought to be baptized, both male, and female, thereby to set forth the
excellent benefits which they have by Christ.

A. R.
A Third [argument] of theirs (say you) is from 1 Cor. 7.14. where it is said,
Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy: Page 3. l. 39, to page
4. l. 3.
Whence (you say) they thus reason; If the Children of believing parents be
holy, (that is to say, in the new Covenant) then they may have the seals of
the Covenant, and be baptized. To which I add this argument, both for
explanation, and confirmation of the former.

All those persons whom we ought to judge to have the invisible Seal (even
the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13.) ought to be esteemed spiritually holy,
and in the new Covenant, and ought to be baptized Act. 10.47. Mat. 28.18, 19
Mar. 16.15, 16
, Act. 10.47. But the infants of (one or both) believing parents, ought to be
esteemed to have the invisible Seal, even the holy Spirit of promise 1 Cor.
7.13, 14. Exodus 12.48. Luke 18.15, 16, 17. John. 3.5. A. R.
, 1 Cor. 7.13, 14. Therefore the infants of (one or both) believing parents,
ought to be judged spiritually holy, and in the new Covenant, and ought to be
baptized.

Your Reasons that they are not in the new Covenant, are

Page 4. l. 22, 23. Page 4 l. 3, 4, 5. to l. 13.
First, Because there is now but one Covenant on foot, which is a covenant of
grace and salvation.

Secondly, Because there is but one manner of entering and being in that
Covenant.

Thirdly, That there is but one holiness now acceptable with God, which is
inward, spiritual, etc.

To which I answer, that the like you may say of the members of the visible
Church, which do actually and verbally profess faith. As if you should say
thus unto them; There is but one new Covenant now on foot, therefore you
(believers) are not in it.

This reason is threed-bare.

Secondly, There is but one manner of entering and being in that Covenant,
therefore you are not of that Covenant! This is as poor as the other.

Thirdly, Because there is no holiness accepted with God, but that which is
inward, spiritual, and in truth etc. Therefore you believers are not in the
new Covenant, nor ought to be baptized! Is not this mad kind of reasoning? But
to perform that which you promised, you should have proved, that the infants
of believers are not spiritually holy, nor never did, or can enter in the new
covenant, and then I would have said, you had done somewhat like to that you
took upon you to do, but instead of taking awa^ ^he position, that infants
are holy and in the new covenant, you tell us, that there is but one covenant;
the manner of entering into it and abiding in it but one; the holiness now
acceptable with God to be but one; To which I further answer, that though a
person be not holy [internally,] nor under the new covenant [in Gods secret
acount] yet [in our acount] he is to be esteemed to be in the new covenant. An
hypocrite may make a glorious show, yea and seem in outward acts of obedience
to go further then a true Saint, 1 Cor. 13.
He may give his goods to the poor and his body to be burned, and yet want
love.

Ob. But peradventure you will ask how then we must judge of an hypocrite?

An. Surely, as the faithful Disciples of Christ judged of Judas; Judas had, a
Saint-ship, an Apostle-ship, and a Deacon-ship Mat. 10.1, 2, 4, 16. Matk.
3.14.19. and 6.7, 12, 13. Luke 9.1.10 John. 12.4.5, 6 and 13.29.
, Simon Magus also had an [outward] Saint-ship Act. 8.12.13
upon him; An hypocrite (or saint outwardly) (I say) must be judged to be as a
[true] Saint is, till he be discovered to us; for though God know the heart,
yet we do not, though he see invisibly, we cannot; We must judge of invisible
things, by visible demonstrations. Some men may creep in, and make a [faire]
show outwardly for a while, yea and a great while, and yet be hypocrites, but
tell they are discovered to be evil, what man can point them out, and say from
his own knowledge that they are not under the new covenant.

A person that offers to join himself to a particular Church of Christ, and
[not only by his verbal confession, but by his life and conversation] apeareth
unto them to be an outside Christian, (they knowing nothing by him but good)
if they refuse him, it is their sin; though all which he does (outwardly) is
fained.

A humane creature though he have the wisdom and knowledge of Angels, yet can he
not know what is in man, none (I say) knows this but only the man Christ;
wherefore it is apparent that though none are by us to be esteemed spiritually
holy but those that are outwardly in the same new covenant in which the visible
Church is; yet all the members therein ought so to be esteemed, till they are
seen to degenerate.

And moreover, I would have you to know, that God does not only accept of our
inward performances, but of our very words, yea of all external holy
performances, in his worship and service, if they be done according to his
will; so David says, L^^ the [words of my mouth] and the meditations of my
heart, be acceptable in thy sight Psalm. 19.14.
; So that though all our worship and service unto God, ought to be spiritual,
and done in spirit, and in truth, yet, God has not bound us to do it only
internally, Holiness both inward and outward is accepted of God.
and not externally also; yea, for as much as he has made us bodies, as well
as souls and spirits, therefore he does require outward performances of us, as
well as inward Mat. 28.20. Rev. 1.3.11. Zach. 14.16, 17, 18, 19. Luke 22.19, 20
, but when his saints are not capable; God then does accept of them
nevertheless, and imputes Christ righteousness unto them notwithstanding
their natural weakness; Let them (while they are capable) keep themselves
unsported, and do that which God requires, and then (when they are no more
capable to know or do any spiritual action) they are still not only known of
God, 1 Cor. 5.3. and 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 20. and 16.1.2. Act. 1.26. and 2.42. Iam
2.18.
but beloved of Christ, and sanctified by the holy Sprit; for though they
cannot apprehend Gods working in them, yet God can tell how he works in them,
and saves them [by the imputation of Christ's righteousness Ps. 3 2.2. Romans
4.6.
;] And after this manner does God work in the Infants of believers: So long as
they are not capable, he does not require them to act but to suffer, as holy
infants in former time suffered, not only the administration of his passive
ordinance Genesis 17.14, 23 Ios 5.3.7.8.
of circomcision, but also death Ex. 1.22. Act. 7.19. 1 Samuel 22.19. A. R. Page
4. l. 13. to l. 24.
it self (for his sake) from the hands of Gods enemies.

But your inference from your foregoing reasons is; That if believers childeren
be in the covenant, and have this true holiness, then all the childeren of
believing parents must be saved, as well old childeren as young, for age does
not make them cease from being their childeren. But all the childeren of
believers are not saved, no not of faithful Abraham himself, according to
that known sentence of the Prophet Isaiah. 10.21. Repeated by Saint Paul
Romans. 9.27. Though the number of the childeren of Israel be as the sand of
the sea, yet but a remnant of them shall be saved: Therefore the childeren of
believers are not in the covenant now on foot, nor ought to be baptized.

To which I Ans. That believers children are in the covenant, is true; but that
[all] the childeren of [all] believers are in the covenant, is not true, but
all their holy infants are, and ought so to be judged, and accounted even in
the state of salvation, as well as the greatest verbal professors of the faith
of Christ, and all these infants of believing parents that live till they come
to years of discretion, are still to be acounted holy and spiritual, except
they apostate.

Now though the Scripture declares that a remnant shall be saved, yet we are
directed, by the rule of Gods Word, to judge, that believing parents, and their
seed that do not degenerate, are of this remnant. But the childeren of
believers in their infancy have not power actually to degenerate from the
righteous steps of their holy parents. But old childeren may possibly. So
Ishmael [when he was an infant] was not a mocker neither was Cain [in his
infancie] a murderer: but when they came to years, and acted these
wickednesses, they were for the same cast out, the one from communion with the
family of Adam Genesis 4.11.14.16.
; the other from the family of Abraham Genesis 21.9.10.
.

And as you reason here against believers infants being in the new Covenant,
because you know not absolutely whether they shall be saved. So you may reason
against the parents themselves, though they are members of the visible Church,
and also as well plead against every verbal professor, that is, a visible
member of the same body.

Thus, All you which seem to be believers, are a people which have indeed taken
upon you the profession of the great name of God, and have given up your selves
unto him, to walk in all his ways, and say, you have taken hold of Gods
Covenant, and have covenanted together to become an entire body, City, House,
Temple, Garden, Vineyard, etc. unto God, whom you suppose to be your builder
and planter, etc. So you think your selves to be his holy people, his bride by
marriage, his peculiar treasure, in covenant with him, etc, But alas! you are
much deceived, you think your selves to be in a holy and happy estate, in
Covenant with God, and that you have right to his Ordinances, but it is not so.
For, then it will follow, That if you believers [members of this visible
Church] be in the Covenant, and have this true holiness, then every member of
you must be saved as well old as young, etc. But all the members of the visible
Church are not saved [no, not of the Christian Church in the Apostles time, for
diverse of them perished, as Judas Iscareot, [ one of the Lambs 12 Apostles] and
Simon Magus: Therefore, though you profess faith, you are not in the Covenant
now on foot, nor ought to be baptized.

If this be a good and sufficient ground, or reason, to prove the parents not
to be in the new Covenant, nor to be baptized, then the same reason is of
force, against the infants of believers, to prove them also not to be in the
new Covenant, nor to be baptized. But this is very weak, against such parents,
Therefore it is of no force, against their infants.

Seeing it is so, you may plainly perceive that I have just ground to except
against your conclusion, Page 4 l. 22, 23
that because all the children of believers are not saved, Therefore the
infants of believers are not in the Covenant now on foot, nor ought to be
baptized.

Such an excuse as this might as well have served informer time for the
children of Israel, that they might not only have neglected Circumcision, but
also, all other Ordinances: But such arguing brings large liberty tending to
Athisme, destruction, and ruination of the foundation of Christian Religion.

Romans 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
But what says Paul, (when he declares that the Jews had the Oracles of God
committed unto them) what if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make
the faith of God of none effect, God forbid, yea, let God be true, and every
man a liar, etc.

The Apostasy of Cain, could not hurt Adam, nor hinder Abel from eternal
life. For though Cain and his seed perished, yet God was still good unto his
Church, unto Israel, to those that were of an upright heart.

Furthermore, for to maintain error, you bring error, false things, to prove
a falsehood, (like two false witnesses that stand one for another,) for, to
prove your own false affirmation, that infants are not in the Covenant
outwardly, nor have that holiness whereby to be admitted now to the outward
ordinance of baptism, as infants were then to Circumcision in the time of the
Law, and state of the Jews.

You say, That the state or Church of the Jews, were under the old Covenant and
Law, Page 4. l. 29.
and stood not by faith and circumcision of the heart, (as this Church of the
Gospel does) but stood merely upon nature and circumcision of the flesh, and
accordingly had their outward and fiderall holiness, and outward cleansings,
all which are abolished with that state, and no such holiness or distinction
is now between any persons in the world, as (you say) shall be further declared
by and by.

To which I answer, That the Church of the Jews were in the old Covenant and
Law, is true, But that they stood not by faith and circumcision of the heart,
as this Church of the Gospel does, but stood merely upon nature and
circumcision of the flesh, is not true, for the Church of the Jews had the new
covenant Mr. Spilsbery grants the Covenant made with Abraham, and the
Covenant now to be the same in substance. See his treatise, page 8 line. 10.
that was confirmed to Abraham Genesis 17. Gal. 3.16, 17.
before, of God in Christ, which covenant the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after could not disanull that it should make the promise of none
effect*.

The Jews were Gods holy special Deuteronomy. 7.6.
and peculiar and 26.18.19.
people, who were not constituted of a visible mixed multitude of (profane
persons, and holy believers and Infidels,) good and bad together and 29.18. and
32.9.12. Esaias. 5.1, 2.
, but were a people called and 41.1, 2. and 43.1.7. Mat. 12.2.13.
, and separated Ps. 135.4. and 148.14. and 125.2. Deuteronomy. 33.29. and 14.1, 2
from other Nations, God brought them out of Egypt Ex. 12.41.42
, and baptized them in the cloud, and in the sea 1 Cor. 10.1, 2
and went before them, by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of
fire Ex. 13.21, 22
, and at the great and victorious deliverance which they had over the
Egyptians, they believed his Words, and sang his praise Ex 15.1. Ps. 106.12.
, then God led them through the wilderness Ex. 15.22.
, and made the bitter waters sweet for them ver. 25.
, that they might trust in him who healed them v. 26.
; and he fed them with Manna, which neither they nor their fathers knew, to the
intent that they might know, that man could not live by bread only, but by
every word of God Deuteronomy. 8.3.
, and he made the flinty rock a fountain of waters Ps. 114.8. Number. 20.8.11
, that they thereby might quench their thirst: Yea, The Lord came from mount
Synay, and rose up from Seir, unto them, he shined forth from mount Paran, and
he came with ten thousands of his Saints, from his right hand went a fiery Law,
yea, he loved the people Deuteronomy 33.2, 3
, they were therefore to trust steadfastly in God, the sword of their
excellency ver, 29.
, and to look continually for eternal life of him, and cleave unto him and
10.20.
who was their life and the length of their days and 30.19, 20.
, whom they were commanded to fear and to love, and to serve, with all their
heart, and with all their soul Deuteronomy. 10.12.
, so the Lord was with them, and they with him, and as he had commanded them,
so they were still to be a holy people to the Lord their God, even as he was
holy Levit. 11.44. and 19.2. and 20.7.
.

By all which it appears that there was a manifest difference put between them
and the profane of the world, as is between Christ and Antichrist.

In brief, as their Church was the Church of Christ See Cant.
and the Covenant Rev. 21.3.
which they had Gal. 3.16, 17.
the Covenant of Christ, so the Commandment Deuteronomy. 30.11.12, 13, 14. Romans 10.6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
(or word) which was not hid from them was the Gospel, (which they were not to
enquire after, as though it were some strange thing afar off, or beyond the
seas, etc. for it was nigh unto them, in their mouth and in their heart, that
they might do it) even the Gospel of Christ, the same word of faith which Paul
preached; yea, further they had not only the Gospel of Christ, but Christ
himself, his presence, in a special manner amongst them, though he were not
then manifested in the flesh. Esaias. 63 9.


Wherefore I would have you to consider, and revoke those rash speeches, that
this heavenly society and blessed fraternity, stood not by faith but merely
upon nature and circumcision of the flesh.

It is an infidelious opinion to judge them to be Infidels (in the Jews state)
whom God did so call and separate, which had his Oracles and Ordinances, whom
he called his holy people, his chosen Deuteronomy. 10.15.
and peculiar people Cap. 14.2.
, his beloved ones Cap 7.7.8.
, to whose seed he promised life as to themselves Cap. 30.19.20
whose hearts he promised to circumcise, as also the hearts of their seed Deuteronomy
30.6.
(as he has promised to his people in the last days;) which thing,
circumcision of the flesh was to teach them, it being the sign Gen 17.11.
and seal Romans 4 11. Col. 2.11, 12.
of the righteousness of faith, as baptism is now. And this you may mind
also, that though the rebellious seed of Abraham (according to the flesh) were
rejected Esaias. 2.6.9
, yet the strangers that joined to the Lord were still received Esaias 56.3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8.
, wherefore this is a plain evidence, that they stood by the grace and life of
God and Christ, and circumcision of the heart, for the cause why God rejected
some of the circumcised seed of Abraham according to the flesh, was, because
they were uncircumcised in heart Ier. 9.25, 26.
, and therefore the Lord threatened to visit them (and did visit them) with the
uncircumcised in flesh.

Wherefore it appears, that without faith and circumcision of the heart they
could not stand at all.

And the Scripture says, that the unbeleeving Jews were cut off for
unbelief, and that those that stand do stand by faith, and therefore are
admonished not to be high minded but fear Romans 11.20.
, and take heed v 21.
and continue in the beautifulness of God v. 22.
, and that the unbeleeving Jews also if they abide not in unbelief, shall be
grafted in again v. 23.
.

Wherefore it appears, that as unbelief was the cause why the unbeleeving
Jews were cut off from the olive tree, whereon they were, so unbelief was the
bar, which kept them off, for if they abide not in unbelief, they shall be
grafted in again; and this proves that their standing was never to be
otherwise but by faith and circumcision of the heart.

Neither are we to think, that the giving of the Law at mount Sinai, or the
ceremonies which the Jews then had to lead them to Christ, or any of Gods
Oracles being committed unto them, or any persons groundless departing from
the State, does argue that the constitution of the same Church was, as you
would have it taken to be; Neither did their circumcision of the flesh argue
that they stood not by faith, and circumcision of the heart, no more then the
outward baptism does now argue, that the Saints now, stand not by faith, and
the inward baptism of the heart and spirit, but merely upon nature and
baptism of the flesh.

But you should know; that as it is not possible to please God now without
faith Heb. 11.6.
, no more was it then Psalm. 50.18.
. In the time of the Law, God abhorred his own Ordinances if they were not done
in faith Isa. 1.13, 14.
.

And as faith gave Abraham the denomination of Gods friend, (the righteousness
of which faith, Circumcision was a seal Romans 4.11.
;) so none were ever esteemed as the holy people, the sons and daughters and
friends of God, but those that were made nigh unto him by the promise of
Christ, and by faith, and circumcision of the heart.

And you should know, that the Jews had not outward spiritual holiness
visibly imputed unto them merely because they were the children of Abraham, but
because Abraham their Father and they his children were the children of God,
and their childrens children were in Covenant, and so they were the children of
the promise as Isaac was, and blessed with their Father Abraham.

And this may further appear unto you, because when any of the seed of Abraham
(according to the flesh) did degenerate, their rejection was not for (or
because) that they were the children of Abraham; but because they had taken
upon them the image of Satan, and so degenerated from the steps of Abraham, and
thereby became the children of Belial.

And as we may say concerning these Hebrews, so we may say concerning the
Heathens, when any of the Gentiles, (or Heathens) became Prosolites, their
childeren that were at years of discretion were not to be circumcised, unless
they were willing to enter into covenant with God, and to take upon them the
Lords yoke, and fight under his banner; Howbeit, whether they were circumcised
or not, they were still the Prosolytes children, according to the flesh.

But concerning the infants of the Prosolytes, there was no questioning of
them, they were to be circumcised (being in the covenant with their parents,)
and yet not circumcised because they were their childeren by nature, but
because they were in the same covenant with their holy parents, and so they
were the childeren of God by his free Grace.

And the Scripture does evidently declare that none were to be admitted into
the Church of the Jews, but believing Hebrews, and Prosolytes, and their holy
seed. By all this it apeareth that the members of the Jews state had a
spiritual holiness upon them, and stood no otherwise but by faith, and
circumcision of the heart. And were not as those who were neither believing
Jews, nor Prosolytes; Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, without hope,
without God in the world, without Christ, and strangers from the covenants of
promise. But the Church of the Jews, (the Lor^s peculiar people) were made
nigh unto God by the bloo^ of Jesus Christ, which was then to be shed; and is
now shed for the remission of their sins, and their reconciliation to God the
father, and his blessed spirit.

And whereas you say that the state or Church of the Jews is abollished.

I tell you, I am not bound to believe that God abollished his Church state
whereof David, Solomon, Hezekias, Josias, and the holy Prophets and righteous
men were members, such a Church at the constitution whereof there was no
profane person, to be admitted, or any root beating gall or wormwood to be
suffered, but if you think that God changed the state in the days of the
Messiah his manifestation in the flesh, and made it more glorious, Even as the
Moon is said to be changed when she has run her course, but remains still
the same Moon, though more glorious then before, this I would rather believe
then that.

And touching your speech of the abolishing of the other things. If you mean an
abolishing of all the beggarly rudiments, taking away the Elimentish part of
some Ordinances, and planting other materials in stead thereof; then I grant
it; But be sure that you stick to this, that Christ came not to deceive the
Infants of believing parents, to take away the substance of the Ordinances, but
rather the yoakes which cleaved thereunto; which circumstantiall things, he
nailed to his Cross, in token that those who rightly and truly enjoyed them
before, were now benefited without them, and were to have, through a general
distribution, an equal proportionable share, and right, to whatsoever came in
stead thereof.

Now let us consider, that if the infants of believers, (members of the Church
of the Jews) were not then aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, nor without
hope, nor without God in the world. They were not then without Christ, neither
were they Strangers from the Covenants of Promise Ephesians. 2.12.
.

But the Infants of believers (who were members of the Church of the Jews,)
were not aliens from the Common wealth of Israel Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15.18. Exodus 12.48, 49.
, nor without hope, nor without God in the world.

Therefore such holy Infants were not then without Christ, neither were they
strangers from the covenants of promise.

Now, for as much as the Infants of believers were not without Christ, nor
aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, nor strangers from the Covenants of
promise, nor without hope, nor without God in the world. They were such as were
made nigh by the blood of Christ See Ephesians 2.13.
, whose blood was then to be shed, and is powered out for them; and therefore we
may safely conclude, that the holy infants are not loosers by his coming. And
therefore [seeing the New Covenant is not abolished] it evidently appears
that the Infants of believers now are in the new Covenant, because the Infants
of believers were in the same New Covenant before. And this agrees with the
words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but
now are they holy; for the Apostle there speaks to believers, and of a
holiness in relation to their faith, and to the covenant they were in.

And though you said, the old Covenant is abolished, yet you grant that the New
covenant is not abolished but remains; Wherefore you must of necessity be
driven to grant also, that the infants of believers are in the new Covenant,
because they were of it before, and the New covenant remains permanent.

Thus having taken away the foundation of your Arguments which you brought
(against holy Infants being in the Covenant) you may justly expect, that all
which is builded upon the same sandy foundation, will fall to the ground.

Page 4. li. 37.
Your next words are these which follow; There being the new covenant now on
foot, which is a covenant of grace and salvation, and which brings certain
salvation to all those that rightly enter into it, and which is only by faith.
Hence it is said, Act. 2.47. That the Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved.

new Covenant is now on foot, and that it is the covenant of grace, and
salvation, and brings it to all those which rightly enter into it in deed and
in truth, is not by me denied. And that the entrance is only by faith, is
very true. But mind this, that there is an external right, and an internal
right. We [finite creatures] must judge of the tr^e by the fruit Mat. 12.33.
Luke 6.44.
, of the faith by the works Jam. 2.18, 19
; Judas had no internal right, for he was a devil Joh. 6.70, 71
inwardly, yet he had an external right, for he was a Saint outwardly Act.
1.17.
; But so long as he was not known to be a wicked man, but still made a great
outward show of holiness, they were to judge him righteous; But when he
manifested evil fruits, of treachery and hypocrisy, then they were to alter
their former charitable opinion of him; And though he had (not only an outward
Saintship, but also) an Apostle-ship, and a Deaconship before; yet when he
Apostated, that man who was before to be accounted a Saint and an Angel on
earth, was afterward to be esteemed as a devil. And so the like may be said
concerning other wicked men. Psalm 41.9, 10. Psalm. 69.25, 26, 27, 28.
Set thou in office over him the wicked one (says holy David Psalm. 109.6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, [20.]
) and let the Adversary stand at his right hand. When he shall be judged, let
him be condemned: and let his prayer become sin. Let his days be few, and
another take his office. [Act. 1.20.] Let his children be fatherless, and his
wife a widow. Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg. Let them
seek their bread also out of their desolate places. Let the extortioner catch
all that he has: and let the stranger spoil his labor. Let there be none to
extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favor his
fatherlesse-children. Let his posterity be appointed to cutting off; and in
the generation next after, let his name be wiped out: Let the iniquity of his
[fathers] be remembered of Jehovah; and let not the sin of his mother be wiped
out. Let them be before Jehovah continually; that he may cut off the memory of
them from the earth, etc.

Now that the Lord added to his Church daily such as should be saved, is
certain; but here we are to note, that this Church in Jerusalem, was a visible
particular Church. And that (as far as men could judge) all those were to be
saved that in outward appearance were rightly added to the same, or to any
other particular Church of the same constitution; And though the Lord added to
his Church daily such as should be saved; yet we are not to determine that all
that joined to a particular Church were saved, yea though they were added
rightly according to order, in an external way. Judas was of the visible
Church, yea of that Church whereof these were members, and yet we will not say
that he is saved. Persons may be saved which are of no visible particular
Church; And persons may be of a true visible particular Church of Christ, and
yet Apostate; and not be saved, any more then Judas, who fell finally, as other
reprobates do, though never so eminent in the Church. Howbeit, we will not say
that any fall away, from the grace of Gods secret election, but from an outward
sanctification, it is possible that elected persons may for a time fall; yet
not without great sin, no more then the temporary falling away of the
incestuous person in the Church of Corinth, and others also, which the
Scripture makes mention of, who were the dear Saints of God, yet (for a time)
fell from their steadfastness.

But now I will examine your reasons what they are, whereby you say Page 4.
lin. 41 Page 5. lin. 1, 2
, That the holiness of children here, is not meant of any holiness in
relation to any Church Covenant.

First, (say you Page 5. lin. 3. to lin. 9.
,) That which is an effect of regeneration, is not brought to pass by
generation (though the parents be holy) but to be of the covenant or kingdom,
is the proper effect of regeneration, Joh. 3.3. without which none can see it
(much less be of it) or enter into it; therefore it cannot be brought to pass
by generation, though the parents are holy.

Ans. That regeneration is brought to pass by generation, I will not affirm;
The infants of believers are regenerated [before they are borne] this you
cannot justly deny; for Jeremie and John Baptist were sanctified in the womb;
and the privileges of believers are alike precious; Not that it comes by the
means of their natural birth, or generation after the flesh; but by the Spirit
of regeneration; howbeit, it is a certain truth, that the Saints generation,
does not hinder regeneration [in any of them:] Generation does not work
regeneration, but generation causes distinction of persons, that what was one
in the root, is become more in the branches; or what was one in such a branch
growing on such a root, brings forth other branches, Abraham's holy action
was Levies by imputation. See Heb. 7.9.
or (as it were) little sprigges, who are in a growing condition (or in a way
of thriving) so long as they are borne up and receive nourishment from the
root. And this division, or distinction, by way of derivation, does not simply
make qualities contra-distinct and opposite one to the other, or break the
conjunction or contraction between them, or take away the virtue of the root
from them. For Abraham's act of obedience which he did before Levi was an
infant, was imputed unto Levi afterward, which act was an act of obedience,
even a fruit of faith, which cannot be without the Spirit.

Now when Levi was borne, should they have said, that he was an unregenerated
Infant? Nay, rather it may be thought that they esteemed as well of Levi (in
his infancy) as Eve did of Seth in his infanci^, when Seth was borne, she did
not say, God has sent mo^ a young Heathen (or Canite) (though the seed of
Caine was hers by generation) but (says she) The Lord has sent me [another
seed] in stead of [Abel] whom Caine slew. Mark now, she did not say, in stead
of Caine, or in stead of Caines infants, (which did indeed spring naturally
from Adams loins,) but in stead of [Abel] (says she,) Therefore (I say) it
is apparent, that (though generation did not work regeneration yet) she
believed in God, and had so much faith, (...)
to put a real difference between Apostates, and those who were not Apostated,
but were spiritually holy: And in that it is said that Seth was in stead of
Abel, it is a plain Argument, that as Abel was in the Covenant, and as Abel
was a member of the Church, so was Seth, according to his name, so was he set
(or appointed) instead of Abel; for the saying imports that he took the room
of Abel, as when one plant is removed out of a fruitful soil, and another
planted in stead thereof.

And seeing God refuses not the bodies of his Saints, but accepts of them in
his gracious Covenant (though they are generated persons) it plainly argues
that generation does not hinder regeneration. And therefore it appears that
this your reason (concerning generation and regeneration) is of no force
against the holy Children spoken of in 1 Cor. 7.14. but rathe^ makes for them,
as shall be further made to appear. And all which you have said here does not
prove that the holiness of children there, is not meant of any holiness in
relation to any Church Covenant, which is the thing for which you brought it.

The Infants of believers are visibly holy in relation to faith, and the holy
Covenant. The unbeleeving yoak-fellowes abiding with their be le^ving yoke
fellows, are sanctified by them for this end; Else were their Children
unclean, but now are they holy. So says the holy Apostle Paul, (1 Cor. 7.14.)
Your children are holy, that is to say, the children of you believers, (in
Covenant with your God) they are the children of the Covenant, differing from
those children that are unholy and out of the Covenant.

But against this you argue, that what is an effect of regeneration, is not
brought to pass by generation (though the parents be holy.) And I suppose,
that those Merit-mongers (keeping still to their principles) may believe the
contrary, I mean such Merit-mongers, who (against the Gospel of free grace) do
labor vehemently to shut out all believers infants from the new Jerusalem,
Rev. 22.14, 15.
and so do in their conceptions rank them with dogs and whoremongers without,
and judge them not to be in the Covenant, or regenerated (because they have not
a natural capabilitie, to discern, apprehend, and both actually and verbally
profess faith, in their own persons;) yea, they judge all infants to be
visibly in one condition (and out of the Covenant in visibilitie) without
putting any visible distinction between the Infants of the Church, and the
Infants out of the Church. But if that which is an effect of regeneration, were
to be brought to pass by generation, they might with some color of truth,
rank them all in one visible estate, (considering that they are all
generated.) And then there had been no weight in the Apostles speech concerning
this matter; But we are to know that the Apostle had good reason for what he
said; The Master of spirits was his instructor, whose words are not to be
wrested and perverted, and so made of none effect, but are discreetly to be
observed, and faithfully obeyed. And though some do despise the Lords vessels
of small quantity, even holy infants, the young Olive plants of believing
parents, esteeming them unregenerated, yet we are taught to esteem highly of
them, and to honor them as the precious Saints, whom the most high God has
regenerated, and separated to himself, as his peculiar treasure, who are
justified, and sanctified, and saved by him; and therefore ought to be sealed
unto him by Baptism, as such holy Infants in the time of the Law were sealed
unto him by Circumcision.

And you your self do grant, that to be of the Covenant or Kingdom, is the
proper effect of regeneration, Joh 3.3. without which none can see it, (much
less be of it.)

Consider what you say; for here you must confess, that (seeing all that see
the kingdom of God are regenerated) either the Infants of believers (which die
in their infancy) are regenerated, or else that they shall never see the
Kingdom of God, much less be of it; But Christ has testified that the
kingdom of heaven consists of such, and therefore we may safely conclude,
that though they die in their infancy, yet they shall see the kingdom of God;
and therefore it appears, that they are regenerated.

What will you say now, in answer to your argument; seeing it makes not
against holy infants, but for them? Surely you will deny that they have any of
the effects of regeneration, or else you will deny your own argument! or the
Scripture of God, (which declares that they are in covenant,) or else
confess, that the infants of believers are to be accounted holy persons, in
covenant with God, and heirs of his heavenly Kingdom, according as the holy
Scripture teaches us: one of these you will do, if silence prevent you not.

Moreover, I know not how you take the being in the Covenant or Kingdom;
there is a twofold being therein, to wit, external, and internal, outward,
and inward; visible, and invisible, (as I observed before, concerning persons
entrance into the Church.)

Act. 8.13.
Simon Magus believed, and was rightly baptized with the outward Baptism,
therefore by consequence, he was visibly in the Covenant, even outwardly, and
externally; He was an elected Saint, so far as men could or were to judge then
at that present time, though his heart was not upright in the sight of God; and
therefore he was not of Gods Kingdom, nor in the new Covenant in Gods secret
account, nor regenerated, no more then Judas Iscariot, though the Apostles
themselves esteemed never so highly of him. But the Infants of believers are
visibly in the Covenant. And we are to judge all that are in the Covenant
visibly, to be elected, regenerated, sanctified, heirs of righteousness,
children of God, and of his heavenly Kingdom, till they appear unto us,
either by some visible demonstration of their own, or evident manifestation of
others, or testification of Gods, not to be that which before we were to judge
them to be.

O mind this well, that Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, Deuteronomy.
29.29.
but those things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our Children for
ever.

Secondly, (say you Page 5. lin. 9. to lin. 19.
) Contradictions cannot be the effect of one and the selfsame Covenant, in
one and the selfsame respect; but for one parent to be a believer, that is,
of the Church, when the other parent is not, to produce a holy seed, (that is)
in the Covenant, 1 Cor. 7.14. And for the other parents, to be one a Jew, and
the other a Babylonian; the one a member of the Church, the other not, to
produce an unholy seed (that is) out of the Covenant, and to be put away, both
wife and all borne by her; as Ezra 10.3. (you say) is a contradiction in one
and the selfsame respect. Therefore it cannot be the effect of one and the
selfsame Covenant.

Ans. That is a contradiction which is opposed to a contrary thing, as light is
to darkness. And that is an effect which flows from a Cause or ground.

The ground why God gave Abraham the sign and seal of his righteousness, was
Abraham's faith, in believing Gods Covenant; For Abraham had first the Covenant,
and faith to lay hold upon it, and afterward the seal thereof. The ground why
Abraham did administer Circumcision (Gods holy sign and seal of the
righteousness of his faith) was faith, in believing the firmness of Gods
promise, Romans 4.11.
and the effectual power and efficacy of the Ordinance of Circumcision; which
(Circumcision) had the denomination of the Covenant it self Genesis 17.10.
, because it was a sign thereof. Ver. 11.
I say, Abraham's action of Circumcision was done in faith, otherwise it had
been sin unto him Romans 14.23.
. But he added unto his faith this virtue, (this effect of the New covenant) to
yield obedience unto God, in performance of this holy Ordinance upon his
infants, according to Gods appointment.

Baptism (being come in the room of Circumcision) though it be more general,
yet it has an equivolence with Circumcision; Col. 2.11, 12.
Wherefore (it being not contradictory thereunto, but sealing up one and the
same Covenant of life.) As Circumcision was to be administered upon the infants
of believers in former time, so Baptime is to be administered upon the infants
of believers now.

Now though every contradiction, argues a difference, yet every difference,
makes not a contradiction. But to restrain (or lessen) the privileges of the
Saints (under the Gospel) is not only to make one Covenant contradictory to
another, but also the New covenant contradictory to it self, which is not of a
fading nature, but of a flourishing nature, and has flourished, (and does
flourish) more under the Gospel, then it did under the Law.

Wherefore if you do conceive, that 1 Cor. 7.14. is of a lesser extent then
Ezra 10.3. you are mistaken; but if you will say. 1 Cor. 7.14. is of a larger
extent. Wherefore have you brought Ezra 10.3. to unfold it? Except it be to
prove forcibly hereby (against your self,) how that all believers infants
generally of what Nation soever, have greater privileges now, since Christ's
death, then they have had heretofore.

As for the second part of your Argument (considering that it wants
explanation one way, and proof another way) it will not stand you in any
stead, to prove what you would have it prove, (to wit) that the holiness
spoken of (1 Cor. 7.14.) is not a holiness in relation to any Church Covenant.

Indeed, if you had set it down thus; That for one parent to be a believer,
and the other an unbeleever, to produce a holy seed in covenant, and the same
parents remaining in the same estate without alteration, to bring forth an
unholy seed, and out of the Covenant; is a contradiction in one and the
selfsame respect. Or thus. For one parent to be a believer, and another
parent to be an unbeleever, to produce a holy seed. And for the like parents in
the same respects, to produce an unholy seed, is a contradiction in one and the
selfsame respect. If you had reasoned thus, and so proved it, then you had
done somewhat like to your undertakings, but in speaking generally of parents,
in covenant, and out of covenant, without noting in particular, the difference
that was between these sanctified and unbeleeving wives (mentioned in 1 Cor.
7.14) and those unbeleeving wives (mentioned in Ezra 10.3.) (who were not then
sanctified to believers for that purpose) you even loose your self.

But you say, it is a contradiction in one and the selfsame respects, and
have not explaned nor declared what it is a contradiction of; whether of the
New covenant, or of the old covenant, or of both covenants: Therefore declare
plainly, what covenant you think this divorcement in Ezra to be an effect of?
Was it an effect of the New covenant, or of the old? you may know, that neither
covenants did allow them to marry those cursed persons. You ought also to
mind, that one Israelite might be divorced from another Israelite, in the time
of the Law; and this precept was granted and written them by Moses, (Deuteronomy.
24.1.) for the hardness of their hearts, (Mat. 10.5.) But this (in Ezra 10.) was
not a bare grant, but an absolute command; not barely permitted (or granted)
unto them, for the hardness of their hearts, there is more in it then so. For
those wicked persons in whom they formerly took delight, they were forceably to
put away, and it was not left to their liberty, whether they would put them
away or no, but it was an injunction laid upon them, under penalty of Gods
curse; for they perceived Gods heavy wrath was hanging over their heads, ready
to seize upon them, unless there were some speedy redress.

And it evidently appears, that you have not well read (or considered) the
Scripture, for if you had, you would soon have seen a great and weighty
reason, pressing these sons of God to put away these daughters of men, and
those unholy children borne of them, for they (in uniting themselves thus unto
them) had made themselves one with them; yea, they had made themselves one with
the abominable Nations (as appears by Ezra 9.1 compared with Deuteronomy. 7.26.) An
accursed thing, like the accursed thing; And did not separate themselves from
the people of these Lands, doing according to their abominations.

And therefore there was a special cause why the children of those Idolaters,
(in Ezra. 10.3.) should be put away, They were not visibly holy; the wives were
not sanctified unto them, to bring forth a visible holy seed. The holy seed was
mixed: But the Apostle says to the believers, in 1 Cor. 7, 13, 14, 15. That
the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified by the husband; Else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy. But if the unbeleeving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is
not under bondage in such cases, but God has called us to peace.

Now we are to take the holiness and unholinesse, to be a holiness and
unholinesse in reference to visibilitie; for those that were holy visibly,
might be unholy invisibly; and those that were unholy, invisibly, might be holy
visibly. But the Saints of God were not to judge any holy, except they had
cause so to do, and ground of persuasion arising from some visible
demonstration, either from God, or from men, according to the direction of the
Word. The visible holiness of these holy children of believers, here
specified, arose from their visible being in covenant and from the
sanctification of the unbeleeving yoak-fellows to their believing yoak-fellows.
The spiritual uncleannes or unholines which the unholy children had, was in
reference to visibilitie; and so when he speaks of holy children, proceeding
from a sanctified wife, he has reference to visibility; the unbeleevers are
sanctified to the believers, else were the children unclean, but now are they
holy; to wit, in visibilitie; for the ground of the childrens visible holiness
was, first, from the parents being visibly in covenant; Secondly, from the
infants being his children, against whom there was no exceptions, they being
conceived by such a wife, who did not depart from him; and therefore the
children are visibly holy; Thus when the Vines are visibly of the Vine of
Sodom and of the feilds of Gomorrha, the grapes are visibly the grapes of
gall, and their clusters are bitter Deuteronomy. 32.32.
; but when the wife is visibly as a fruitful Vine by the house-side of him
that fears the Lord, the children are (to be esteemed) as Olive plants Psa.
128.3.4
.

A. R.
Thirdly, (say you Page 5. lin. 19. to lin. 35.
) It appears from the Jewish Church State, from whence this successive
holiness and being in the Covenant is concluded to come. The Prosolyte that
was to be brought in, was to circumcise all his males, Exodus 12.48. Where we
may conclude, that his females were included in that time in the males, there
being (say you) no other ordinance of admission for them; Whence (you say) it
will follow, that if the Jews Church State, from whence (you affirm) this
succession of being in the Covenant is derived) does not admit in any
consideration of any lawful being of parents, the one a member of the Church,
the other not, to produce a seed within the old Covenant, that then such a
thing under the new Covenant, cannot be concluded to proceed from that rule,
but (you affirm) the former is true from the ground before laid, and that
therefore the later is also true, and if not from that rule, then from none,
But not from that by consequence of the former argument, therefore from none.

Ans. This is set down obscurely, You say Lin. 19, 20, 21.
, It appears from the Jewish state, from whence this successive holiness and
being in the Covenant is concluded to come? What successive holiness? and
what being? and what Covenant do you here mean? and who are they that make
this conclusion?

It has been proved before, that the people of Israel had two Covenants See
before page 39.
, one established with Abraham Gen 17.
, another long after at Mount Sinai Gal. 3.17.
; But for Confirmation of your speech, you say Lin. 21, 22, 23.
; The Prosolyte that was to be brought in, was to circumcise all his males,
Exodus 12.48. Where we may conclude, that his females were included in that
time in the males, there being (say you) no other ordinance of admission for
them.

Ans. You spoke before of a successive holiness: But what holiness was this
which the Prosolytes had, that were never on the Church before? Was this a
successive holiness? Surely this does not import any other holiness, but what
is by faith in Christ; Wherefore you may see that you have not rightly applied
this place of Scripture to prove your successive holiness: It was faith
professed by the parent that brought in his seed with him; it was not his
being circumcised, but his belief, which was always to go before, even as
faith now is to go before Baptism, and to be professed before a man, or his
seed, is to be admitted to the ordinance of Baptism. Now the Prosolytes were
to circumcise all their males. But we do not read that the Lord did command
the Prosolites to put away their unbeleeving wives, they being married unto
them before, (even when they were Heathens) but they might still retain them,
and have children by them, capable of the ordinance of Circumcision. Whereas
you speak of admission, I think you mean admission to the Passover, for they
made themselves one with the people of God, by believing the promises of God,
which thing they were to do before they were circumcised, and circumcision was
administered afterward, for the sealing and confirming of that faith before
professed.

Now how you understand, that the females were included in the males. I know
not.

Whether do you mean in his male children, or some other males?

If you say, they were included in his male children; Then I put the case, that
he had no males; how then? were his females included in the males that were
not?!

But your speech, (in charity) may have this construction, That seeing the
Lord did command the Prosolyte to circumcise his male children, that very
command did intimate that his female children were in the Covenant, and
according to their capabilitie to assent to Gods ordinance, that it was good
and holy, though they were not to receive it, yet had a right to whatsoever
came in stead thereof. And this being not to be received by them actively, it
must needs be construed that they were employed imputatively: This then was a
great privilege; for without this imputative holiness, they could not be
numbered Isa. 4 3.
among the living in Jerusalem, but rather counted among the uncircumcised
Philistians, neither could they without this imputativenesse be admitted to
receive the Lords Passover Exodus 12.43, 44.47.
? which was a figure of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ our Passover, which
is sacrificed for us 1 Cor. 5.7.
.

But from hence you collect a supposition, and upon your supposition you ground
a position, Your position is, That if the Jews Church state (from whence (you
would have us take notice that you say) this succession and being in the
covenant is derived) does not admit in any consideration of any lawful being
of parents, the one a member of the Church, the other not to produce a seed
within the old Covenant, your position (grounded upon this supposition) is,
that then such a thing under the new Covenant, cannot be concluded to proceed
from that rule.

Now, it would be known, what you mean by parents, whether you mean any
parents whatsoever! or but some only; for it does not follow, that because
some were not admitted, that therefore no unbeleevers were allowed to abide
with their believing yoak-fellowes, for producing of a holy seed in Covenant.

But let us see what proof you have, upon which you ground your supposition
and persuasion.

The former is true (say you) from the ground before laid, and therefore the
latter is also true.

To which I answer; I know not (in particular) what ground you here mean! but
this may suffice that what you have before laid, is answered fully before.

But because you think the former to be true, therefore you conclude, the
later is also true; and (further you say) if not from that rule, then from
none; But not from that by consequence of the former argument, therefore from
none.

Now, I know not what you mean by these words, Do you mean that the former,
and later of this your argument is true, from that Rule, and if not from that
Rule, then from none; but not from that, by consequence of the former Argument,
therefore from none!

Surely you are out here, on either side! Neither do I know what Rule you mean,
nor what, nor whose Argument you mean: Do you mean by that Rule, a Rule of
Scripture; or only some position grounded upon Scripture; you should know that
Ezra 10 3. will not bear out your position, neither will any tittle of
Scripture else; for though the Jews were to put away these wives there
mentioned, yet it does not follow (as you would infer) that therefore the
Church of the Jews allowed not in any consideration, of any lawful being of
some parents (the one a member of the Church, the other not, to produce a holy
seed within the old Covenant,) (though they allowed not of other some.) And
therefore your Argument, both suppositive and positiv^, together with the
ground, is fallen to the ground, and makes nothing against holy Infants being
visibly in the Covenant with their believing parents.

You should know that it is evil to make any Conclusion, [from any Scripture]
which is not concluded thereby, or included therein.

But that the Jews Church state allowed in no consideration of no lawful
being together of parents, the one a member of the Church, the other not, [to
produce a holy seed in Covenant;] is not concluded thereby, nor included
therein; therefore it is evil to make such a Conclusion therefrom.

But if you mean by Rule, the Rule of Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.14. or Exodus 12.48.
You may know, that all this makes nothing for your purpose neither; but is
also directly against you.

Now whereas you lay down, a positive argument, [to confirm your former
speeches,] and cross the same, by saying, and if not from that rule, then from
none, but not from that, etc. therefore from none.

I suppose it is some oversight; Wherefore, I intend not to wade any further
to find out the depth of it, till I see an explanation thereof from you.

But in the mean time, I will give you my conceptions further, concerning
Exodus 12.48 (which is the Scripture cited here by you) and so leave it to your
consideration.

God commanded the Prosolyte, to Circumcise all his males, Exodus 12.48. (to
wit) all his male Infants (and all those males in his house, who in sincere
affection, did desire the ordinance of Circumcision) though his wife (the
mother of those Infants) were neither Jew nor Prosolyte. And his male Infants
[which he had by that woman] were (of necessity) to be circumcised [in their
infancie] and not to be reckoned without, but within the Church of Israel.
Exodus 12.48.
For we read that the Lord commanded him to circumcise all his males; but did
not injoyne him to put away his wife, (which he had before his Conversion)
though she were no believer.

Marriage being honorable amongst all men, Heb. 13.8. Shall we think they
were to break it? An honorable marriage according to Gods ordinance, dissolved
without any just cause, or weighty ground, was a derogating from the first
institution thereof; and such a thing which we never read, that God commanded
or allowed the Prosolytes to do; though their wives could not be persuaded to
become Prosolytes.

Mat. 5.31, 32. and 19.8, 9.
Yea, and though Christ himself (in some case) does allow that a man may put
away his wife; and Paul declares the same in effect, when he says, If the
unbeleever will not abide; a brother or a sister is not under bondage in such
cases (but God has called us unto peace.)

Yea, and although such a divorce, does not argue a hard-heartednesse in the
party offended, nor was condemned (but allowed of) in Christ's time (though it
were done after the manner of Moses) yet touching other divorces, Mar. 10.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
which proceeded from a hard-heartednesse, Christ did not allow of such, but
says, from the beginning it was not so Mat. 19.8.
.

And therefore we are not to imagine, that the Lord did command or injoyne the
Prosolytes (in the time of the Law) to break the bond of matrimony; by
dissolving that marriage which once was honorable, neither ought we to think,
that the conversion, or faith of the one parent, made the marriage which before
was honorable, any more the dishonorable; and if it did not, then we may
lawfully conclude, that they needed not to be married over again, or separated
the one from the other by divorcement, so long as the unbeleevers were content
to abide with their believing yoak-fellowes, but that they were rather to
remain together in love and amity, and bring forth a holy seed in Covenant,
such a seed who were in their infancy to be ranked with the Israelites holy
infants. So for the Prosolytes to claim the privileges of the Jews holy
offspring for his own Infants, though borne of an unbeleever, was no sin in
him, nor contradiction of the new Covenant of God, but the effect of one and
the selfsame Covenant, he being commanded to circumcise them, even all his
male Infants, in which you your self grant that the females were included in
that time.

Now I conceive, that if any of the Prosolytes daughters at his entrance in,
did refuse to come in, she could not be compelled violently, but was still, as
she remained so to be esteemed without, and numbered not amongst the living in
Jerusalem, but the dead in Palestina. And therefore by the same rule, if any of
his male children, (who were at years of discretion) would not be content to
come in with his father, as his father was to reckon him among the
uncircumcised, so was he not to circumcise him, nor compel him to be
circumcised, till he submitted voluntarily; yet if this Prosolyte had male
infants, borne of her that was sanctified to him, though she did not sanctify
him, he was to circumcise them, and to rank his holy infants (both male and
female) among the circumcised Salemites; and to put such a real difference
between them and his disobedient children; as between holy and profane, as
between members of the Church, and not of the Church; as between circumcised
Israelites, and uncircumcised Philistines.

And so the holy Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. teaches all believers to esteem
such Children holy; and directly opposite to those Children, whose unbeleeving
parents are not so much as sanctified to any believer, for procreating a holy
seed: and therefore the Infants of one, or both believing parents, are to be
esteemed holy; and it is a sin to rank them with those infants, whose parents
are not any one of them in Covenant with God, or at least so to be esteemed;
for we have nothing to do with secret things, which belong only unto God; but
things revealed we are to look into, and so to judge of the tree by the fruit;
and in doing thus, we shall not do amiss, or commit sin, because we so judge,
though things fall out afterward contrary to our former expectation, since
those persons declare themselves otherwise then before they did; or that God
discover them unto us to be otherwise, then we were formerly to esteem them.

But to this objection, Page 5. lin. 34 A. R.
That they are here termed holy, and are so to be esteemed. You answer.

Page 5. lin. 36, 37, 38.
That so were the unbeleeving Jews, when they were broken off, Romans 11.16. and
so is the unbeleeving wife in this place; yet neither of these are to be
baptized for their being termed holy; and therefore not Children for their
being here termed holy.

To which I answer, that you do not observe the scope of the Apostles words,
for he would not have us to judge, that those are holy in visibilitie, who are
visibly Apostated, and are cut off; for the Apostle speaking of the Apostate
Jews, says, What shall their receiving be but life from the dead Verse. 15.
? For (says he) if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump; and if the
root be holy; so are the branches Verse. 26.
. Intimating, that those branches are visibly holy, which abide in the Vine,
and Olive tree, and receive nourishment from, and are borne up of the root;
Ver. 17.
And the Apostle declares that those unbeleeving Jews were broken off, and
were not then partaker of that benefit which the believing Gentiles had, by
being grafted in (in stead of the Jews) and so made partaker of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree: Ver. 18.
yea, and further, the Apostle declares the cause of the Jews cutting off,
namely, unbelief; Through unbelief they are broken off; Ver. 19.
and therefore he exhorts the believing Gentiles not to be high-minded, Ver.
20.
but to fear; Ver. 21.
and to take heed, and to behold the bountifulnes, and severitie of God: Toward
them which have fallen; Ver. 22.
Severitie; but (says he) toward thee bountifulnes, if thou continue in his
bountifulnes; or else thou shall be cut off. And they also, Ver. 23.
if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be grafted in: for God is able to
graft them in. So then it appears that the Apostle does teach us, that their
abiding on the Olive tree, does demonstrate them to be holy, (in the appearance
of men.) Howbeit, those are holy, (in the sight of God) who shall be saved,
though they are not (known unto men to be) holy, but ought to be esteemed
unholy in visibilitie. So the incestuous person of the Church of Corinth, (when
he was cut off from them) was by the Church to be esteemed unholy, in
visibilitie; but afterward, when he repented, he was then to be esteemed holy
by those persons who formerly (and rightly according to visibilitie) esteemed
him unholy, even at the time when he fell from his steadfastnesse. And so it is
said, Isa. 4.3.
that he that is left in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, shall be called holy,
even every one that is written amongst the living in Jerusalem: So it
appears, that till we see them to be of the number of those, who are in mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, we are not to esteem them holy: What they are in Gods
secret account, his sacred Majesty knows; but the revealed will of God has
directed us, not to call those visibly holy, who are visibly unholy, (as all
visible unbeleevers are,) nor are we to esteem those unholy outwardly, who are
outwardly holy (as all visible believers are) for the Apostle puts a
difference between branch and branch; between visible believers, and visible
unbeleevers; as we must do between the members of the visible Church, and
those that Apostate therefrom, and are cut off.

But the holy children of believers (in their infancy) cannot justly be said
to Apostate from God or to degenerate from that heavenly state, and holy olive
tree, in which they are by faith ingrafted, and therefore well might the
Apostle teach us, that we are to esteem them holy.

Whereas you say, so is the unbeleeving wife in this place.

I Ans. It is not so, The Apostle says not, that the unbeleeving wife of the
believer is holy, but sanctified, but he declares that the children are holy.

And as for the baptizing of such branches (that are broken off before they are
grafted in again, or the unbeleeving wife, before she be a believer) we plead
not; but allege the contrary; for they are not visibly holy, as you would
infer, but they are unholy in visibilitie, and are not to be esteemed as
written among the living in Jerusalem, but as dead in sins and trespasses, till
they repent, and believe, and live thereby; and so the Apostle says, Romans
11.15.
What shall the receiving of the unbeleeving Jews be, but life from the dead;
But so long as they are spiritually dead, they are not to be esteemed holy, nor
reckoned among the living in Jerusalem Rev. 22.15.
. For as such unbeleevers were not meet to be members of the visible Church, in
the time of the Law, no more are they meet to be members of the visible Church,
in the time of the Gospel; for as the Church of God, both was, and is a
spiritual holy Church, so it has refused (and does and ought to refuse) all
those persons that a^e not living stones, holy, and spiritual; for holiness
(says David) becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever. Psalm. 103.5.

Next, you rehearse a question, What holiness it here meant to the Children?

To which you answer, That it is not that holiness that accompanies faith:
and such holiness only is available to the admittance into the state of the
Gospel, and to have right to Baptism.

To which I answer, that it is to be taken for that holiness that accompanies
faith, and therefore it is available to admit them into the state of the
Gospel, and gives them visible right to Baptism; and this may appear unto
you from the Apostles testimony, which declares that if one of the parents be
a believer, the children are holy, different from those unclean children whose
parents are neither holy, nor sanctified to the holy, to produce a holy seed;
and therefore I conclude, that we are to account the Infants of believers to
have that holiness upon them, which accompanies faith, and gives them visible
right to Baptism; and they are to be judged to be of the number of Gods elect,
as really, as those, are to be judged, who profess faith, and manifest
obedience in their own persons.

And it is further to be minded, that visible Saints, who make a verbal
profession, and walk holily in outward appearance, though we cannot infallibly
tell whether they have faith or no, they are to be baptized, And we are not to
dream that we can discern internally in men, seeing God only knows the
heart, and no man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is
in him; yet where we see a holy verbal profession, and a life and conversation
annexed thereunto, and correspondent therewith, outwardly, though the inward
qualifications be not according to the requiring of the Word, yet we are to
judge them to have that internal true holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord, and also that the Lord has admitted them into the fellowship of
his Son Jesus, and into the state of his Gospel, and that they are as lively
precious stones, as living fruitful plants, and therefore are to be accounted
to have as much right to Baptism, as he that manifests more holiness. So it
is said of Simon magus, Acts 8.13.
that he also believed, and was baptized, and yet afterward when he manifested
evil fruits, Peter said unto him Ver. 21.22.23. Note though Simon Magus was in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, yet he was said before
to believe, and was baptized; And now since, Peter bids him repent, etc.
Which does plainly show, that Peter knew not then but that he might be saved.
, Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter; for thine heart is not right
in the sight of God. Repent, etc. for I perceive that thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And therefore we are to baptize
those whom we are to judge to have holiness internally, though in Gods sight they
have it not; That is to say, Those that have holiness outwardly, are to be
admitted into the outward visible state, and are to have the outward Baptism;
they being to be judged to have the inward graces; as the holy children of
believers have in visibilitie, and so are to be esteemed in the judgment of
charity; which thinks no evil. But what is the reason why you think, that
the holiness ascribed by the Apostle to the children of believers, is not that
holiness that accompanies faith; Is it because they cannot work? Is it so
indeed?! I tell you, that the Scripture teaches us, that those that are of the
faith, (though they cannot work) the same are the children of Abraham Gal. 3.7.
, and that the children of the promise are counted for the seed Gal. 4.28.
, and that Isack was a child of promise in his infancy Ver. 28, 29, 30, 31.
; And that faith and works are different things Romans 4.2.4.
; And therefore though the holy children of believers cannot work yet the Lord
imputes righteousness unto them Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6. Genesis 17.11. Romans
4.11.
without works; And yet we are to mind Phil. 2.12.
, that the Lord would not have his people to cease from working and to be idle,
so long as they are able to work. But when they have neither will, skill, nor
ability, (as many a visible Saint that is in years may want, and yet be no
Covenant-breaker) then the Lord accepts of them, and imputes his
righteousness unto them, as if they had done all the holy works which ever
were done in the world, by any, who were imputed righteous. God is a wise God,
and knows that his Saints can do nothing without him, nor act further then
they have capabilitie, therefore in his mercy he exacteth no more. Good in his
wisdom knew that the Infants of believers were capable of passive Ordinances,
and therefore he instituted the same to be imposed upon them, and administered
unto them; But as for active ordinances which they could not perform, nor had
natural capabilitie to do, God did not require it at their hands, no more
then he did require the Proselytes females to be circumcised, who (as you say)
were employed in the males. And this does in no way eclipse the Glory of
Christ's mediatorship, but advances the free Grace of God, and the
righteousness of Christ, far above all the works in the world. But to affirm
that the infants of believers have not the true holiness, which accompanies
faith, is (in a manner) to darken the Glorious Sun of Righteousness, and the
light of his Gospel, with a meritorious smoke of corrupt doctrine, arising out
of the bottomless pit of sorry man's deceiptfull heart.

But let us hear what you say further for confirmation of your affirmation.

True it is, that in the time of the Law, and state of the Jews, A. R. Page 6.
lin. 5.
and old Covenant, there were some fiderally, and outwardly holy, and outwardly
unclean, and then all men, yea, all things in the world, were distinguished by
this kind of holiness: So the uncircumcised were then unholy, and they of the
Circumcision holy, and might not accompany with the other, Act. 11.3. And
accordingly had they their outward washings and purifications, for these their
outward pollutions: all which were but typical things, and all these and such
like distinctions are now abolished with that State, and quite taken away out
of the world by the coming of Christ; and this is evident by Peter's vision,
Act. 10.11. etc. expounded by himself in the 28. verse, where he says, That
God had showed him, that he should not call any man polluted or unclean:
Whence it is clear, that now all men in the world are as clean as the
Circumcised, and those as polluted in the Gospel-sense as any other; for now
all are as one and alike in Christ Jesus, as may appear by these Texts, Romans
10.11. Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28. and 5.6. And as none then without this legal and
outward holiness, ought to partake of those legal performances and worship,
nor be admitted thereunto, without being first circumcised in the flesh, and so
made legally holy, Exodus 12.48. So now none are acceptable, or ought to partake
of the Gospel, worship and ordinances, without the Circumcision of Christ,
which is of the heart and spirit, Col. 2.11. Romans 2.28, 29. And thi^ ^^ward
spiritual truth, was typified by that outward fleshly shadow: Hence therefore
I will conclude, that the Apostle meant no such kind of holiness in this
place, for the believers children to have. Nor is there any such kind of
holiness now in the world amongst men, nor is this or any other kind of
holiness (save only that true holiness that accompanies the new creature)
available to Baptism.

To which I Answer. All this which you have said here, makes nothing against
the infants of believing parents, forasmuch as they are declared to be holy now
under the Gospel. 1 Cor. 7.14.

The cessation of the ceremonies of the old law, pleads their divine right to
whatsoever came in stead thereof, considering that Christ came not to
impoverish them, but to enrich them; If he took away any ordinance from them,
which was typical, he left them that which is substantial; And the like we
may say, concerning the outward holiness ceremonial, which had still relation
to the covenant and Church of God; which if it were taken from them, shall we
think they were left so naked, and bare, that they had not as substantial
holiness, as they had before; God does not do by holy men, as thieves do by
honest men; even strip them of their ornaments, and so leave them to shift for
themselves, and get other where they can. But our heavenly Father, cares for
all his children in a special manner, both for great and small, for young as
well as old. He takes nothing from them, which he knows is profitable to
them, or beneficial for them; but gives them as great, if not greater in
stead thereof; If he know they have a necessity of it, it is his will and
pleasure they should not be debarred from it. And therefore seeing baptism is
come in stead of circumcision; as holy infants then were to be circumcised, so
holy infants are now to be baptized; And as God declared unto Abraham, saying,
that such infants must needs Genesis 17.13.
be circumcised; so we may know (that baptism being come in the room of
circumcision) such infants must needs be baptized. And therefore as holy
infants then had need of a Savior to come, and therefore were circumcised, in
token that Christ was theirs; so holy infants now have need of Christ come, and
therefore are to be baptized in token that Christ is theirs also.

And may the circumcised accompany now with the uncircomcised* yea surely; and
this is a great plea for holy infants being in covenant, and does really
signify, that it is a visible spiritual holiness which differenceth them now
from heathen infants; considering that God never takes from his people any
thing which differenceth them from other people, but he leaves them the
substance of that type, which substance does difference them spiritually now;
Therefore the Lord calls his people (now under the Gospel) to come out from
among the Idolatrous heathens, and to separate themselves, and not to touch the
unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
and promises that he will be a Father unto them, and that they shall be his
sons and daughters; That is to say, that as he was a father to the families of
the Jews, who were separated from strangers, so likewise is he a Father to the
families of the separated Gentiles, who obey his voice; and as God did
graciously accept of the infants of believers, who were separated from
Idolaters then; so does he accept of the infants of believers, who are
separated from Idollaters now; I will, says he, be a father unto you. Now he
that is a father Isa. 22.21.
to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the house of Judah, he Ver. 24.
bears the holy offspring, and the blessed Issue; even all the glorious
vessels of small quantity. Despise not therefore the infants of believers, for
though in quantity they are small, yet in quality, they are excellent,
therefore suffer the little infants to come unto Christ, Luk 18.16.
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore
considering that they have that holiness, which acompanieth faith, and are in
the state of the Gospel, they have right to baptism, as the holy infants of
the Jews (in the time of the law) had right to circumcision.

And true it is that in the time of the Law, there were some fiderally and
outwardly holy This is to be understood of a ceremonial holiness, for the
members of the visible Church now, are outwardly holy (that is to say) in
visibilitie, without which we ought not to esteem them holy inwardly.
. But they were members of the Church; And it does not argue, that (because
they had ceremonial holiness) therefore they were not spiritual in
visibilitie; the contrary rather appears from what has been before observed.
Again, you should consider, Lev. 5.3, 4, 5.
that there were some who were spiritually clean, and yet in respect of bodily
diseases were unclean; for we are not to think that every one that were
defiled in their bodies, by touching of dead folks, or unclean persons, that
had issues, or leprosy, (or the like) were therefore defiled in their souls,
or rent thereby out of the Covenant, or that they ceased therefore to be
visible members of the Church: No surely; Lev. 4. and 5. and 6.
But yet we are to know, that those who did any of these things presumptuously
were guilty, so that nothing could purify the^ without repentance, yea, when
any sinned but ignorantly, and knowing it, neglected to bring their trespass
offering, their sin was increased, and they were to bear their iniquity, for
remission whereof, more was required then before; yea, if a person were
outwardly polluted accidentally (though he did not defile himself by any act
of his,) he was to be cleansed according to the law of God Lev. 14.^.
, which thing if he did not endeavor to do, it was his sin, and surely it
could not then be taken away by any outward washing, without repentance, See
Lev. 17.16
and laboring to do that which he should have done before; which ceremonial
cleansings and purifications, were to lead them to Christ, who was then to be
manifested in the flesh, and a Savior to save them from their sins, which
the blood of bulls, and goats, and outward washings could not do away Heb.
10.4.
; no more then the outward Baptism, and the Lords Supper, (Gods holy and
blessed Ordinances) will take away our sins now; for Christ's blood is only
effectual for this purpose Rev. 2.5. Heb. 10.5. and 8.14.
; he is the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. Joh. 1.29.

But our chief point is not here about ceremonial circumstantiall shadows;
for we all grant, that the ceremonies of the old law are ceased.

And to argue that (because they were then subject to legal pollution, and
some of them had it,) that therefore they had not the inward and spiritual
cleanness, is a vain and groundless thing so to think; for the Good Lord
was merciful unto every one that prepared his heart to seek the Lord, the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he were not cleansed according to the purification
of the Sanctuary; 2 Chro. 30.18, 19. They had not time to purify themselves,
yet they did eat of the Passover.
that is, though he had not that outward purification which you speak of.

And their purifications and washings (which you mention Page 6. lin. 11.
) they were to teach them the benefit which they had and were to have spiritually
by Jesus Christ. Their circumcision of the flesh Genesis 17.10, 11. Romans 4.11.
also, was to teach them the Circumcision of the heart Deuteronomy. 10.16.
; all which circumstantiall Ordinances, though they are ceased, yet we have the
substance of them in other Ordinances, and that outwardly.

And further, it is to be minded (concerning the people of Israel) that their
conformity unto the Laws of God, did really demonstrate unto men, that they
were spiritually holy; and so now the conformity of Gods people, to the Laws
of God, does give sufficient demonstration of their holiness in the sight of
men, whereby they are to judge them to be communicable persons in a spiritual
way.

And though the uncircumcised were then unholy, (as you speak Page 6. lin. 9.
) yet they were such uncircumcised, who were not to be judged circumcised in
their hearts; and though persons then were circumcised both in heart, and
flesh, and did yield universal obedience to Gods commands, See Lev. 14.8.
yet through some accident they might have a kind of ceremonial defilement,
and yet retain their visible holiness still.

You should also mind, that the people of Israel (after the Law was given in
Mount Sinai) many of them, were uncircumcised in flesh Josh. 5.5.
, yet they were (at the time of their uncircumcision) a holy, peculiar people
unto God, and none were like unto them Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 26.18, 19. and 33.29.
, and therefore your alleging that there was a difference between the
circumcised, and the uncircumcised, and that the circumcised Israelites might
not then company with the uncircumcised Heathens, is of no force against this
truth, even, that the Infants of believers have that holiness which
accompanies faith; Some uncircu^cised persons might be accompanied with, and
some Circumc^sed persons might not be accompanied with.
for though circumcised persons were not to accompany with the uncircumcised,
yet it was meant of those uncircumcised persons, who were aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise; and not
of those who were then members of the Church of God; and therefore it was not
meant of all uncircumcised persons; for then the parents should not have kept
company with their Infants, before they were circumcised, but were to deliver
them to other uncircumcised persons, to keep till the eight day, wherein they
were circumcised; And then the uncircumcised believing Gentiles were not to be
circumcised, by the circumcised, but by the uncircumcised: Which to dream, is
mere foolishness; and therefore it appears that your Collections have no
footing against holy infants.

To the point then; Seeing that the Infants of believers, though uncircumcised,
might be accompanied with (in the time of their uncircumcision) and that by the
circumcised: It evidently shows, that there was a great difference between
them, and the heathen Infants of uncircumcised unbeleevers. And seeing the
uncircum^ised infants of believers, might be lawfully accompanied with, and
were different then from unbeleevers, it is appare^t that they were holy then,
though uncircumcised. And seeing that believers infants (though uncircumcised)
were holy in the time of the Law, and distinguished by their holiness from the
Infants of unbeleevers; and seeing that Jesus Christ is still one, and the
same; and that the ceremonial holiness is ceased; it plainly argues, that when
the Apostle Paul ^aketh (in 1 Cor. 7.14.) of the holy children of believers,
had by a sanctified wife; he means such a holiness which is not ceased, but
remains permanent, and does visibly demonstrate those persons who have it, to
have right to Baptism.

And as Circumcision did not give faith to the Infants of the Church, nor add
the Infants of the Church to the Church, (no more then any other person) but
rather confirm them in it. So Baptism now, does not bring regeneration (or
faith) unto such, (or unto any other persons) as many fondly imagine, neither
does it add them to the Church, but rather confirm them therein.

Touching Peter's vision, which you mention Page 6. lin. 15.
, that God showed him, that he should not call any man polluted or unclean.

It is good to understand in what sense it is spoken; for we may rightly ca^l
all the visible members of Antichrist polluted, let them be what they will be,
high or low, great or small; though they have, and usurp the ordinances of
God, yet they are polluted persons so long as they remain in that estate;
(even as the Apostates in the time of the Law, though they usurped
circumcision, and other Ordinances, yet they were polluted persons) and these
remaining in that sinful estate, they are not clean, neither legally nor
evangelically.

To your inference Lin. 8.
, (from Act. 10.13.) I answer, That in the Gospel sense; those that are
separated from Idolatry, and those that are Idolaters, are not all one in
Christ Jesus; for how can any be said to be in Christ, so long as they are
visibly out of Christ? Wherefore it is to be understood, that as the wicked, of
whatsoever Nation, degree, or sex they be, Romans 2.8, 9. Rev. 22.15.
are all one out of Christ; so, on the contrary, the Saints of God, of
whatsoever Nation, degree, or sex they be, are all one in Christ, Romans
10.11.12.13. Gal. 3.28. and 5.6.

And this shows us to put a visible distinction between those who are visibly
holy, and those that are not. But the infant^ of believers, are visibly holy
(as has been proved before) and therefore we are to judge them in Christ, and
one with him, members of his mystical body, and different from those who are
not visibly holy, but are out of the Covenant.

Whereas you say Page 6. li. 25, 26, 27.
, that so now none are acceptable, or ought to partake of the Gospel, worship,
and ordinances, without the Circumcision of Christ, which is of the heart and
Spirit.

I answer, That one ought to be baptized, before they are circumcised, or
washed spiritually in the heart, (at least so far as may be discerned by men)
neither ought any to presume without the inward, and outward Baptism, to lay
hands upon the rest of the holy institutions of God, which properly and
peculiarly are tied to the Church. And the Proselytes, or believing Gentiles in
the time of the Law, before they were circumcised in the flesh, they were to be
circumcised in their hearts; and before they did partake of the Passover, (a
figure of Christ's body) they and their holy seed were to be Exodus 12.48.
circumcised in flesh, as well as in heart; which participation in the
Ordinances then, was not to be limited only to the outward fleshly shadow, no
more then our partaking of Baptism, or the Lords Supper now, ought to be only
limited to the outward elements, of Water, Bread, and Wine. But as for the
Infants of believers, they ought to be judged to have the circumcision of
Christ, which is of the heart and Spirit, (as has been formerly proved, and
shall be further showed,) and therefore it is apparent, that they are
acceptable, and may lawfully have the Ordinance of Baptism imposed upon them;
for they being proved to be members of the visible Church of Christ, it
appears, that they are to be judged in Christ, and new creatures, and that
therefore the true holiness accompanies them, And this being so, what then
will follow, but that according to your own confession, they have right to
Baptism.

Further you say; If it be objected, that in respect of Justification, Page 6.
lin. 3^
it avails nothing, but to Baptism it may.

To this you Answer Lin. 37. to Page 7.
, That that which avails to Justification and salvation, does according to
the Rule, only avail to Baptism; for if thou beleevest with all thy heart,
thou art justified, Act. 13.39. and shall be saved, Act. 16.31. and may be
baptized upon the same, and no other grounds, Act. 8.37.

To which I Answer; As is the objection, so is your answer, without
distinction: for there is a difference between justification in the sight of
God, and justification in the sight of men; By the Word persons must be
justified, and by the Word they must be condemned.
All those persons who are outwardly holy, may be justified in the sight and
apprehension of men, and ought to be baptized upon this ground, though their
heart (known only to God) be (like the heart of Simon Magus) not upright in
the sight of God. But the holy Word of God, is our Rule whereby we are to judge
both believers and their infants (now under the Gospel) to be in covenant,
regenerated, sanctified, and adopted unto God; the children of the promise in
their infancy (as the infants of believers were in former time.) And upon this
very ground, the Infants of believers now may lawfully be baptized, as the
infants of believers (who were members of the Church in the time of the Law)
were lawfully circumcised.

To the objection Page 7. lin. 1, 2.
, That all that were baptized by the Apostles themselves, were not saved, etc.
You answer.

And say Lin. 3. to lin. 15.
you do grant, that all baptized by the Apostles were not saved, and yet deny
the consequence, by distinguishing between the rule, by which they are to be
baptized, (which is infallible) and the judgments of men, who are failable,
and may be deceived in applying this rule; but it follows not, but that the
rule being of God, is still as infallible as God himself is; for all that
believe, shall be saved (which is true as God himself is true) yet all who are
judged by believers to believe, do not believe, and therefore are not saved.
This failing then here is not in the rule, but in their judgments, who are but
men, and can judge only in the outward appearance, (by their f uits ye shall
know them) Mat. 7.16 And cannot judge as God, who only knows the heart, 1 Samuel 16.17. Jer 17.10.

Ans. Though this by construction, may be without contradiction, yet it may
have a little further explanation, thus:

That though the Saints do judge by the infallible rule, concerning persons,
yet if they alter their judgment, according as the persons alter, they sinn^
not in the alteration of their opinion, because the infallible rule does still
guide their judgments: As for instance:

The infallible rule, does direct our judgments to look upon all the members
of the visible Church, to be in the state of salvation; So the Disciples of
Christ esteemed highly of Judas, as indeed the infallible rule directed them;
but when once he discovered himself not to be that in ^ff^ct, which before he
was in appearance, then they were directed by the infallible rule, to alter
their judgments without fail.

Further: in stead of these words; Yet all who are judged by believers to
believe, To judge of persons according to the infallible Rule, is righteous
judgment; in which the judgers must lay aside all partiality.
do not believe; It may be construed thus; That all who are rightly judged (or
ought to be judged) by believers to believe, do not believe; For there is a
difference, between what persons do, and what they should, or ought to do. And
persons judging as they ought, though their judgment is alterable, yet as the
Rule is not failable, neither is their judgment by it sinful; but righteous,
holy, just, and lawful judgment.

This being construed thus, and so taken, I assent thereunto.

But as for your following inference, I abhor, and detest from my very soul.

Your words are these: A. R.
Page 7. li. 15. to lin. 25.
But in the baptizing of infants, the case is far otherwise, yea, quite
contrary, who will or can fail in judging an infant to be an infant; the
failing therefore here is in the Rule it self, and so the fault and sin in
the appointer of such a deceivable Rule: This therefore cannot be of God, who
is truth it self, but must be of man; For let God be true, and every man a
liar. And when does he show himself more vainly to be so, then when he goes
about to set his p^sts by Gods posts; and when he teaches for doctrines, his
own vain and lying traditions, such as this is.

Ans. Groundless positions and false inferences there from, are frequent with
you; your words import, that in the baptizing of infants, because none can
fail in judging an infant to be an infant, that therefore the layling is in
the Rule it self; and therefore you conclude, it cannot be of God, but of man,
a vain tradition!

The like might be said of the Circumcision of infants, in the time of the Law,
that because they could not fail in their judgments, in judging infants to be
infants, that therefore the circumcision of infants was not of God, but of man,
a vain tradition! and the rule was not infallible!

But you may know, that for believers to impose the sign Genesis 17.11.
and seal Romans 4.11.
of the righteousness of faith, upon their children (in their infanci^) was
good, lawful, and warrantable Exodus 12.48. Baptism is to us as Circumcis^on
was to the Jews.
, directed by the infallible rule of Gods Word; which rule was never yet
abrogated; therefore it stands in force, and is not a vain tradition; and
seeing God himself administered Baptism upon infants, before the Law was given
in Mount Sinai; how dare you say, it is not of God?

Next after this, you cast your eye upon an Author, A. R.
whom you See Page 7. lin. 25, 26.
call, A l^arned and able Author of our times; whose expression (you say) you
cannot but take notice of.

Ans. It may be, you call him learned, and able, because (as you say) he
confesses himself unconvinced of the lawfulness of the Baptism of infants,
by demonstration of Scripture for it. And yet he takes the Baptism of infants
to be one of the most reverend, general, and uncontrouled traditions which the
Church has, and which he would no less doubt of, then the Creed to be
Apostolical.

And upon this belief and confession of his, you Paraphrase In lin. 31. to
Page 8.
, saying, No more would I doubt thereof, if I could be convinced by any
demonstration of Scripture for it: But seeing demonstration of Scripture,
neither to us is, nor by him can be produced for it, I do and must remain
still unconvinced with him, and must needs take it to be a mere humane device.

To which I answer, That the doubting conscience cannot be satisfied, unless
God do it by his Word, or Spirit, but if the Lord do open your eyes, and give
you sight to apprehend, and comprehend this light, then in it you shall see
clearly this truth, even the lawfulness of the Baptism of holy infants. But
if God do not by his Spirit open your heart, the tongue of men and Angels
cannot convince you, but you must still remain unconvinced. But how can you
expect that this Author (whom you call Mr. Daniel Rogers) should produce
Scripture for the Baptism of Infants, while he is (as he says himself)
unconvinced of it by demonstration of Scripture, except you did expect that he
should have played the hypocrite, and so have gone against his Conscience; you
should know, that Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

And it does not argue (as you infer) that (because no demonstration of
Scripture is brought by him) that therefore none at all is brought to you, by
those who are convinced of it by the authority of Scripture. This cannot be
true which you affirm, considering the many Scriptures which you acknowledge
have been alleged for to prove the Baptism of infants; The demonstration
whereof has been sufficiently showed unto you, and therefore if you take it
not for satisfaction, you may remain unsatisfied, and still unconvinced,
(though convicted) with your alleged Author, and take it (or rather mistake
it) (as you esteem it) for a mere humane device.

But further you say; A. R. Page 8.
Nor is this Author alone, in deeming the Baptism of infants a traditions, for
many of the Ancients with him have so declared it.

Origin calls it a Ceremony or Tradition of the Church. In Levit. hom. 8. in
Epist. ad Romans lib. 5.

Augustine calls it a Common Custom of the Church. De baptismo contra Dona.
lib. 4. cap. 23. Et de Genesi ad literam. lib. 10. cap. 23.

To which, I say, that things may be traditionall, and c^mmonly, and
customarily practiced, and yet have sufficient ground and warrant in the
Scripture.

Origin.
But in citing Origin, you do not tell us, what he says in the same Epistle,
(to wit) that the Church received Baptism of infants from the Apostles.

Augustine.
And in citing Augustine, you do not declare what he says ( in contra
Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 23, 24.) that the Baptism of Infants was not derived
from the authority of man, or Counsels, but from the tradition or doctrine of
the Apostles.

But next of all you say, Erasmus Lin. 9
, lib. 4. de Ratione Concio, says, that they are not to be condemned that
doubt whether Childrens Baptism were ordained by the Apostles, etc.

To which I answer; No more will I condemn those who in weakness do doubt of
the Baptism of Infants, but rather pity them, and pray for them, and labor,
(as the Apostle bids us concerning those that are fallen through infirmity)
To restore them with the spirit of meekness. But when their sin comes to
such a height, The obstinate, though ignorant, are to be rejected, when they
reject the truth.
that they resist the truth, and run on wilfully, and blasphemously, with a
leaprous headines, and that against the Scripture, and the very light, and law
of reason, and will not hear good Counsel, nor receive wholesome instruction;
then they are not to be borne with, but condemned.

Whereas you say further, that Ekius Lin. 12.
calls (the Baptism of Infants) a Commandment and ordinance of man; In
Echiridion.

I answer, You should know, that it is a Commandment, and ordinance of God, In
the Scripture.

Whereas you produce the Papists Lin. 15.
, and the Authority of Counsels Lin. 23:
(to jump with you, and your first learned Author, cited by you, against the
Baptism of Infants,) to prove it not to be warranted in the Word, but grounded
upon tradition, and not upon the Scripture.

I answer; It evidently appears, that these your erroneous conceptions, and
peremptory conclusions, are builded upon a sandy foundation. I pray you, tell
me; How can they believe a thing by Scripture, that judge the Fathers above the
Scripture?

And as you thus bring humane unsufficient Testimony, to prove the Baptism of
Infants, to be a humane invention; so you do the like in laboring to make
known the time when it was invented, a mere dream! and vain conceit of
your own! a thing far above your reach! And you would by your humane
Authors, bear your Auditors in hand, as if the Baptism of infants, were
invented some hundreds of years after Christ; which is neither certain,
probable, nor possible; and yet you cite other humane Authors for it, whose
historical relations (as you have set them down) have no bottom upon truth,
and therefore are to no purpose against the Baptism of holy Infants. And
therefore your citing them, makes nothing for your purpose neither. But you
ought rather in this to mount above humane testimony, and leave these your two
cited Authors to reconcile themselves;) Go to the Law, and to the Testimony
Isa. 8.29.
, (for whatsoever is not according to that, has no light in it) and there see
what time the baptism of infants was administered; I think that Circumcision
of infa^ts was not invented, nor administered before the Baptism of infants.
As for the time of the invention thereof, I will not intermeddle, or take upon
me to determine at this time; forasmuch as it is sufficient for us to know,
that God is the Author and instituter of it; the administration whereof was in
the Cloud, and in the Sea, not long after the Israelites came out of the Land
of Egypt, But it was before the Law was given in Mount Sinai many hundred
years before Jesus Christ was manifested in the flesh; and therefore your new
account is too short a weapon to undermine Gods holy administration of Baptism
upon his Redeemed ones; 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.
Such as the Israelites were, whom he brought out of the Land of Egypt, and
baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

Further, you cite more humane Authors, (to speak your pleasure) against the
baptism of infants, as if it were thrust upon the world Page 8. lin. 37.
, under color, and pretense; foysted Page 9 li. 1, 2.
in (say you) like all other Antichristian devices, have their cloakes and holy
pretenses.)

I answer; These are rude words, and words that we may rather admire at, then
embrace, considering what little ground you have to speak them, and how
violently you have wringed them from humane testimony, builded also upon
mistakings of humane Authors. Have you no more fear of God in you, then upon
such slight grounds, so publicly to break out, and that in such unseemly
terms, against the Baptism of Infants, Gods holy and blessed Ordinance? Now
surely, you are not to be justified, but condemned in your presuming thus to
affirm, what you cannot prove; and laboring sacrilegiously to take away the
visible badge of Christianity from Christian Infants. Consider what a
dangerous thing it is to diminish from Gods Word; Rev. 22.19.
He that takes away therefrom, God shall take away his part out of the book
of life, etc. And with this consider also what ground you have had, for your
evil persuasion, unjust calumniation, and sinful affirmation. You should
know, that the Baptism of Infants was not brought into the world by man, much
less was it thrust upon the world, under color, and pretense, and
Antichristian-like, foysted in, (as you unjustly affirm) but God in his love,
and mercy, and bountiful liberality, brought it into the world, amongst other
privileges, for his Elects sake, and did not thrust it upon the world, (as you
speak) but ordained it in an orderly way, to be imposed upon his Church and
People; whose visible holiness gave them right unto it; And he did not bring
it under color, and pretense, as the Anabaptists do their Baptism, in
administering Baptism upon People, and then telling them, it is right, and
afterward that it is wrong, (and that they must therefore be baptized again,
by them in another manner,) and so after they have been baptized by them again
and again, they after a while are restless again and unsatisfied, because he
who baptized them, was unbaptized himself upon their own grounds, Nor can they
believe there is any baptized rightly in the world. And so they know not upon
their own grounds, what to do, or how to practice any Ordinance of the New
Testament.

These their Baptismes (I may say) are rather to be accounted as thrustings,
colorable pretenses, and foystings, (and the like,) then the Baptism of holy
Infants, which was brought into the world by the Wonderful Counselor, whose
mighty power is to be magnified in all his noble acts; who saved Noah and his
family in the Arc, (when all the world of unbeleevers, both young and old,
perished with the Flood Genesis 7.
;) Which figure answers the baptism that now is 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
; who baptized the Children of Israel in the Cloud, and in the Sea 1 Cor. 10.1,
2.
; When Pharaoh and his H^st were overwhelmed with the mighty waters Exodus 14.28.
; who (according to his blessed promise Deuteronomy. 18.15.
, made unto his People) sent his blessed Son Jesus Christ, (our Emanuel Mat.
1. and 2.
) into the world, to bear our sins, and to suffer death for us, and put an
end to our iniquities; Who was buried, and rose again the third day, according
to the Scriptures 1 Cor. 15.4.
; And at his Ascension into the bosom of his blessed Father, he gave
Commission to his Disciples, to teach all Nations Mat. 28.19.
and to preach the Gospel to every creature Mar. 16.15, 16.
; and to baptize those who were to be esteemed in the state of salvation; Who
(when his earthly tabernacle dwelt amongst us) declared that the kingdom of
heaven consists of such holy infants Luke 18.17.
, for whom he prayed earnestly Joh. 17.20, 21, 24.
, upon whom he laid his own holy hands Mat. 19.15.
, pronouncing them blessed with his own mouth Mar. 10.16.
. Wherefore you show your self very ignorant, and exceeding presumptuous, that
dare (with open face in the view of the world,) so far to deny Christ, (in a
manner,) as to say that his Ordinance of Baptism, (administered upon holy
Infants,) is such a thing, which (by a supposed help of frail man) you have
declared it to be.

Consider further, how that although all these Ancient Fathers whom you have
cited, were on your side. And though you should cite many more, in Antiquity
far surpassing the other, yet all is vain which you do, yea, properly vanity
without the Scripture, and as it is to no edification, so it will give no
satisfaction, or information to the ^oubting soul, or make any thing for
strengthening your error; (though it may harden you and other seduced in it)
but it will be a means rather to add grief, and vexation to your spirit, at
the day when you must give up your account, for all your idle words, vain
actions, and hard speeches, when it will be little available to sly to these
mountains to hide you from the wrath of the Lamb; whose word shall judge
these fathers whom you have cited, by which they shall be justified or
condemned; when they shall not judge it, or condemn it, (as Heretics formerly
have done,) but be judged by it.

I have not told you that Auxertius, (one of the Arians Sectaries, with his
adherents, (who denied the persons in the blessed Triniti^, and deni^d the
Godhead of Jesus Christ,) was one of the first that denied the baptism of
Infants.

And that Pelagius the Heriticke was a patron of this opinion of yours. Whom
Augustine and others of the Ancient Fathers, have opposed by the Scriptures,
and condemned for heresy, as justly they might; for then it may be you would
say, that Augustine was an Heretic himself as well as the rest, and
therefore the citing of him (or any such as he was) can make nothing for our
present purpose, in clee^ing the case in controversy; for indeed, after this
manner, did Mr. Smith (the Anabaptist,) answer Mr. Clifton, who was his
opposite and overthrew his errors.

But indeed I desire that all things may be tried by the touchstone of the Word
of God, which is the only rule for every divine action, which directs us to
hold fast that which is good, and to judge of persons and causes accordingly.

Th^rfore I desire that what has bin spoken already in answer to your several
objections, and what has been also gathered from the word of truth (in
vindication of this truth, of the baptism of holy Infants) may be observed.

It has been declared how the promise is made to all believers Infants, as
really, as to themselves, or any of their children See before in Page 3. to
Page 15.
.

It has been proved, that the general institution of Jesus Christ, is no
manner of way l^sse general Page 15. to page 24.
then circumcision, but more general in respect of the parties upon whom it is
to be administered.

It has been minded Page 24. to page 64.
, how that the Infants of believers were holy, and members of the visible
Church in the time of the Law, and that neither the cessation of the ceremonies
of the old Law, nor any thing else, which can be alleged, does argue that they
have not still the true ^^linesse which gives them visible right to Baptism.
But seeing the dispensation of Gods gifts, and the distribution of his graces,
are multip^yed under the G^spel, we are still to esteem the young Olive pla^ts
of believing parent^ to be holy, as well as the stock or branches upon which
they grow. And it being so, we may conclude, that they have right to holy
Baptism, as their holy parents have. And to debar the holy infants of
believers from Baptism, is to reject them, and so (in a manner) it is a
rejection of their holy parents; a means of their discouragement; a weakening of
their faith; a discomforting of their hearts; yea, and discouragement to others.

But Truth overcommeth all things, it is great, and will prevail against all
that oppose it.

Thus having answered directly to what has been set down by you, I proceed to
the next.

Your next words are these: But now to the Question; A. R. Page 9. lin. 21.
What is meant by the holiness which children are said to have, 1 Cor. 7.14.
In answer whereto, I shall show only what I conceive it to be, and then leave
it to the judgment of the wise.

Answer. If you mean the holy children of believing parents, (spoken of 1 Cor.
7.14.) Let us hear what you say.

I say then it is only such a holiness, A. R. Lin. 25.
as is opposite to some kind of uncleanness, which I take to be this, as if
when they are said to be holy, it is no more then to say, they are not
unclean, (to wit) no Bastards.

To which I answer; That you are greatly mistaken herein, There is no such
restriction in the Scripture, as you conceive, and would gather from thence;
for it is apparent, that when the Apostle says to Believers (1 Cor. 7.14.)
Else were your children unclean; he means here such an uncleanness, 2 Cor.
6.
which he speaks of in 2 Cor. 6.17. Which uncleanness, the Saints are bidden
not to touch; I will dwell in them, and walk in them; Ver. 16. Ver. 17. Ver.
18. The Apostle speaks to the same people, uses the same Scripture Phrase,
in applying the precious promises. And does in no way exclude, but include
their posterity. For confirmation whereof, see the practice of Peter in Act.
2.39.
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from
amongst them, and be ye separated, says the Lord, and touch not the
[uncleane] thing, And I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

Observe here, how that this uncleanness is directly opposed to the holiness
which those have who are in covenant with God; who always did put a difference
between the holy and profane, between the infants of the world, and the
infants of the Church. And so the Apostle (speaking in the Scripture language,)
calls the children of Believers holy: Else were your children unclean,
(says he,) but now are they holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children
bastards (say you) but now are they no bastards. This, you conceive, is the
meaning of that Scripture: But you should mind, that the Proselytes in the
time of the Law, and the believing parents in the time of the Gospel, who were
formerly unbeleevers, Heb. 13.4.
were not all bastards: and legittimacie is not a thing peculiar to believers
but unbeleevers may have it. But when the Apostle speaks of a holiness,
which the children of believers have, it is that which is peculiar unto the
Saints of God, and not common to Infidells, who are without God in the world,
and not to be communicated with.

You should mind, that the Apostle speaks in the heavenly language of
Canaan, in the Scriptures ordinary phrase; giving the believers infants such a
style, which the holy Spirit of God has given them; (according as it is
plentifully manifested in the Scriptures of God,) and which he has not given
and granted unto unbeleevers infants. There is no place of Scripture, which
declares them to be holy: Wherefore we may conclude, that there is a great
deal of difference between the infants of believers, and the infants of
unbeleevers; and that the uncleanness of the one, Rev. 22.11. 1 Cor 6.14.
is opposed to the holiness of the other, as darkness, is opposed unto light.
As Idolaters, are (said to be) opposed to those that are separated from them
Ver. 15, 16, 17, 18.
. And so the Jews (separated from Idolaters) were all holy, both young and
old, and Gods separated peculiar people Deuteronomy 29.10. and 14.1, 2.
; The Lord was their God, and they were his people, and he dwelt in the midst
of them Levit. 26.11, 12.
, and sanctified them unto himself Exodus 31.13. Psalm. 135.4.
, and gave unto them his blessed Oracles Romans 3.2.
, and holy Ordinances: yea, and the Gentiles also, who had like precious faith
with the Jews, were then made partakers of the like precious privileges with
them; which extended unto their infants Exodus 12.48.
, as well as to the infants of the Jews. Therefore as the infants of the Jews
were holy, so were the infants of the Proselytes, (or belee^ing Gentiles.)

And forasmuch as the distribution of Gods gifts (under the Gospel) are larger,
then they were under the Law; the infants of believers now, Ephe. 3.5, 6.
have the same spiritual privileges, as the infants of believers had th^n;
and have the same precious holiness, which is available to B^ptisme; and
therefore we may conclude, that when Christ came to die for their sins, he
came not to destroy their soul^s, and so to r^b them, to p^yle them, to make
them spiritual bank^outs, to take from them his righteou^ness, and leave them
to be clothed with their own righteousness; But surely, we may rather conclude,
that Christ [as he was once himself an infant, of a believing par^nt,
according to the flesh] so he loves the infants of believers, Luke 2.7.16. and
18.17.
because they are Subjects of his kingdom. And as he suffered for them, so he
does not only come unto them, but cast his garment of righteousness over
them, and dwell with them, and abide in them; Isa. 22.21.
and is a father unto them, as he was to the Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem. Our God is a God of truth, and therefore he will not deceive his
people, nor break his Covenant which he has made with them; which Covenant is
to his Saints thus; I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed Genesis 17.7.
; I will be their God Ver. 8.
: So says the Spirit of Truth, who will not, (nor cannot) lie; Who for
strengthening of his peoples faith, and increasing of their comfort, that their
hearts in loving him, might be enlarged, and their joy in delighting in him
might be full; he did command a visible sign and seal of the rig^t^ousnesse
of faith, to be imposed upon them, and upon their seed, whose G^d he had
testified himself to be.

Now those persons to whom God is a God, they are blessed in a special manner
Psalm. 33.12.
, and he is a father unto them Esa. 9.6.
; and those persons to whom God is a God, and a Father, are separated from
Idolaters, and are a holy 1 Cor. 7.14. 2 Cor. 6.17.
peculiar people unto him, directly opposed to those who are unclean Rev.
22.11.15 Isa. 52.11. Rev. 21.7, 8.
, and out of the Covenant. But God is a God, and a Father to the infants of
believing parents now, as he was formerly; [for his holy Covenant is sure] and
therefore such infants, (even the holy off spring, and blessed issue of the
blessed) are all the sons, and daughters of God; and are to be accounted
amongst the number of separated Saints, in covenant with him; for he has
promised to be a God and a father unto the believing Gentiles (2 Cor. 6.18.) as
he was unto the believing Jews, (Genesis 17.7. Jer. 31.1.) Concerning whom the
Lord says, Their children shall be as aforetime, Jer. 30.20. Jer. 30.20.
whose holiness is directly opposed to the Idolatry, of those Idolaters, which
the Lord commands his blessed Saints to sep^rate from, and is quite contrary
to this uncleanness, which unbeleevers, and their infants have; who though
they are not bastards, yet they are unholy, because they are out of the
Covenant, and God is not their God, nor father, to hallow the^, as he is to the
holy children of believing Gentiles, and as he was to the holy children of the
Jews, in covenant with him.

Thus the Contents of your exposition being not right, we may justly conceive,
that all the Scripture which you bring to confirm it, will be wrong in the
application; and your grounds false. But let us hear further what you say.

A. R. Lin. 29. A. R. Lin. 30.
And I will show my ground by my thus opening the Text.

The believing Corinthians both men and women, married and single, do join in
a Letter to the Apostle for resolution of many of their doubts touching their
several conditions, this appears in the first verse, and thence to the 12 and
their doubts in this particular, and which he answers in the five verses
following, seems to be this in effect, as if they should thus write; we being
borne anew, and made the Sons and Daughters of God ^y Faith in Jesus Christ:
and being made holy by his spirit, and taken into Communion and fellowship with
Jesus Christ, and his Saints in light, from an estate of darkness and death,
from being Idolaters, and Children of the Devil, have very uncomfortable
cohabitation and felloship with our wives and husbands, remaining still in
their natural and blind condition, so far different from the estate into
which we are now brought: Surely our holy God that bids us touch no unclean
thing, does not allow us thus to do: And we f^are least we have done very ill
in continuing thus so long, for our Marriage we cannot think but it was
dissolved when we first believed: And we ought then to have put away our
wives as the Jews di^ their strange wives; and unto this the Apostle begins
his answer in the 12. verse thus; And unto the rest (to wit, of your doubts)
speak I, not the Lord, If any Brother have a wife that believes not, if she be
content to dwell with him, let him not put her away, And the woman that has a
husband that believes not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him: for the unbeleeving husband is sanctified to the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the believing husband, else were your
Children unclean, but now they are holy.

As if the Apostle should have said to them thus, you Corinthians do doubt of
your co^abitation with your unbeleeving married yoke-mates, of ^hic^ t^^re is
no cause, for to the pure all things are pure (that is, all l^^^ull (...))
(namely, whatsoever is lawful in nature or civil use) is (...) to the
believer, and yet even those things are impure to the imp^^e, or u^bel^^ving,
for even their minds and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. But to the
Bel^ever, all things are pure, (that is, as I have alrea^y said) all lawful
things, for things that are unlawful in themselves c^^^^t be sanctified by ^^e
faith of a tru^ B^lee^er, no not to his use; but m^^t be l^f^ and (...) as
si^full and wi^k^d, which if your cohabitation were such as you i^ w^ak^^sse
judge, then ^as not your marriage lawful at the first, then it is not lawful
nor sanctified to y^u now, as you judge it is not, and then are your children
unclean: But if your marriage were at first lawful, then your Cohabitations
now with your ^oke-mates is likewise lawful, and then also sanctified to you
now by your believing, else were your children unclean (that is) unlawfully
begotten and Bastards, but now are they holy (that is) Legitimate and no
Bastards.

Ans. Here has been many words to little purpose, as appears by your own
Conclusion; for the Tenor of all is, that which you have affirmed before Pa^.
9. lin. 26, 27.
, which is your Conclusion now P^^. 10 lin. 31, 32.
. As if the Apostle should say, Else were your Children unlawfully begotten,
and bastards, but now are they legitimate, and no bastards; A very poor
collection, or rather restriction of the Apostles words! But that this
restriction is in the Text, we must take it upon your bare word; for you have
brought no Scripture, which any way clears this your Affirmation. But it has
been proved before, that the Apostle means a religious holiness; a holiness
in relation to faith, and to the holy Covenant of God; in which C^venant,
b^l^evers and their infants are now, under the Gospel. And this may further
appear unto you by these Considerations.

First, That the Apostle (in this place of Scripture) speaks not of all
infants, but only of the infants of believing parents in Co^enant; for he does
not say to unbeleevers, that their children are holy, neither does he direct
his speech unto any unbeleever, but unto believers; wherefore this principally
concerns believers, that they might know the privioidges, which appertain
unto them and their seed, according to the covenant of God, G^n. 17.7, 8.
which declares that God will be their God.

Secondly, The Apostle does not say that the [unbele^vi^^] ^^^band or wife
sanctifies the [beleeving] husband or wife, but the ^^^^leeving wife is
sanctified in the believing husband, and the unbeleeving husband in the
believing wife; (that is to say, in consideration that ^^e is h^ sanctified
yoak-fellow;) Where we are to note, that though the unbeleeving wife have a
privilege to be sanctified in her believing husband, yet not to sanctify her
believing husband; nor has the unbeleeving husband, any privilege to
sanctified is (believing) wife. Nor does it need (in this case) for believers
are holy without them; though their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes are not
sanctified without them.

Thirdly, We are to note from the Apostles words, Else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy: That because the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified to the believing husband, or the unbeleeving husband to the
believing wife, therefore the children are holy, else not.

Fourthly, We are to take notice that the cause of the sanctification of the
unbeleeving wives (or that which made them to be so sanctified) was two things.

Frist, Their abiding.

And Secondly, Because their yoak-fellowes were believers, if her yoak-fellow
be a believer else she cannot be so sanctified to the believer, for that that
is not, cannot be said to be.

Fifthly, The Ap^stle treats of holiness; which we are to take for that
excellent spiritual holiness, which becomes the Lords House, even such a
holiness which Abraham and his infants had. Which holiness gives the persons
who have it, visible right to the covenant of Grace, and scales thereof. The
Apostle speaks of holiness, and does no way lesson it, and therefore
considering what the infants of bell evers have been, and what Christ has done
for them, we may well understand that the holiness which they have now, is a
holin^ss^ in relation to the covenant and Church of God.

Sixthly, It evidently appears from the Apostles words, that we may safely
conclude, that such children (spoken of here) are different from heathens; for
the unbeleeving wife had not that privilege to bring forth such a holy seed
unto a heathen. And so the like may be said for the unbeleeving husband, that
he could not beget a holy seed of her that was an unbeleeving wife, but it is
peculiarly bound up in the believing yok^fellow. Therefore the childeren of one
(or both) believing parents are h^ly indeed, taking the Scripture in the
largest extent.

Seventhly, If the Apostle had said to the believers, that their children were
unholy, nevertheless, you might still have made such a collection, as you have
here, (to wit) that he means that they are no Bastards, but legitimate; for
the legitimate children, whose parents are neither of them believers, are
unholy; and yet they have your holiness (to wit) that which evidenceth them to
be no Bastards. Wherefore that the Apostle Paul me^neth such a holiness, which
you speak of we may not in reason conclude; but the contrary, as has been
observed before, (na^ely) that the Ap^stl^ means a holiness directly
opposite to th^^ (...) spoken of 2 Cor. 6.17. And also in this place, 1 C^^.
7.14. When he says, Else were your children unclean, but now are (...). But
you (in giving the sense according to your sense, or understanding) say it is
thus; Else were your children Bastards, but now are they no Bastards!

And further you say; And that this is the genuine sense of this place, A. R.
Page 10. lin. 33.
may further and clearly appear by the general scope of the Apostle in the
20, 21, 22, 23. verses following in the same Chapter, where he after he had
resolved the married Believers not to depart from their lawful yoke-mates, he
then in these verses exhorts Servants and all others, to abide likewise in the
lawful callings wherein they were before their Conversion, and seems to tell
them in effect thus much; That their being converted to the faith, did in no
wise release them from any lawful Covenants and civil duties in their
several relations wherein they stood before, but bound them to a more due
performance of all such obligements toward all men, but in point of Religion
and worship of God, therein they were not to be in subjection to any, save
only to Jesus Christ, who had therefore bought them with a price.

Ans. All which you have said here, makes nothing for your purpose, for
vindication, illustration, or confirmation of your strange restriction of the
Apostles words; but rather makes against you, for as much as the Apostle
desires every believer to abide in the same calling wherein he was called. So
that the believing married persons had no need to put away their unbeleeving
yoak-fellowes, for as much as the Lord allowed them to abide together, and that
the unbeleeving yoak-fellowes were so sanctified for producing a holy seed;
Else were your children unclean, (says the Apostle) but now are they holy.
But you pretend that you gathered your interpretation (Else were your children
Bastards, etc.) from the general scope of the Apostle in the 20, 21, 22, 23.
verses following of the same Chapter.

The words therefore I will repeat at large, because you shall see that here is
nothing in these verses, which you pretend, or by which you have any occasion
to urge what you do.

Ver. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Ver.
21. Art thou called being a servant, care not for it? but if thou may be
made free, use it rather. Ver. 22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lords freeman: Likewise also he that is called being free, is
Christ's servant. Ver. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants
of men.

Now consider what ground you had to build such an affirmation, that the
Apostle in speaking of holiness, (1 Cor. 7.14.) does not mean a holiness in
relation to faith, and that where he says, Else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy; he means, else were your children bastards, but now
are they no bastards!

What title of Scripture is here to warrant these your vain conceits, in thus
opposing holy infants? Or upon what reason do you ground these unreasonable
collections? Is it because the Apostle says, that the called of the Lord, are
the Lords freemen, the Lords servants, and are bought with a price? Surely,
this makes nothing against holy infants being in Covenant; for they are bought
with the same price. Christ came not to damnifie them, but to dignifie them;
not to make them loosers, but gainers. And all this is wrought by him, in whom
is all fulness, and no emptiness; riches and no poverty; life, and no
death; He it is that came to give himself a ransom for them.

But you would infer, that because believers are exhorted by Paul to perform
their civil Covenants, and lawful Contracts which they have made with men,
that therefore it appears that the gloss which you gave upon the Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 7.14. is a true interpretation. What weight is in your words? let
any one that has sense and reason judge; For the like might have been objected
in the time of the Law, against the infants of the Church then, whom the Lord
did call and sanctify, and cause to approach near unto him; that because the
parents, and others, were to perform their Conditions and bargains, which they
made each with other (or with strangers) not changing, Psalm. 15.4.
or going from their word, though it were to their hindrance, that therefore
their holy infants then had no more holiness then a mere l^gittimacie, nor
were different from the infants of Heathens, and Infidells.

Were it not foolishness thus to think? [much more to affirme] yea, surely!
and therefore such affirmations of yours, are to be taken for sensles
imaginations, and vain conceptions, not worthy to be uttered to any [much
less unto many.] Neither should they (at this time) have been mentioned here,
but to manifest the vanity thereof, That reasonable creatures may not be
deluded, by such unreasonable collections, and false inferences; But may
examine what they receive before they receive it; and embrace nothing but what
is agreeable to the Rule of Truth.

Further you say;

A. R. Page 11. at lin. 5. to lin. 23.
And this may likewise appear in Mal. 2.14, 15. where the Spirit of God by the
Prophet shows the reasons why their offerings were no more accepted, because
(says he) God has been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth (that
is his first wife then living) against whom thou have dealt treacherously, yet
she is thy companion, and the wife of thy Covenant, and did not he make one,
yet had he abundance of the Spirit, and wherefore one in that he sought a
godly or holy seed, therefore keep your selves in spirit, and let none
trespass against the wife of his youth: In which words it plainly appears
that the scope of the place is, that those Children which are generated by one
man and one woman lawfully married, are a godly or holy seed, and those that
are generated otherwise, are not so but Bastards. And the reason of this
holiness arises not here from any relation they had to the Jewish State, nor
from any Church Covenant, but merely from Gods first Institution of Marriage in
the Creation, and his then providing one woman for one man, and which therefore
is of Universal concernment to all mankind, by the Law of Creation.

Ans. Herein you pervert the Scripture, and bring such Conclusions therefrom,
which are not included therein.

Whereas you say, it is his first wife then living; I ask you why not his
second Jacob had 2 wives, Leah and Rachell; the one was elder then the other,
and one was married before the other: But the children which he had by the^, as
also those by Billa and Zilpah, were all holy in their infancy, and so are the
Infants of believers, a godly and holy seed; and all other Infants are
otherwise, whether legitimate, or illegitimate.
wife then living? If you will limit it only to the first wife, then it seems
by your speech that he might deal treacherously with the other, and bear no
blame for it. But you should know, that these Jews, to whom the Lord speaks,
were taught to follow the righteous steps of their holy parents, and not to
deal treacherously with any of their wives.

You say, that the scope of this place in Mal. 2.14, 15. is, That those
Children which are generated by one man, and one woman, lawfully married, are a
godly, or holy seed, and those that are generated otherwise are not so, but
Bastards. But that this is the scope of the place, we must take upon your bare
word, (or else choose,) for Scripture to prove it you have none. But (by these
your speeches) it seems that you would have us to believe, that godliness and
holiness of children depends upon the parents lawful generating of them. And
so by this it will follow, that all the legitimate Infidells in the world are
godly and holy, both young and old; which is very strange, and absurd, and
overthrows the Scriptures, which declares that there has been always a
difference between the holy and profane, between believers and Infidells,
between the Infants of the Church, and the Infants out of the Church; one sort
being called, the children of God, the other, the children of men.

Again, This speech of yours in saying that the children of one man, and one
woman lawfully married, are a godly and holy seed; and those that are generated
otherwise, are not so but Bastards. It does imply that then all legitimated
persons shall be saved, and that no Bastards shall be saved. And so out of your
own mouth (for ought you know) you bring a heavy censure, and sentence of
condemnation against your self; for it seems by your words, that your own
assurance of salvation, must rest merely upon humane testimony; for you know
not whether you are legitimate, or no, but by the testimony of your parents,
which if they were not lawfully married at the time of your begetting, then
where is your godliness and holiness? You have it not at all upon your own
grounds; howsoever, at the best, I think you will say, that you have it not
from your own knowledge, but by humane testimony.

But (for your comfort) you should consider, that in a religious respect, a
Bastard, if he be a Convert, must not be rejected, as a castaway; for although
his father and his mother sinned in his procreation, yet their sin shall not
be imputed unto him; neither will the Lord reject him any whit the more for his
being unlawfully begotten.

Yea, though believing parents should (through temptation,) derogate from Gods
institution, by begetting children contrary to Gods Law, yet we will not say,
but as there is repentance and forgiveness for the parents returning unto God,
so the believing parents may have hope (from the Scripture, that sweet
fountain of consolation) that God will not impute that their sin unto their
children, who never sinned actually, but will receive them to mercy with
themselves.

So David's child, which he had by the wife of Vriah the Hittite, though it was
unlawfully begotten (contrary to Gods institution in Paradise) yet it does
evidently appear, that we have no ground to say, that the infant was out of
Gods covenant, any more then David was. David repented, and his sin was
forgiven him, and his child was clean, both in a civil, and religious
respect; the which cannot justly be said of any infant, whose parents are both
of them unbeleevers, though they are lawful husband and wife, and the child
legitimate; yet the parents (being neither of them in the Covenant) were not to
esteem any of their Infants to be godly, or holy, neither from 1 Cor. 7.14. nor
from any other Scripture.

In consideration whereof it does appear, that there is a real difference
between the infants of the godly, and the infants of the wick^d; and that the
holiness which differenceth them, is a spiritual holiness; For in respect of
legitimaci^, some of the infants of unbeleevers had the pre-eminence, when some
of the infants of believers had it not, and yet the infants of believers
(whether legitimate, as Isaac, or illegitimate, as (Pharez) were in respect of
their religious sanctification, the only infants, whom God accepted of visibly
in his Covenant: But as for the others, which were out of the Covenant, God
rejected them, whether they were legitimate, or illegitimate; So then, it
appears that it is the holy Covenant, which demonstrateth the children of
believers to be holy and members of the visible Church, as the holy infants
were in formed time.

By this you may see, how you are deceived, both in mistaking, and
mis-construing the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.14. and misunderstanding, and
perverting the words of the Prophet, Mal. 2.14, 15.

Your next words are these; In the same sense is the Apostle to be taken, Heb.
13 4. where he says, Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled, but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

If Marriage be honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; then the issue of
that Bed must needs be undefiled (that is) clean and holy; as ^n the other
side, the issue of all unlawful conjunctions are unclean, illegitimate, and
Bastards. Now this holiness and unholinesse of Children, proceeds not from
the holiness or unholinesse of the Parents; But from the lawful or unlawful
conjunction of the Parents in the begetting of their Children, for the Apostle
in this place speaks of all men universally.

That the Apostle speaks of all men universally in Heb. 13.4. when he says,
that Marriage is honorable amongst all is (in a sense) true; but that he
speaks of all men universally in Cor. 7.14. is not true in any sense; for
(the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 7.14. speaking to the members of the Church, of
that which principally concerned them) he groundeth his speech concerning the
holiness of children, and sanctification of the unbeleever (to that use) upon
the faith of one of the parents, that if one of the parents be a believer,
though the other parent be an unbeleever, the Children are holy, that is to
say, they are under the holy Covenant; And so it necessarily implies, that if
neither parents are believers, the children are unholy, that is, they are not
born holy, nor under the holy Covenant. For it was faith that made the
believers y^^k-mate to be so sanctified to him, as the Apostle speaks,
Because he was a believer, the Infidel was sanctified to him; For to an
unbeleever she could not be sanctified, but unto a believer, And therefore the
children of those believers were holy, because one of the parents was a
believer, and this faith (so sanctifying the unbeleeving yoak-mates to this
end, and use) made the children holy; which cannot be said of an infant, whose
parents are neither of them believers; though his parents were honorably
married, and the bed undefiled in his procreation, but he is unholy, ungodly
and out of the Covenant, neither of his parents being holy, nor any of them
sanctified then in themselves, nor sanctified in (by, or to) a believer, for
producing a holy seed, spoken of in 1 Cor. 7.14.

But you go on still, and say, that A. R. Page 11. li. 34.
It seems that the holiness here of the children, arises not from the faith or
holiness of the parents, but merely from the lawful marriage and conjunction of
the parents in begetting their Children.

Lin. 38.
It is even so.

Ans. Is it even so? How is it even so? Does the holiness of the holy children
(spoken of in 1 Cor. 7.14. arise merely from the lawful marriage, etc? How
prove you this? Who revealed this unto you? Belike you think your bare
affirmation (it is even so) is sufficient proof; It may be, you will say, that
Pharez and Zarah were ungodly and unholy, Genesis 38.16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30.
and out of the Covenant, because their parents had not lawful marriage at
their conjunction in begetting of them: And also that David's illegitimate
Infant was ungodly and unholy and out of the covenant, because he was not
lawfully married to Bersheba, 2 Samuel 11.4, 5.
before he had begotten him. For surely if the godliness and holiness of the
Infants of the faithful arise merely from the lawful marriage and conjunction
of the parents in their begetting, then all the infants of the faithful,
(whose parents have not lawful marriage in their begetting) are not holy, nor
godly. But seeing the infants of the world, whose parents were married to each
other, in their begetting were (though born legitimate,) yet not borne holy,
(that is to say) not under the holy Covenant: And seeing that David's infant was
in the Covenant, though he was illegitimate, 2 Samuel 11.27. and 12.16, 17.23
(which thing might be said of other illegitimated Infants of the Church then.)
It plainly argues, that there is a great gulf, between the holy infants of
the Church (spoken of in 1 Cor. 7.14.) and the infants of the world, whose
parents are ungodly, and out of the Covenant. And also it is clearly seen, that
you fowly miss it, in saying that the holiness arises merely from the
lawful marriage and conjunction of the parents in begetting their children. In
all which speeches, you still cross your self, in what you have set down, in
the fourth Page of your Book See A.R. his second Book, page 4.
, where you enter upon this particular, concerning 1 Cor. 7.14. For there you
affirm (in opposing Infants holiness.)

First, That there is [now] but one Covenant on foot, etc.

Secondly, That there is but one manner of entering and being therein.

And thirdly, That there is but one holiness [now] acceptable with God, etc.
Consider what you said there, and that which the Apostle declares here (in 1
Cor. 7 14.) That the children of believers are holy [now] under the Gospel.
[Now] are they holy (says he) and so judge your self in reason, whether you
do not wrong the Scripture, [and your self also unreasonably] in making this
one holiness to be a mere legitimacie, proceeding merely from the parents
lawful conjunction in matrimony.

But let us see what further reasons you can give for maintenance of this your
opinion.

For the question or doubt was only whether they might put away, A. R. Page 11.
lin. 38
or depart from their unbeleeving yoak-mates, the which the Apostle answers,
that they ought not to put them away; and he implies this reason, because they
were lawfully married unto them, according to Gods ordinance. Ans. Here you
grant, that the Apostle says, the believers ought not to put away their
unbeleeving yoak-mates; This makes directly against you; for it does
demonstrate that the children of believers are holy, as the holy children of
the Jews were; which children were not to be put away, whose visible holiness
gave the believing Jews a sufficient ground to administer Circumcision upon
them in their infancy, And so Baptism being unto us, as that was to them; the
holy children of believers are to have this, as they had that. For these are
holy now, and have right to this, as those were holy then, and had right to the
other.

And the Apostle Paul, when he exhorts the believing parents, not to depart
from their unbeleeving yoke fellows, he yields this reason, (what ere he
implies; 1 Cor. 7.14:
) For the unbeleeving husband is sanctified to the wife, and the unbeleeving
wife is sanctified to the husband; and for confirmation of this reason (or
these reasons) of his, he says further, Or else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy; so that the holiness of the children, is the main
argument which proved that their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes were sanctified, and
so might be retained, and not put away.

Next you say; A. R. Page 12. li. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And this he backs with a double reason:

First, Because their unbeleeving yoak-mates were sanctified to their use.

Secondly, Because their Children, begotten in that state, are legitimate and
holy.

Ans. That the unbeleeving yoak-mates of the believers, were sanctified to
their use, is true; But this is not all, They were sanctified to them for this
use, the male to beget, and the femal^ to conceive, and bring forth, a holy
seed; or else were your children unclean, (says the Apostle) but now are they
holy. And that their children begotten in the state of matrimony, are both
legitimate and holy, is very true; keep to this, and then you keep to the
truth; Their children begotten in that estate, are legitimate and holy. If then
they are legitimate and holy, as your self do confess here, why will you
seek to debar them from the privileges of the holy Covenant? Surely this
speech of yours (being considered and compared with your former) you can object
nothing now against them (except you cross your self) but that they may, yea,
and ought to be Baptized. But yet I would have you to mind, that it is not
their legitimacie, or illegitimacie, which can debar them from Baptism, or
admit them to it; but it is their visible holiness, which gives them visible
right to Baptism. And this is according to your former speeches, in this your
Treatise; Where you affirm, That there is but one holiness now acceptable
with God Page 4. lin. 8.
; and such a holiness is available to Baptism Page 6. li. 2, 3.
, according to tha Rule Lin. 38.
.

Next you say; A. R. Page 12. lin. 6.
On the other side, If they were not so lawfully married to them, then these
three conclusions would follow.

First, They would not be sanctified to them.

Secondly, Their children would be unclean, and Bastards.

Thirdly, They might and ought to put them away.

Ans. These three Conclusions (you say) would follow, if they were not [so
lawfully married] unto them. Here is a threefold injunction, employed in these
three words [so] [lawfully] [married] And these you have put as a preparative
to your three Conclusions; all which are laid down ambiguously.

I doubt not but the unbeleeving yoak-fellowes of the believers, were
sanctified to them; but this is not all, their servants might be sanctified
unto them, and all lawful things; but their yoak-fellowes were sanctified unto
them, for this end and use, for producing a holy seed, as I said before *. And
the reason was because one of them (being a believer) sanctified the other; If
all the legitimate Children in the world, have the holiness spoken of in 1 Cor.
7.14. Then all the legitimated Children whose parents are neither of them
believers, are holy: and then it will follow, that unbeleeving yoke mates
sanctify their unbeleeving yoak-mates; But this is not to be thought, for it
makes the Apostle Paul's words of none effect, where he binds it only in the
believer, and does not tell us, that the unbeleever sanctifies the believer,
or unbeleever, but [the beleever] sanctifies the unbeleever. And this does
forcibly prove the holiness (in 1 Cor 7.14.) to be another thing then a mere
legitimacy; for it proves it to be a peculiar thing unto believers, but
matrimony is not peculiar to believing parents, no more then legitimacy is
peculiar to their Infants; others have the same as well as they.
the unbeleever was sanctified, in, by, or to the believer, for this very end,
of generating children unto him, or rather unto God; So that the believer
sanctifi^d the unbeleever. Which thing could not, nor cannot be said of the
unbeleevers, that they sanctifi^, or that their yoak-fellowes are sanctified in
them; for they indeed are sanctified in themselves. But by your reasoning, Paul
might as well have said, that the believer is sanctified to the unbeleever, as
to the believer; But so to say, is a turning of the Apostles testimony
up-side-downe. And (...) doubt not but the believers children (begotten in that
estate of matrimony) were legitimate. But the holiness is not taken simply
from the lawful marriage, but in resp^ct to the Covenant of Grace, and Church
of God, they being borne members of the same, as has been proved before;
Having the holiness and righteousness of Christ imputed unto them. And seeing
that believers holy chil^ren had the like privileges, as Isaacs holy children
had; therefore, as those children of Isaac were in the Covenant; So were the
holy children of believers in the time of the Law, and so are these now in the
time of the Gospel. They are even in the holy Covenant of God and so are
hallowed with their parents, by the same God who made their parents holy; the
root is holy, and so are the branches, the first fruits are holy, and so is the
whole lump. And upon this ground, does the Apostle Paul prove, that the
Corinthians might lawfully keep their unbeleeving yok-mates; because that Else
their children were unclean, but now are they holy; because that one of them
was a believing parent in Covenant; for that is the reason both of the
holiness of the children, and of the lawful retaining of the unbeleeving yoke
mates.

Whereas you say, secondly, Their children would be unclean, Lin. 9, 10.
and bastards.

Thirdly, They might and ought to put them away.

How do you prove this, that they might and ought to put them away!? I think
they might and ought to keep their own Infants, though illegitimated,
Bastards; Yea, and in some considerations to keep their wives. So David
according to the Law of God, kept his illegitimate infant; and did not put away
the wife who bare it, but still retained her, and had a holy and elected seed,
by her.

See Mr. Henry Ainsworth his Answer to the Anabaptists Dialog. pa. 95.
So Mr. Ainsworth answers this Objection of the Anabaptists, by proving unto
them, that mis-begotten children, and Bastards were not to be put away in
respect of civil use; for (says he) who should nourish, or bring them up,
rather then their own parents? 2 Samuel 11.4, 5. and 12.14, 15, etc.

Moreover, If unbeleevers cannot be sanctified to beget, or conceive, a holy
seed, except they be yoked unto believers, as you here grant, (by your words)
in saying, that See A. R. Page 12. lin. 19.
[[ that which is sanctified to a believer, being unsanctified to an
unbeleever, must needs be sanctified unto him by his believing. And so the
meaning (of the translations whether by or to See A. R. lin. 16:
) is all one, and may be thus expressed; That the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified unto the believing husband, by, or through his beleeving]] Then it
will follow (by your own confession) that though an unbeleever be in the state
of matrimony, yet (except it be with a believer,) the unbeleever cannot
procreate such a holy seed To wit] not borne visibly holy in the holy Covenant,
as the Infants of believers are.
, spoken of in 1 Cor. 7 14. And so this argues, that there is a great and
manifest difference [in respect of holinesse] between the infants of believers,
and the infants of Infidells; And that this holiness proceeds not merely
(according to your former inferences Page 11. lin. 36, 37, 38. Lin. 14, 15.
) from a lawful conjunction, in respect of Matrimony, which is honorable to
all; Neither does the unbeleevers being sanctified, come simply by being in the
honorable state of Marriage, (which those have who are not so sanctified) but
because she (or he) is coupled in marriage with such a believer Keep still to
this [that the unbeleeving yoak-fellow may be sanctifi^d to her (or his)
believing yoak-fellow, but not to any unbeleever;] And then there will be some
more hope, that you will be drawn out of your Anti podobaptisticall errors,
for (as I said before) this does show, that those children whose parents are
neither of them believers, are not holy, nor sanctified, by their birth, from
any ground appearing, in 1 Cor. 7.14. or any other Scripture.

Moreover, I know none that pleads that the unbeleeving wife of the believer,
should be admitted to Baptism, and Church Fellowship with her believing
husband. And yet she is sanctified unto him, in the enjoyment of her, to bring
forth a holy seed; and therefore is (in this respect) far different from his
cattle, and beasts, with whom he may not so unite himself; they are not so
sanctified to him, as to bring forth a holy seed; but his wife is: which
difference you do not set down, when you say See A R. Page 12. lin. 21, 22,
23.
, that she is no otherwise sanctified then servants, and his cattle, and
beasts. But you should have minded, that the Beasts are sanctified to him, as
beasts, the servants, as servants, and the unbeleeving wife, is sanctified in
him, (to him, or by him,) as a wife. But touching the children, they are holy,
under the holy Covenant; as has been formerly observed, and proved, and shall
be further cleared. A. R. Page 12. li. 27, 28. A. R.


To another Question which you call an Objection; Whether the Children of
believers have no more privilege, then the children of Heathens, Turks, and
Infidells: You say Lin. 29.
, In respect of the Covenant of Grace and Salvation none at all.

Ans. If by their children here, you mean their infants, then I absolutely
affirm and will prove, that the infants of believers have more privilege then
the infants of unbeleeving Heathens, in respect of the Covenant of grace, and
salvation; for God has testified to Abraham Genesis 17.7. Jer, 30.22. Ezekiel.
37.27. Heb. 8.10.
, saying, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And this is
the new Covenant of grace, and of salvation, That God will be our God, and we
shall be his people: Which Covenant is not made unto the wicked and their
offspring, to Turks, and Heathens, who are without God in the world. Rev.
21.3.
Nor have they any ground to hope for the salvation of their infants; for true
hope is grounded upon some promise of God, which they are destitute of; 2 Cor.
6.16.18.
and where God has made no promise, who can expert performance? Touching
secret things, they belong unto the Lord our God, but things revealed,
appertain to us and our children Deuteronomy. 29.27.
for ever,

And whereas you say Page 12. lin. 30.
, It comes not by any natural Birth, but by the work of the Spirit; for the
Spirit blows where it lists, Joh. 3.7, 8. And God is no respecter of
persons: But in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness,
is accepted of him, Act. 10.34, 35.

I answer; As the Saints generation does not hinder their regeneration, so
their natural birth, does not hinder the birth of the Spirit; for the Spirit
blows where it lists; John 3.8.
And yet the sound thereof may be heard by the testimonies of Scripture; which
declares that the Spirit of God is in all that are his, and he has wrought
upon some of the infants of believers miraculously, before they were born; and
God loves all his Saints, without respect of persons God has promised to
circumcise our heart, and the heart of our seed: and this is the work of the
Spirit.
; yea, he respects the poorest of their infants, before the infants of the
world, which are without, though they are never so rich. In every nation he that
fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10.34, 35.

And as those infants (in the time of the Law) whom he claimed visibly for his
own in special, were not then to be judged destitute of his Spirit; no more
are such holy infants now; for as Gods Spirit is the Spirit of promise, so God
is always as good as his word.

Whereas you say See A. R. Page 12. lin. 34.
, In respect of the means of salvation, their privilege in having believing
parents, is far more then those that have not; because believing parents may be
a means to bring their Children to the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ, and
so be instruments of their salvation, as Saint Paul says here; The believing
husband may save his unbeleeving wife.

I answer; If by children here, you mean infants, if this be all the
privilege you will afford them, I thank you for nothing! But it is well they
are not at your finding; for indeed this measure of yours is somewhat scant.

If they die in their infancy, how shall their parents bring them to the
knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ? yea, how shall they believe that they go
to heaven, if they had not some warrant to believe, that the work of
regeneration was wrought in them before? If the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
and the graces of his holy Spirit were not imputed unto them before? Psalm. 6.5.
In death there is no remembrance of God; in the grave who shall praise him?
But the Comforter (which would not have believing parents mourn, 1 These. 4.13.
as those which have no hope) has informed them, that he is the Circumciser of
their heart, and of the heart of their seed Deuteronomy. 30.6.
; a plain evidence, that they love, and know him, or rather are beloved and
known of him; He that loved them in their life, will not forsake them in their
death; For the dead which die in the Lord are fully blessed, yea, says the
Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them Rev.
14.13.
.

But by your words it appears, that you judge the infants of believers, and
Infidells, all alike.

Yea, the Infidel servants, which serve believers (if these your words be
true,) have a greater privilege then the Infants of believers; for the
servants are capable of instruction, (in respect of a natural capabilitie) but
the Infants are not.

Now if you will still grant, that the Infants of believers, (though they die
in their infancy) have a greater privilege, then the infants of unbeleev^rs,
then you must also grant, that that their privilege rests in something else,
besides the bare publication of the Gospel, which they are not in their
infancy capable of.

And you should not have over-topped them so far as to say, that because
believing parents may be a means to bring their children to the knowledge, and
faith of Jesus Christ, that therefore they have no more privileges, then the
unbeleeving wife; As if this were the greatest privilege which believers
infants have, which unbeleevers themselves may have, Mark. 16.15. But you
should rather have reasoned thus:

Believing parents may publish the Gospel to their unbeleeving servants, and
unbeleeving wives and to all other unbeleevers, but they may, yea, and ought to
apply it to their infants See Mar. 16.16. Luke 1.76, 77, 78, 79.
as well as to themselves and also to all those whom they are to esteem in the
state of salvation; he that has faith thus to do is a Christian; he that has
not so much faith, but refuses to apply the Gospel so, the Lord be merciful
to his soul! by giving him repentance, and remission of his sin.

All godly parents [^ike faithful Abraham] were to teach their children the
way of life, both what things were, and what things signified ( Genesis 19.17.19.
Josh. 4.21.24.) and to declare unto them the goodness of God in the land of
the living; yea, to hide nothing from them, which might be profitable to them,
or beneficia^l for them. But as they grew up to be capable of knowledge, the
parents were (as before mentally, so now) verbally, to apply the promises unto
themselves, and their children, etc. Psalm. 78.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And
surely this is one cause why the Land mourns, and why the Lord smites the
earth with cursing, Mal. 4.5, 6.
because the heart of the parents are not linked to their Infants. This part of
good Elias and John Baptists minist^ry, does not work upon them. And how can
it work upon them so long as they continue in their sins and so wrap
themselves, and their offspring, in many mischiefs and miseries, and do not
choose life, (the thing that pleases God,) but refuse it, and follow the ways
of the strange woman, whose ways are ways of death, and whose steps reach
down to hell.

And surely, I may well say unto you, that those are Physicians of no value who
in stead of curing them, do kill them, and in stead of preserving them, do
poysen, harden, corrupt, and pervert them, with such damnable doctrine, which so
violently possesses them, that they think the Infants of believers have no
privilege at all in respect of the Covenant of grace; no more then the
children of Turks and Heathens, who are unholy. A dangerous doctrine! and to
be abhorred, detested, and witnessed against, by those that fear the God of
heaven, and desire to make a difference between the precious and the vile,
against all such Mongrell opposites, who by speech, and writing, (contrary to
the Tenor of the whole Scripture) do labor to rank all infants in one
condition! Thus coupling light and darkness, God and Belial, the believer and
the Infidel together! But woe unto them, may we say, (as says the Prophet
Isaiah, Isa. 10.1.) which decre^ unrighteous decrees, and write grievousnesse,
which they have prescribed. Thus drawing Isa. 5.18.
iniquity with the cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope.
Woe Ver. 20.
unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

Psalm. 73.1.
Yet surely God is good unto Israel, (may we say) to those that are pure in
heart. The Lord has been mindful of us; He will bless us. He will bless the
house of Israel (says that sweet singer of Israel) He will bless the house of
Aaron: Psalm. 115.12, 13, 14, 15.
He will bless those that fear the Lord, with small and great. The Lord shall
increase you more and more, you and your children. You are blessed of the Lord,
who has made the heaven and the earth.

NExt See A. R. Page 12. lin. 40. Page 13. li. 1, 2. Page 13. l. 3.
you say, The fourth Scripture is, That which speaks of Christ's commanding
little Children to be brought unto him, and said; That of such is the kingdom
of God. Hence (you say) therefore some reason; The kingdom of God belongs to
little Children, why not the Seals?

I Ans. If by these [some] you mean the people of the Separation; then (I say)
you have not set it down according to our expression: It is too generally laid
down; We say the kingdom of heaven belongs to the Infants of believers: and
we do not barely question, why not the seals? But we set it down
affirmatively, that the seals do belong to the infants of believing parents.
But for as much as our point is particularly concerning the Baptism of
infants; I intend to proceed directly to the matter in hand, and answer your
trifling objections by the way as I trace you.

Mat. 28.19. Mat. 16.16.
First, It is to be minded, that Baptism is one of the privileges of Christ's
Church, which is his house and kingdom.

Secondly, It is also to be minded, that Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of
God, and Lord of Glory, and of all administrations, and giver of every good and
perfect gift, when he says, Suffer the little Children to come unto me, Mar.
10.14. Mat. 19.14.
etc. For of such is the kingdom of heaven. He does hereby apply the Gospel
unto them. I say, It is Gospel which he speaks here. [] Where the kingdom
is, there is the Gospel. Get the kingdom, thou have God, and Gospel, and all.
And so we are to understand that [with the kingdome] the infants of believers
have the Gospel of the kingdom also appertaining unto them, together with the
privileges thereof.

It being so, the Argument lies thus;

Those persons to whom the Gospel may lawfully be applied, to those Baptism
does of right belong, and upon them it must be administered, Mar. 16.16. Mat.
28.19.

But the Gospel may lawfully be applied to Believers infants, Isa. 22.24 Jer.
30.20.22. Mat. 19.13, 14. Mar. 10.13, 14, 15, 16. Luke 18.15, 16, 17. and 19.9,
10. Genesis 17.7, 8.11.13, 14. Rev. 21.3. and 22.14. Infants Baptism, Jure Divino.


Therefore Baptism does of right belong unto them, and must be administered
upon them.

The first and second part of this Argument, being thus expressed, and also
proved by the Scriptures, cited for Confirmation thereof; the Conclusion is
true and certain; and may further appear so to be, by what has been said in
this Treatise, (where the point has been handled) and may be further evinced,
by taking away whatsoever else you can object against the same.

And now let us hear your Answer:

First, A. R. Page 13. lin. 5.
That if Infants have right to one of the seals (if I may so call them) then
to both; to the Supper as well as to Baptism.

To which I reply, That this objection is impertinent. The Infants of believers
(the Lords blessed Saints) have right both to Baptism, and the Lords Supp^r;
Mar. 10.14.16 1 Cor. 7.14.
as the infants of believers in the time of the Law, had right to Circumcision,
and the Passover; and we are to mind, that although persons were not (nor
could not be capable In respect of a natural capabilitie.
) at all times to receive the Ordinances, yet they had right unto them then,
and so persons now have right to those heavenly things, which they are not
capable to receive; So we know that diverse Saints (though in years) have
right to the preaching of the Word; yet have not capabilitie In case of
deafness, or other defects in nature.
(at all times) to conceive what is taught* Wherefore your arguing (that if
Infants have right to one of Gods Ordinances, they have right to both) has no
weight in it against Infants right to Baptism.

Your next words are, that Here (they say) not to the Supper, A. R. Lin. 8, 9.
until they be able to examine themselves, which is required of all that
receive the supper.

Answer. If by [they,] you mean those of the Separation; And if by infants, you
mean their infants; I answer then, that we affirm no such thing, as you would
^ather upon us Lin. 5.
, (that holy infants have no right to the Supper!) for we know they have a
right unto it, though they want capabilitie to partake of it; The Lords supper
being an active Ordinance [there is more required then a bare suffering,] for
there is an acting required of the partakers thereof; Mat. 26.26.
Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me Luke 22.19.
, etc. But Baptism, [being a passive ordinance] the party upon whom it is
imposed, is not required, [actually] to do it, The Lords supper is active, and
Baptism passive, in refere^ce to the receivers thereof.
but only to suffer it to be done.

So the infants of believers in the time of the Law, had right both to
Circumcision, and the Passover; yet Circumcision they might receive, (when
they were not capable to partake of the Passover,) because that (as has been
formerly minded) there was an activenesse required of the partaker in
partaking, and at administration of the Passover, but only a mere suffering,
(by the subject) when Circumcision was imposed upon him. So that holy infants
now are as capable to receive Baptism, as the infants in former time were to
receive Circumcision; and these are as capable to receive the Supper now, as
those infants were to receive the Passover then. Wherefore seeing there was no
reason to keep those infants from being Circumcised, though they could not
partake of the Passover, (having right unto both.) Therefore there is no just
reason can be given to debar such holy infants from Baptism now, though they
cannot partake of the Supper; yet they have right both to Baptism and the
Supp^r.

It may be you will say, that all that had right to the Passover, were not to
be kept from it, but to partake of it at the time of administration; and that
all who have right to the supper, are to partake of it when it is administered,
etc.

Ans. No; not so; for persons might have just occasions, which might justly
hinder them from the Passover, and yet they had right unto the Passover; As
when they were unclean, or in a journey, yet they had still a right unto the
Passover, (though they were not at that time to partake of it.) And if they
were driven from the society of the Saints, they had still right unto the
ordinances, though they could not come to enjoy them. So if persons were sick,
we will not say, that the Passover was to be infused in them, against their
stomach; yet had they a right thereto, though they could not partake thereof.

When the Children of Israel were in Egypt, Exodus 12.11.
they were commanded to eat the Passover, with their loins girded, their
shoes on their feet, and their staves in their hands, and to eat it in have,
for it was the Lords Passover; and though every member of the Congregation,
had right thereto Exodus 12.47.
, yet we will not say, they were to partake thereof, when they could not, for
the causes before specified, or the like occasions.

And as it may be said concerning coming to the Passover then, so it may be
said of communicating in the Lords Supper now, that all that have right
thereto, are not commanded to partake thereof.

And those Saints then that could not partake of the Passover, did not (and
these that cannot partake of the supper, do not) sin in not partaking
thereof; and therefore these are not commanded or enjoined by God to partake of
the Supper (for God requires not impossibilities of us,) neither are we
commanded (or enjoined) to administer it unto them; but circumcision was
commanded to be administered upon, and unto the other; therefore it appears
that though they were not capable [actually] to receive the Passover, yet
seeing they were still the Saints of God, they had right thereunto.

And the like may be said concerning all the holy infants of the Church now;
and concerning the ordinances now, which are in stead of the ordinances then,
and in effect the same. Though the Infants of Believers, have right to the
Supper, yet have they not capabilitie to receive it, and therefore it must not
be administered unto them; but Baptism [that passive Ordinance] may, because
there is required no actual doing of the receiver, but a suffering, for the
water in Baptism is not to be drunken by them, nor to be infused into them,
but imposed upon them.

Moreover, Concerning their not having the Supper, A. R.
you have answered your self, in answering them, when you say Page 13. lin.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
, That Examination (in respect of the Supper) is required only of men of
years, not of infants, who are not able to perform it.

Further you tell us, That if your Author, nor memory fail you, Children were
admitted as well to the Supper, as to Baptism, for many years in time past,
(and over against in the margent of the page Page 13. at lin. 15.
you name Parker on the Cross.)

Ans. Indeed you may suspect your memory, if you take your imagination to be
your memory. And you may expect, that your Author can stand you in little
stead, in opposing the Baptism of Infants; A good object may fail a bad
subject; and so your Author may fail you, especially, he being neither an
Author, nor upholder of your error, which you labor by all means to uphold.

Next you say; A. R. Lin. 17, 18, 19
And why not to the one as well as to the other, seeing the same reasons are
alike in both, and will center into one, if fully prosecuted?

I Answer, This is but a begging of the Question, I have told you why not to
the one, as well as to the other, Because they are capable of the one (in
respect of a natural capabilitie) but not of the other. And therefore I deny
that the reasons are alike in both; or will center into one, though [never] so
fully prosecuted.

Whereas you further oppose infants Baptism, saying, that Page 13. li. 21, 22.
no Infant is required by God, in Scripture, to believe, or to repent, or to be
baptized by any man, etc.

The Infants of believers are not impenitent,
I Answer. That this your speech is ambiguous, and abominable, and you may know,
that we stand not for the Baptizing of Infidells, or those in whose hearts we
cannot rightly judge the foundation of repentance to be laid. For God has not
required such to be baptized, no more then he did command such to be
circumcised in the time of the Law. And you should know, that faith is the gift
of God, and so also is repentance; and though the Saints of God are not
required to manifest their faith and repentance actually, so long as they
cannot act; yet for to say, that therefore they have not faith and r^p^ntance,
or that we are not to judge them to have the gifts and graces of the Spirit,
because they cannot act, is a mere idle toy! and frivolous foppery. But if you
will say, that though the infants of believers cannot manifest faith and
repentance, no more then Isaac could (who was a child of promise in his
infancy) yet they are to be judged to have faith and repentance
notwithstanding. Then you will agree with us in this truth. But if you will
say, you deny it, and will not assent unto it, and that therefore the infants
of believers, ought not to be baptized; Then I tell you, you have your answer
long ago.

Christian Infants (says Mr. Ainsworth In his Censure upon the Anaba^tists Dia
^g. pa. 70. lin. 19.
) Have the grace they speak^ ^f, repentance, faith, regeneration, etc. Though
not actually, or by way of declaration to others; yet they have (through the
work of the Spirit) the seed and beginning of faith, virtually and by way of
inclination, so that they a^e not wholly destitute of faith, regeneration, etc.
though it be a thing hid, and unknown unto us, after what manner the Lord
works these in them. E^cles. 11.5.

Which Mr. Ainsworth does further prove, thus In the same page, lin. 27. to
page 71.
;

If Infants naturally are some ways capable of Adams sin, and so of
unbelief, disobedience, transgression, etc. Then Christian Infants
supernaturally, and by grace, are some ways capable of Christ's righteousness,
and so of faith, obedience, sanctification, etc. But Infants are capable of the
former evils by Adam: therefore they are capable of the later good things by
Christ.

That they are capable ^f the former, he proved (in his treating of original
sin) from diverse Scriptures, as Psalm: 51. John 3. Romans 5. etc. The
consequence, to wit that infants are capable of the later good things by
Christ, he proves thus See his book page 71. lin. 8.
.

First, Because the first Adam was a figure of the second Adam, Christ; So that
as the sin of the first Adam, his fault, disobedience, and death for it, came
on all his Children, both by imputation, and infection, or corruption of
nature; So the righteousness and obedience of Christ, comes on all his
Children, both by imputation, and renewing of nature, unto life and salvation;
as the Apostle compares them, Romans 5.12.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.21.

Secondly, Because Infants ( being (by Adam) sinners, Children of wrath, etc.)
m^st be borne again of the Spirit, or else they cannot see the kingdom of
God, Joh. 3.3.5 6. But the Christian Infants, dying in infancy, shall see the
kingdom of God, and not be damned, (as the Adversaries grant. The old
Anabaptists do grant, that children (dying in their infanci^) shall see the
Kingdom of God. But some now (that stand against the Baptism of Infants) say,
They are all in the state of damnation; Others (that withstand Infants
Baptism) say, They know not how to judge of them; But I say, by the Scripture,
We are to judge the infants of believers, to be in the state of salvation, and
those of them that die in their infancy, are not damned, but saved: And as for
other Infants (even the infants of the wicked) we have nothing to do to judge
them within, but without.
) Therefore by Christ's doctrine, they are borne again of the Spirit: and so
must needs (in some measure) have repentance, faith, and holiness, without which
there is no regeneration.

Again, That Infants have the faith, and love of God in them: And regeneration
in their measure is thus proved;

They to whom God gives the sign and seal of righteousness by faith, and of
regeneration, they have faith and regeneration [ for God gives no lying figne,
he seals no vain (or false) Covenants.]

But God gave to Infants Circumcision, which was the sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith, and regeneration. Genesis 17.12. Romans 4.11. and 2.28, 29.
Colos. 2.11.

Therefore Infants had (and consequently now have) faith and regeneration,
though not in the crop of harvest by declaration; yet in the bud and beginnings
of all Christian graces.

They that deny this reason, must either make God the Author of a lying sign,
and seal of the Covenant to Abraham, and his Infants; or they must hold, that
infants had those graces then, but not now; both which are wicked and absurd to
affirm; Or they must say, that Circumcision was not the sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith, and then they openly contradict the Scripture, Romans
4.11.

Moreover, As the Apostle in Romans 5. compares our natural estate in Adam, and
our spiritual estate in Christ, so may we, in this case.

If we cannot justly object against Gods work in nature, but do believe that
our Infants are [reasonable creatures] and are borne [ not bruit beasts, but
men] though actually they can manifest no reason, or understanding more then
beasts ( yea, a young Lamb knows and discerns his damme sooner then an
Infant knows his Mother;) then neither can we justly object against Gods
work in grace, but are to believe, that our Infants are sanctified creatures,
and are borne believers, not Infidells, though outwardly they can manifest no
faith, or sanctification unto us.

And why should it be thought incredible, that God should work faith in
Infants? If it be because we know not, or perceive not how it can be; let us
consider, that we know not the way of our natural birth, and other earthly
things, Eccles. 11.5. Joh. 3.8. How then can we know heavenly things?

If we make question of the power of God; nothing is unpossible with him. He
made all things of nothing; He can make the dumb beast speak with man's voice,
Numb. 22. He can make the babe [ in the mothers womb,] to be affected and leap
for joy, at the voice of the words spoken to the mother, Luke 1.44. And can he
not also work grace, faith, and holiness in Infants? Has Satan power by sin,
to infect, and corrupt Infants, (as is before proved) and shall not God have
power to cleanse from corruption, and make them holy? If we mak^ doubt of the
[will] of God herein, behold we have [his promises,] to restore [our losses]
in Adam, by his graces in Christ, ( as he shows in Rom 5.) That he will
circumcise our heart, and the heart of our seed to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. We
have the seal of his promise, in giving Circumcision to Infants, to signify
and seal the righteousness of faith, Romans 4 11. Genesis 17. And we have
assurance of all his promises, and of that to Abraham and his seed in
particular, to be confirmed unto us (not abrogated or lessened) by Christ, 2
Cor. 1.20. Luke 1.72, 73. Gal. 3.14. etc. Wherefore they are but a faithless
and crooked generation, that notwithstanding all that God has spoken and done
in this kind, do deny this grace of Christ to the Infants of his people, and
the seal, or confirmation of this grace by Baptism now, as it was by
Circumcision of old.

Next you say; Secondly, A. R.
This reason is grounded upon a great mistake of the sense of the Text; for the
words are not unto them belongs the Kingdom, but of such is the Kingdom,
(that is) of none else, but of such, as the next words which follow in these
Texts, do manifestly declare; for in Luke 18.17. Mat. 10.15. In both places,
where Christ had said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, for of such is
the Kingdom of God. He presently confirms it in the next words, thus; Verily,
I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child shall not enter therein. As also in Mat. 18.34. Christ speaking to his
Disciples, says, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven; Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven. Whereby it is evident, that when Christ says, of such is the Kingdom
of heaven, his meaning is not of them, nor of such as them in age, nor
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20. But of such as them in humility, and such like
qualifications.

Ans. If you mean here, that the Seperates do ground their reason upon a great
mistake, of the sense of the Text, in saying, that the Kingdom of God
belongs to the Infants, and therefore Baptism. Then to your impertinent and
confused answer, or groundless aspersion. I reply.

First, That it is not sufficient to say, that the reason is grounded upon a
mistake, unless it be so, which if it be not so, then you are mistaken your
self (and that greatly) both in the reason, and in the sense of the Text also,
in charging us with a great mistake, when it is not grounded upon any mistake,
much less upon a great mistake, and least of all upon a great mistake of the
sense of the Text, as you unjustly speak; and therefore your charge is but a
treble evil surmise, a mere supposition of that which is not; and this may
evidently appear to be true, because out of Christ's own words, we may gather
that the Kingdom of heaven belongs to the holy Infants; for, says he, of
such is the Kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, We do not say, that the words are in express terms, unto [them]
belongs the Kingdom, (you shall not father this upon us,) but of [such] is the
Kingdom of God, and yet notwithstanding the sense is rightly taken, according
to the Text, that the Kingdom of heaven belongs unto the infants, and
therefore you cannot justly charge our reason to be impertinent, or to be
grounded upon any mistake at all, much less a mistake of the Text; So then it
appears that the mistake is not ours, but yours; seeing you mistake your
self, and us, and Christ, and all.

Thirdly, I do not know your meaning, when you rehearse Christ's words, Of such
is the Kingdom of heaven, and say (that is) of none else, but of such, You
should know that the Kingdom of heaven belongs to those that are past
infancy, as well as to Infants, Aged persons are of the Kingdom of heaven as
well as such children. If you deny this, you will deny your own entrance
into the Kingdom, or else say you are an infant, which thing I suppose you
will not do. But the drift of your interpretation is to prove, that when
Christ says, Of such, he means such, and none el^e but such [and therefore
no Infants] For so it appears by your words afterward, when you say, Christ's
meaning: [not of them, nor of such as them in years nor understanding;] a mere
nonsense conclusion; and your ground is, Because Christ says [of such] and
does not say [of them;] But herein you err, and are mistaken in the word such;
and your inferences therefrom, are not according to truth; which may appear
thus; As for Instance;

When Paul says, Rom 1.32. Those that do such things are worthy of death, he
m^aneth those things before specified in the same Chapter.
Suppose a person should come to you, and before diverse persons charge you,
saying, Such persons who do such things as you do, are worthy to be
condemned. I suppose the accusation touches your own particular person, as
much as any other, and that so you will confess, and take it as meant of you.

But if upon examination of the accuser, you shall find him to faulter, and
say, that therefore he meant not you, nor any such thing which you do, etc.
would you not count him a knave, or a fool or a liar?

Again, He that should come and say, Such an argument or arguments as you
bring here are good, and full of wisdom, and abound in sense! you would hear
him patiently, and partly, (if not fully) approve of his speech. But if he
should draw a consequence from his former words, and say, that therefore (he
means) your arguments are evil, and full of foolishness and abound with
nonsense! and that in saying such arguments were good, he does not mean that
your arguments are good at all, nor such as yours, in such a respect, but in
respect of such, or such a thing. Would not you begin to wonder at him, and to
count him a madman? an idiote? a fool? or a liar? or one that sets himself
on set purpose to cavil, or quarrel?

Apply this to your self, for even so is your own argument, or objection here
against Infants; And therefore I hope I may tell you (without giving you any
occasion of offense,) that as your vindication unto that person before
specified, would be, that your Arguments are such as those which are so
answerable to them, that they are such, and that therefore his arguing can make
nothing against your Arguments. So I (in answer to you) may say, that the
infants which Christ took up in his arms, are the same with those who are so
answerable to them, that they are such; for reason teaches us to know, that
those infants then in Christ's arms are such as they then were, and not
otherwise then they then were; and so now reason teaches us, that reasonable
creatures are as like unto themselves as those to whom they are compared, and
that those to whom they are compared rightly, are not more like themselves,
then themselves are like themselves, and therefore apply all this to our
present purpose, and then we may see the unreasonableness^, and perverseness,
crookedness and foolishness, of those who will so wrest Christ's words, as if
when he says, Of such is the kingdom of heaven, he means not them, but
excludes them and such as them, and only includes some others who are for
qualifications like them.

And therefore now (Mr. A. R.) I challenge you, [and all that take your part in
opposing Infants] to bring me one instance in all the Scripture, where persons
are spoken of, and where it is said of such, that the persons with whom they
are compared, and to whom such a thing is applied, are not included or
comprehended in the word, such, as well as those who are compared with them. In
the mean time, till you show such an instance, [whic^ thing you can never doe]
I must still rest in the mind of Christ, that he means them as well as any,
and includes them as well as the rest, and does not exclude them, but include
them, in these words, Suffer the little Children to come unto me, etc. for of
such is the kingdom^ of heaven.

Fourthly, If Christ had said, Of [them] ^s the kingdom of heaven, and had not
said, Of [such] is the kingdom, etc. Then you might have had more color, for
to limit, and restrain the Scripture as you do. And then you would object;
thus,

Yea, It is true Christ as he was God, knew all things, and therefore he
(knowing the^ to be elected) says in particular, Of them is the kingdom, etc.
But it does not follow, that therefore such as they are of it, and therefore we
cannot say, that any other believers infants are of the kingdom of heaven
besides them. But here you may see, that this blocketh up your objections,
considering that Christ says, Of [such] is the kingdom, etc. And that the
word [such] is of a larger extent, then the word [them] and includes them
also, as has been observed before.

Fifthly, If the next words after (both in Luke 18. and Mar. 10.) do confirm
the former, (as you confess,) then it still argues, that the reason is
invincible; and therefore neither you, nor all the men in the world, can
overthrow it. It was firm before, and it being (by your own confession)
confirmed in the next words after, then it is not contradicted there, as you
have contradicted it here, and therefore judge your self, whether you have not
bestowed labor in vain, in thus opposing holy Infants. For these Texts do
prove still, that as infants are of the kingdom, so they are not destitute of
the graces of the Spirit, without which none are capable Subjects of the
Kingdom. Wherefore here is sufficient demonstration of Infants conversion,
humiliation, regeneration, and great estimation, which they have with Jesus
Christ, whose word is to be taken, and not refused, it being spirit, and life,
and truth, and so directly opposed to your erroneous affirmations, that it
quite overthrows your unsound collections, in your violent opposition of holy
infants.

Sixthly, You speak very untruly, and do abuse and wrong the Scripture
exceedingly, by inferring from the premises, That when Christ says, Of such is
the kingdom of heaven, His meaning is not of them, nor of such as them in age
nor understanding. For Christ as he speaks of them, so he means them,
(though he do not shut out aged persons, that are in respect of holiness,
such as those holy infants then were, or such as these holy infants now are)
and he means [such] properly, both in years and understanding as may appear
by the scope of the place, where it is said, that Christ commanded to suffer
them to come unto him; and declares the reason (namely) because they are
Subjects of his kingdom; for of such is the kingdom of heaven (says he.) And
when he comes to teach a further lesson, he applies it also to persons of
years, that they should learn to receive the kingdom of heaven, like them,
and to be converted, and to cast away all pride, and to humble themselves: All
which graces (the fruits of regeneration) the Infants of believers are not
destitute of, for as much as they are regenerated, they have the seed, and
beginning of all Christian graces, as has been proved before.

Now, that Christ means these infants, when he says, Of such is the
kingdom, is clear in the Text, and may partly appear unto you from the
former Considerations. But for further confirmation of the premises, let us
mind the scope of the place, and examine the Scriptures cited. In which is
expressly declared.

First, That [the Infants] were [brought] unto Christ, Luke 18.15.

Secondly, The persons intent in bringing them (or the reasons why they brought
them) was, [that Christ should put his hands on them, and pray] Mat. 19.13.

Thirdly, When Jesus saw that the Disciples rebuked those which brought them,
he was [much] displeased, Mar. 10.13, 14.

Fourthly, And he [called] them unto him, Luke 18.16.

Fifthly, We are discreetly to observe, Christ's twofold charge, given unto
his Disciples, In these words, (1.) Suffer the [little] Children to come unto
me,] (2.) [and forbid them not,] (Mar. 10.14.) Mat. 19.14.

Sixthly, We are, heedfully, to mind the reason, (which Christ rendereth for
this) which is expressed, in these words, [For of such is the kingdom of God,]
Mar. 10.14. Luke 18.16.

Seventhly, Christ's addition, or confirmation of his former speech, or the use
(which Christ's Disciples should make concerning themselves) is not to be
forgotten; Verily, I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein, Mar. 10.15. Luke
18.17.

Eighthly, We are to mind Christ's act to these Infants; which was threefold;
(1.) [He] took] them] up] in] his] arms,] and (2.) [Put] his] hands] upon
them;] and (3.) [Blessed them,] Mat. 19.15. Mar. 10.16.

All which does give us sufficient warrant to esteem highly of them, and of
all those who are like them in every respect. Therefore I desire you to weigh
these things distinctly, and discreetly, and then, I hope, it will evidently
appear unto you, that you are mistaken in your meaning, and have done very
evil, (though you meant never so well) in saying that Christ's meaning is not
of them, nor of such as them in age, etc.

For indeed, you may as well say, that those were not Infants whom Christ took
up in his arms, and that he did not lay his hands upon them, nor blessed them,
nor such as them, in age, and understanding. But surely, if the Scripture in
speaking of such persons, do not exclude the persons spoken of, then we have
no reason to exclude these infants here specified, but to know that Christ
Jesus, who was once an infant, and like other infants, both in age, and
understanding In respect of his humane nature.
, he includes the infants, and those like unto them both in age and
understanding; when he says, Of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Consider how that the infants Not aged persons like Infants.
were brought unto Christ; The intent of those that brought them was good, and
their act, in bringing them, was pleasing unto God. The truth of this may
appear, by observing the declaration of their intention; and likewise Christ's
great displeasure, or offense given by and taken at his Disciples, because they
rebuked those that brought them; He was much displeased (says the Holy Ghost
by Mark, Mark. 10.13, 14.) which declares an agmentation, or aggravation of
his displeasure: The noting of which, makes still for clearing the case in
controversy; and may serve for further satisfaction of the doubting soul,
that by Satan's deceit, Isa. 53.11.
is apt to think, that this righteous servant through his knowledge does not
justify many Infants, as well as others. Christ's double charge unto his
Disciples, that the holy infants should have free access and admittance unto
him, without any let or hindrance, by any; and Christ's forcible reason for it,
(namely) for (or because) of such is the kingdom of heaven, etc. And then,
Christ's acts concerning these infants, [that he took them up in his arms, and
put his hands upon them, and blessed them] does further declare, the strength
and sufficiency of mine, (and the weakness and insufficiency of your)
interpretation.

Seventhly, As without Christ's mind, you have taken upon you to deliver
Christ's meaning, contrary to his own expressions, manifestations, and
commissions; so you cite, 1 Cor. 14.20. for confirmation of your strange
restriction of Christ's declaration concerning the Infants. As if Paul were a
Patron of this your fond opinion; but I tell you, in this you are much deceived
also, and do err (and as I in charity judge) do not know the Scriptures. It
was no part of Paul's doctrine, to speak of holy infants as you do, he tells
us, they are holy 1 Cor 7.14.
. And this his exhortation (in 1 Cor. 14.20.) makes nothing for you against
holy infants; for Paul does not speak unto Infants, when he says, Brethren,
Be not children in understanding, howbeit, in malice be ye children, but in
understanding be men. Now who knows not but that those Saints, who are
capable to act, are to perform acts of obedience unto God: when those Saints,
who are not capable to act, are not bounnd so to do; For (as has been
declared before) God requires actual obedience of his people, [so far as they
can act] and no further; and so Paul's speech is, not to bind us to
impossibilies, but to teach us (who have capabilitie) to exercise the same, to
the uttermost of our power, in searching after the mycries of Christ, and in
treasuring up those divine truths, which are taught us by his Spirit. And this
makes nothing against holy Infants being in the Covenant, or kingdom, no more
then it makes against those aged Saints, who (in respect of a natural
capabilitie) are like children, and know no more then Infants know, nor do no
more then infants do, and yet do as much as God requires; and in respect of
a spiritual capabilitie, are like those Saints, who are capable to act, and
do act according to the same; and yet those who want that capabilitie, whether
Christian infants, or other Saints, though the graces of Gods Spirit do not
appear in them, in the blossom, or fruit, yet have they still the sap, and
seed of all Christian graces in them.

Even as a man, or child, which has not the use or exercise of reason, must
not be judged to be an unreasonable creature, and wholly destitute of reason,
but a reasonable creature; So these (precious Saints) before specified, though
they have not the use and exercise of the graces of Gods Spirit, and cannot
show forth the same in the fruit, or outward manifestation, yet they are not to
be esteemed ungracious (or destitute of Gods grace,) but gracious Saints. And
though they be in understanding like children, yet (in respect of their
capablenesse of the Spirit) they are to be esteemed as precious as any men on
earth, and we are not to judge otherwise, but that they shall be glorified,
and made equal with the Angels, and be the sons of God in heaven.

Now your citation of Paul's words (1 Cor. 14.20. Be not children in
understanding, etc. to confirm what you inferred and collected from Christ's
words concerning Infants,) does imply, that you do judge that all those who
are like those Infants in years or understanding, are not of the kingdom of
heaven. And this your interpretation brings in three absurdities.

First, It directly contradicts Christ's words which he spoke concerning them,
and checketh him in his actions which he did to them, upon them, and for them;
and so you make the words, and actions of Christ, both vain and frivolous.

Secondly, Your speech implies, that Believers infants are not of the kingdom
of God; and so their minority hinders their salvation, (if they die in their
infancy;) and this strikes at the fundamental principles of Gods free love
unto them in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, In (implying, that none are of the kingdom of heaven, who are like
Infants in understanding,) Here I think you bring in a heavy censure against
your self; for (I suppose) as you know not how soon your life shall be taken
from you, the like you may say for your understanding; and when your
understanding is taken away (which may be done, and yet you may live many
years after) how do you differ in understanding then from a child; Surely
you are then in understanding like a child, little babe, or infant; and how
then (by your own exposition) will you answer the Apostle, Be not children in
understanding. Surely at the time when you will want both will, skill, and
ability to act any more then they, what are you differing from them, and
wherein will your understanding exceed theirs?

Surely in consideration of these things, you will grant, that old men, and
others, that are the true Saints of God, may be like children [in
understanding] and yet not break their Covenant. And in this declining or
declined condition, an aged Saint may (in this respect) be said to be as
destitute of understanding, as the youngest babe of a believing parent. And he
may be said to be still capable of the Spirit (without being brought in any
other covenant then he was in before) though he be not capable to [doe] any
spiritual action, by way of manifestation, but God must do all in him.

Now though there be no difference between these two, in respect of
spiritualitie, yet in some respects there is a difference; The Infant is [in
nature] growing upwards, or in an inclining condition, and has the seed of
Christian graces in him; the aged Saint before specified, is in a declining
condition; the leaves of the tree are fallen, no fruit appears, yet the
spiritual sap remains, etc. And the consideration of this does teach us, not
to despise any of the Lords vessels, either the infants for their minority,
or the old men for their antiquity, or the middle-aged for their bodily
imbecilitie, but to esteem of the^ as they are, (according as the blessed
spirit of God does teach us, in his sacred Word) though through imperfection,
or defection of natural ability, they cannot actually and verbally manifest
the fruits of their sanctification, but are even as Children [in
understanding;].

By this glimpse, you may see, that the Apostles words (in 1 Cor. 14.20. when
he exhorts us, Not to be children in understanding) will not bear out your
childish construction of the words of Christ, whereby you would have us judge
that he excluded infants; All which is evil in you so to think, much more to
speak, and worst of all, in that you would boulster up your opinions by Paul's
words, in 1 Cor. 14.20! Which makes nothing at all for your present purpose,
in your restriction and mis-application of Christ's words, where you think
(through the help of Paul (1 Cor. 14.20.) to get some advantage, or plea, to
keep back the holy infants of believers from the spiritual blessings, which
Christ Jesus has testified appertains unto them, which you think did not
appertain to those Infants, which Christ took up in his arms, and laid his
hands upon, and blessed; And why do you thus conceive? Because it is said of
[such] and not of [them.] But this word such, will evidently appear, (being
duly weighed by the Scripture) to be of a larger extent then the word them, and
so to include all them, especially, considering that in all those places of
Scripture where the word such is used, there is no exemption, either of the
thing to which such is equalized, or coupled; for such implies the same in
nature, and condition, etc.

So when Paul writes to Philemon (Philem 9, 10.) concerning Onessimus, he
says, Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being [such a one as Paul the
aged.] He means himself: and when John says, Blessed and happy is he that
has part in the first resurrection; for on such the second death shall have no
power, etc. Rev. 20.6.
He means by [such] those persons who have part in the first resurrection.
The word [such,] being a general word, includes them all. And when Nehemiah
says, ( Nehe. 6.11.) Should [such] a man as I fly; He means himself as much
as any other man.

And so when David says, Psalm. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness
unto childrens children [unto such as keep his Covenant] He means those that
keep his Covenant, for this mercy was promised to Abraham, and his seed; who
were to keep his covenant, by doing his commands. So God said to Abraham, Thou
shall keep my Covenant, [Therefore] thou and thy seed, etc. Genesis 17.
And the keeping of his Covenant, consisted then, and consists now in the
Saints yielding all obedience unto him, according to their capabilitie. And
thus it appears that when David says to [such] as keep his Covenant, he
means all [those] that keep his Covenant.

Diverse other testimonies of Scripture concerning persons and things, where
this word such is mentioned, might be produced, which does still include, both
the former and the later, in the specification thereof, But this may suffice,
for in the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing is established. This
still gives us more ground to believe that when Christ (in his Gospel) says
(concerning infants) of such is the kingdom, etc. He means those who are
such in every respect; and as it is contrary to reason, so it is contrary to
the Scripture, to think that the infants in his speech were not employed and
included, if not principally intended.

Lastly, Whereas you say, it is meant of such as them in humility, and such
like qualifications; I know not from what conception you ground your speech, if
not from this consideration, that the infants mentioned here (in Christ's
Gospel) have humility, and such like qualifications; You should know, that
although like, is not always the same, yet the same is the same, and is as
like unto it self, as that which is like it in every respect, and therefore
Christ's speech of Infants, (when he says, Of such is the kingdom, etc.)
implies the infants [as well as other Saints, who are like them in
understanding, though they differ in years.] I say, Christ's speech is not
bound up from them, nor from any other Saints, though they are like them in
every respect. And if they have humility, (according to your own grant) then
you may know also that God will not reject them. He has promised to give grace
to the humble (Jam. 4.6.) To save them (Job 22.29.) To uphold them, (Pro.
29.23.) And to dwell in them, (Isa. 57.15.) and sanctify them, and renovate
them by his Spirit. And seeing they have humility, Christ is in them and they
in him, and therefore they are new creatures; and the 2 Cor. 5.17.
holiness which accompanies them (by your own grant) gives them right to
Baptism. And these new creatures have new created spirits, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
to whom is united the Spirit of the Creator Isa. 44.3.
, and ( Christ by him) quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5.21. which Spirit makes
intercession for them, when they cannot intercede for themselves.

All which privileges the infants of believers have, and though they cannot
manifest the same actually, yet we may conclude that eternal life is theirs,
and the second death shall have no power over them; Rev. 20.6.
they are blessed and happy, having part in the first resurrection; for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven; and therefore it appears that they are given for
an heritage unto Jesus Christ, who is the way, and the truth, the resurrection,
and the life, and their Physician, the graces of whose good Spirit, which is
infused in them, they cannot be said to refuse, or to reject his kingdom, or
any of those good things, which are distributed unto them. If the kingdom of
heaven should not appertain unto the infants of believing parents, as it has
done heretofore, then the Scripture is not fulfilled, which says, that their
children shall be as aforetime; but the Scripture is true, as God himself is
true, and therefore your words cannot be true. God took the infants of
believers into covenant with him formerly, and admitted them to be members of
his visible Church then, and he caused a visible sign Genesis 17.11.
, and seal Romans 4.11.
, of his covenant, and his righteousness of faith to be imposed upon them
then, and he declared from time to time his dear love, and his tender
affection which he had toward them, and therefore they are as holy as they were,
and shall be as holy as they are. Christ is a father 2 Cor. 6.18.
unto the believing Gentiles, as he was unto the believing Jews; and he is the
same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; And therefore as the infants of
believing Jews Genesis 17.
and Gentiles Exodus 12.48.
were received with their believing parents into the Church of God in former
time; So the infants of the believing Jews and Gentiles, are received with
their believing parents into the Church of God now; and as the other had
Circumcision, so these are to have Baptism, it being given to all the members
of Christ's visible Church Mat. 28.19.
, amongst whom they are a part Mat. 10.14.
. And this is according to what is written in the Scripture of God; for thus
says the Lord, Their children shall be as aforetime, and their Congregation
shall be established before me, etc. Jer. 30.20.

Wherefore now let us see who can give one instance, or tittle of Scripture,
for the dismission of their membership, or for barring them from any spiritual
privilege (now under the Gospel) which they are capable off, and in particular
this of Baptism, seeing it is so generally distributed by the Lord of all
administrations, and appertains to all Saints. Indeed if Christ Jesus had not
been much Mar. 10.14.
displeased with his Disciples for such a thing, and if he had not declared
that the kingdom of heaven appertains to them, and had not given a command,
that they should be admitted unto him, or if he had not taken them up in his
arms, and laid his hands upon them, and blessed Ver. 16.
them, but had despised these, and put them from him, and justified his
Disciples in their rebuking of them, or if he had given the bringers of them a
check, (...) ^5.26.
as he did to the Cananitish woman; or if he had given the least touch of holy
Infants supplantation, then you might have had some matter to work upon, in
this your sacrilegious opposition of holy infants. But you have no tittle of
Scripture to bear you out, all the Scripture from the beginning of Genesis to
the end of the Revelation, makes against you; and therefore we may conclude
against you, that the Infants of believers are, (now, as the Infants of
believers were, in former time,) even subjects of Gods kingdom Luke 18.16.
, members of his Church Genesis 17.
, glorious branches, young sucking-sprigs of his noble Vine Psalm. 80.11.
, holy plants and 128.3.
, proceeding from those Olive trees, which are planted in the house of the Lord,
and are said to flourish in the Courts of our God and 92.13.
; And what man shall root them out, without rooting out himself: Jesus has
honored them greatly, and what shall be done unto those whom the King of
heaven delights to honor? That the Lord Jesus Christ greatly delights to
honor the Infants of believers, Mat. 18.2.3. and 19.13, 14, 15. Mar. 10.13,
14, 15, 16. Luke 18.15, 16, 17.
is apparently seen in these Scriptures, where Christ Jesus [now in the time of
the Gospel] honors them so much by his words and actions. And this is that
which that heavenly Prophet Isaiah (being carried by the holy Spirit of God)
spoke of long before, Our God, (that Father of mercies, and God of all comfort
and consolation,) declared prophetically and oraculously, by Isaiah, the
continuation of his truth unto believers, and their Infants, now under the
Gospel; prophesying of Christ and of Christians, Isa. 22.21.
thus; He shall be a father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, 22.
and to the house of Judah; And the key of the house of David will I lay upon
his shoulder, so he shall open, and none shall shut, 23.
and he shall shut, and none shall open; And I will fasten him as a nail in a
sure place. 24.
And he shall be for a glorious throne unto his fathers house. And they shall
hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, the offspring and the issue,
all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the
vessels of slagons, Isa. 22.21, 22, 23, 24.

First, It is here to be observed, that Christ Jesus is called here a Father,
ver. 21. He shall be a Father, (says he.) So [in Isa. 9.6.] he is called the
everlasting Father. Now he that is a father, must be a father of some, and
whereas he is called an everlasting father, it shows that he is (as the
Apostle says) the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever Heb. 13.8.
.

Secondly, It is declared, to whom he is a father (namely) to the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. Now the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
the house of Judah, were the Lords Saints, in covenant with him, his Church and
people, of whom he had declared that Christ Jesus their Savior should come;
and these, Christ Jesus was said to be a father unto, even to the Church of the
Jews, both young and old, parents and children; and salvation was said to be
of the Jews Joh. 4.22.
; Their advantage was much every manner of way, first, because the Oracles of
God were Romans 3.1, 2.
(through Christ) committed unto the^; The God of their fathers Exodus 15.2.
was their father Jer. 31.9.
, and was as a nursing Number. 11.12.
father unto them; And the same God is a father now unto the believing Jews
and Gentiles, as largely every way as he was then 2 Cor. 6.18.
; The same God over all, was Psalm. 86.5.
, and is, rich Romans 10.12.
unto all that call upon him; And though some do not believe, it makes not
the faith of God of none effect no more then the infidelity of some persons
then, for God was still good unto Israel, [his faithful Jews and Proselytes,]
that were of an upright heart, and so he is now.

Thirdly, It is said, And the key of the house of David, Isa. 22. ver. 22.
will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open, and none shall shut, and he
shall shut, and none shall open. And the very same with this, is applied unto
Christ Jesus, as is mentioned, in Rev. 3.7. These things says he that is holy,
he that is true, he that has the key of David, that opens, and no man
shuts, and shuts, and no man opens, etc. Thus through his knowledge
this righteous servant is made able to justify many; and 53.11.
to open to whom he will, and to shut out whom he will; but he shuts not out
the infants of believers; for he declared, Of such is the kingdom of God.

Fourthly, He says, I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; Note here,
he is said to be fastened as a nail in a sure place;] A nail in a sure place,
is such a thing, upon which other things have dependence, so that if the nail
fall, all those things fall which are upon it; But if the nail be sure, all
those things which hang thereon, are still upheld by the strength thereof. Now
the Lord Jesus Christ is this nail, and he is strong, and powerful, he is
perfect, and pure, no sin or brittlenesse, was found in him, he was capable
to bear the burden that was put upon him, and able to bear it. Yea, and much
more does it appear, in that he is fastened as a nail in a sure The safenes of
holy infants consists in the surenes of Jesus Christ; He is unto them, as
the sure place is unto him, whose choice burden shall not be taken down, till
the time appointed of the Father,
place, his humanity is in heaven, and there it is seated and united with his
divinity, and there is his place of rest, and abiding, he is at the right hand
of God, bearing us, and yet thinks not himself over-burdened; he is able to
bear, and does bear all his holy vessels, both great, and small; even the
offspring, and the issue, the vessels of small quantity; so that it is as
possible to pluck God out of heaven, as to take away his former favors, which
he has extended (and does extend) toward the faithful, and their seed; Isa.
59.21.
As for me, this is my Covenant which I will make with them, says the Lord,
the spirit, that is upon thee, and the words, that I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of [Thy mouth] nor out of the month of [thy seed] nor out
of the mouth of [thy seeds-seed,] says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Fifthly, It is said, And he shall be for [a glorious throne] unto his fathers
house; that is, a resting place, and a place of Judgment Psalm. 122.5.
, and Justice, Righteousness is the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness,
the girdle of his reins Isa. 11.4.
. And this is Christ Jesus our Lord, who does all things by his own power, and
rests not upon any humane thing, but only upon his own divinity, in whose
name we ought to do all which we do; Mat. 18.20.
and he has promised, upon the same, to be in the midst of us, to ratify
those divine actions, which proceed from our sincere affections; And as he has
promised the tree of life Rev. 2.7.
and hidden Manna 17.
, and morning star 28.
, (even his own self 24.16. and 3.21.
) unto us, so has he promised to grant us to sit with him in his throne.

Now he is not said to be for a glorious throne unto any, but unto his fathers
house, there is this glorious throne set in the midst of this heavenly
Regiment, in the midst of his Temple, there is Jesus as a throne or seat;
Revel. 4.6.8.
yea, further in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, there
are also the four animalls (said to be) which are full of eyes before and
behind, and rest not neither day nor night, crying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

Isa. 22. ver. 24.
Sixthly, It is said further, And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his
fathers house; Here is a weighty sentence, full of substance. This glorious
throne, and holy nail, which is fastened so surely, is done for no slight
intent, but it is for great purpose, (namely) to bear all the glo^ie of his
fathers house: It is his fathers pleasure to exercise him, in bearing our
glory, which is his glory, our brightness, which is his brightness; (for
indeed we have no comeliness but from him, and we cannot bear our selves,
but he must bear us,) we are the burden, and he is our upholder; he depends
upon that which will not fail him, and we depend upon him, which will not
fail us.

And this Angelical patron, has taught the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the
house of Judah, (even his Church) to fasten upon him, all the glory of his
fathers-house. It is then an Ordinance from heaven, that we shall so do, as he
has said; And this institution therefore being not of man, but of God, it will
stand, and it being an injunction laid upon us all, that we must (both young
and old) have dependencie upon this nail, even the Lord Jesus, we must do
so. Now if we take this word [shall] prophetically, it being also a
declaration of what should happen, (though it now be historical to us) we may
still see the fulfilling of it, in Mat. 19.13. Mar. 10.13. Luke 18.15. where
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the house of Judah brought their children
unto Christ, and he took them up and bare them in his arms; A real sign of
his love unto them indeed; And his Saints now do esteem their Infants, blessed
in Jesus Christ, and do depend upon him, that he will circumcise their hearts,
and the heart of their seed, (to love him more, and more,) according to his
gracious promise; Deuteronomy. 30.6.
And this is that which this Prophetical and Documentall sentence teaches us,
when it says, They shall hang (or cause to rely, or depend) upon him, all the
glory of his fathers house; The least glory must not be left out, but all
must be brought in, and laid upon him. He is the object, upon whom they must
fix their eyes; He is the nail, upon which they must fasten them; for so is
his Command, Mar. 10.14.
Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of God. As if he should say; They are the burden which I must
bear, because they are part of the furniture of my fathers kingdom. And those
whom the father gives me, I will not cast away. It is not the will of your
heavenly father, that any of these little ones should perish Mar. 18.1. Joh.
21.15.
. They are Israelites, the lambs of my pasture, and I am the Shepherd of
Israel, and will in no wise cast them away. He said, Surely they are my people,
children that will not lie, so he was their Savior; In all their affliction he
was afflicted; Isa. 63.8, 9.
And as I (being the Angel of Gods presence) saved them, and in my love and in
my pity redeemed them, and bare them up in mine arms all the days of old,
so will I bear them now; Therefore, suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.

Wherefore let all those who oppose holy infants know, that they thus far, are
enemies unto the Gospel, and so do sin against God exceedingly, in laboring
to cast out these who are the glory of our fathers house. But the holy Prophet
Isaiah says, that upon all the glory, there shall be a covering Isa. 4.5.
. Now Infants being part of the glory, there is a covering upon them, and this
covering, 59.21.
is by the Spirit of the Lord, for verification whereof, see the Evangel. Mat.
19.14 Luke 18.15, 16
where Christ says, Of such is the kingdom of heaven, (Mark. 10.14. Of such
is the kingdom of God. And he took them up in his arms, and put his hands
upon them, and blessed them. (Ver. 15.) And by this it may appear, that all
believing parents have ground to cast their infants upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
and for them to depend upon him, who is as a nail fastened in a sure place.

And whereas it is said, [All the glory,] We are taught not to leave out any
of the glory, least by abridging (or debarring) our Infants of their
privileges, we leave out some of the glory, (if not the chiefest part) and
so highly disobey Gods Institution, in leaving out his ordinances, and his
people, which are the glory of his house. It is to be minded, that this word
[all,] is agreeable to the words of Christ, when he says, Of such is the
kingdom of heaven; for this word [such,] (as has been observed See before in
page 92, 93. 99. 100.
) is of a large extent, and includes them also, they being the glory of the
Fathers house; So in Malachy, the seed of the godly are called, a godly seed,
Mal. 2.14. and in 1 Cor. 7.14. they are termed holy children. God greatly
delights in them, and they are a glory unto his Church; Wherefore they are
dignified with names accordingly.

And moreover, Christ being set forth as a nail unto these holy vessels, it
does signify unto us, that these must be put upon him which have not a
natural capablenesse, the holy offspring, and blessed issue, the vessels in
Gods temple must be fastened upon Not but that they are of the Temple, or
members of the Church, but for more comelines, and honor, and eminency,
safety, glory, and dignity, they were appointed to be set on high (by the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the house of Judah) upon him, who is as a nail
fastened in a sure place.
him by others.

If we compare the 17th of Genesis with this, it will give light to the point;
for there the parents were commanded to circumcise their children, which was
unto them a sign and seal of the righteousness of the same faith which
Abraham had, and so it was a token that they belonged unto the Lord. And
Baptism [being unto us as Circumcision was unto them,] we therefore baptize
our infants, as they circumcized theirs; and thereby do confirm them unto
Christ, as they confirmed theirs. And because he claims these holy vessels
of small quantity, we therefore dedicate them unto him, according as God
commanded the Children of Israel concerning theirs, and so we put them upon the
Lord Jesus Christ; and they are his peculiar treasure, and he bears them, and
approves of our practice in bringing them unto him, it being according to his
Commandment, who is as faithful in his house as Moses, and is worthy of more
glory then Moses Heb. 3.3.
, inasmuch as he who builds the house, is worthy of more honor then the
house. Now in this house, there the Lord has ordained his vessels of small
quantity to abide, who are the offspring, and the issue, and the glory
thereof. And they may well be called so, for God calls and counts them so.
And also where this glory is, there is still hope, and it is, and may (in
reason) be expected, that as they come to be capable, so they will manifest
actually the fruits of Gods Spirit; and as they are children of light, and
enlightened, so they will set it forth, to the glory of the father of lights;
And as glorious stars in eminency, show forth their excellency, in the
bright firmament of that heavenly Jerusalem, wherein they are planted, and
placed, and will be also a means to increase it, not only by grafting in
those far remote, but also by propagation, (or multiplication) of persons
within themselves. As Moses (that good Christian, who was like unto Christ)
says, Deuteronomy. 1.11.
The Lord make you a thousand times so many as you be. Which speech is not to
be limited to an addition of persons, unto them from out of the world, but it
is meant that they should increase amongst themselves, and so multiply; even as
a tree, which (though it have grafts) yet grows into many branches, which
branches are not grafted in, but spring therefrom and grow thereupon. Now where
this glory is not, there is a want of it, yea, and a great want, I may say
indeed! And why? Because that the Church then is (in expectation, according to
the ordinary course of nature) in a decaying condition. I say, the Church is
ready to decay, that is to say, to be lessened more, and more, in this
terrestrial habitacle; for it is appointed unto men once to die, and when they
are dead, they are gone, and leave the remnant, or none behind them.

But holy infants being in the Church, and members, of the same, they are a
glory unto it, and it may well be expected, (according to the ordinary course
of nature) that they will outlive the other, and so succeed them after their
decease, and so the celestial glory of the fathers will shine in the
children, (according to the mind of God) in this terrestrial world.

Now where this glory is missing, (so that the generations in the Church do
pass away, and none are borne to succeed,) there is a want in that respect,
and so consequently, the supply thereof is to be desired; which if it be made
up, then it is a glory, an honor, a rejoicing unto them. So that though this
hope deferred, makes the heart sick, yet the desire coming is as a tree of
life, Pro. 13.12.
a reviving unto them.

Look upon the first Church that was on earth, Adam and Eve, see whether they
were not comforted in bringing forth children to God; and what hope had they of
the continuance of the Church on earth, if it were not by promulgation of
children to their celestial Father. After Abel was slain, and Cain cast out,
God sent Seth, in stead of Abel; Genesis 4.25, 26.
and this thing Eve did acknowledge, and this was a great comfort unto them.
And thus Eve, the mother of us all, was like unto Rachel and Leah, who built
the house of Israel; And how was this? Even by bringing forth a holy seed unto
God, and bringing them up in his fear. And this made all the People, and the
Elders of Israel, Ruth 4.11, 12.
to say unto Boze, (upon his wedding day;) The Lord make the woman that is come
into thine house, like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of
Israel! And do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlem. And let
thy house be like the house of Pharez (whom Tamar bare unto Judah) of the
[seed] which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.

Note here, that the holy seed, the offspring, and the issue, are materials
for building the Lords house, they are the comfort of Israel, and the glory of
Gods holy house, and kingdom. But where there is no offspring, no issue, then
there is not that joy, that gladness, that glory, that expectation of
succession, as would be, if there were children. Wherefore the Lord for
comforting his people Israel, Isa. 29.22, 23.
says in the 29th of Isaiah, ver. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord, who redeemed
Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob; Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither
shall his face now wax pale. Ver. 23. But when he sees his children, the work
of mine hands in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my Name, and
sanctify the holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. Ver. 24.
They also that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding; and they that
murmured, Jer. 30.20.
shall learn doctrine. And in the 30th Chapter of Jeremiah, Ver. 20. God
says, their children shall be as aforetime, and their Congregation shall be
established before me, etc. And in the 31. Chapter of Jeremiah, Jer. 31.15, 16,
17.
Ver. 15, 16, 17. Thus says the Lord, (to Rahel, which wept for her children
(from two years old and under, (( Mat. 1.16, 17, 18.)) and refused to be
comforted, because they were not) Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine
eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, says the Lord, and they
shall come again from the land of the enemy. Ver. 17. And there is hope in
thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come again unto their own
border.

Take notice here, how the Lord comforted his people, and spoke comfortably to
Jerusalem; And he is the same unto his people, as he has been heretofore; His
comfort is not lessened, but is extended to all Saints, from the least unto the
greatest, from the youngest to the eldest. God never lesseneth his glory nor
his excellency, Psalm. 68.19.
which he communicates to his people, but daily increases his blessings, and
multiplieth his benefits toward them and theirs, and increases their glory,
and does not, nor never did, diminish it from them, or their infants. And
therefore experience teaches us, that the infants of the Saints are the glory
of the fathers house, as heretofore they have bin.

Seeing then it is so clear, that the infants of believers are the glory of
the fathers house, they (being of his household) must have the privileges of
the house, according to the appointment of the householder; and what is
appointed for such vessels of honor, and of glory? Surely these holy vessels
of the Lords sanctuary, they being believers, and Disciples of Christ, being
hallowed by the holy Ghost, ought to be baptized; See Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.16.

Seventhly, It is declared, what this glory is, and wherein this glory
consists, or what must be put upon Christ, what glorious things, even the
offspring, and the issue, (says he) that is to say, their seed, or children;
for they are the offspring, and the issue, as may appear by these Scriptures;
[ Job 5.25. Isa. 21.8. and 48.19. and 61.9. and 65.23. Rev. 22.16. Genesis 48.5,
6.] And this is according to what the Apostle declares in 1 Cor. 7.14. that
the children of believers, (male, or female,) the offspring, and the issue,
are a holy seed.

Now this offspring, and issue, has dependency upon Jesus Christ, and he
bears them, and will bear them, Romans 8.30.
and bless them in bearing them, and justify them in blessing them, and
sanctify them in justifying them, and glorify them in sanctifying them; He is
all in all, in them, and for them, and to them; Their glory, is the glory of
his Fathers house, and they are the glory thereof, as has been showed before.
Wherefore let all Christian parents, as they love Christ, in procreation of
their children, dedicate their holy offspring, and blessed issue, unto God,
and lay them upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and say unto him, Save us thy people,
(both great and small, Psalm. 28.9.
) and bless thine inheritance, gather them, and lift them up for ever.

Eighthly, Further, this holy offspring, and blessed issue, which is the glory
of the house of the God of all glory and power, (who is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ) are called vessels of small quantity; vessels of small
quantie, are used to be set upon nails sometimes for show, for safety and
conveniencie, glory and decency. Now Jesus Christ is as a nail, the
offspring, and the issue, are the vessels of small quantity, and these holy
vessels of small quantity, Jesus Christ is said to bear; yea, and to bear
them all, [all] vessels of small quantity, (says the Text.) Wherefore we
have no ground to cast away any of them, or omit the least of these vessels,
though they are but of [small] quantity.

Some peradventure will think, that because the infants of believers are
vessels of [small] quantity, that therefore they are [no vessels,] or
vessels of [no] quantity, or vessels of contempt, or disgrace, or such in whom
there is no glory spiritually, or such concerning whom they cannot judge, or
such in whom the seed of Gods grace is not to be esteemed to be. But let them
know, that they do violent injury unto Jesus Christ, and do exceedingly
eclipse the glory of his Mediatorship; For as the smallest vessels in the
Lords Temple, in the time of the Law, were as holy as the greater, though they
could not contain so much; So the Infants of believers, (who are the Lords
vessels) are as holy, as those Saints who are past their minority, though
they being Infants, through tenderness of years, cannot contain, or receive,
what the others (who are aged) can; yet are they as precious in Christ's
estimation, and have his holiness upon them, as aged Saints have. There was a
great difference They differed in the quantity, not in the quality. Zach.
4.20.
, in the time of the Law, between the spoones, flaggons, and cups, in the
Temple; and the censers, seas, and potts: and yet they were all holy, both
great and small: and so were the Jews, both young and old, great and small,
Infants and aged persons they were all holy ecclesiastically, and all the Lords
holy vessels; and we are not to have such sacrilegious thoughts, as to think
God does refuse the infants of believers, though they are vessels of small
quantity.

The Boules before the Altar were counted very glorious, when it is taken for
such an excellent thing, for the potts in the Lords house, to be like unto
them. If then the potts in the Lords house, spiritually are, (in these last
days, and flourishing times of the Gospel In respect that there is and has
been [both by the sight of the eye, and hearing of the eare] (and in diverse
other respects) most of God, of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, manifested in
these last days.
) like the boules before the Altar; What are the boules before the Altar? What
are the cups? What are the flaggons? The Lord in numbering up his holy vessels
of small quantity, [even the holy offspring, and the blessed issue,] calls
them by the name of cups and flaggons, and calls them the glory of his house.
All which does set forth the excellency of the Infants of believers, their
great holiness, and high estimation with Jesus Christ. Compare with this the
Historical Relations of Christ, concerning infants in the Gospel; and there
the fulling of this Prophecy will appear to be; for there they brought
infants to him, that he should put his hands on them, and pray; and he approved
of their act Mat. 19.13.
, yea, and gave free admittance for the infants to come unto him, and charged
that none should interrupt the bringers, by forbidding them; because of such is
the kingdom of heaven Mar. 10 14. Luke 18.17.
; and he took them up in his arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed
them Mar. 10.15.
.

But to this you answer; First, That all this is not baptizing them; for Christ
baptized not, A. R. Page 14. lin. 3, 4, 5.
Joh. 4.2. And therefore this place seems not at all to prove the baptizing of
Infants.

Ans. The holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius, and his friends, Act. 10.44.
at Peter's preaching, though all this was not baptizing them with water; yet
(they being baptized by the holy Ghost) who could forbid water that they should
not be baptized, which had received the holy Ghost as well as Ver. 47.
others; So the infants which Christ took up in his arms, he laid his hands
upon, and blessed, Christ did more for holy Infants, then baptize them with
water.
and declared that the Kingdom of God belonged unto them; Of such is the
Kingdom of heaven (says he) and Christ had declared, that without the Spirit,
persons could not enter into the Kingdom of God. But these infants were
subjects of his Kingdom, (according to the doctrine of Christ) and therefore
they had the Spirit; and seeing the infants of believers are as they were, they
have the Kingdom, the Gospel, the Spirit, and the graces of the Spirit, and
all, and therefore they may lawfully be baptized, and therefore these places
have not only a semblance in them, but also a substantial ground for the
baptizing of the infants of the faithful; It being not various in the least,
from any of Gods institutions, but every manner of way agreeable to the same.
And though then neither Christ, nor his Spirit, baptized with the Baptism of
water, but instrumentally, yet those that have Christ, and the Spirit, have the
inward Baptism, and so are to have the outward Baptism; but the infants of
believers, have Christ and the Spirit, (for they have the Kingdom, which
cannot be without the Spirit) therefore the infants of believers are to have
the outward Baptism; As has been proved before, and even now, and shall be
further cleared afterward.

Next you say; Secondly, Let them that please do as here Christ did, A. R.
yet much rather let us all learn the lesson which Christ here taught, A. R.
without which we cannot be saved. But we quite perverting Christ's meaning,
do in another sense become little children: for some at first had no sooner
hence sounded out this tune in our ears, that the Kingdom of heaven belongs
to little children, and therefore Baptism: But we all presently, like little
children, dance after this pipe, as though our heads were lighter then our
heels: and in the mean time loose the true sense, the marrow and fatness of
these Texts which so much do concern us.

And thus it is not only in these Texts, but in many more, in so much that we
through this our childish (if not brutish) following the heard of Interpreters
from humane authority, rather take many gross errors for undeniable
principles, then once open our eyes to see and receive the truth upon Gods own
bare word, that we might believe, and so be saved out of this quick-sand of
delusions: And indeed how can we believe, giving and receiving honor thus one
of another, and seek not that honor that comes of God alone: As Christ tells
us, Joh. 12.44.



To which I answer, That those may rightly do as Christ here did, who are
heirs of the Kingdom whereof Christ is King. But before [you] do as Christ
here did (take that counsel which you give unto others) learn the lesson
which Christ has here taught, without which, (you say) you cannot be saved.
And seeing that the kingdom of heaven consists of the infants of believers,
we may safely believe, and justly conclude, that though they are little in
quantity, yet they are great in quality, and most precious in the eyes of the
Lord.

And surely we have need of humility, to teach us, not to be so proud, as to
despise the day of [ small Zech. 4.10.
things.] It is not the way to be happy, to despise those that are happy,
though they have not attained to such a measure, as to confess, or express,
by verbal relations, or visible demonstrations, Gods work upon their souls.
And I tell you further, If you hold on in your errors, in withstanding holy
infants, and do not repent of this your evil, you cannot rightly do as
Christ here did, nor learn the lesson which Christ here taught, (and so upon
your own ground cannot be saved) but do come under the censure (which you have
here set down Page 14. lin. 8, 9.
) of quite perverting Christ's meaning, etc. and loosing the true sense, marrow,
and fatness of these Texts, which so much concern us: An evident proof of
this appears in your interpretation of the Scripture (in the Gospel which
speaks of infants) which you would not have to be meant of those Infants, nor
of such as them in age or understanding, but of others, who are such as them in
humility, and such like qualifications. So that you tying your self unto this
restriction In Page 13. lin. 26, 27. 38, 39, 40, 41.
, have indeed lost the marrow, and gnawne upon the bone, bitten on the bark in
stead of the pith, the shell in stead of the kernel.

And thus you have done, not only in these Texts, but in many more, as does
evidently appear, in these your Childish Treatises of Baptism.

And if your humane Authors have made you childish, and brutish, be no more so;
If you have followed them in stead of the Word, as it so appears by your
citing them, in your Childish Treatises, and building upon their mistakings;
Repent then, and sin no more; Open your eyes, and see the truth; Take hold of
the promises (if it be possible) that you may be saved out of this your
quick-sand of delusions.

As for the objections which you call scattering objections Page 14. lin. 24, 25.
, which (you say) you have met withal; As they are set down by you, some of
them may well be said to be scattering. In the first objection, (in the
inference) you speak of ordinances Lin. 29.
in general, which must be esteemed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, by whom
soever, or on whom soever they are administered. But here you have not told us,
what Ordinances are to be esteemed so. But in answering Lin. 33.
it, you labor to discover the weakness of the Objection, which is without
distinction; and you would infer, as though the objecters meant by
ordinances, acts merely; for so you say Page 15. lin. 9.
, this objection imports, that had but the Idolatrous Corinthians taken bread
and wine, and broken it, and divided it among their dogs and swine, yet this
should have been the ordinance of Christ, if it must remain his by whom
soever, or on whom soever it is administered; And so you demand Lin. 15.
(upon this) whether the Apostle received any such ordinance, etc? And at
length you deny it to be the mind, commandment, or ordinance of Christ at
all, and therefore you conclude, That for any to call such actions his
ordinances, can be no less then blasphemy against the Son of God.

To which, I say, that if he who framed this objection, means that the
ordinances of Christ, are the ordinances of Christ, then we are not to
understand that he means here by ordinances, mere natural acts, as giving
bread and wine to dogs and swine, he has not so expressed it; and therefore,
though you denied your own inference, or swinish insinuation, yet you could not
justly charge him with blasphemy against the Son of God in this particular;
But rather those may be charged with blasphemy, who deny the ordinances of
Christ, to be the ordinances of Christ. And indeed I think reason should teach
you, that the ordinances of Christ, are the ordinances of Christ; for as every
thing is the same with it self, so every ordinance of Christ is the same with
it self.

But (next you say;) Obj. They will reply, that bread and wine received by any
in such a manner, and water sprinkled in the Name of the Father, etc. are his
ordinances, and therefore whosoever has these, has his ordinance.

Ans. I think this your accusation, is a mere surmise, or groundless
supposition. You say, They will thus reply; Who are they that will thus reply?
I think you have no opposite, in withstanding this, except it be such as your
self. This may well be called scattering; for it is the nature of chafe, and
stubble, to be scattered by the wind; and indeed, I think that this objection
(which you make to be a reply of others) is your own (if the truth were
known.) And you might have saved your labor in bringing such frivolous toys.
For you know, that our point is not concerning eating bread, or drinking wine,
or sprinkling water, as they are merely natural acts, but as they are divine
ordinances. Now to say that the eating of bread, and drinking wine, and
sprinkling water, [as they are merely natural acts] are divine ordinances, and
that therefore whosoever has these, has his ordinances, is very absurd. I
never did hear it proceed out of any ones mouth, nor read in any book, besides
your own. I conceive then that you might have saved your labor, and not made
answer where there is no opposition, but have kept your Bartholomew-babies for
Bartholomew-faire, unless you could have proved them to be the Kings Subjects,
as the children of six months old are, whom you have (familiarly Page 16. lin.
1.
by a Supposition Lin. 2.
) equalized Lin. 15.
with them in your answer. But herein also you are deceived in your judgment,
it being a very childish and babish comparison; For you might know (if you have
the use of your senses) that Bartholomew-babies [of the best sort] are
unsensible, but [the meanest children] (of six months old) are reasonable
creatures, and therefore it appears that your unsensible comparisons are
unseasonable at this time.

But the next objection being sound, you cannot answer, but in laboring to
turn it away, discover how deeply you are drenched in deceivable errors, and
vain conceits.

The objection or position is, that It is said (1 Cor. 10.1, 2.) of the
children of Israel, that they were all baptized in the cloud, and in the sea;
there being young children, as well as men of years.

Your answer unto this is as follows: The Text is, that they were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, A. R. Page 16. li. 23.
and in the sea: But our question is not of baptizing unto Moses, but of
baptizing unto Christ, by being dipped or buried in water by the similitude of
his death, according to the institution of Christ: Thus were not these
Israelites baptized, for they were in the cloud, and in the sea dry, nor was
baptism then instituted; Thus then is the sense of the place; That no enjoying
of any outward privilege, as Baptism, or the Lords Supper, without true
faith, companied with obedience, will now save us any more then the many
outward privileges and visible signs of Gods presence, and the great outward
deliverances which the Lord by the hand of Moses afforded and wrought for the
Israelites, in bringing them through the sea, in defending and guiding them in
the Wilderness; by the cloud did exempt and save them from Gods Judgments;
for notwithstanding their enjoying all these outward favors, many of them
perished in the Wilderness for their sins and disobedience; which St Paul
sets out as examples unto us; and therefore here by way of allusion compares
their outward privileges, to the outward privileges and ordinances of the New
Testament; Even as St Peter in like manner figuratively speaks of the Arc, 1
Pet. 3.20, 21. When once the long suffering of God, waited in the days of
Noah, while the Arc was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were
saved by water; the like figure whereunto Baptism does now also save us, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

These then being only figures and allusions, cannot serve at all to prove the
point in hand.



The Reply.

That the Text does declare they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and
in the sea, is clear, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. And this place does make directly
against particular parts of your Judgment; as your denying the Baptism of
Infants to be lawful, affirming it to be only a mere device and tradition of
men, brought into the world for politic and by-ends See A. R. his first book,
in the Epistle to the Reader.
. Now here you may see who brought it into the world; I will not say God did it
for politic or by-ends; for then I should be like the Serpent, which would
have persuaded Eve that God [for such by-ends] did forbid them to eat of the
tree of knowledge of Good and evil; thereby to possess them with this, as
though God envied their happy estate. But we know that Gods love is not
self-love, his end was always to do his people good at their later end; and
by the baptizing of them in the cloud and the sea, he did prophetically
demonstrate what should be in the days of the Messiah; and herein aimed not
only at his own glory, but at his peoples comfort.

See A. R. his Vanity of Childish Baptism, page 9.
Secondly, This place makes against your Judgment, in your holding and seeking
to maintain a necessity of plunging the whole man in water in the ordinance
of Baptism; for the Apostle says, They were all baptized in the cloud, and in
the sea; But we will not say, that they were plunged in water (or overwhelmed
with the water of the Sea;) for then they would have been like unto the
Egyptians; for the Egyptians were served after this manner Exodus 14.27, 28.
. Neither will we affirm (as you do,) that the Israelites were in the cloud
and in the sea dry, without declaring what drines we mean; for though they
went upon dry ground, and the waters were a wall unto them; on the right hand,
and on the left Ver. 22, 23.
, yet we may collect from the Scriptures, that they were baptized 1 Cor. 10.1,
2. Exodus 14.19. Psalm 77.15, 16 17, 18, 19, 20.
with water out of the Cloud (or Sea.)

But this Text you labor to shift off, by telling us, that your question is
not of baptizing unto Moses, but of baptizing unto Christ, by being dipped or
buried in water, etc.

And by this it appears that you think this Baptism which the Children of
Israel received, was not the Baptism of, (or unto) Christ, but merely a
Baptism unto Moses. But you should know that Moses was not such a one as you
take him to be; for he was faithful in all his house, and brought no
innovations into Gods Church. The Evangelicall Ordinances and Oracles then,
were the things of God; If then they were the things of God; Gods Son, who
was always God with God, was then the owner thereof, and he being the Angel of
Gods presence Isa. 63.8, 9.
, who was with them in the cloud, and in the sea, when they were Baptized Exodus
14, 19.
, we may safely conclude, that the Baptism was his, as well as the rest of
the Oracles and Ordinances. And you should know, that though the manner of
[Baptising] then unto Moses, and now unto Christ, differs in Circumstances,
yet the [Baptisme] is one and the same in substance, and therefore the Apostle
Paul tells us, they were all [Baptized] in the cloud, and in the sea 1 Cor.
10.2.
; and he puts no other differences between the two Baptismes, but that the
one is as the other. And therefore when we speak of that Baptism, we cannot
but speak of the Baptism of Christ Understand here, that I speak of the
Baptism of water; for Christ is said (by his authority) to Baptize with
water, as well as with the holy Ghost and fire; and so the baptism of water is
his, whether before or after his ascension.
; for as the Baptism of Christ, is not the Baptism of John, yet the Baptism
of John, was the Baptism of Christ. So though the Baptism of Christ is not
the Baptism of Moses, yet the Baptism of Moses was the Baptism of Christ;
For Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant (for a testimony of those
things which were to be spoken afterward) but Christ as a Son, who was
counted worthy of more glory then Moses; for he was the builder of the house;
and therefore is worthy of more honor then the house Heb. 3.2, 3.
. And seeing they were all baptized unto Moses (who was commended for his
faithfulness Ver. 5.
) there is no just reason can be given to debar the infants of believers from
Baptism now, or from being baptized unto Christ, seeing Christ is worthy of
more glory th^n Moses; and that the Sons Ver. 6.
privileges are no less (but more) then the servants.

But you bring in exceptions against the baptism then, and so labor to make a
disparitie between the baptism then in the cloud and sea, and this baptism
now; for you say, They were not dipped, and then yield this reason; for they were
in the cloud, and in the sea dry. But I would know of you, how long they were
dry? Surely they might be watered, and yet not be dipped! There is a Medium
between being dipped, and being dry. We read that the children of Isreal were
baptized 1 Cor. 10.2.
, but we do not read, that they were overwhelmed, (as the Egyptians were
Exodus 14.28.
.) But by this it appears, that the Scripture is of no value unto you,
unless it will agree with your fond opinions; for you would argue, that
because they were not dipped; therefore they were not baptized, at least, not
according to Christ's institution.

And afterward you say, Nor was Baptism then instituted. So you have answered
your self, though it be after a writhen manner; If Baptism were not then
instituted, how could that Baptism be according to the institution of Christ?
though they were dipped never so much! I hope you will not say, that dipping, or
plunging, makes Baptism any more to be of Christ's institution? For then you
will say, that the Egyptians were baptized according to Christ's institution,
and not the Israelites. But you should know, that the Israelites were not
baptized contrary to Christ's institution; The Angel of Gods presence was with
his people then, in the cloud and in the sea, He was the Instituter.

Consider then (I pray you) what want was there of any thing needful unto
Baptism?

Instituter?

sea.

Administrater?

Instituter could do it, or appoint it to be done by some other besides
himself; But they were all baptized (says Paul) therefore I conclude, that
seeing they had the Administration, it was not without an Administrator.



cloud, and if that had been too little, there was more in the sea; and if the
Angel of Gods presence (their present companion) had seen it good, they should
have been dipped, and should have had as great a quantity of the Element in
Baptism, as the Egyptians had without it.



subjects themselves, and right subjects we may say; for they were such who
were in Gods covenant; of which Circumcision (the seal Romans 4.11.
of the righteousness of faith) was a sign Genesis 17.11.
.

This being rightly minded, it may refute your former opinion (to wit) that the
Baptism of infants cannot be of God, but of man, a vain, and lying tradition
Page 7. lin. 18. 19. 22.
, thrust upon the world under color; foysted in like Antichristian devices.

Now sure if it were not of God, but of man, you will tell us what man invented
it. Seeing you have presumed to be so bold to go thus far, I pray you (if you
can) go a little further, and tell us who invented it; you cited diverse humane
Authors Page 7.8, 9.
, which were since Christ, but sure they were not the inventers thereof, for here
you may see it was administered long before they were borne, many hundreds of
years; and so your new account comes too short to prove the Baptism of
infants to be invented since Christ, for as much as this of Moses undermineth
that your sandy conception. Who invented it then? I pray you tell me, for sure
you can tell! at least you think so, otherwise you would not have termed it as
you do. Moses did not invent it, he was faithful over his Masters house as a
servant, bringing nothing into the worship and service of God, but what was
appointed by God; neither would he, or God suffer such a thing to be acted, and
to go unreproved; except it were according to Gods appointment. Neither would
the Apostle have called it Baptism, as he does in 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. had it been
an invention of man, and not an institution, or an action of Gods. But you
(your self) have granted it to be a privilege unto them; then sure you must
by this confess it was no invention of man, but the Lords doings, though it be
mavelous in your eyes; and therefore seeing that the children of Israel (in
the cloud, and in the sea) had baptism conferred upon them by divine right; it
was not a humane invention, nor diabolical institution (according to your
former affirmation) but an Evangelicall Administration.

Next you take upon you to give the sense of the place, but you vary from it;
you tell us, that no enjoining of any outward privilege, as Baptism, or the
Lords Supper, will now save us, without true faith, accompanied with obedience;
and I tell you, that I also affirm the same.

But when you should declare that our Baptism cannot save us without faith, no
more then their Baptism could save them, you vary from the point in
particular, and speak in general of their many outward privileges; and when
you come to particulars, you mind their bringing through the sea for one, their
defense and guidance in the Wilderness by the cloud for another; but you omit
their Baptism, the maine thing which you should keep to at this time, and so
you run on, and would turn Paul's particular testimony, into a general;
whereas Paul does speak in particular, and tells us, that they were baptized.

And at length you come to Peter, and take upon you to tell us the manner of
his speech, how he compares the Baptism of the Arc, with the Baptism now,
and says, the like figure Baptism does now also save us; and so you tell us,
that these being only figures and allusions, can prove nothing to the point in
hand. Thus now you have cast off both the Baptismes of the New and Old
Testament; for the Apostle Peter speaks of the Baptism of Noah, and of the
Baptism now, and says, this is a like figure to that, and you tell us, they
are figures, and allusions; but I think you mean delusions; for you say, they
serve not at all to prove the point in hand.

But as for this Answer of yours, it is one and the same with that in the
Anabaptists Dialog. For there they tell us; 1. That Moses did not at all wash
them with water in the cloud and sea. 2. That this of Moses is called Baptism
by comparison, as Noah's Arc is called the figure of the Baptism that saves
us: for as the Arc saved those in it from drowning: so the Israelites were all
under the cloud, and in the sea, and therein baptized or safegarded from
destruction of their enemies. 3. That it pleased the Holy Ghost to [say] they
were baptized in the sea and cloud, because the sea and cloud was their
safety, as Noah's Arc was: And as Christ says, they are baptized that suffer
for his sake: So there is as much warrant to enjoyne Infants to suffer
persecution, because it is called Baptism; as to baptism them, because the
cloud and sea is called Baptism.

To this Mr. Ainsworth says In his book called A censure upon the Anabaptists
Dialog pa. 99.
; Let them consider Exodus 14.24.25. compared with Psalm. 77.16, 17. etc. And
they may see there was water enough in the cloud: and they will not say (I
think) that there was no water in the sea. All outward baptizing or washing,
must be with water, or some other liquor. If they were not baptized with water,
what other liquor were they baptized in? Not with blood, as in the baptism of
suffering death for Christ's sake, which they impertinently mention. Not with
wine or strong drink; for they found none such in the Wilderness. If they can
show nothing but water to baptize them in, let them deny no more (for shame)
that they were baptized with water. God spoke to our fathers by the Prophets at
sundry times (or in (...)
sundry parts, as it were by peice-meale) as the Apostle teaches, Heb. 1.1. By
Moses he showed how the cloud removed from before Israel, and stood behind
them, (as they passed through the Sea) and gave them light, but was darkness
to the Egyptians: and from the fiery cloudy pillar the Lord looking, troubled
the Egyptians, and took off their Chariot wheels, that they drove them
heavily, Exodus 14.19, 20.24, 25. This being briefly and obscurely told by
Moses, God after by Asaph another Prophet, shows the manner of it, how not
only the waters of the Sea saw the Lord, when they fled and parted; but the
clouds also from above powered out water when they rained; the skies sent out a
sound by thunder, etc. Thus the ground being softened with the rain, occasioned
the Chariot wheels of the Egyptians (sticking in the mire) to fall off, and
hinder their pursuit: Psalm. 77.16. etc. After this the Apostle ( taught by Gods
Spirit) manifests the mystery which before was kept secret, namely, how this
passage under the cloud ( which rained) and through the sea, was a baptism to
the Israelites: even as Christian men's washings in rivers or vessels, was a
baptism to them. And as the Manna which Israel eat, and water from the rock
which they drank, was the same spiritual meat and drink, which we have
signified by bread and wine in the Lords Supper, so their washing in the cloud
and sea, and our washing in vessels or rivers, is spiritually the same
baptism: from hence we gather the baptizing of our Infants by two Arguments:]
1. All our fathers ( says Paul) were baptized in the cloud and sea: therefore
(say we) Infants; for seeing there was no other baptism but that in the cloud
and sea, such of our fathers as then were Infants, were at that time baptized,
or else many of our fathers ( even all the infants of many thousand families)
were never baptized: which is contrary to the Apostles doctrine. And if Infants
had baptism under Moses, it cannot be denied them under Christ.

2. In that the Apostle teaches us, that the extraordinary and temporary
sacraments (or seals of salvation) which Israel had, were the substance and
truth which we now have, though Moses does not so express: It follows upon
like ground, that their ordinary seals, namely, Circumcision, and the
Passover, were the same in truth and substance with baptism, and the Lords
Supper, which we now have, and being the same; As Infants had Circumcision
then, so they are to have baptism now.

Secondly, Whereas they say that of Moses was called baptism by comparison, as
if it were not properly baptism: they swarve from the right way: it was as
truly and properly baptism to them, as ours is to us, though the manner of
administration differ: even as their Manna and water were as truly and properly
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to them, as bread and wine in the Lords
Supper are to us. Otherwise the Apostle should not say truly, that they were
the same. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.

Thirdly, Noah's Arc is not called the figure of baptism, as these corrupters
of Scripture tell us: but baptism ( says the Apostle) is a like figure (or
antitype) 1 Pet. 3.21. So that the saving by water of eight then in the Arc,
was a type or figure: and the saving of a few now by water in baptism, is an
antitype, or like figure; both of them figuring salvation by the death of
Christ.

Fourthly, Neither do these men set down the reason fully and rightly, why
they are said to be baptized, (namely,) because the cloud and sea was their
safety, as Noah's Arc was,) for though it may in some sense be granted, that
these were their safety, as baptism is our safety, (for it is said to save
us, 1 Pet. 3.21.) yet properly they are said to be baptized in the cloud and
sea, because they were in them sacramentally washed from their sins, and
planted together in the likeness of his death, burial, and resurrection, as
we are now by baptism, Romans 6.3, 4, 5.

The cloud served them for three uses:

1. To protect and keep them safe, Isa. 4.5.6.

2. To guide them in the way that they should go, Numb. 9.17 etc. Exodus 14.21.
And these two were ordinary.

3. To baptize them by pouring down water, and this was extraordinary, and but
one time in the red Sea, for ought we find. And in this respect Paul says,
they were baptized in it.

Fifthly, Their last speech of injoyning infants to suffer persecution, as well
as to baptize them, is spoken with a wry mouth: for as we injoyne not Infants
to be baptized, though we baptize them; so can we not enjoyne them to suffer
persecution. But this we say and know, as Infants are baptized into Christ, so
oftentimes they suffer persecution for Christ, being with their parents
afflicted, imprisoned, banished, etc. yea, and bereaved of life it self, so
that they have even the baptism of blood or martyrdom also.

Thus you may see, that there has been (long ago) a large and sufficient
Answer made unto this Answer of the Anabaptists of old, which is even one and
the same with yours.

Thus much for reply to your Answer to the third objection.

As touching the fourth and fifth objection (the charitable construction being
set aside) I except against them both; but especially the fourth; that the
outward baptism is not needful to him that has the Page 17. lin. 8.
other. And so for the fifth objection Lin. 19.
, which is, that Baptism is nothing, (though it may bear a charitable
construction) yet if any conceive Baptism is nothing, as it is an ordinance of
God, they err. Neither do I know any one amongst all the Separation, that
holds Baptism to be nothing, but they reverence it as an ordinance of God.

It is true [as you have granted in answering hereof Lin. 26. Christian Reader,
See Mr. Henry Barow, one of the three Martyrs (in Q Elizabeth's time,) his
discovery of the false Church; for there he treats on this particular point
at large, and reproves the scholasticall party, who did labor to persuade
the Queen, that seeing her Majesty had the inward Baptism, and had done many
works of mercy and piet^e that therefore she might rest her self satisfied,
whether she had the outward baptism or no: On the other hand, the Romanist^
said, that she must count the Church of Rome a true Church, or else deny her
Baptism: But these were deceived, and did not consider, how that Gods
ordinance is his ordinance, though in the depth of Apostacy. See the Ans. to
your first Treatise.
] That in some sense Baptism is nothing; even no more was Circumcision in
former time yet as it was Gods holy ordinance, it was to be regarded as a thing
of great concernment, and was not worn out then; though in the midst of
Antichristianisme, or Apostasy; So Baptism now being no less durable, though
more general then Circumcision was, nor less honorable, it ought not to be
rejected but regarded, and the reverent receivers of it respected, and the
contemners of it reproved and condemned.

Take notice here how that in pursuing after these scattering Objections In
Page 14, 15. 17.
, you have strangely varied from the point concerning Infants, and so have shot
at rovers. Therefore I would have you (for order sake) to observe what has
been set down by me to prove the lawfulness of the Baptism of holy Infants,
(against all your objections which you have set down, unto this period) all
which I leave to the consideration of you, and the observation others, and so
proceed to answer the next which follows.

But (say you) Page 18. at lin. 2.
their fifth and maine [Argument] is yet behind: from the Covenant which God
made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. And hence (you say) thus they reason.

As the Covenant and promises were made to Abraham, (being a faithful man) and
his seed, and thereupon all his seed were circumcised in the time of the Law,
so the same Covenant and promises are made to them, being believers and their
seed: And therefore their seed may now upon the same ground be baptized.

Ans. You have set down an argument on your opposites part, but you have not
declared (in particular) whose it is, whether you mean that the Seperates, or
those some others, or other Churches, which you specify (in your first part,
and the beginning of this your second part) are the Authors hereof.

But whosoever the Authors are, you call this their maine argument, and it may
be you count it so, because it is generally laid down, and undistinguished;
and I tell you, though the matter may be the Seperates, yet the form is not,
but rather your own; for it is Anabaptisticall to infer, that because the
covenant and promises were made to Abraham's seed before the Law, that thereupon
all his seed were circumcised in the time of the Law; if by [all] you mean all
his seed by generation after the flesh; for then it will follow, that all
Ismaelites, and Edomites, were circumcised, and all other Apostates of Abraham's
seed by generation, besides the rest of his seed: But we do affirm, and will
prove, that as Abraham had no command to Circumcise all Nations (or seeds, or
any Apostate whatsoever, though the offspring of his body) but those that were
the seed in covenant with God Genesis 17.11.
; so the Saints of God, which continued in that estate wherein God had set
Abraham, were to circumcise none but such as they were; yea, in this respect,
the infants of the Proselytes were preferred before the infants of the Apostate
seed of Abraham; and therefore you may see that we are far from affirming that
any Apostate that sprung from the loins of Abraham, [(was, much less that all
were)] to be circumcised; for Apostates whether they were of Abraham's loins or
not, they were all visibly in a bad condition, and not to have the sign (or
seal) of Gods covenant put upon them; And those who were not Apostates,
whether Jews or Proselytes, they were all visibly in a good condition, and
were to have the sign and seal of Gods covenant administered upon them, and
were different, and quite contrary to the Apostates.

By true Jews and Proselytes and true Christians, I mean visible Saints.
Therefore (to keep to the matter in hand) the Argument for the Infants of
believers lies thus; That as all the infants of the true Jews and Proselytes
were to have the seal of Gods covenant put upon them then, so all the infants
of those who are true Christians, ought to have the seal of Gods Covenant put
upon them now.

See Gal. 3.17, 18. and compare herewith the words of Peter, Act. 2.39. The
promise is unto you, and to your children, etc.
And seeing the Covenant was (confirmed of God in Christ four hundred and
thirty years before the Law) and was established with Abraham, and all his
seed, who did not degenerate, and thereupon they were all to be sealed unto him
(as his peculiar treasure) with that sign (or token of his covenant) which he
had appointed then. It follows that now the same covenant is confirmed of God
in Christ, and made sure unto all faithful parents, and all their seed, who
do not degenerate, and therefore they may all be sealed unto God, (as his
peculiar treasure) with the sign (or token of his covenant) which he has
appointed now.

It follows also that [ Baptism being the seal of one and the same
Covenant, which Circumcision was a seal of;] it ought to be administered upon
the infants of believers now, as circumcision was formerly; because that the
infants of believers being formerly in the new Covenant, of which Circumcision
was a sign, are not rent out of it by the coming of Christ, but confirmed in
it; for Christ is no changeling, and therefore Baptism being now the seal of
the same Covenant, it admits of the same subjects, and it being not more
particular, but more general then Circumcision, and to be administered upon
male and female, it appertains to the Infants of believers, both male and
female. And this is according to that teaching Oracle, which God did in the
cloud, and in the sea, in which the whole body of the Israelites were baptized,
both male and female.

Page 18.
But you say, That neither Abraham nor his seed were circumcised, because the
Covenant was made with him: and your reason is, because the Covenant was made
with him above twenty years before Circumcision was instituted. And yet all
this time neither Abraham nor his seed were circumcised; neither had he or any
of his seed ever been circumcised, for his being in the covenant, had not the
Lord afterward expressly commanded the same.

To which I answer, that though they were not circumcised so soon as they were
in the covenant, neither commanded to be circumcised then, yet if Abraham had
not been in the covenant, neither he nor his infants could have received the
ordinance of Circumcision, the sign of the covenant, according to Gods
appointment. See Genesis 17.
But believers and their seed that came after, were not to omit circumcision;
for if they did they brake the covenant. Exodus 4.24, 25, 26.
Now Abraham and his seed by virtue of Gods covenant, were bound to yield
obedience to God, and to walk in all his ways, as God revealed himself unto
them: So that when once Circumcision was instituted, it was not to be omitted.

Next Page 18. at lin. 17.
you say; Nor was that covenant made with Abraham and his seed, A. R.
merely for his being a faithful man (for then should it have been made with
Noah being a faithful man) but for his being such a faithful man, whom the
Lord pleased to choose, and set out as a pattern to all believers, Romans 4.23,
24. and to be a father of many Nations, Romans 4 17, 18. And in whose seed all
the Nations in the world should be blessed, Act. 5.25. and 13.23. (to wit) in
Christ, who was to come of his flesh.

Ans. The same new covenant that was made with Abraham, was made also with
Noah; wherefore as Abraham is called the father of many Nations, so Noah is
called the heir of justice, which is by faith; Heb. 11.7.
Such a faithful man as Abraham was, such a faithful man was Noah; yea,
chosen of God, and a pattern to all believers which should come after him.

Now whereas you say, that the Lord was pleased to choose Abraham, and set him
out as a pattern to all believers; I suppose you mean all those believers
which came after him, not those that were dead before he was borne; So Noah was
a pattern to Abraham, not Abraham a pattern to Noah.

And it is sure that Abraham was a father of many Nations, and so was Noah; and
that not only according to the flesh, but also spiritually; He was a father of
many Nations according to the flesh, because he was the father of Abraham See
Luke 3.
, who was the father of many nations according to the flesh. Spiritually, Noah
was the heir of Justice, and Abraham's father, as Abraham is said to be our
father, and the father of all those who walk in his steps. And seeing that
Christ came of Abraham, and Abraham of Noah, therefore Christ came of Noah, so
that it may be said (in this respect) of Noah, as of Abraham, that in his seed
(which is Christ) all the Nations of the earth are blessed.

Further you say Page 18. at lin. 24.
; A. R.
Therefore although the Covenant and promises were made to Abraham and his seed,
yet the consequence will not follow, that the covenant is likewise made with
all believers and their seed; for believers only are the seed, and the seed
only, and none of them a father in the Gospel sense, nor any other save only
Abraham, to whom and his seed the covenant and promises are made.

Ans. That the covenant and promises were made to Abraham and his seed, you
cannot deny; that the Proselytes and their seed were heirs of the same
covenant, as well as Abraham and his seed, the Scriptures are clear, Genesis
17.9.12. Exodus 12.48. Isa. 56. So when Zacheus believed, and so became the
son of Abraham, he had the same privileges which Abraham had, namely, that
the same time salvation was come to his house Luke 19 8, 9.
. Therefore seeing that he was the son of Abraham, his infants were in the
covenant of Abraham. And this is according to what the Apostle says, Gal.
4.28. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise; if now the
brethren are, as Isaac was, then their Infants are as Isaacs infants were, and
are to have the same privileges of the covenant as Isaacs infants had; But the
former is true, from the Apostles Testimony, and therefore the latter is true
also. And therefore [ Baptism being one of the privileges of the covenant of
God [which they are as capable of as of circumcision] they ought to be
baptized, as Isaacs infants were to be circumcised.

And seeing the same Covenant which was made with Abraham, was made with Isaac
and his seed, and that believers are (as Isaac was) the children of promise.
The consequence then, that the covenant is likewise made unto all believing
parents, and their holy seed, is very true.

Whereas you tell us that Believers only are the seed, and the seed only, and
none of them a father in the Gospel sense, nor any other save only Abraham. I
tell you, that if Abraham had not been a believer, he could not have been the
seed, much less a father spiritually unto those who walk in his steps;
neither could Isaac the child of promise have been as he was.

2. Though Christ is the root of David Rev. 5.5.
, yet he is also the offspring of David Rev. 22.16.
; so is he the root, and the offspring, the father Joh. 8.58.
and the son of Abraham Mat. 1.1.
; so that Abraham was Christ's seed spiritually, as all the Proselytes were, and
in this respect Abraham is our brother.

But you tell us, Believers only are the seed, and the seed only, and none of
them a father in the Gospel sense, save only Abraham; but you should know,
that Noah was Abraham's father, both spiritually and temporally, and a believer,
and so were the holy Patriarchs before him, therefore they were the seed, and
yet we will not say they were the only seed in the largest extent, for I
think that all the Saints which are, or have been are not yet the only seed,
for there are no doubt many yet to come. Now if by the only seed, and the seed
only, you mean that God never accepted of any seed, but such as they were
spiritually. I grant the same; that such are the seed indeed and in truth; and
such a one was Isaac in his infancy, and such are the Infants of believers
now, as those infants which Christ took up in his arms, Mar. 10.16.
and laid his hands upon and blessed. And though the infants are not fathers,
but faithful children of the faithful, yet they have the blessing of Abraham,
which lighted upon Isaac in his infancy; and those that are blessed with
faithful Abraham, are the seed of Abraham, and children of the promise; but
the infants of believers are blessed with faithful Abraham, therefore they are
the children of the promise.

Moreover, You should not be ignorant, that Enoch, Noah, S^m, Abraham, Isaac,
and diverse others, were fathers spiritually. But you would have Abraham to be
the only father; for you say, None of them is a father in the Gospel sense,
save only Abraham; so that you exclude all believers from the beginning unto
this present, (yea, to the end of the world) from being fathers any of them in
the Gospel sense; But you should know, that all believing fathers, who have
holy children, are fathers in the Gospel sense; and as they are holy, so are
their infants, who have no more children, then Isaac had in his infancy, yet
seeing they are heirs of the Covenant, which was made with Abraham, they have
his blessing. So Paul terms the children of believers holy 1 Cor. 7.14.
; and so Peter says, The promise is unto you, and to your children, etc. which
implies fathers; and surely I think this is Gospel sense, Act. ^.39.
if not Gospel it self.

Further you say; Wherefore to affirm that every believer has now the same
Covenant and promises made to him and his seed, A. R. Page 18. at lin. 30.
as Abraham had to him and his seed, is very absurd: and is all one as to say,
that now every believer by his believing does immediately become a father of
the faithful as well as Abraham.

To which I answer as before, that believers are in the same Covenant, and
therefore both they and their seed, have the same privileges of the Covenant,
as the Proselytes and their seed had in former time. And you should know, that
Abraham was not the father of Noah; but Noah was the father of Abraham, and he
was before Abraham, and therefore was not only the father of Abraham, but also
the father of all believers after him spiritually. Now though Abraham was not
the father of so many believers as Noah was father of; yet Abraham had the same
privileges in respect of the new covenant as Noah had: Abraham sojourned in
the land of Canan as a stranger, but his seed did inherit it, yet the promise
of salvation was equally made both to him and his seed, as it is to us and our
seed.
So Jacob, though he was not the father of so many believers wc^ Abraham was
father of, yet had he the same privileges, (in respect of the new covenant) as
Abraham had. I will not say, that Abraham had the same outward temporal
privileges which Noah had; for Noah was the father of all Nations according to
the flesh, though not the father of Caine, or those before him; neither will I
say, that Jacob, or Isaac had the same outward temporal privileges in every
respect as Abraham had, for Abraham was the father of the Ismaelites and
Edomit^s after the flesh: And yet this does not prove, that every believer upon
his believing, does become a father of the faithful; no more then Isaac, who
was a father of the faithful as well as Abraham.

And seeing your demand Lin. 35.
, Where any seed are, [if] all be fathers is grounded upon an [if] or
supposition, that all are fathers; let it be a supposition still, and so (upon
this ground) when you bring supp^s^tions (without distinctions) builded upon
your own imagination^, and prosecuted with such groundless cavillations, you
may expect that your building will fall to the ground, as this does.

Lin. 36, 37, 38, 39.
To your affirmation, That their seed, and their seeds-seed are all members of
the Church, and to be accounted faithful, and so to be all fathers of the
faithful as well as Abraham, from generation to generation to the worlds end.

I answer, That the infants of the faithful, are all members of the Church;
and they are not to be accounted unfaithful, though they die in their
infancy; And seeing Gods kingdom belongs unto them, though they have no
children, ^or are fathers of the faithful (...) Abraham's was, yet they have
the same precious privileges, as Abraham's infants had; So that they are to be
esteemed, now, t^ be the sons of God, and yet it is not manifested wha^ they
shall be, when their terrestrial bodies (being made like the glorious body of
their sweet Savior) shall (...) celestially in the kingdom of Eterni^^^.

Next you would make us believe, that you will express your self more
plainly, Lin. 40.
(and in the intrim you promise this truth) That there is now no difference
between any circumcision or uncircumcision, Page 19. lin. 1, 2.
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, male or female, but all are one in Christ Jesus,
Gal. 3.28.

And to this I answer, that Gal. 3.28. does not prove, that you have performed
what you promised, and called a truth; for as you have laid it down, it is an
untruth, namely, that there is no difference between [any] Circumcision, or
uncircumcision, etc. In this you have done evil, and in fathering it upon the
Apostle Paul, you have done worse; for Paul is no patron of this opinion, it
was no part of his doctrine, that there is no difference between [any]
Circumcision, or uncircumcision, etc. But he puts a manifest difference
between Circumcision of the heart, and Circumcision of the flesh; as also
between Jew and Jew, namely, he that is a Jew outwardly only, Rom 2.28, 29.
and he that is a Jew inwardly; as also he puts a difference between Gentile
and Gentile, namely, an unbeleeving Gentile, and a believing Gentile. So that
Paul makes the believing Gentiles, and the believing Jews, all one in Christ,
and not believers and unbeleevers all one in Christ, for he applies his speech
to the Saints only. So that it appears you have quitemistaken the Apostle,
yea, there is no Scripture which will bear you out in this your absurd
affirmation.

And now I will come to what you call your plain expression, which is that; If
every believer by his believing does become a father of the faithful as well
as Abraham, A. R. Page 19. at lin. 3.
then it must be at the very instant of his believing that he does become a
father of the faithful as well as Abraham, and if so, where then will be any
children to all these fathers; for none can be children before they be
faithful; and also at the same instant cease to be chil^^en, and become
fathers, which implies a flat contradiction, and then how ^an Abraham himself
be father of all believers, Romans 4.11, 12.

Answ. Who does affirm, that every believer does immediately become a father?
That which you say implies a flat contradiction, Page 19. lin. 7.
I think is builded but upon a supposition of your own, Isaacs fatherhood
made him not cease to be Abraham's child, no more then our fatherhood does make
us cease to be his Children.
as if they should affirm, that believers upon their believing, at the same
instant cease to be children, and become fathers! And then upon this you ask
how Abraham himself can then be father of all believers? Which interrogation
of yours implies rather a flat contradiction of the Scriptures of God; as if
Abraham was not both son and father.

1. A son of Noah he was, as we are the sons of Abraham by faith in
Christ. 2. A father of the faithful he was also: So that Abraham was both a
son and a father.

You do not explain your self Lin. 9.
, when you ask how Abraham himself then can be father of all believers? for
you may know, that Noah was father of more believers then Abraham, and Noah
himself was a believer before Abraham, And if Abraham was not his father, then
he was not a father of all believers who went before him.

But it may be you mean, by all believers, all that came after Abraham, and
walked in his steps; for if you mean by all bel^evers, all that ever have been,
are, or shall be, then by your own ground, there were no believers before
Abraham was a father, or else you must confess, that Abraham was not a father
of them. But the^e were believers before Abraham was borne, and b^leevers there
were, and are after him, therefore Abraham was, and is, both a father of some
believers, and a child of other believers, as we are the children of him, if
we derogate not from his steps; and are the fathers of our posterity (after
the flesh) who do not aberate from Gods commandments.

Next you say; Or how can the promise be sure unto all the seed, if believers
childr^n be the seed, for they will not affirm that all their children are
saved. But this is affirmed of all the seed to whom the promise is made, Romans
4.16. Heb. 6.16, 17.

Ans. You think if believers children be the seed, the promise cannot be sure
to all the seed! and why is this? your reason is, for th y will affirm, that
all their children are not saved. But if this be a sufficient reason to prove
infants not to be in the promise, then it will prove that their parents are not
in the promise, nor any other, and so upon this ground you must baptize none at
all, nor judge any to be in the promise, though they profess faith never so
much, since that many who are members, and make a verbal profession, and ought
to be baptized by Christ's rule, fall back, like Judas Iscariot, and Simon Magus.

But you should rather have questioned thus (according to truth) how can the
promise be sure to all the seed, if believers infants be not in the promise?

And surely, we are not to argue so perversely, and foolishly, that because
[some] believers children are not saved, (since they rent themselves out of the
promise) that therefore [no] believers children, o^ that their infants are not
in the state of salvation, and that the promise appertains not unto them; for
this will not stand with true sense or reason, nor with the Apostles
Testimony, when he says, Romans 3.1, 2, 3.
That the Jews advantage was much every manner of way, and that the unbelief
of some, did not make the faith of God without effect. So that the Apostle
himself answers your objection; for the promise is still su^e unto all that
abide in Gods Covenant.

And seeing the infants of believing parents do abide in Gods covenant, they
are part of all the holy seed, and therefore it evidently appears, that the
promise appertains unto them, as has been proved before; and this does as
really appertain unto them, as to those who profess faith, and those that
deny this, do in a manner make the faith of God of none effect, and so make
the Author thereof a liar.

But let such despisers of the children of promise, wonder and perish, without
the promise, rather then that the Infants which God has given to believing
parents, should not be counted for the seed, within the promise.

But next you say; Now then, if the promise be sure unto all the seed unto whom
it is made, A. R.
and all believers, and only all believers the promise is sure to: Then all
believers, and only all believers are the seed unto whom the promise is made,
and then none of Abraham's own natural seed, nor the natural seed of any other
in the world, are to be accounted the seed, unto whom the promise and covenant
is made, until they believe, Romans 9.7, 8. Romans 4.13, 14 Gal. 3 7.9.

Ans. It is a sure truth, that the promise is sure to all the seed to whom it
is made, and it is made to the faithful, and their seed that do not
degenerate from their steps. But their Infants cannot justly be said to
degenerate from the steps of their holy parents, who continue in their
righteousness; Therefore they are holy, and in the Covenant, and are the
children of Abraham. And seeing you have granted that all believers, and only
all believers are the seed unto whom the promise is made, then all those to
whom the promise is made, are the seed, and so are believers; but the promise
was made unto Abraham's infants, as well as to others: God said unto Abraham,
that he would be the^r God; and for confirmation of his Covenant, he ordained
that the infants should have the sign of his covenant, Genesis 17.
the seal of the righteousness of his faith in their infancy. And the like
may be said concerning the Proselytes, and their infants, for God was a God
unto them all, both male and female, bond and free. And the like may be said
now concerning believers, and their infants, for Christ's love is not lessened
since he manifested himself in the flesh; He is the same as he was, and will
be the same as he is, in this respect; and therefore seeing we have not one
tittle of Scripture for debarring our infants of the privileges which formerly
appertained to the infants of the faithful, we ought not so to shut up the
kingdom of heaven against them, but ought to believe that the blessing of
Abraham belongs to them, as well as to the infants of old; for it is a sure
truth, that the promise is sure unto them, and therefore the seal of the
promise must be imposed upon them.

Now whereas you say, that none are to be accounted the seed, till they do
believe; If by belief, you mean belief by manifestation, actually, in their
own persons; What is this but an arguing against Isaac in his infancy? and a
shutting him out (in your conceptions) from being then a child of promise, and
a shutting out of others also, who were as holy as he, and yet could not
manifest faith actually in their own persons, no more then he could in his
infancy. And so if you mean that none are the seed, until they do profess
faith (as it appears you do) is not this to make void the promise of God, in
shutting out all Abraham's infants, and the infants of all other believers, and
thus (through their sides) to strike at Christ, who was once an infant like
them?

Now the thing which you should mind (but do not) is that the Covenant was
established with Abraham and his seed everlastingly; with his infants, as well
as others. And as we may say concerning Abraham, and his infants, so we may
say concerning the Proselytes and their infants; and the like may be said for
believers, and their infants now, whom you can never prove to be out of
Covenant, till they appear to be seeds; and then do your best; but so long as
they are not degenerated but remain the seed, they are to be accounted holy,
and within the promises, and covenant of the Gospel. And as for the holy
infants, I know not how they can be charged with unbelief, or disobedience
against any of Gods Commandments, any more then their holy parents, to whom
the Lord has testified, saying, that he shows mercy to thousands of
generations of those that love him and keep his Commandments.

Next you say; A. R. Page 19. lin. 21.
This then being a most evident truth, it may in no wise be granted, that the
covenant is made with all believers, as with Abraham, or that the promise is
made unto all these, as unto Abraham, or that all these are fathers as Abraham,
for all these are the seed, and the only seed and children of Abraham: And
those to whom the covenant and promises do only belong under the term seed.

Ans. These your words do imply, that Abraham was not any part of the seed,
and that the covenant was not made unto him as he was a believer, but merely as
he was a father. But when God made his Covenant with him, He did not say, I
will be thy God merely as thou art a father, and the God of thy seed, merely as
they are thy seed, and of thy seeds-seed, merely as they are thy seeds-seed;
but he testifies that he will be the God of him, and them, though he and they
should increase to many persons, yet he would be a God unto them all; as he was
a God unto him; God was a God unto Isaac, and he was a God unto Abraham, and he
could be no more unto him. What could Abraham have more then God? a greater
reward he could not have, then the reward that exceeded all rewards. Now God
has covenanted with his people, that he will be their God, and therefore it
appears, that the covenant is unto them, as it was unto Abraham; And so it
was with the Proselytes, and their seed, as with the Jews, and their seed.

And though this be a most evident truth, yet you say, it may in no wise be
granted, that the Covenant is made with all believers as with Abraham; yea
though they have the like spiritual privileges, as Abraham had; yet you
resolve, not to grant it, and it is not material whether you grant it or no.

Now that they are all fathers, as Abraham was, I will not take upon me to
prove, but this I know, that they are in the same covenant, and have the same
spiritual privileges, which Abraham had. As for your affirmatton, that all
these are the seed, and the only seed, and children of Abraham; For
explanation, I answer as before, that if Noah was Abraham's father, Abraham was
not his father, and therefore Abraham was not the father of all those believers
that were before he was borne; for Noah (Abraham's father) was a believer. And
to this agrees your own words, for you say, believers are the seed; yea, all
believers, and only all believers, are the only seed, and the seed only, and
therefore you may see that Abraham, though he were a father, yet he was part of
the seed; for I think you will not deny him to be a believer.

Whereas you say, that if it were otherwise, then must they be comprehended,
(Genesis 17.7, 8.) under the term thee, and then the rest of the phrase (to wit)
and to thy seed, would be in vain, and superfluous, which to think were very
irrational.

I answer, That this which you have said will not stand with reason; for you
should know, that if the covenant did appertain to Abraham's s^ed, in no wise,
as to Abraham, then the rest of the phrase, (to wit) and to thy seed, would be
in vain and superfluous, which to think would be very irrational indeed. And
the like we may say concerning Peter's application of the promise unto
believers and their children, that if it is bound up only in the parents, then
Peter might have rested at those expressions concerning the parents particular
persons, and only have said thus; Act. 2.39.
the promise is unto you, and not have added these words, and to your children.

Abundance of testimonies of sacred Scripture might be cited, where the seed
and generation of the faithful are declared to be in the promise with their
parents, but this may suffice which has been spoken, that we may not exclude
the holy offspring, and blessed issue of the blessed; but whenever we
happen upon any such place of Scripture, where the seed is said to be in the
blessing with the parents, (especially, considering that the Scripture
affects brevitie) we ought then to mind, that if the blessing be bound up
from the infants in the parents, then the words are in vain and sup^rfluous,
where their children, seed, offspring, and issue, are mentioned.

But seeing that the promise to the seed, is not vain nor superfluous, nor
ever was, it is irrational to think, that God is not the same God in
extending his grace and mercy to the seed of believers, as to themselves.

Next you say; Lin. 32.
Put the case it be granted them to be fathers, as they do desire to be like to
Abraham, then must they be fathers of only such as believe, and not until
they believe, for according to the tenor of this new Covenant, and in the
Gospel sense, Abraham himself is father of none other, nor otherwise.

Ans. Though in some respects we desire to be fathers, as Abraham was, yet far
be it from us, to desire to be fathers as he was in every respect. You shall
not father such a thing upon us. We desire to be fathers as Abraham was
(though not in every respect) and it is lawful for us so to do, yea, our duty,
not only to desire it, but to strive to imitate Abraham, in instructing our
families, and teaching them the way of life, according as every one of them is
capable to receive instruction. But though some of our children do degenerate,
as some of Abraham's children did, yet it makes not the promise uneffectuall to
the rest, no more then it did to the rest of the children of Abraham, who was a
father of them in the Gospel sense; as we are fathers of the^e, our children,
who abide in our righteous steps.

And we are fathers of our own infants, otherwise then we are of the
unbeleeving Jews and Turks; for ours we know are in the cov^nant, but the
other we know are not, until they do believe, But when they do believe,
then have they as great privileges for their infants, as Isaac had for his
infants, And these are, as those were, and therefore as it was warrantable for
those to be sealed then, so is it warrantab^e f^r these to be sealed now.

But hence you affirm; That Publicans and Harlots may be the seed, A. R.
and have as much right to Baptism^, as any believers seed, or as any of
Abraham's own natural seed; for all and every of these, must first repent, and
then be baptized, Act. 2.38.

Ans. If this be forcible against believers infants, it is of force against
themselves, and if such a reason could have bin strong against Abraham's
infants, then against Abraham himself; for the Heathens then might become
converts as well as now.

Moreover, I tell you, that it is not to the point for us to look what persons
may be, or may have right unto, but what persons are, or must be judged to be,
and what they have right unto; and therefore this position of yours is very
impertinently brought against Infants right to the covenant, or Baptism,
especially considering that the infants of believers are neither publicans nor
harlots, nor to be ranked with them, or their infants, till the publicans and
harlots cease to be so; and God create in them a new spirit, as he does in the
infants of the faithful; and so circumcise their hearts, and make them new
creatures, and give them the same blessing which Christ gave unto the
Israelites in^ants, whom he took up in his arms, and imposed his hands upon
and blessed.

Whereas you further add, that Upon the same terms may any, yea, the most
wicked in the world, and their seed be baptized.

Ans. It is true, that the infants of those who are penitent, and in Gods
covenant, though they were formerly wicked, are to be baptized as well as their
parents. But note this, that Baptism is a confirmation of their being in
Covenant, as Circumcision was to Abraham, and his infants, and to the
Proselytes, and their infants.

Touching your reason for this which you annex Page 20. at lin. 4.
(to wit) that the partition wall is now broken down, and that the Gospel knows
no difference between any; but is to be preached to every creature in the
world; and so you cite, Mar. 16.15, 16 Mat. 28.19. Gal 6.15. and 8.29.

I answer, That though the former position be true, yet this reason brought to
confirm it is impertinent, considering that the Proselytes, and their infants
[in former time] were received into Gods covenant, to whom salvation was not
denied then, though Christ were not manifested in the flesh nor the Go^p^l
published unto all Nations, as now since, by Christ it was commanded to be.

And as for the Scriptures cited by you, they make much for believing parents,
and their infants; for as much as the application of the Gospel appertains
unto them all. In Mar. 16.15, 16. the Gospel is commanded to be preached unto
[every] creature; and it is said, that Whosoever bel^eveth and is baptized,
shall be saved; and whosoever believes not, shall be damned When Christ says,
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, He no more intends to
exclude the infants of the faithful from Baptism, then from salvation: but
those that exclude them from the Covenant, do as much as in them lies, to
exclude them from both.
. And in Mat. 28.19. Go make all Nations Disciples (says Christ) baptizing
them. As if he should say, in former time I bound my self to one Nation, and
published my name unto them, but now I stretch forth my hands further, that all
Nations might be made Disciples, and baptized, as that one nation of the Jews
were made Disciples and circumcised.

Now sure as we cannot justly deny the infants to be creatures, to whom
salvation or damnation appertains, so we cannot deny but that the Gospel
appertains unto the infants of believers (as well as to their parents) though
they die in their infancy, or that the holy infants are Disciples inclusively
with their parents, as they have been heretofore.

If then infants are included in the general Commission (as doubtless they
are) then they are not to be excluded; but the infants of believers are
^dmitted by God to come into the Church with their parents, according to the
anci^nt custom, which was very profitable and comfortable, and no dishonor to
God, nor discredit to his cause, nor hinderance to his people, but a glory unto
his house, they being his pure vessels, which he prized at such a high rate, as
to send his only begotten Son into the world to take upon him the nature of
them, and to suffer for them, and to make them new creatures, such as are
mentioned in Gal. 6.15. which avails with God, when neither Circumcision, nor
uncircumcision does; therefore they are not excluded from the general
Commission.

Moreover, Christ has declared them to be his, by blessing them, and
testifying that they are of his k^ngdome; and seeing then, that they are
Christ's, they are Abraham's s^ed, and heirs according to promise, Gal. 8.29.
and have interest into this grace wherein they now are, so that they cannot be
deprived of their inheritance, no more then those who profess faith, and do
act that which these Infants have not a natural capablenesse to do.

As touching your demand Lin 13.
(which you say is demanded in cool blood) how we do become Abraham's seed;
you have testified what we will say, Lin. 14, 15.
(which may be stood to without danger,) namely, that we become Abraham seed
only by faith Imputatively
.

As for the inference Lin. 15, 16.
(which you bring upon it,) that so must our children by the same way; we
grant the same, it is one of our principles; as also, that there is (as you
confess) but one seed, and not more in the sense and acceptance of the
Gospel.

Next you say Page 20. at lin. 18.
.

They further reason from the equity of circumcision thus:

As infants then by Gods allowance, received that seal of the covenant, so by
proportion why not this now of Baptism.

And in answer hereunto you rehearse Lin. 21.
Gods commandment to Abraham concerning circumcision, and say, That it was
both right and equal that Abraham should do herein as God had commanded him,
and it had been sinful for him to have done otherwise, more or less: And so
likewise it is right for us to do as God has commanded us to do, and no
otherwise.

To which I answer, that Gods divine institutions are full of equity, and
there is no iniquity in them, nor in any thing which he does, and God not only
allowed but strictly commanded Abraham to circumcise, and without the command
(or institution) he was not to put the same in execution. But when once
Circumcision [the sign and seal of the righteousness of faith] was
instituted, then it was to be administered; and this was ^ight and equal, and
allowed o^ by God.

Now it remains for you to prove (if you can) when the substance Mr.
Spilsbery grants, that the matter of Gods worship is not changed at the
coming of Christ in the flesh. See his T^^^t. Bap. page (...) lin, 15.
of this institution was taken away.

Peradventure you will say, that the institution of Baptism has put anullitie
to the s^al^.

I answer, That the enlargement of a thing, or taking away of the
circumstances, does not take away the substance or being of it.

Wherefore it appears, that the command for sealing of Infants, is not yet
abrogated, but remains still; and seeing Baptism was instituted by Christ in
stead of circumcision, the infants are to be baptized.

But yet you question Lin. 28.
, Where the institution for baptizing of infants is? And my answer is, That the
Institution for sealing of the infants of the faithful, was given to Abraham,
and Baptism being in stead of Circumcision, and more general, and it being
now the seal, they are to be baptized, as formerly they were to be circumcised.

But you say Lin. 30.
, That was to circumcise, not to baptize, that all his males, not his females,
that all borne in his house, or bought with money, at eight days old.

Ans. All this makes nothing against the baptizing of Infants; for the sign
and seal of the righteousness of faith, is not c^ased, but the substance
thereof continues, though the outward shadow or element is departed, and
delivered unto us (as it were) in another garb. And you granted before, that
the females were employed in the males.

And you ought to know, that the generality of the latter Commission above the
former, does plead a specialitie which the Infants have in the latter, as well
as in the former.

But you say Lin. 32.
, If they ground it from this institution, then must they observe it in every
thing, for so did Abraham, who had sinned in doing otherwise in any thing.

To this I answer, That we may well ground this, from the institution of that,
though we are not tied to observe that in every thing. The institution for
sealing the infants of the faithful, ought to be observed by us, in every
thing, and though God have altered the circumstances, as he has done in diverse
other ordinances, (the substance of which we have now in the ordinances of the
Gospel) yet we must not therefore neglect the substances of them, considering
that they are not taken away by the alterations, changing, or taking away of
the circumstances.

The Passover, and the Lords Supper, were all one in substance, though they
differed in circumstances; the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ
were one, though they differed in some circumstances. And the like may be
instanced in diverse other ordinances, which are equivolent and suitable each to
other; And therefore it will hold in Circumcision and Baptism. And so this
still pleads the divine right which Infants have to the seal now, as they
had to the seal then See this treatise, page 121. at lin. 7.
.

Now, that which is not only permitted (or allowed) but commanded, it is both
right and equal it should be observed, Deuteronomy. 12.32. But God commanded the
outward seal of his Covenant of grace to be imposed upon the infants of his
people, Gen 17.11, 12, 13. Romans 4.11. This commandment in respect of the
substance of it, was never yet abrogated or disanulled.

Therefore it is in the substance of it, still to be continued, and it is both
right and equal it should be observed.

Next you say?

Here they say Lin. 35.
, We have another institution to baptize all Nations, A. R.
Mat. 28.19. But here you should observe, that we stand not for the baptizing
of all Nations, but as they appear unto us by the rule of the Word to be
Disciples. Secondly, Though this be general, in respect of the subjects, yet
it is a particular institution to baptize, as Abraham's was to circumcise.

And now let us hear your answer.

Then they ought to observe that institution, A. R.
which is first to make Disciples, and then to baptize them so made: for so is
the institution, and no otherwise Lin. 37.
. To which I reply; That we do observe that institution, We plead not for the
Baptizing of those who are not Disciples, no more then that any were formerly
to be circumcised, who were not Disciples; for the institution of circumcision,
and of Baptism, is one and the same, though the circumstances in the several
acts are different, as I showed before; and infants are as capable to be
Disciples now, as they were formerly, and you cannot justly deny, that the
infants of believers are Disciples.

Now though none were to take a ground for Circumcision from the institution of
Baptism, If Christ's Commission for Baptism, does not concern infants at all,
but aged persons, as some men dream, then his days are days of famine, and
not of food, times of poverty, not of plenty, of leannes, not of fa^^s. Now we
ought to note, that the glory of the first ^ommission, is included in the
second; if then the second be less general then the first, and have swallowed
up the former, and yet n t increased, but diminished, then it is like Pharoahs
7 lean ears of corn, and 7 l^ane kine, which swallowed up the fat ones. But
Christ's ^o^mission is much la^ger th^n that given to Abraham, and therefore the
dream, that infants a^e not in the la^ter as well as in the former, is false.
yet from Circumcision they might take a ground for Baptism; not to enlarge
the institution of Christ for Baptism, as if it were less general then the
institution of Circumcision, but to show the largeness of Circumcision, that
thereby we may confute those that do seek to make Baptism (in reference to
the subjects) more streiter (or less general) then circumcision; for
circumcision was acted upon the male infants, in which (you confessed) the
female infants were included. And I know not how any can without sacrilege,
rob (or deprive) both the infants of the male, and female kind, of these holy
things, which are so largely distributed since Christ's manifestation in the
flesh; for considering that infants were once to be commanded to be sealed in
their infancy, and are not forbidden in the Scripture, they ought to be
sealed: But it was once ^ommanded, that the infants of believers should be
sealed in their infa^ci^, and is no where forbidden in the Scripture; therefore
the seal of the Covenant ought to be imposed upon them in their infancy.

And seeing you have ^cknowledged, that the females were included See A. R.
page 5. lin. 24.
in Circumcision, o^ in the circumcised males; therefore your objection against
the positio^ Page 21.
, (by w^y of answer) that Abraham was not forbidden to circumcise his f^mal^s,
is to no purpose, unless it be to contradict your self; for seeing you have
granted the f^males to be included, they were not exc^uded; therefore your
comparison here of the males of Abraham's ^^ast^, as his cam^ls and asses Lin. 7.
with Abraham's infants, either male, or female, is not equal; no more then
that of the Bartholomew-babies, which you formerly showed (in page 16.) But
still it appears, that our position Page 20 l. 40.
, being builded upon a right foundation, remains permanent, for it cannot be
showed, either by express command, or necessary consequence, that God has
forbidden the baptizing of holy Infants.

Moreover, Whereas you labor to seek out what they mean, that affirm, Lin.
13.
Infants now ^re as capable of Baptism, with all its significations, as
infants then were of circumcision.

Ans. I think they intend that the infants have not only a capablenesse, but
also a right to receive the ordinance of Baptism, as the infants of believers
had not only a capablenesse, but also a right to the ordinance of
Circumcision. And I suppose, if you seek to prove that the infants of believers
were more capable of Circumcision, and had more right unto it, then the infants
of believers are now capable of Baptism, or have right unto it now, you will
loose all your labor.

But you (in your answer Page 21. lin. 19.
) do affirm, that so all infants in the world are capable of Baptism, and so
all infants from Adam to Abraham were capable of Circumcision. And next, you
demand of them why these were not circumcised? You say, They will say, because
Circumcision was not then commanded; but as soon as it was commanded, it was
done.

But I tell you for answer, That to affi me, that as soon as Circumcision was
commanded to be done upon some infants, it was done (or to be done) upon all
infants. It is an untruth, as this demand Lin. 20.
is your own, so I doubt not but the answer Lin. 21. compared with lin. 19, 20.
thereunto is yours also; for your tenets leads you to this, that Abraham
might circumcise any Ap^state he would, so that he brought them in his house,
though they neither feared God, nor reverenced man. I will not say, this is
childish, but I am sure it is foolish, and brutish, to have such unreverend
thoughts, of the ordinance of Circumcision. But I suppose, that Abraham could
be^ter understand the mind of God, then those who labor so to debase the
ordinance of Circumcision, and the right subjects thereof. As all those do who
affirm, that all the infants in the world, from Adam to Abraham, might have
been circumcised, if God had instituted Circum^ision then. But this is to bring
in the feed of Caine with the seed of Seth, the infants of the idolatrous
Heathens, with the infants of Abraham; and so to make a compounded mixture in
the Lords Church, which he always labored to keep from pollution, by
sequesterating them from the vile.

Furthermore, You make answer to a position Lin. 26.
, which is, that God ga^e to infants Circumcision, which was a sign and seal
of the righteousness of faith and regeneration, Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11. And we
know God gives no lying sign, nor seals a Covenant to any persons that are
not therein: Therefore infants are in the Covenant, have faith and
regeneration, and so ought to be baptized now, as well as circumcised then.

To this your answer is Lin. 32.
, That it is true, that God gives no lying sign, nor seals to any persons
that they are in the Covenant, when they are not therein.

To which I reply, That I like it well, that you will now confess this truth.

But it appears by your following words Lin. 12, 13, 14.
, that you take for granted, a thing which you have not proved, as if God
declared and made known unto Abraham, that Ishmael was not in the Covenant
before he was circumcised. And you cite Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21. Which Scripture
makes nothing for your purpose; for if you will say, God established his
Covenant only with Isaac, and none other, and all the rest were out of the
Covenant, then it will follow, that the rest of Abraham's children, which
Abraham had by Keturah, yea, and the Proselytes, and their children, were out
of the Covenant, by your ground. But you should consider, that God in
establishing his Covenant with Isaac, and setting him out for a singular
person, did give Isaac the pre-eminence; as Sem had above Japhet Genesis 9.27.
, and Judah (Jacobs fourth son) over his eleven brethren Genesis 49.8, 9, 10,
11, 12.
; And God establishing the Covenant with Isaac as the root, did establish it
unto all those who were of the true Religion, as the branches; but if any
departed from Isaacs banner, they deprived themselves of Isaacs blessing.

Now for as much as it was the mind of God, that Ishmael should be circumcised
Master Spilsbery grants, that Ishmael and Esau were by God commanded to be
Circumcised as well as any of the rest of Abraham's seed, Genesis 17.10.13. See his
Treat. of Bap. page 7. lin. 3, 4, 5

So Iscariot and Magus were commanded to be baptized as well as Peter and Paul.


, and that circumcision was the signs, and seal of the righteousness of
faith; It confirms it, that in the account of man, he was then to be judged
worthy of it, even righteous, and in Gods covenant; for God is not (by your
own confession) the author of a lying sign, nor seals to any persons, that
they are not in the Covenant, when they are not therein. Now this is in respect
of visibilitie And so Mr. Spilsbery further grants, That though such were
rejected as were not elected, this made not the promise of God of none effect
to those who stood firm in the Covenant by grace in Christ Jesus, as branches
in their root, page 17. lin 21, 22.
; for Simon Magus had Baptism (the outward visible seal of the Covenant) and
yet we cannot say, that he was ever in Gods secret account in the Covenant: But
secret things belong to God.

And till God declared unto Abraham, that Ishmael was not in the Covenant,
though he promised to give Isaac never so many privileges, yet Abraham was not
to judge Ishmael to be out of the Covenant, (any mo^e then others of his
household) till God had directed him so to judge.

Again, I suppose that Ishmael [being come to years of discretion] it was
sacrilege in him to usurp the ordinance, and a sin in Abraham to impose the
same upon him, except he were in the Covenant (so far as men were to judge)
of which Covenant, this (by your own confession) was no lying sign.

Now though Infants were not capable to resist, or refuse to be circumcised,
yet those of elder years could, and Ishmael was thirteen years of age when he
was circumcised. Therefore Ishmael (submitting according as he and the rest of
Abraham's family were taught, (who were at years of discretion) was to be
esteemed to be in the Covenant.

Moreover, That the children who were ^ircumcised (according to Gods
appointment) were visibly in the Covenant before they were circumcised, is
apparent by Genesis 17. ver. 14. God says, The uncircumcised man child, whose
flesh of his f^re-skin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his
people, he has broken my Covenant. Which does plainly argue that he was in the
Covenant before, else how could he break that which he never had? And Abraham's
children then could not be said to be rent out of the Covenant, which they were
never in, or rent from a people, who were never theirs; but we may rather
conclude, that as Gods covenant was their covenant, and Gods people their
people so God was their God, as he had testified himself to be And also I will
be their God] That is (says Mr. Spilsbery) their God, whom they shall believe
and obey, upon whom they shall depend for the performance of all that I have
promised unto them, by which faith and obedience they shall acknowledge me to
be their God. See Spils. Treat. Bap. page 12.
, before they were circumcised; and circumcision was added as a sign, for
sealing or confirming of the same thing signified thereby. But whereas God
himself calls circumcision his Covenant Genesis 17.10.
, meaning expressly a sign of it Ver. 11.
; and Paul calls it a seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.11.
; you say, It was not by God ordained, nor by Abraham understood to be to the
persons circumcised, a seal of their being in Covenant, and much less of
their being in the faith, or regenerated See A. R. Page 21. l. 37, 38, 39.
; and so by this it seems, that you would make the words of Paul, and of God
himself to be false; for you openly contradict them both; as also that which
you granted before, (namely,) that God gives no lying sign, nor seals to
any persons, that they are in the Covenant, when they are not therein.

Next you say, that Genesis 17.11. and Romans 4.11. See A. R.
must be understood Page 22.
, that the circumcision which Abraham received, both upon himself and seed,
was to him and them a sign, and seal, that righteousness should be, (not by
the law or circumcision in the flesh) but by the faith which Abraham had when
he was yet uncircumcised: That he should be the father of all those of many
Nations, which should afterward believe: and that as faith was imputed unto
him for righteousness, even so likewise it should be imputed to all believers
whatsoever, whether they were circumcised or not. And that all these are, and
were to be the only h^ires and true seed, to whom the everlasting covenant and
promises of life are assuredly made, and do properly and undoubtedly
appertain, ver. 3.11.12, 13, 14.16 17, 18.22, 23, 24. And therefore (you say)
Circumcision never was, nor is any rule for baptizing.

Ans. That the Circumcision which Abraham received, was received by him, is
true, but that the circumcision of his seed, was received by him, wants
explanation; it would stand more with reason to say, that Abraham administered
it upon his seed, and that his seed received it; then to say, that Abraham
received the circumcision of his seed, [upon himself.] Abraham received his
own circumcision upon himself, and his seed received their circumcision upon
themselves, and so it was to each of them a sign, and seal, not that it was
diverse sorts of circumcisions, (because it was administered upon diverse
parties,) but the same ordinance of circumcision which Abraham received upon
himself, in particular, the same ordinance of circumcision his infants
received upon themselves, in particular also.

And if you did but well consider the Texts, Genesis 17.11. and Romans 4.11. you
might see, that it was a sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, which
went before circumcision.

Consider moreover, what benefit the infants of believers [which died in their
infancie] had by it; for if you will say, that it was a sign and seal of that
righteousness which they never were partakers of, (or for ought we know shall
never be) then your own conf^ssion will come against you Page 21. lin. 31, 32.
, where you grant, that God gives no lying sign, etc. Now circumcision was a
true sign of that righteousness which they had received formerly, and for
confirmation of the covenant [which had been] made to them before, and to be
further and further manifested, and continued to them. This is clear from Genesis
17.11.14 and Romans 4.11. as has been showed before.

And therefore you may see, that I plead not that that righteousness came by
the Law, or Circumcision; for they were righteous before, otherwise they could
not have been capable of the seal of righteousness.

The righteousness sealed, was a righteousness^ before the seal was fixed.
And this righteousness^ was imputed unto them all, both young and old, great
and small, infants and aged persons; It was unto them a sign and seal of
righteousness, yea, unto the Infants as well as others.

And this righteousness which it sealed, was not the righteousness of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 30.12.
but the righteousness of faith; and the righteousness of faith speaks on
this wise; Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend up into heaven, Romans 10.6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
that i^, to bring [Christ] down from above? or who shall descend into the
deep that is, to bring up [Christ] again from the dead? But what says it, the
Word is nigh thee, etc.

Wherefore it appears, that you have not done well, in inferring from the
promises, that circumcision is no rule for baptizing you ought rather to have
concluded, that it is a rule for baptizing, seeing that circumcision was a
Gospel seal, and that the Baptism which Christ has instituted, is one and
the same with it, a sign of the same thing, a seal of the same Covenant. And
therefore though circumcision is not the [onel^] ^ule for baptizing, yet it is
a rule, which the Saints of God may strengthen themselves withal, in the
administration of Baptism upon their infants.

Consider further; What circumcision sealed to the infants of believers, (that
died in their infancy,) what good it did do them? either it did them good, or
hurt. It was a wound, or hurt [in respect of their bodies] but it did not hurt
their souls; therefore it was [some] benefit to them; for if it should not,
then God gave a thing to hurt their bodies, and to do no good to their souls.
The land of Canaan it sealed not unto them; for they never lived to enjoy it; A
fleshly fatherhood, it sealed not unto them; for they died in infancy. What
did it seal then? Did it seal nothing?! We will not say so; they being the
infants of those whose sins were forgiven; and they being such which could
not act, and therefore not commit actual sin. Surely (when all comes to
all) we must confess, that this sealed unto them some spiritual thing; for
(they having received the wound, and incision, and dying in their infancy) it
appears, that it sealed not unto them a natural life, therefore it sealed
unto them a spiritual life, and a spiritual place, wherein they shall enjoy
that spiritual life; which place, is the heavenly land of Canaan. God did not
aim at the hurt of the infants when he commanded them to be circumcised, but
at their good. Wherefore this very hurt of their bodies, did demonstrate some
good thing which weighed down all their former hurt; And therefore seeing that
infants received benefit spiritually by circumcision, that benefit came from
God; God gave it to the fathers before Moses was borne almost four hundred
years Christ said to the Jews, Moses therefore gave unto you Circumcision, not
because it is of Moses, but of the Fathers. See John. 7.22.
; And he never intended to take away this beneficial ordinance from the
infants, but to plant as great a one in stead thereof, and make it sure to
them, yea, as sure as the promise. Otherwise Christ should be less faithful
in his house, then Moses; for Moses was so faithful, that he durst not (nay,
would not) presume to lay such sacrilegious hands upon Circumcision, (Gods holy
i^stitution) as to bereave infants of circumcision, and disanull it by his old
law, which came long after it; yea, the Apostle expressly declares, that the
Law could not disanull the covenant, and we know it did not disanull the sign
and seal of that covenant; neither did Christ ever disanull it, or bereave
holy infants of the benefit of it; but did take off the old garment, and put on
a new, I mean, changed only the circumstantiall part of the sign of his
covenant, but the substance remained still, though under another element.

And as a man which has one day, one manner of apparel, another time,
another suit of apparel, of another color, and more excellent then the
former, is still the same man, though in another habit; so the ordinances of
Christ, which are equivolent one with the other, are the same, though the
latter excel the former. So the seventh day was the same with the first day of
the week, as it was a Sabbath, though not as it was [the seventh day,] yet as
we may take a ground for the keeping of [a] Sabbath, from the old Testament,
leaving out the circumstance, not tying our selves to [the] seventh day; so we
may take a ground from circumcision, as it was [a] sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith, whereby we may be grounded in the administration of
Baptism: And it is seriously to be minded, that Baptism is not larger then
circumcision one way, and lesser another way (I mean less general) but (in
every respect) it is as general, yea, and (in some respects) more general: As
general, because such males who had right to circumcision, have right to
Baptism: More general, because circumcision was to be administered only upon
the males; but Baptism upon males and females. Now to make it more general,
and less general, then circumcision, is a contradiction, and you by no means
will allow of contradictions, at least you pretend it.

If a Master promise to give his servants such or such a portion in brass
farthings, and above his usual (or ordinary) custom, give it them in silver,
weight, for weight; It is all one. He has fulfilled his promise, seeing he
lesseneth not the sum, and his servants (if they are wise, and know what is
good for themselves) will not take exceptions thereat, or refuse the same; Even
so it is with God and his people, The things which he gives unto them, are
better and better, not worse and worse, larger and larger, not lesser and
lesser, and therefore we may apply this to this particular case in hand; and
believe with David, that God has magnified his Word above all his Name.
Now though Baptism be greater, and more general then circumcision, in respect
of the subjects, upon whom the same is administered; yet it does not therefore
argue, that Baptism is the seal of one covenant, and circumcision the seal
of another covenant: The River of the Sanctuary, mentioned in Ez^chiel, though
it was not so deep in one place, as in another place, yet it was the same
River; And a small light and a greater light, is all one and the same light,
though the greater seem (in a manner) to swallow up the lesser; So a fire, is
still the same fire, though it be increased as much again as it was, fastening
upon more fuel, yet it is still one and the same, though much greater then
before: So Baptism, although it be, to be imposed upon the females, and
differs in respect of the act from circumcision, yet it is one and the same
in effect, a seal of one and the same covenant; for the enlargement of a thing
(as I said before) changes not the nature of the thing enlarged, but makes it
to include more then it did before.

Whereas it is said, that Infants were then members of the Church Page 22 l. 12.
; and whereas it is demanded, When they were cast out Lin. 12.
To this you answer Lin. 13.
; That they were cast out when the Jews Church State, Line 15.
and old covenant was abrogated by the coming of Christ, and preaching of the
Gospel, and planting other Churches, far different from that of the Jews in
many respects.

To this I reply; That this which you have said, proves not at all, that
infants were cast out; There is not one tittle of Scripture in all the New or
Old Testament to this purpose, that the infants of believers are, (or shall be)
cast out; Bring me one Instance, if you can, of any one infant of a believer,
that at Christ's coming was to be cast out, and then you will say something for
their exempting out of the covenant, but as yet you have brought none, neither
can you find any, but many, yea, multitudes of Scripture there are to the
contrary, both in the new and old Testament.

But you seem to point out the time when the holy infants were cast out of the
Church; You tell us, they were cast out when the Jews Church State, and old
covenant was abrogated by the coming of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel,
and planting other Churches, far different from that of the Jews in many
respects. But alas, you take for granted, a thing which you have not proved,
and it is no marvel indeed, to see the thing that is not probable, to be
without proof. That the Jews Church State was abrogated with the old
covenant, I am not bound to believe, except I see it in Gods Word, much less
will I grant, that the preaching of the Gospel overthrew the Church State. But
seeing the new Jerusalem has gates and foundations, Rev. 21.
according to the number of the twelve Tribes, and twelve Apostles of the
Lamb, and that the Jews and Gentiles being grafted into one Olive tree, Romans
11.
make up but one Church. I must conclude, that the Church of the Jews is the
Church of the Gentiles; for Christ is not properly the head of two bodies;
neither did he come to abrogate the old Church So Mr. Spilsbery says, That the
Church of God under the old Testament, and that now under the new, for nature
are one, in reference to the elect of God, called to the faith, an^ by the
spirit of grace united to Christ, as b^anches to their vi^e, and so an holy
p^ant of Gods plan^ing; of wh ^h indeed the true ^h^rch of God ^onsists. See
his ^reat. of Bap^^^ ^1. at lin. 14.
, though he abrogated the old covenant.

But now let us see how far you would make this Church different, from the
Church of Israel; you know, it must be either in matter or in form, or in
both, otherwise, (I suppose) (you will strive without an opposite,) for all
Christians generally do confess, that they were bound to observe such
circumstances, which we are not bound to observe; but all this did not argue,
bu^ that their Church was fit matter, and a right form, and the same with the
Church of the Gentiles.

But you say A^ lin. 20.
, That was corstituted upon nature, and the natural seed of Abraham; this upon
grace, and the spiritual seed of Abraham.

To which I answer, That if by nature, you mean corruption as it appears you
do, then (by your ground) the Church of the Jews was constituted upon
corruption, and was a corrupt Church, a leporous Church, in the very
constitution. You think, that the Church of the Jews in her constitution, (which
was of Gods building, Isa. 5.1 2, 3. No man ( says Mr. Spilsbery will admit of
dead plants to be set in his v^neyard, or grafted into a stock, but only such
as are capable to comply with the same, in the sap, and nourishment thereof, to
the end it may grow, and bring forth fruit: and so it is with Christ, who comes
not short of nature, and therefore he admits not of any dead plants to be set
in his spiritual vineyard, or dead members to be joined to his mystical body,
but only such as by faith are capable to comply with the head. Neither took
he for himself a compounded body, consisting of both living and dead members,
which all are that have not a living principle of grace, etc. For this see his
Treat. of Bap. page 20. lin. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and consisted all of visible Saints, Deuteronomy. 29.18.) to be c^rrupt. For the like
you said before in your book. p. 4 That they stood merely upon nature and
circumcision of the flesh and not by faith, and circumcision of the heart. And
here you oppose this nature unto grace, and the natural seed unto the
spiritual seed. And thus it appears, that you hold neither the matter, nor
form of the Church to be spiritual then, nor the persons graci^us, but
ungracious, fleshly, and carnal. But the Scripture teaches us, that they were
a holy nation, and a peculiar people unto the Lord their God; and so excellent,
that none were like unto them; Great advantage had they every manner of way:
Unto them was committed the Oracles of God. And shall we think, that God
committed his Oracles to a Church which had a carnal constitution? or that he
owned such for his holy peculiar people? God made an everlasting covenant with
Abraham, that he would be a God unto him and his seed for ever: And though the
Law was added, because of transgression, yet it could not disanull the
covenant, and therefore not the Church (or people of the covenant), or the
seal of the promise. Now surely, if that the Church had been constituted upon
nature corrupted, (such as you have opposed to grace) and upon the natural,
and not upon the spiritual seed See before in this Treatise page 29, 30, 31.
For there it is answered at large.
, then there was no difference between the Israelites, and the Heathens; and
then was the Church of Israel, no communion of Saints, but a mixed multitude,
which to think is very erroneous, as may appear by these Scriptures, Exodus
19.5, 6. and 22.31. and 12.48, 49. Number. 9.14 and 15.15. Levit. 19.2. and 20.7,
8. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.1, 2. and 26.18, 19. 1 King. 8.53. Deuteronomy. 4.20. and 29.10,
11, 12, 13. and 10.15. Psalm. 147.14.

But from this your groundless affirmation, you would (through an inference)
make another disparitie, between the Church of the Jews; and the Church of the
Gentiles: You say, That was therefore termed Israel according to the flesh, and
of the circumcision of the flesh, this Israel according to the Spirit, and of
the circumcision of the heart, Romans 8 28.29. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Coll. 2.11. And to
this I answer, That your speech does here import, as if none who were Israel
according to the flesh, were Israelites according to the spirit: but the
Apostle says, All are not Israel that are of Israel; He makes a manifest
difference between Israel, the Church of God, and those who were not really
Israelites; though they came of Isreal's loins according to the flesh. But your
speech crosses the Apostles speech, and tends to prove, that all were Israel
that were of Israel. But what will you say to the Proselytes, and their seed?
Were they Israel according to the flesh? Surely they were not; therefore they
were Israelites according to the spirit? As well as others, who were also
Israelites, both according to the spirit, and flesh.

Moreover, None were to be circumcised, externally in the flesh, but those who
were in Gods covenant, and were circumcised in heart, so far as m^n could
discern; and those that were in Gods covenant, were Israelites spiritually,
and so to be esteemed, even as true members of the Church. So David says, Yet
surely God is good unto Israel, unto those that are pure in heart. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
Circumcision of the flesh sealed unto them the circumcision of the heart; and
this God promised both to them, and their seed, and then both male, and female,
were all one in Christ Exodus 12.48, 49. Number. 9.14. and 15.14, 15, 16.
, and so they are now Gal. 3.28.
.

As for the Scriptures (Romans 2.28, 29. Romans 9.6, 7, 8 Coll. 2.11) which you cite,
they make nothing for your present purpose; to prove, That that was [onely]
called Israel according to the flesh, and the other only according to the
spirit; The one constituted upon that [nature] (which you have opposed to
grace) and upon the natural seed (destitute of the spirit,) the other
constituted on grace (without nature,) and the spiritual seed of Abraham
(without the natural seed) Prove this, and then you say something, else it is
nothing to your purpose.

But indeed the substance of what you say here, is answered at large in this
Treatise, page 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

And now I will proceed to examine the Scriptures which you have cited here,
for confirmation of these your opinions.

As touching Rom 2.28, 29. there the Apostle declares who are the true Jews
indeed, (namely) those that are Jews inwardly; and that the true Circumcision
indeed, is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is
of God, etc. Now will you reason from this place, that those who were the
natural seed (not degenerating) were not the spiritual seed? and that because
God accepted of the infants with their parents, and commanded them to be
circumcised, that therefore the Church State was built upon nature, and not
upon Christ! Surely you cannot gather any such thing from the Apostles words,
in Romans 2.28, 29. nor from any other place of Scripture, but rather the
contrary. Yea, the Apostle in the following Chapter declares, that as for the
advantage of the Jew, and the profit of circumcision, it was much every manner
of way; chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God: For
(says he) what if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make the faith
of God without effect? God forbid: And so he concludes, that both Jews and
Gentiles are justified by faith; Seeing it is one God which shall justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith; Do we then make
void the Law through faith? (says he) God forbid: yea, we establish the Law.

And in the fourth Chapter Paul treats of justification by faith without
works; and expounds David's speech; for whereas David says Psalm. 32.1, 2.
, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and in whose spirit
there is no guile. Paul explaineth it thus; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes [righteousnesse without works:] From which places of Scripture, much
may be gathered against those who deny infants to have faith imputatively; for
the Apostle declares that he to whom the Lord imputes not sin, is a
righteous person.

Now every person is either righteous, or unrighteous; for as righteousness is
not imputed unto those to whom sin is imputed, So those whose iniquities are
pardoned, and their sin covered, the Lord (imputing no sin unto them) he
imputes righteousness unto them, [without works.] and this righteousness,
is that which justifies before God. It was faith which was counted unto
Abraham for righteousness. And so he proceeds in the 9th, 10th, and 11th
verses, to prove, that this blessing, or blessedness, came not only upon the
circumcision, but also upon the uncircumcision, declaring that Abraham received
not circumcision before he had this blessedness; wherefore he calls
Circumcision a sign, and seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had
before he was circumcised; which imports, that all those who were circumcised
then (according to Gods appointment) were (in visibilitie) blessed before, and
had this righteousness before; even as all those who are baptized, according
to Gods appointment, are righteous before, and have (in visible account) the
same blessing, which those had, who were circumcised, according to the revealed
will of God. And he goes on in the 13, 14, 15. verses, and there tells us,
who are the right heirs. And in the 16th verse, he says, that the promise is
sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also
which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all. And he further
shows, that this promise ([so shall thy seed be,] and that Abraham's believing
Gods promise,) was imputed unto him for righteousness; and was not written for
his sake alone, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
God.

Touching the other Scripture, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Isaac was no mocker, though he
were mocked; no persecuter, though persecuted in his infancy.
which you allege to prove your former position, concerning the different
constitutions of the Church of the Jews, and of the Church of the Gentiles, it
makes nothing for your purpose neither, but directly against you; for there
we may see, that though all are not Israel which are of Israel, yet the Word
of God takes effect; according to that in Romans 3.3.

Ishmaels mocking of Isaac, did not argue, that Isaac was also a mocker.

Isaac remained still a child of promise, (though an Infant.) But if it be
true, (as you would infer) that the state was a state of bondmen, and that an
heir, or Lord, differed nothing from a servant of sin, and if it were
constituted, and stood merely upon nature, and circumcision of the flesh, and
not by faith, and circumcision of the heart: it argues that the Word of God is
without effect! that all were Israel that were of Israel! all mockers with
Ishmael! profane persons with Esau! etc. which to think, is very erroneous;
for the word of God has taken effect, to retain the holy Infants, and cast
out visible profane persons, and therefore the state wherein they were, was a
state of freemen.

God was well pleased with them, and accepted of their sacrifices, and promised
unto them, remission of their sins through Jesus Christ, who was then to
come, and is now come. Therefore I would have you to banish such evil thoughts
out of your mind, as if they had a false, corrupt, or carnal, and not a
spiritual constitution.

Again consider, That Church upon whom holy Baptism was rightly administered,
was holy and spiritual.

But holy Baptism was rightly administered upon the Church of Israel. 1 Cor.
10.1, 2. Psa. 77.16, 17,


Therefore they were a holy spiritual Church, as well as we.

But peradventure you will say, you mean, that in their Apostacy they pleased
not God; and therefore their Church State which they were in formerly, had a
carnal constitution, and was not spiritual.

To which I answer, That the like you may say concerning the Churches now,
which you acknowledge to be spiritual. But you should consider, that many are
called, but few are chosen: Gods garden may have some plants therein, which
possibly may degenerate from their kind, and become wild, yet the garden is
still the Lords; but the husbandmen ought when they discover such, to weed
them out. So corruptions began to spring in the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 7.11.
and they cut down the tender fruits thereof in time. And God threatened the
members of some of the Churches of Asia, (...) Rev. 2. and 3.
to execute judgment upon them, if repentance prevented him not.

As for Coll. 2.11. which you have cited, that the Church of Collossia, was
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. This implies not
but that the Jews and Proselytes, before Christ's coming, had circumcision of
the flesh, as an outward sign unto them, that the Lord would circumcise their
hearts, and the hearts of their seed, to love him more and more, according to
his gracious promise. And seeing that the Apostle makes circumcision here, the
same in effect with our Baptism, it plainly argues, that as infants (in
former time) were to receive circumcision, so infants now (in their infancy)
are to receive Baptism the seal of the same covenant.

Whereas you say, That was a state of bond men Lin. 23.
, wherein an heir differed nothing from a servant, this, not of servants Lin.
28.
, but of sons and freemen. I suppose you mean by bondmen, those who were
bound-servants to Satan; and by freemen, those who were set free by Christ:
In this respect then you have not done well, in saying that such a one that was
made free (in this spiritual respect) differed nothing from those who were
visibly bondslaves of Satan. Then (it seems) Isaac differed nothing from a
mocker; nor the Proselytes infants, from Heathens and Infidels.

And if you mean, by servants, those who are wicked in the Church, I say, they
were to be cast out, as they manifested evil fruits; for though they were in
the house a while, and were as children, yet they manifesting themselves
afterward to be servants of sin, were no longer to abide; but those who are
not servants of sin, are now (as they were then) to abide for ever therein;
so Ishmael was in covenant with Isaac, and was circumcised; but when he
manifested fruits of unholinesse, out he was cast. And why was this? Genesis 21.9,
10.
Not because he was Abraham's son, according to the flesh; but because he
manifested himself afterward to be a servant of sin, and so degenerated from
the righteous steps of Abraham.

Now you ought to know, See before in this Treatise page 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,
147, 148, 149.
that the Church of the Jews was constituted of freemen, and there was not
one sinner to be suffered in that church, but when he was discovered, either he
must repent, or be cut off; therefore it plainly argues, that visible wicked
persons, bondslaves of Satan, were not to be the matter of that Church; in
the first constitution, they were such who in all outward appearance, were not
alliens from Gods covenants, or promises, or strangers to God, but were such
whom he knew, and owned, and such whom he would acknowledge, as in the kingdom
of grace here, so in the kingdom of glory hereafter.

It may be you think thus; That if the Church of Israel were constituted of
freemen, why then were many of them manifested afterward to be wicked? Corah,
and his company, a congregation of Rebels, from whom Moses, and the rest were
commanded to separate; famous men, and men of renown amongst the Israelites,
and yet were chief in the rebellion; also Nadab and Abihu, offerers of strange
fire, and many more, manifested themselves to be evil persons.

Ans. If this be any ground of your prejudicacie against the Church of the
Jews, then let this satisfy you, that these were freemen at first, according
to visibilitie, as holy as Judas, or Simon Magus, or Ananias and Saphira; And
therefore if it be an argument of a false constitution, for members of a Church
of God to fall from their steadfastness, then it will follow, that the Church
now (under the Gospel) has not a true constitution, seeing that diverse fall
from their steadfastness, some for a time, like the incestuous person in the
Church of Corinth, others, finally, totally, and eternally, like Judas
Iscariot, who was one of the Lambs twelve Apostles.

Let this then be the conclusion, that the state may be a state of freemen,
though some bondmen appear in it, and are cast out, as Ishmael the son of
the bondwoman, was cast out of the state of freemen, wherein the infants of
believers were admitted, though they were not the seed of Abraham according to
the flesh.

And the consideration of this makes much for the infants of believers now,
for as much as believers (even free-mens) privileges are much enlarged since
Christ's manifestation in the flesh. The freemen had this privilege formerly
to bring in their infants, and to difference them from those without: And
surely their privileges are not lessened now: What had the Infants of
believing parents done, to deserve Excommunication (or casting out of the
Church?) If they had don nothing worthy of it (as it is sure they had not) then
I may justly conclude, that they were not children of the bond woman, and if
not of the bondwoman, then still of the freewoman, and if children of the
freewoman, then members of the Church, and if so, then there is no just reason
can be given to debar such holy Infants of their privileges; amongst which,
Baptism is one, as Circumcision was of old.
Christ came not to bring loss and damage to holy infants; And if it be true,
which you say, That till Christ's coming, an heir (or believer) differed nothing
from a servant. If by a servant, you mean Ishmael, or such as he, who
manifested themselves to be servants of sin, then why was the son of the bond
woman cast out, and differenced from the son of the freewoman? But indeed
you should mind, that Christ came to take the yoke of the Law from the
shoulders of believers, and so to ease them of that servitude, under which they
were; and this does not impair the infants of believers, no not in the least.

Touching Christ's discourse Lin. 30.
, which you bring to make your affirmations to appear evident true; It does
evidence, that your affirmations in this particular, are evident false; for
Christ says no such thing which you feign, that he says; for he speaks to
those that did derogate from the steps of Abraham, which the believers Infants
could not justly be said to do. And Christ does not say, that the Church of
the Jews was constituted upon nature, flesh, carnalitie, opposite to the
spirit; but he says, that those that continued in his Word, they then were his
Disciples indeed, and should know the truth, and the truth should make them
free; (not that the Church, whereof he and his brethren were members, was
evilly constituted, because evil persons were in it, or degenerated from it)
but that these were members in the Church, which had need to amend, or else to
be cast out.

See John 8.
Their answer to Christ was, that they were Abraham's seed, and so were free
al^eadie, and were never in bondage to any man. But in this they said not true;
for they had degenerated from the steps of Abraham. And Christ in telling them,
that whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin; did therein declare,
that it was no benefit unto any to be of Abraham's seed, if they degenerated
from Abraham's steps; for this was a means, (though they were members of the
true Church) to make them no m^mbers of it, but to be cast out thence; for (so
says Christ unto them) the servant abides not in the house for ever. Now by
this house, is meant his Church, in which though sinners abide covertly (for a
time) yet as they manifest themselves to be corrupt, and levennous, are (or at
least ought) to be cast out; Therefore they abide not there for ever; So the
Jews were taught by the ceremony of casting away leaven, to cast out the
leaven of sin, out of their hearts, and out of their families; and also to
purge the Church of God, both of sin, and sinners, so far as they could
discern by the light of Gods Word, But those that were true Saints, were to
abide in that true Church State for ever. So it is said, Psalm. 15.5. That such
shall never be moved out of Gods Tabernacle, and holy Mountain. So Christ
says here, that the Son abides for ever; If therefore the Son make you
free, you shall be free indeed. By this freedom, he meant a freedom from
condemnation for ever, from the law of sin, and of death for ever, because he
opposes it to the bondage they were in.

Further, These persons whom Christ reprehended, were not obedient to the new
covenant, neither did they regard the commandments of the Law; for the
commandment says, Thou shall not kill. But Christ said unto them; I know you
are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me, because my Word has no place in
you, etc. This wickedness of theirs, was not warranted, neither by the new,
nor old covenant, and therefore they were not allowed in any respect, but
condemned. Wherefore it evidently appears, that you cannot gather from either
of the covenants, that such visible wicked persons, were by God allowed to be
in (much less the ground of) his Churches constitution after their discovery.
These then were not meet to be members of the Church of the Jews, yea, though
they were the children of Abraham (according to the flesh) yet by the new and
old covenant, were to be cast out, when the least infant of a faithful
Proselyte, remained still a member of the Commonwealth of Israel, which was
the Church of God.

Moreover, Christ did not affirm any such thing (as you would further feign he
did,) that persons by natural birth, and circumcision of the flesh, were
admitted free; for Ishmalites and Edomites, by fleshly generation, were the
children of Abraham, yet they were not therefore admitted freemen, till they
renounced their parents sin, and came into the Church. And the infants of
wicked parents, were circumcised in Apostacy; yet we will not say, that
therefore they were free; But this we are to know, that the natural seed of
the faithful, that were not apostated, or degenerated, were to be accounted
the true seed; and all those who were circumcised, Genesis 17.14.
according to Gods appointment, were the true seed in covenant with God, and so
were made free; when Apostates (though circumcised) were bond-servants to
sin, and were not to be admitted (as they stood in that state of Apostacy)
to be members of the Church of the Jews, as you most fainedly would father
upon Christ.

You fain as if Christ should say, that Abraham's nature could produce no other
but servants of sin, etc. But I know not what you mean hereby. I know
Abraham was a sinner in the loins of Adam, yet Adams sin was not imputed
unto him to condemnation; no more was it visibly to Abraham's seed, but as they
degenerated from Abraham's steps; for the sin of Abraham, which he had
actually, and originally, was forgiven him in Christ.

And think not, that he was destitute of the new covenant, for though the new
covenant was before the manifestation of the old covenant in Mount Sinai, yet
it was new in respect of perpetuity, though old in respect of antiquity; and
is set forth in Rev. 4. by the similitude of a Rainbow, in sight like an
Emerauld round about the throne of God.

And the Infants of Abraham were never out of the Church State, till they
apostated, and degenerated from the steps of Abraham; If the promises had been
made to seeds, as of many, then there had been some ground ^o believe, that
visible wicked persons, or persons merely natural, destitute of the spirit,
were fit matter for the constitution of that Church, and that the seed of
Apostates might be circumcised, as well as others. But the promises were made
only to one seed Gal. 3.16.
, namely, Christ, that is to say, Christ's body, which consists (or ought to
consist) visibly of none but sons of God, by faith in Christ. And seeing the
promise made to Abraham, and his seed, was not made through the Law, (namely,
the old Law) and that this old Law could not disanull the promise, therefore
the old covenant could be removed, and yet the promise continue still, to all
those subjects to whom it was made.

See A. R. Page 24. li. 1, 2. Mat. 1. Luk 3. Isa. 11.
But further you would feign, that the flesh spoken of in Genesis 17.13. was
Christ, who was to come of their flesh. But you should know, that Christ came
of the Tribe of Judah, by liniall descent, and not of the rest of the Tribes,
nor of the father- Proselytes, and yet they being circumcised, that covenant of
circumcision was in their flesh.

Moreover, Christ himself was circumcised [in his infancy Luke 2.21.
,] where was that covenant, if he were the flesh spoken of? The covenant was in
his flesh, as well as in the flesh of his brethren. Now by flesh, we may, and
ought to understand, that place from whence the superfluity of their
foreskinne was cut off. Genesis 17.10. Ver. 14.
My covenant, says he, shall be in [your] flesh; and the uncircumcised
man-child, whose [flesh of his foreskin] is not cut off, the same person shall
be cut off, etc.

Again, If by the flesh, was only meant Christ's natural body, and by the
covenant, only the circumcision, which Christ was to receive, (and did
receive) in his flesh. Then circumcision was abolished, (or at an end) when
Christ was circumcised, and none were to be circumcised after him.

Yea, and if he were that flesh, which was to be circumcised; then it will
follow, that though none other had been circumcised before or after, they had
not broken the covenant.

But God did declare, what the circumcision was, and where it was to be
administered, and upon whom: First, It was a cutting off, of the superfluous
fore-skinne: Secondly, That it was to be in their flesh, and not in the flesh
of others in stead of them. Thirdly, That it was to be administered upon Jews
and Gentiles, that were in the covenant: Genesis 17. Exodus 12.48.
And so such persons were by virtue of Gods covenant circumcised, not only
before Christ was circumcised, but also after; and therefore you have not done
well to interpret Genesis 17.13. after such a manner, and you have done evil, in
faining it, as if it were the speech of Christ, when no such things ever
entered into his thoughts.

Whereas you think circumcision was a covenant properly, you should know, that
though circumcision had the denomination of Gods covenant Genesis 14.10.
, yet it was but a sign of it Ver. 11.
. The names of things signified (in the Scripture) are given to the signs,
which signify them; So the Lamb was called Gods Passover Exodus 12.11.
; the Rock, Christ 1 Cor. 10.4.
; the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, Christ's body and blood, etc. Mat.
26.26.
And in this sense, is circumcision called Gods covenant, that is to say, a
token, or sign thereof, as God terms it himself in Genesis 17. ver. 11.

As for those which say, that the promise, covenant, election, and faith,
belongs t^ [all] believers children (which supposed case you put to shut up all
Se^ A. R. Page 25. at lin. 8.
your matter) I tell you, that if by all, they mean the godly children of godly
parents, then they say true; But that the wicked children of godly parents,
have these excellent things belonging unto them, is no article of my faith.
When the Apostle Peter says to the Jews; Act. 2.39.
The promise is unto (you, and to) [your children,] and to all that are a far
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. In including the children
here with the parents, his meaning is not to include all believers children,
but only those holy ones who abide in their parents righteous steps; which
thing holy Infants do, as before has been proved at large See page 3.
, they do not degenerate from the righteous steps of their holy parents. And
therefore such may be lawfully baptized, for no more in effect is required to
Baptism, then was to circumcision of old; this is, as that was, and these are,
as those were: Holy infants were to be circumcised then, and therefore such may
be lawfully baptized now.

Next, you See A. R. Page 25. li. 19.
charge the great Clerks of our times, with confounding the two Covenants, of
the Law and Gospel together. And to this, I say, if by these great clerks, you
mean those who think Infants Baptism to be a mere tradition; Indeed then your
accusation may prove true upon them, for such as they do put no difference
between the new covenant, made with Abraham and his seed, and the old covenant
and law, which came long after it; but they think this new covenant, and the
old covenant, to be both one, and do not rightly understand the nature of
them; and therefore the hodge-podge in their teachings, and writings, which you
mention Lin. 29.
, is their own, as well as any ones else; as also the intermixture of grace
and works, truth and error; as also the distillation of the spirit of
giddiness into the hearts of their hearers, that they walk indeed (as you
speak Lin. 33.
) in a circular Maze: And so by confounding Law and Gospel, have labored to
bring you (or rather detain you) in bondage to sin.

See A. R. page 26. at lin. 10.
Next, You would make us believe, that you desire that the doctrine of free
grace by Jesus Christ, might be set forth distinctly in its native luster, and
the spiritualitie thereof in its fullness of beauty and glory clearly laid
open. Which is indeed a thing to be desired, both in the continuance and
increase thereof. But alas, little do you think (as I in charity judge) how
all your labor in this Treatise, tends to the darkening, obscuring,
eclipsing, restraining, and limitting of the doctrine of free grace by Jesus
Christ, the distinct displaying of whose native luster, though it be never so
often done, or the spiritualitie thereof in its fullness of beauty and glory,
never so clearly laid open before you, yet you cannot see it clearly indeed, so
long as you thus hudwinke the eyes of your charity, and present the blessed
babes of believing parents, unto you, and your self unto them, in such beastly
shapes, as you have don throughout your discourse concerning them.

You talk freely of free grace, as if it were excellent in your eyes, and that
you desire to be satisfied with the fulness of the beauty thereof; But in the
mean while, you would not have us think that any part thereof belongs to the
holy infants: But surely (as I said before See before in this Treatise, page 82.
) it is well they are not at your finding; for if they were, it seems that
you would ( Dives-like) not admit them the least crum which falls from your
Table. But our sweet Savior Jesus Christ who was once an infant, and is (and
always was) the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth, has
free grace enough in store for them, and has displayed the same excellently in
its native luster, as is frequently manifested in the Scripture of God. Which
thing no doubt you will perceive, when once God opens your eyes to see how
the covenant of mercy is made with believing parents, and their seed, that he
will be their God, and will accept of them in Christ, (binding them to do
nothing above their ability) And this free grace of God arises from his
loving kindness, or good will which he has unto them, and always had; which
kind mind moved him to look upon them with the eye of pity, and so to take
such his chosen ones to himself. And this grace may well be said to be free,
and why? Because it proceeds not from works, but from the love of God in
Christ Jesus. The love which is in God, is that which moves God, (who is love)
to love; Because He loved thy fathers, Deuteronomy. 4.37. Genesis 17.7, 8.
therefore He chose their seed. So the covenant of free grace runs thus; I will
be the God of thee, and of thy seed after thee: And he binds the holy infants
to no action, or any thing which they cannot do, but gives them the true
blessedness without works; And therefore though you talk never so long of
free grace, and toss it never so often in your mouth, yet it is no freedom
for you, but bondage unto you, so long as you do (by with-standing holy
infants) as it were, snatch their bread, out of their mouths. The ground
whereof is your unbelief, because you persuade your self, that the holy
infants are not visibly in the state of salvation, till they actually and
verbally express faith: As if the believers infants [dying in their infancie]
were not saved by Christ's righteousness, imputed unto them without works. And
your own errors (you mention) which like hypocrites twins, do smile and
weep stand and fall together, may be justly fathered upon those, who b^r^e out
the infants from the said privileges which Christ has bequeathed unto them,
as they are selected unto him.

As for the gay Clergy which you mention, Page 25.
(meaning those of the Church of England, as I suppose) which you now run upon,
(as you did at the latter end of your first book,) though it be to little
purpose; (for as much as it does not concern our point in hand,) yet I will
tell you what I know, and have found by experience, that they are feign to
betake themselves to Anabaptisticall Arguments, both for the maintenance of
their state, and retaining of evil persons therein; which indeed arises from
their gross mistake of the History of the Scripture, thinking (as you do)
that the Church of the Jews was constituted merely upon nature and carnalitie,
and the like stuff, never considering that God (from the beginning of the
world) always constituted his Church only of such persons, who in all visible
account were faithful, and holy; And still provided a way and means to purge
the Church from corruptions.

Moreover, The parties (formerly specified) in maintenance of their state, have
also a fond erroneous conceit, that because they have some of Gods ordinances,
therefore they are a true Church; not considering that Gods ordinances may be
in a false state, as in Jeroboams whorish Church, (as has been observed
formerly See the Answer to A. R. first part.
.) Hereupon they are forceably driven, either to confess the Church of Rome,
to be a true Church, or else to maintain that an unbaptiz^d person may
baptize. Now if they stand to deny the baptism in the Church of Rome, they
deny their own Baptism, which they received successively from thence; which
if they do, (as upon your grounds they are driven thereunto) then how do you
think they will raise baptism, except an unbaptized person baptize another?

Thus you may see into what streits they wrap and ensnare themselves, in taking
up such groundless Arguments as you bring, and all to justify themselves in
their own way, and to avoid, and withstand the way of Separation, which is the
only way of God.

Whereas you bring in the disorders in worship and government, which you say,
the Papists have brought in; I tell you, this is a varying from the matter in
hand, yet I say, we ought to learn by the same to avoid them, and all those
who seek to ruinate the foundation of Christian Religion, by casting dark
shadows upon the heavenly beauti^ and glorious excellency of Christ's Kingly,
Priestly, and Prophetical office, and eclipse his Mediatorship, as if it were
less then it was before he was manifested in the flesh. As if he who has all
power both in heaven and in earth, has not given so much authority, as
generally and universally to make Disciples, and baptize them; as the Saints of
old had to make Disciples and circumcise them; Surely seeing Christ is as
faithful in his house as Moses. As the Gospel of Christ (in former time) was
so effectual and powerful, as to cause Proselytes (and their seed in their
infancy) to have such dignity (by virtue of Gods covenant) to be circumcised;
The Gospel of Christ (being every jot as glorious as it has been,) is also as
effectual and powerful now, to dignifie believers, and their infants, with
the ordinance of Baptism, and that by virtue of Gods covenant; unto which is
annexed Christ's institution, which is very general, yea, more general then
circumcision was of old. And surely if the infants of believers had that power,
as to become the children of God in their infancy, fellow- heirs with the
Saints in light, as Isaac was, and all those like him were, and to be
coe-heires with Jesus Christ, of the everlasting inheritance, kingdom, and
glory, and that before Christ's resurrection; Then the infants of believers,
borne after Christ's resurrection, have the like privileges. But the first is
true from the grounds before laid, from their right to the covenant, their
being in the covenant, etc. and the unchangeablenesse of the Angel of the
covenant, Therefore the latter, that holy infants are still in the covenant, is
true also; And this has been sufficiently proved before.

Touching your Exhortation, how we should bewail the great Ap^stacie, etc. I
say, as the Saints of old did bewail the great Apostacy of the Israelites,
both in faith and worship, Isa. 2.6.
who were replenished from the East, and were south-sayers, like the
Philistians, and pleased themselves in the children of strangers; So we ought
to bewail this Apostacy of these now.

We have cause to bewail their ignorance, who pretend holiness to God, and
make a verbal profession, drawing near unto God with their mouths (like the
Apostate Israelites) when their hearts are far from him; pleading for the
baptizing of those Infants, whose parents are neither of them believers,
causing the holy sign to be administered upon their infants in that idolatrous
estate; in the partaking whereof, they have no right, any more then the seed of
those Apostates of the Israelites, had right to circumcision in former time.

But yet though the Infants were circumcised in that Idolatrous estate, the
Prophets work was to call them to repentance, and if they returned (the manner
of their circumcision being repented of) it was as effectual unto them, as if
they had received it in an excellent and holy manner. So those who are baptized
in their infancy, in the state of Apostacy, at their conversion are not to be
baptized again; but to repent of the evil of the manner, and not cast away
Gods holy institution, but still retain it, and make a holy use of it, yet
they ought not to Idolize it, by preferring it before that which is greater.
Though the Temple, Rev. 2.1, 2.
and the Altar, and the worshippers, were to be measured, yet the Court without
was to be cast out, and not to be measured, because it was given to the
Gentiles.

Again, Whereas you speak of the abrogation of the state of the Jews. I say,
This has been answered fully before, you should still mind that Jesus Christ
came not to undermine or overthrow his kingdom, though it was taken out of the
hands of the unbeleeving Jews, and given unto another people, whom Christ
testified, would bring forth fruits of it.

Again, Whereas you speak of the casting off of Israel, according to the flesh.

I answer, That none were cast off merely because they were Israelites
according to the flesh; and though some were cut off, yet others remained on,
and in that state where the Gentiles by faith were planted and placed; as some
of the Jews, through unbelief, were cut off, supplanted, and displaced. So
the Ap stle Paul says, the Jews some of them (not all of them) were cut off,
because of unbelief, and the believing Gentiles grafted in their stead. As for
those that believed, their privileges and prerogatives were still as great,
and as large, both to them, and their seed, as they were before. And the like
may be said concerning the Proselytes. And so your other question is resolved,
concerning the bringing in of us Gentiles, and our seed, as acceptable on Gods
Altar.

And whereas you question again; A. R.
Whether the parents, Jew and Gentile, must needs be borne again of the Spirit,
and only by faith become the seed of Abraham, and heirs according to promise,
Gal. 3.7.29. Romans 4.11, 12. And shall their children become the same seed by
nature?

I answer. The birth of the Spirit is very necessary both to young and old,
without which they cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. And I would have
you to know, that I plead not that the children of the faithful become heirs
of the promise by nature; but by the free grace of God, which passes all
understanding; which is as sufficient for believers, and their children now, as
formerly.

And these interrogations of yours, are answered at large, you having mentioned
the same things before.

Again, You say; A. R. Page 30. lin. 2. to lin. 10.
Neither can any show any one such promise to any believer, in all the whole
world, and his seed, as was and is to Abraham and his seed, who is therefore
the father of us all (to wit) of all believers, and only of believers, Jew and
Gentile, father and child, etc. Romans 4.16. and therefore it is faith, that it
might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; but
the promise is sure only to believers; Therefore believers only are the seed
of Abraham, to whom the promise and ordinance of the new Testament do properly
appertain.

To which I answer, That this has been answered before already, It has been
proved sufficiently, that the same covenant which was made with Abraham and his
seed, is made to believers and their seed; and it being a perpetual covenant,
the heirs of it are perpetual heirs, even such to whom the promises do
appertain, as well as unto their dear brethren of old, who are departed in
the same faith; and this heavenly order the old Law which was given at Mount
Sinai, could not disanull.

And I hope there is no reasonable man, but will condescend unto this, that all
those who were to receive the sign and s^ale of the righteousness of faith,
were visibly holy and faithful; but the Infants of believers were, by Gods
appointment, to receive the sign, and seal of the righteousness of faith;
therefore the Infants of believers were then (as they are now) visibly holy and
faithful. And Christian Infants are as capable (every way) of the seal now,
as the Infants of the Jews (Gods holy ones) were capable of the seal in
former time.

Therefore the Baptism of the New Testament, does properly appertain unto
such; and therefore the administration of Baptism upon them, does not
overthrow the least part of the Gospel of Christ, or any thing of his, much
less the whole, as you (in your following words) most falsely speak; and
therefore the minor of your following argument, being so small, that there is
no truth therein; the conclusion builded thereon, (that that Baptism Page 30.
l. 15.
is Antichristian and abominable) is Antichristian and abominable, as well as
your comparisons, specified in your first Book, where you compare the Baptism
of Infants with the abominable Hierarchy. Against which imprecations, I must,
and will still, as I have done, maintain the Baptism of holy Infants to be
just and lawful, holy and Evangelicall; and ought to be observed, according to
the command of Christ, Mat 28.19. M^r. 16.16. Of which sufficient has been
spoken before, and more may be according as time and occasion shall be offered.

But your bare affirmations, (without proof) you take for granted to be very
true, and therefore upon this ground, you proceed to make a final conclusion
of your Book, with this Conclusion; A. R. His last Conclusion.
That the Baptism of Infants, is the greatest delusion, and a thing of as
dangerous consequence, as ever the Man of sin brought into the world; and
therefore the greatest maintainers thereof, are justly to be esteemed the
greatest deluders. Wherefo^e it is high time for us to look about us, to awaken
out of the drunken slumber, and to see how hitherto we and our fathers have
been blindly led, by our blind guides, into this depth of ignorance, and mist
of iniquity, and let us seek out by what means, and by whom we are so
miserably intosticated, as to stumble and grope for our way, thus even at noone
day.

To which I answer, That it is not material or sufficient to say, it is a
delusion, except it could be proved to be so; you should know, that it is not a
delusion, nor dangerous in the least, much less can it be the greatest
delusion, and of as dangerous consequence, as ever the Man of sin brought
into the world; as you (without so much as any just consequence) most unjustly
conclude; rather we may conclude, that the greatest with standers of holy
Infants Baptism, are the greatest deluders; Wherefore I may better conclude
against you, that you have done very evil in uttering forth such bitter words,
against the Baptism of holy Infants, before you had seen the promises better
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary. And why is it? but because you do
not look upon things with a single eye. Yea, your spiritual sight is so
darkened, (or rather that natural reason which is in you,) that in pushing at
Gods people, you push against God, who stands between you and us; though you
(rideing upon the insufficiency of your humane testimony, which will not bear
you out) see him not, no more then blind Balaam saw the Angel of Jehovah, that
fought against him; But when your eyes are opened, then you shall see your
error, and be enabled to perceive a difference spiritually between the Infants
of believers, and the Infants of unbeleevers, in respect of a visible state,
and reverence the ordinance of Baptism, administered upon holy Infants, for his
sake, who is the Author and Instituter thereof; and no more condemn the
generation of the just, who practice the same; and so kick against the pricks,
and be a fighter (as you are now) against God. But know, that it is no better
then sacrilege, to father Gods holy Institutions upon the Man of sin.

And seeing the sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, was commanded by
God to be imposed upon the Infants of believers we may justly conclude, That
those are deluded by sin, which say it is a delusion of the Man of sin; but
such prejudicate opinions, as yours are, are the very suggestions of Satan;
for with the same carnal reason did he possess Eve; and with the like
suggestions has he violently possessed you; this being as bad as that, it not
worse; and therefore those who are most active and famous to withstand the
Baptism of holy Infants, are (if you will have it) the greatest and most
grossest deluders, at least (and at the best) they are deluded.

And if you will still determine to hold on, as you have done, saying that the
Baptism of Infants is a mere device, and tradition of man, and brought into
the world for politic and by-ends, etc. when it is apparently known, that God
first brought it into the world; and his love is not self-love, neither has
he any other ends, but his own glory, and the good of his people. I say, if you
hold on in your peremptory conclusion, that it is a delusion of the Man of
sin, and that the greatest maintainers thereof, are justly to be esteemed the
greatest deluders. I must (knowing you to be deluded) desire you to awake out
of this [your] drunken slumber; and know, that in all these your fond
imaginations, and vain conceptions, you have brought forth a mere dream; When
you awake (I hope) you will not find it so.

AND now for conclusion, I desire you seriously to consider the Scriptures,
reasons, and arguments brought by me to vindicate the lawfulness of the
Baptism of holy Infants, against whatsoever objections you have here set down
in opposition of this Truth. And withal take notice (I pray you) how that
throughout both these your Treatises against Infants baptism, you have not
brought one Scripture, from whence we may draw the least consequence for
dismissing the holy Infants from being m^mbers of Gods visible church, or for
k^^ping them f^o^ Baptism ( the visible sign of the new Covenant,) extant now,
any more then such holy Infants were exempted in former time from Circumcision
the visible sign of the new Covenant) ^xtant then. But many yea, multi^udes of
plain and evident testimonies there are, evidently d^claring the excell^nt
benefits which appertain unto them in Jesus Christ; Amongst which, Baptism is
one, which though it be external, and is not effectual [(...) i^ self^] to
the salvation of any, yet it is a sign (or token) by which God will have all
his visible Saints, marked out for the peculiar sheep of his own pasture.

And ^f holy Infants were not to be baptized, is holy Infants formerly were to
be circumcised before Christ was manifested in the flesh, then it would argue a
great weakness, or imperfection in Christ, eclipsing his Mediatorship, as if he
were not so able to make this as profitable unto these (in their infancy) as
Circumcision was unto the other (in their infancy) importing as if Christ were
not so faithful in his house, as Moses, and as if Baptism were of smaller
value, and of less effect then Circumcision.

But Baptism is as general and as effectual every manner of way as
Circumcision, therefore as Circumcision was not worn out from the Infants of
believers, but was so permanent, that it remained till Christ's first coming,
and till he took away the Ceremonies of the old Law; so Baptism has not, nor
shall not be taken away from these, but remain as permanent with them, till
Christ ( who was once an Infant like them) come again in the Clouds of heaven,
with power and great glory, descending with his shouting Troops of heavenly
Hosts; When the heavens from above, and hell from beneath, shall be emptied of
those immortal souls and spirits which are therein, when your own eyes shall
behold our Emanuel, either to your glory, or confusion; at which time, all the
dead both small and great, Infants as well as others, shall be seen to stand
before God to be judged; Then shall there be a separation between the precious,
and the vile, when Jesus Christ, our sweet Savior, (the very beauty of
holiness, the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his
person) shall invite the blessed babes of believing parents, ( together with
the rest of his sheep) to receive the substance of all his ordinances, the
accomplishment of all his promises, the enjoyment of that glorious and
immortal estate, that ununchangeable and perpetual supreme inheritance,
which shall never be worn out, or taken away, but remain from everlasting to
everlasting.

FINIS.

