The Cheshire Petition for establisshing of the Common-Prayer-Booke, and
suppression of Schismatiques, presented to the Kings Majesty, and from him
recommended to the House of Peers by the Lord Keeper.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords,
and the Honorable the House of Commons Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse of the Nobility, Justices, Gentry, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester, whose
names are nominated in the Schedule annexed.
Your Petitioners with all cheerfulness and contentation, affying in the
happy settlement of the distractions both of Church and State by His Majesty's
pious care, and the prudent and religious endeavors of this Honorable
Assembly, and with due humility and obedience, submitting to the unanimous
conclusions thereof, yet conceive themselves bound in duty,
HVmbly to represent to your mature considerations, that the present disorders
of many turbulent and ill disposed spirits, are such, as give not only
occasion of present discontent to your Petitioners, but seem to import some
ill event without early prevention.

The pure seed of our faith (the doctrine of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, established by so many Acts of Parliament, and so harmoniously
concurring with the confessions of all other Reformed Churches, being tainted
with the Tares of diverse Sects and Schisms lately sprung up amongst us.

Our pious, laudable, and ancient form of Divine Service, composed by the holy
Martyrs, and worthy Instruments of Reformation established by the prudent Sages
of State (your religious Predecessors) honored by the approbation of many
learned foreign Divines, subscribed by the Ministry of the whole Kingdom,
and with such general content received by all the Laity, that scarce any
family or person that can read, but are furnished with the Books of Common
Prayer: In the conscionable use whereof many Christian hearts have found
unspeakeable joy and comfort, wherein the famous Church of England our dear
Mother has just cause to glory; And may she long flourish in the practice of
so blessed a Lyturgie; yet it is now, not only depraved by many of those who
should teach conformity to established Laws, but in contempt thereof in many
places wholly neglected. All these daily practiced, with confidence, without
punishment: To the great dejection of many sound Protestants, and occasioning
so great insultation and rejoicing in some Separatists, as they not only seem
to portend, but menace some great alteration; And not containing themselves
within the bounds of civil government, do commit many tumultuous (if not
sacrilegious) violences both by day and night upon diverse Churches.

Therefore your Petitioners being all very apprehensive of the dangerous
consequences of Innovation, and much scandalized at the present disorders, Do
all unanimously pray,

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. The Petition Signed by Lords,
Knights, Justices of the Peace, and Esquires, 94. By Gentlemen of quality 440.
By Divines, 86. By Freeholders and others, in all. 8936.




London Printed for John Austin* 1642.


