CHESHIRES SUCCESS, Since their Pious and truly Valiant Collonell Sr. William
Brereton Barronet, came to their Rescue.

Set forth in 4. Chapters;

I. The Battle at Namptwich, Jan. 28. II. The Battle at Torperley, Feb. 21.
III. An account how the time was spent since Sir William 's first advancing
into the County, till the Battle at Middlewich. IIII. The memorable Battle at
Middlewich, March 13.
Confirmed by a Letter sent from that Industrious and Faithful Collonell unto
his dear Friend in London: And a Copy of the same unto an Honorable Member of
the House of Commons, and by the House Ordered to be Printed.

Together With a Catalogue of the Names of the chief Commanders that were
taken Prisoners at the said Battle: which are 1. Baronet, 1. Collonell, 1.
Lieutenant Collonell, 2. Sergeant Majors, 9. Captains, 6. Lievtenants, 4.
Ensigns, 2. Corporalls, 1. Quartermaster, 2. Canoniers, 4 Cornets colors,
400. and odd Prisoners; 2. Brass Pieces, 8. Barrells of Gunpowder, etc.

Whereunto is added a strange Warrant, etc. And certain News of the great
Battle near Stafford, much like Kyneton Battle.

LONDON, March 27. Printed for Thomas Underhill and (...)

Cheshires Success.
I. CHAP. The Battle at Namptwich.
THe well affected in the County of CHESTER having a long time expected Sir
William Brereton Barronet for their relief (who were miserably infected by the
Commission of Array) on Saturday Ian. 28. he advanced from Congleton in the
same County to Namptwitch; but hearing Sir Thomas-Aston, with his Forces
intended to take that Town before him, he sent a Party before to secure the
Town for himself, who were but few in number, but came seasonably; Sir
William advanced after with his Carriages, which he durst not leave without
himself to guard them. Sir Thomas understanding that a Party of ours had
possessed themselves of the Town, he came against it about three of the Clock,
was five times valiantly repelled; in which assaults we lost but one man,
slain by a poisoned Bullet, though the Town lay open on all sides, without
any trench or bank: when he saw his hopes for that Town frustrate, he
retreated, and fell upon Sir William, who was not above 150. strong; but Sir
Thomas had near 400 Besides that, he had all other advantages; for he had
first surveyed and chosen his ground in a Lane near the Town, had made his
Van strong, flanked them on either side, and there stood in Battalia, till Sir
William came, who had no notice of his enemies, but by a Boy who told him of
their approach, which caused them to order themselves for an Assault, in chance
that News were true: but they were gotten into the jaws of death before they
were aware; for it being dark, near six of the Clock, they dscern'd them
more by the Enemies whispering, than by their one eye: but God to whom the
light is all one as the day, was a Pillar of fire unto them, and gave them so
much light, as served to the obtaining of a glorious Victory. Sir Thomas let
fly, but without success; Sir William discharged his Drakes which wrought
more terror than execution: for the ground was very rough; but the enemy cried,
Let us fly, for they have great Ordnance. Captain Goldegay dismounted his
Dragoneers, and turned his Horses upon them, which brought them into confusion,
and charged upon them very sore; all the rest fell to it with their Pistols
Dragoones, and Carbines, but that service was but short, for there was neither
time nor place to wheel about, or renew the Charge; then they fell to it by
dint of sword, and weight of their battle-axes, with which they belabored the
Enemy, that the Prisoners confess they never felt the like blows in any other
Service; in a short time so many were unhorst, and beaten down with violence,
that all the work that remained was the taking of Prisoners, Horses and Arms.
Sir William who first had carried it with brave resolution, was the first that
took Prisoners; seconded by many more who apprehended more than they could
secure. Sir Thomas seeing how things went fled (as we hear) on foot three
miles, and then got an horse, on which he fled to Whitchurch. Sir Vincent
Corbet crawled away on all four, lest he should be discerned, and then ran on
foot bare-headed to Ower, 6 miles, many were dispersed abroad in the Fields, and
diverse found that next day: one man with a stick in his hand disarmed three
men, and took them Prisoners, and two others that he met with also, but two of
them slipped away, which he durst not pursue, lest he should loose the other
three; what number of men we slew is uncertain, but some were seen dead in
the Lane, some afterward were found dead in the fields, and some graves were
discovered: we took 110. of their Horse, and near 120 Prisoners; amongst
those, Captain Bridgeman and Captain Cholmeley, with other Commanders and
Officers, three of ours (as I take it) were slain, and two or three were
Prisoners, whom they brought into Chester with triumph, having made them six
in number, by men they had taken up by the high ways. Sir Thomas after some
days returned to Chester, with about 50. or 60. horse, but for his honor,
they sent many of their horses privately out to meet him, and so returned as a
man well re-inforc'd: It Is very probable they lost more horses than we got, by
which stroke they were foulely shaken, and their friends discomfited. We for
our part had a sollemne day of thanksgiving, and fell to the managing of the
weighty affairs of the County.

CHAP. 2. The Battle at TORPERLEY, Febru. 21.
AFter this, on Tuesday Feb. 21. we had a pitched Battle at Torperley, the mid
way betwixt Chester and Namptwich, which was thus occasioned: We sent forth our
Warrants to require all betwixt 60. and 16. years old to meet us at Torperley,
to find out the strength of the County, and who were for us in case we had
need of them the enemy took notice of it, and gave it out they would meet us
there; we were not sure of it, because we are not sure of any thing they say or
swear: yet we went out about 1500. strong, as I take it, to guard the
Country: They came also from Chester, and were on the ground before us: when
we surveyed their posture, we thought they lay in Ambuscado a little from the
Town, where 4. ways meet: we judgeing that place impassible, advanced no
further, but wheeled to the right hand to plant on a good ground, near a place
called the Swannes Nest: but whilst we were on our March, they got the ground
before us, where they stood in Battalia. They had all advantages that could be,
the Wind clear and strong, a firm even Soil, well mounted, a hole toward us
where they planted diverse Musketeers; laid an Ambuscado in an hedge, and
planted their Ordinance amongst their Horse. We Marshald ours on a Field over
against them toward T^^ston Hall, a Valley with a strait passage being betwixt
us; we had no Ordnance nor could we reach them with our Muskets. They had as
fair a mark, as they could desire, for our Infantrie were at the bottom of
the hill, under the command of their Muskets, and our Cavelrie, were on the
high ground, the but for their Canon. We saluted one another with fire and
lead; they played on us for about the space of an hour, with Canon and Musket,
yet we lost not a man, only 3. were shot, scarce wounded, and an Horse hoof
hit with a Musket ball out of a Canon, which was a miraculous providence of God
in the judgment of all men: Besides our Forces there, we had about 200. in
Beston Castle, which we sent for to join with us, reserving 30. to keep the
Castle, which they finding out by their Scouts, sent two Troops to intercept
them, having by treachery gotten their word, they saluted them as Friends, gave
them the word shook hands and the more deluded them by Captain Green, who was
very like a Lieutenant of ours, and whom they had dressed in an Habit most like
him: but being within them, they bid them throw down their Arms, and let the
Roundhead Rogues try for quarter: whereupon Ours retreated a little, and then
gave fire, which so amazed them that both troops fled: Sir Thomas pistol'd one
that for that day bare the Colors, and out Party report they saw diverse of
theirs fall upon their fiering.

The issue of that days work was this, we retreated to the Heath to find out
a better ground, considering we might suffer much, but could make no execution
on them where we were rallied; new ground was not to be found there, it being a
conegrew, part of the Army making it a retreat, the rest followed, not out of
fear for our Enemy durst not meet us on even terms, but to get home before
we were nighted: the Enemy by their Scouts, discovered about 700. of our
Club-men coming near them from the Forest, and in a good posture suspected
that we wheeled to the left, while the other were ready to charge on the other
hand, which struck them with such fear that they fled to Chester, The
Commission of Array staid at the Cross in Torperley, not daring to come to the
Battle, whereby they had the Precedence in the Fight: thereby Torperley,
escaped plundering and the Parsonage the ruin threatened; for they stayed not to
drink a draught of Beer, but bad them solemn nize another day of thanksgiving,
scoffing at the Ordance, and triumphed in Chester, they had got Sir Williams
hat and feather, a great Trophee, though upon examination, it was found to be
one their own Soldiers.

CHAP. III. An account how the time was spent since Sir Williams First
advanceing into the County till the Battle at Middlewich.
FOr as much as many are charging us of floath and neglect of the Country, since
little has been done of late in a long time; we shall truly relate what
things in six or seven weeks space have been done, and let others judge.

After Sir William had possessed himself of Namptwitch, his care was to order,
enlarge and maintain his forces, how to bring in the Gentry to him, who had
conjoined in the late accommodation with the Commissioners of Array, and how to
secure the Town, which was extremely malignant and lay very open: business
came in on a throng, but the Country came not in to help forward that work,
but by special warrant. It has been found a work of no small difficulty to
perfect that work begun, what ever others think that make their reckning
without their host. All were forward for the taking of Chester, which in all
probabillitie had been sea-sable, had we suddenly called in the Country, and
gone about it, before they had time to reinforce themselves, and before their
trenches were made, but we knew we could do little without assistance, so by
degrees we drew in the Gentry, and many fit to bear Arms, and of so small a
beginning are enlarged to about 2000. well appointed, many of these being Horse
and Dragoneer's: then we set the Proposition for money on foot in a very strict
way, which has brought us in many hundreds, much provision of Cheese, Bacon,
Hay, Corn, etc. and not a few Horse, we have also all sorts of Officers
amongst us, fitting for a Camp, and have brought in Malignants goods from all
parts about us: we have taken in Beston Castle, where we keep a Garisone which
awes all the Country about, at which our Enemies grind their teeth, and the
walls being in many places leveld to the ground, we have made up all those
breaches with mud walls, so as we doubt not but to keep out 20000. men with
that small garrison; we have intrencht all this Town of Namptwich with good
works and Walls so as through Gods help we fear not, though many thousands
of our enemies encampe against us. We have fortified Northwich with trenches,
Sconces etc. for the security of all those parts, which have been much
infected by the Commission of Array, and the Ea: of Darbies forces at
Warrington, and we have often sallied out for the clearing of those parts
which were most in danger. One place above others has been extremely
assaulted: Mr. Brooks of Norton: a near Neighbor to the Ea: Rivers, against
which they brought their Canon, with many Horse and Foot, and fell to batter
it on a Sabbath day: Mr. Brook had 80. men in the house, we were careful he
should lack no powder, with all other things, Master, Brook furnished them
fully: a man upon his Tower with a Flag in his hand cryde them aim while they
discharged their Canon, saying, wide my Lord on the right hand, now wide two
yardes on the left, two yardes over my Lord etc. He made them swell for anger,
when they could endamage the house, for they only wounded one man, lost 46. of
their own, and their Canonier, then in divelish revenge they burnt a barn,
and Corn worth (as is valued) a thousand pound, set fire to another, but more
execution was made on the man that attempted it, than the Barn; for he was
blinded in fireing the barn, and so found wandering in the fields, and confessed
he had 5. pound given him for his Service. After this they plundered Mr.
Brooks Tenants, and returned home with shame and hatred of all the Country: to
this worthy man's rescue, we could not go, because the march was long and full
of hazard, and we thought their aim was to tire us out upon that service,
upon which they might put us almost every day, by reason of Halton Castle in
their possession, and but half a mile from Norton. More we might instance in
to take of our reproach, but another Army greater than ours, lying under the
same censure, will vindicate us, unless ungratefully we condemn them.

CHAP. IIII. The Battle at Middle-wich, betwixt Collonell Brereton, and Sir
Tho: Aston, March 13.
SIr Thomas Aston and his party in Chester, recovering strength after their
late overthrow, exercised the same in mischief, and all wicked outrages, for
besides their plundering and wasting of all the Country near Chester, they
laid such intolerable taxes both on the City and Country thereabout, that
their own party was inbittered against them yea before we secured Northwich,
whiles some of our forces were in that Country; they plundered Weverbam and the
Country about, they carried Old men out of their houses, bound them together,
tied them to a cart, drove them through mire and water, above the knees, so
brought them to that Dungeon, where they lie without fire or light, and now
through extremities are so discased that they are ready to yield up the Ghost.

On the Sabbath, March 12. having a littie before advanced to Middlewich, they
plundered all that day, as a most proper season for it, commanded the Carts in
all the Country about, to carry away the goods, kept a Fair that day near
Torperley, to sell those goods: In Over when they had plundered they left
Ratbane in the house wrapped in papers for the Children, which by Gods providence
was taken from them before they could eat it, after their Parents durst
return to them; and being a considerable body, they sent for more strength,
and by their warrants to the Churches about, commanded all the Country to come
in with such insolent, and imperious expressions, that they were hateful to
some Malignants, and concluded to give no quarter to any Roundheads, and were
confident quickly to carry all down before them.

Sir William at that time was at Northwitch with a considerable party, many
Gentlemen of his party were at Namptwitch, with about 7. or 800. armed men,
their generous spirits were enraged to see such outrages committed, it wrought
alike in all Sir Williams Forces to provoke us for to fall upon the Enemy,
though we could not easily communicate our purposes one to another: at
Namptwitch we agreed to assault them the next morning, signified the same to
Sir Will: he was as forward as we, our Gent. desired a Minister to come to
their chambers upon the Alarm to be given at 12. a clock, that commending them
to God in prayer they might speed the better, some Ministers and others fell to
the work that day, by prayer and fasting, though not as Moses Aaron and Hur,
in prospect of the Armies, yet wrestling as Jacob did, and putting their
mouths in the dust, if so be there might be hope, of which they had a
gracious return by three a clock. The business of that day was carried thus:
Sir Will: being four miles from the Enemy assaulted that side of the Town by
8. a clock, March the 13th. and continued the fight for about three or four
hours before we came to his help: In which time this accident fell our, that
his powder was all spilt excepting about 7. pound, they took Council upon it,
and it was concluded they must retreit, because their party from Namptwitch
was not come in to their assistance, but Sir William was resolute not to
retreit, but to send to Northwith for more powder, and to keep them in play as
well as they could till the Powder came, which accordingly they did, betwixt
11. and 12. a clock, we came to their assistance, which they knew not of till
they heard us in hot service, on the other side the Town, when we began, their
powder came. The Enemy had chief advantages their Ordinace planted; we had
none, they laid about 150. Musketeers in an hole convenient for them, they
laid their Ambuskadoes in the hedges, Musketeers in the Church and steeple,
and had every way so strengthened themselves, that they seemed impregnable: but
God lead on our men with incredible courage. Captain George Booth faced the
Town with his Troop whiles they played on with their Ordinance, which once
grazd before them, and then mounted clear over them, in another that it dashed
the water and mire in his and two other Captains faces, but there it dies:
this was no discouragement to our men, they marched upon their all Ambuscadoes,
drove them all out of them into the Town, entered the Town upon the mouth of
the Canon, and storm of the muskets, our Major (a right Scottish blade)
brought them up in two files with which he lined the Walls, and kept that
street open, went up to their Ordinance, which he took, then the Enemy fled
into the Church, Sir Thomas Aston would have gone after them, but they durst not
let him in, lest we should enter with him, then he mounted his Horse, and fled
with all speed by Kinderton, and diverse others with him, for that way only was
open, all the rest we had surrounded, we slew diverse upon the top of the
Steeple, and some they say within the Church: our Major with Captain Hide
fired the Church-doore, and thrust at them with swords as they looked out of the
Windows, then presently they cride for quarter, which was granted them: we
took Sir Edward Mosley Baronet, one Colonel, one Sergeant Major, eleven
Captains, 3. of them Cheshire men, Captain John Hurleston, Cap: Massy of
Cottington, and Cap: Starkie, we took 3. Colors from their Troops. Sir
Thomas Astons being one, and about 500. more, many of them Commanders, and its
probable near as many are fled to their Houses, never to return to that
party again, we have taken their Ordinance and much powder, the Soldiers
took much spoil from the prisoners, abundance of Money, for they had
converted their plundered ware into Coin, a multitude of Muskets, Buffe
Coats, Scarfes, Swords, Satin Boublets etc. We lost 6. men, and about 10. are
wounded: we slew of theirs about 30. that we know off, besides many wounded:
our Gunpowder by accident was blovvne up so soon as we entered the Town, but
God supplied us more then treble out of our Enemies store. Sir Thomas is fled
that Country, the Array are in great perplexity. The tidings of this coming
to Nampwitch, we turned our prayers into praises, sent the Belman to warn the
Town to the Church, to return God thanks for such an unparalleled mercy,
which they did with great alacrity, and joyful acclamations in a full
Congregation. Upon Wednesday after, the Colonel with all the Gentlemen,
Soldiers and the whole Town presented God with solemn thanksgiving, who
has hitherto crowned this County with such glorious victories.

Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be all the Glory. For by thy
power we have beaten down such as have risen up against us.
A Letter from Sir William Brereton.
THis day is deservedly set apart to be a day of Thanksgiving for that complete
and great Victory which the Lord has given us on Monday last, even then when
the enemy came out Armed with power (of flesh) and resolution to destroy and
overrun all the rest of the Country; In which design they were so hopeful
and confident, as that they took the boldness to encamp themselves in
Middlewich, a Town between Namptwich and Northwich, where I was, and where we
had begun to fortify and place a Garrison: we conceived this attempt of most
dangerous consequence, and therefore thought fit to allow them no rest, nor to
give them time to Fortify. To this end, there was a strong party of Horse went
out from Northwich upon Saturday night last, upon their first coming there,
who gave them an Alarm. The next day being the Sabbath, could not be observed,
it being the work of the whole day to prepare for our defense, and how to
annoy our Enemy; toward whom I went out upon Sunday in the afternoon, with
betwixt two and three Troops of Horse, and betwixt two and three Companies of
Dragooners, who went near to Middlewich, and gave them an Alarm there; but
without any intention to assault them in their Quarters, they being very strong
in Foot, and well armed, and we had no Foot at all then there, our greatest
care being to preserve the Country from Plundring, and let the enemy know we
durst look them in the face, and come even to the very door. This evening,
March 12. being Sunday, we resolved and concluded to meet the Namptwich Forces
the next morning, who were appointed to come unto us by six of the clock in the
morning: But we were in fight near four hours before they came in to our
assestance; during which time they played full upon us with their Canon, but
without any success at all, there being only one or two men hurt, but not
mortally. During which time our Musketeers (we had not above 200. our greatest
force of Foot being at Namptwich) behaved themselves very gallantly, and made
good three passages, and kept the enemy in play, till the Namptwich Forces came
in to our assistance, who came on so resolutely, and with such undauntednesse
of spirit, even to the amazement and admiration of the enemy, whom they beat
from their works, and from their Cannon, And as they entered one end of the
Town, our Soldiers entered the other end with no less courage and resolution.
Colonel Ellis* Sergeant Major Gilner, Sir Edward Moseley, and ten Captains
more, besides all other Officers (a List of whose Names you shall find here
enclosed) who betook themselves to the Church and Steeple, from whence they did
much annoy us for some short time; but within an hour after, the Lord was
pleased to make us possessors of the Church and Steeple, and of the Commanders
and Soldiers that were therein; and of their Ordinance, Magazine, and great
store of Arms, so as I believe since the beginning of this unnatural War,
God has not given many more compleater Victories, nor has there been many
more Prisoners taken, there being not many fewer than 500 Prisoners, and very
many of them commanders and considerable persons. I desire the whole praise and
glory may be attributed to Almighty God. who infused courage into them that
stood for his cause, and struck the enemy with terror and amazement. For
farther particulars I must refer you to a fuller relation.

We hear nothing from London how thing go there, but our confidence is in the
Lord of heaven; to the protection of whose Providence, I desire to commend you,
and so conclude, and Rest,

Namptwich 15. March, 1642. Your -- William Brereton.

Another Letter from a man of Note.
SIr, I need not relate to you the great victory which the Lord has given us
at Midlewich, a Reverend Divine in our Army, having sent up an exact Relation
of all our Proceedings since our coming into these parts; to which Relation I
refer you; yet a few great Circumstances I may not omit: Sir Tho: Aston,
Colonel Leigh of Adlington, and all their Troops of Horse fled away, or else
we had taken them, which makes many of the Commanders that we have taken
prisoners affirm, that if they were at liberty, they would never fight for Sir
Tho: Aston without a promise under his hand that he would not run away: nothing
vexed them more then that he would not let them know so much, that they might
have shifted for themselves, as well as he: we lost five men, and ten were
hurt, but not one man killed with their Canons, although they shot at us all
the while: Collonell Brereton carries himself very gallantly, and I doubt
not, by the assistance of the Lord of Hosts, he will clear these parts very
shortly. The Prisoners that we lost in the battle of Nampwich our enemies
brought with them from Chester to Middlewich, and so we have them again. The
same morning we set upon them, Sir Tho: Aston, and the rest drank to Billie
Brereton, as they called him, and said they would give him a Breakefast anon,
but such was the good hand of God upon us, that we fared better then they would
have had us: Their Word was Prince Rupert; Ours, The Lord of Hosts: And so you
see that The Lord of Hoasts overcame Prince Rupert, Farewell.

A Catalogue of the Names of those that were taken Prisoners at the Battle.
ONe Barronet, Sir Edward Mosely. One Collonell Ellis. 1 Lieftenant Col. Massey
of Coddington. 2 Sergeant Majors
Hu^lstone. Gilmore.
Nine Captains.
Captain Corbet. Captain Starkey. Captain Morris. Captain Davenport.
Captain Jones. Captain Horton. Captain ^on. Captain ^e. Captain Mason.
Six Lievtenants.
Lieutenant Marvey. Lieutenant Sherlet. Lieutenant Hosevar. Lieutenant
Iennings. Lieutenant Dod. Lieutenant Corbet.
Four Ensigns.
Ensign Ward. Ensign Proudlove. Ensign Morris. Ensign Davenport.
2 Corporalls. 1 Quartermaster. 2 Canoneers. 4 Cornets Colors. The ^ot
Companies had no Colors. 400 and odd Common Soldiers. 2 Brass Pieces, all
the Enemy had there. 4 Barrells of Powder and as much more which the Soldiers
took in baggs.
A Copy of a VVarrant sent abroad in Cheshire, from the chief Agents for the
King in that County, And which should have been put in strict execution, had
not the good success of Valiant Sir William Breerton hindered it.
But it will very well serve for a President to the contrary Party.
Whereas by the Kings Majesty, His Warrant under His Sign Manual, bearing
Date at Oxford. 28. day of Febr. last; whereby it appears that His Majesty is
informed that diverse Gentlemen and Fre-holders of that County are at this time
in actual Rebellion in this County. And that others have absented themselves
from their houses, and habitations, and do assist the present unnatural
Rebellion; We are required and commanded to seize and sell all the goods, and
to sequester, and lease out the estates of all such persons as have or shall
appear in Rebellion, or having withdrawn themselves shall be any ways aiding
or assisting to the Rebels in any place whatsoever.

And We are thereby required to employ the issues and profits arising out of
such persons goods, and estates for advancing His Majesty's service, and the
maintenance of the necessary charge, of this County and City.

These are therefore in pursuance of His Majesty's pleasure and command, and
for the advancement of this service, to publish and declare, and strictly to
charge and command all person and persons, having in their hands any of the
goods and chattels, or in their possession any lands of any person in
Rebellion, or aiding and assisting to any of the Rebels, to give speedy notice
of such goods or lands in their possession, to Sir Nicholas Byron the Governor
of the City of Chester; and high Sheriff of the County, within six days
after publication thereof.

And further to publish and declare unto all such persons as have since the
first of January last, withdrawn themselves from their houses and habitations
in the County of Chester, whereby they have deprived His Majesty's loyal
subjects, their aid and assistance for suppressing the present Rebellion; that
they and every of them shall within six days after publication thereof,
return to their respective dwellings, and acquaint Sir Nicholas Byron of such
their returns, or show unto him the cause of absenting themselves, upon peril
of being proceeded against, as persons aiding and assisting the Rebels,
according to His Majesty's command aforementioned. And hereof they are to take
notice at their perils.

Given under Our hands, and the hand of the said Governor of Chester, the 8.
of March. 1642. Rivers. Rob: Kilmurrey. Rob: Cholmley. Tho: Savage. Nic: Byron.

From the Army near Stafford.
SInce the Messenger was not dispatched away with that expedition expected when
the Letters within were written, I thought good to add what has since
occurred in these parts.

Upon Sunday, March, 19.

We had a Battle with the Enemy upon Salt Heath, near Stafford, wherein we
had also very good success, our strength then present come in upon that
ground, being but small in respect of theirs; especially their Horse, whereof
there were (as is conceived) 1000. or 1200. there being the Kings own Troop,
or the Princes, and the Duke of Yorkes. On their part was slain the Earl of
Northampton, whose body we took away with us from the ground, the Kings own
Standard was taken, and the Cornet slain, and 3. or 4. more Colors. We have
one of the Earl of Chesterfields Sons prisoner, namely Fardinando.

Of theirs great store were slain, many Cart loads we hear were carried away,
sure we are that about 60. were found dead in one ditch: We hear say we have
slain many men of note, Hastings is wounded, and we had him, but he overgot us
in the Fight; our enemies were valiant fellows, and causing our Horse to
retreat upon our Foot, we were afraid they would have disordered them, and
that we should have had the worst of it, but praised be God, our freshwater
soldiers kept their ranks, and fought manfully, caused the enemy to retreat,
and we kept the field 3. hours after; we have not any one considerable man of
our side killed or hurt. In some respects this was like Keinton Battle.

1. They were both upon the Lords day, 2. In regard of the suddenness of it.
3. They lost their General then, so now. 4. The Kings Standard was taken then,
so now: (Sir William Breereton has it.)
Herein they differ, the enemy had more advantages of us at this fight, then at
Keinton, they being 2. if not 3. to our one, etc. And in the smalnesse of our
loss, which was not above 6. or 8. men at the most. We are now returned to
Vttoxeter, about 10. miles off Stafford to refresh our selves. The Lord be
praised, I rest,

Yours.
Vttoxeter, March 20. 1642.
Some say Master Spencer Lucie is slain. We lost two Case of Drakes.
The Original of which the Stationer can show any man from a good hand.

Master Noble, and Sir Edward Littleton have Letters to read in the House this
Saturday morning, which agree with this Relation.

FINIS.

