A REMONSTRANCE To the Valiant and well deserving SOLDIER, And the rest of the
CREDITORS OF THE Commonwealth; CONCERNING The Publique-Faith Soldiers
Arrears, AND Other Public Debts of the Nation.


Written by Samuel Chidley, Solicitor for the payment thereof till the time of
the dissolution of the late Parliament, April 20. 1653.

PSALM. 11.3 The Foundations are cast down; what has the just Man done?

London, Printed for the Author. 1653.

A REMONSTRANCE TO To the valiant and well-deserving Soldier, and the rest of
the Creditors of the Commonwealth, concerning the Public Faith Soldiers
Arrears, and other Public Debts of the NATION.
Considering that in this present Juncture of time a few seasonable words will
be useful to the People, who have opened their mouths, and panted a long time
for justice, as a tired Heart after the Water-brookes, concerning the moneys due
unto many of them upon the Public Faith, and Debenters; and because they may
not count my labor concerning the same, or their disbursements, or public
services for the Commonwealth as utterly lost, notwithstanding the dissolution
of the late Representative, unto whom I have been an importunate Solicitor in
much weariness, and diligent attendance, for the space of 15 months last past,
for satisfaction of the said Debts, at the entreaty and earnest desire of many
well-affected people who entrusted me with the management thereof; I do hereby
declare to all the said Creditors of the Common Wealth, that they need not be
discouraged by what has lately happened to those men who were then in present
Authority; for there is no cause to believe otherwise, but that this late and
sudden change will work a more speedy settlement of security, and general
satisfaction to all the good people of England, without such importunate
solicitations for justice to those whom God by his Providence sets over Us.
For albeit it is a rare thing to find Rulers suitably qualified according to
the Rule, able men in judgment, fearing God, and hating Covetousness; yet it is
hoped our future Governors will prove better then them of late. Nevertheless,
this my Hope is not without some doubts and fears, lest the continual sins of
the people, and their impenitencie, provoke the Lord of Hosts to give children
to be their Princes, and Babes to rule over them. Although my earnest desire is
otherwise, that our Officers may be Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness, that
so the Widows and Fatherless may no more be forced to complain of the vanity
and deceit of men in high degree; nor shed their precious tears upon the foot
steps of their Oppressors, as water spilt upon the ground, which no man
gathers up. For doleful Experience teaches Us what Fountains, Rivers, and
Streams of tears, have issued from the bleeding Hearts of the sighing Spirits
of the groaning, afflicted, and needy people, to water the face of the Earth
with continual springs from souls that wept in secret, and so covered the
Altar of the Lord that no Sacrifice could be regarded or received with
good will at the hands of their Religious Oppressors. So that when they
stretched forth their hands, the just God hid his eyes from them, and though
they made many prayers he would not hear them, because their hands were full of
blood. For indeed the price of blood is very precious; and the loss of life is
the loss of losses, which was little regarded by them. For many of the said
Creditors have ventured their lives; many of them lost their blood, and the
primest of their strength; many of them lost their husbands, their fathers,
their brethren, and near friends, and deer relations, in the late wars, whose
Heirs or Executors they are, and could not have satisfaction for their
Arreares, the price of their blood, unless they would sell the same at an
inconsiderable value, or double the like sums upon the Credit of the
Commonwealth, which abundance of them could not do; many of them freely and
voluntarily lent their Moneys and Plate, with other useful Materials, for the
use and benefit of the Commonwealth upon the Public Faith, and Propositions
to be paid again out of Delinquents (...) of them borrowed upon credit (...) of
the Commonwealth, pay^^g (...) r^st for the same unto this day; and many of
them being in extr^am pover^y suffering imprisonment, and seeding continually
upon the bread and water of affliction for want of that moneys to relieve
their necessities, and satisfy their Creditor, many of the faces of the poor
Creditors have been ground away by reason thereof; as witness their
countenances; and many have been forced through their extreme necessity to sell
their Bills and Debts for 5 s. 4 s. 3 s. yea, less then 2 s. per pound, their
^ys failing with longing expectations for the performance of the Parl. promises
upon their Declarations and Engagements, they having deeply suffered for their
constant good affections and adherence to the Public, and fainted with
sighing, and had no rest; For the rich men by these deficiences, and taking
advantages by the unrighteous Decrees, and grievous prescriptions of the Parl
by which they sold justice for nine parts in ten, were tempted more and more as
it were to pant after the dust upon the heads of many of the poor Creditors,
which made them weary; and in the bitterness of their hearts, in the midst of
their pining and perishing condition wish for a new Representative, which might
make better provision for them. Besides, diverse well-affected persons having
money due from the Commonwealth, upon the credit of the late King, Queen, and
Prince; and in great necessity for want of it to supply themselves and
families, yet could not obtain it. In the midst of the peoples cloudy
calamities they knew not what to do or say, they having waited so long, many of
them above seven or ten years, and still to have their hopes deferred from
time to time made their hearts sick, and their spirits so dead, that they could
not commend the PARLIAMENT to GOD or MAN for any good, And no marvel that they
lost the affections of the People, for they sold the Needy (as it were) for
silver, and the Poor for a pair of shoes, having more respect to their bruit
Beasts, then to men who were made in the Image of God: No truth or constancy
was found in them; for amongst 30 or 40 Orders gotten with much ado, from them,
for the Public Faith, they kept but a tenth part of them; and those three or
four which they observed were altogether ineffectual by their delatory
proceedings, clothing justice with sackcloth, and turning judgment to wormwood
and gall. Although they were chosen and put in trust to keep judgment, and do
justice, and to use their utmost diligence and best endeavors for the good of
those who had entrusted them for their weal and not for their woe. And they had
professed, that justice they would not sell deny, or defer, much less tire our
the people and make them faint and perish at their feet with fruitless
attendance: yet they altogether broke the yoke of their Engagements, and burst
the bonds of their Promises, which they se^, appointed, and made to the
Creditors of the Commonwealth, putting them off with Orders from day to day,
from week to week, from one fortnight to another, from month to month; yea, and
we may say from year to year; for by their Order in January 1652. they faced
about as they were in January 1651. as may appear by the books left in the
Parliament House. So did they make the poor Public Faith to go round like a
horse in a Mill, and thereby ground the faces of the Poor, and stopped their
ears at their cry.

Oftentimes have they been earnestly desired to make no further delay, but to
ascertain and satisfy the said Debts by Discoveries, Cathedrals, and other
Particulars, according to their own Orders and Acts read in the House, and
several times by themselves appointed to be read again.

Therefore, the Creditors did make it their humble Request, that the same might
be done without fail, and have a free and speedy passage, as adjudging it to be
both honorable and advantageous to the Commonwealth, and much tending to the
glory of God, and the just, equal, and orderly satisfaction of the many
Thousands of their well-affected Creditors, who drew out their Souls for Good
in times of public and general calamities; and for whose relief, reparation,
and just satisfaction, the Parliament would have been more forward, if they had
loved the Commonwealth better and preferred the Public good before their
private self-interest.

And although it concerned them in an especial manner to vindicate the credit
and reputation of the Public Faith to succeeding Parliaments, that after ages
in cases of eminent danger and extreme necessity might not startle at the
engagement upon the Public Faith of the Commonwealth of England, but respect,
credit, and look upon it, as the most substantial security in the world. Yet
they pretended other business intervening, that they could not dispatch this
business of great importance, al^hough they oftentimes ordered it to be done
the first business, yea and nothing to intervene; and entered the same in their
Books, which were daily before them in the House: yet neither their own words
de die in diem, and Orders, to make speed in the business, would drive them,
nor the excessive pains of the Solicitors for the Public Faith draw them, nor
the multiplicity of their promises and engagements in conscience oblige them,
nor the cries of the poor (following them in the streets and at the
Parliament-doors) terrify them, nor the fair speeches of their cordial and
bosome-friends woo them nor the extreme necessities of the Creditors
compassionately move them, nor their own Honor which lay at the stake
rationally persuade them to be true and faithful in their promises to the
Creditors of the Commonwealth of England; but they, like men of high degree,
not being as good as their words, but breaking their own Orders, Promises, and
Engagements from time to time, as if the just God had given them up to hardness
of heart; and the selfish cares of the world choked them, and covetous
thoughts stupefied their senses, and made them (like men bewitched with their
own fancies) both senseless and shameless.

Therefore the poor people were put to a stand, not knowing what was the
matter; for they were more and more distressed; and their Solicitors spent
their precious time in fruitless attendance: for they saw there was little good
to be expected, without great pains, and importunare solicitations a whole
year, for that which might be done in a day, because there was no good
settlement, nor a total removal of corrupt Lawyers, and other mercenary
self-seekers, out of the House, who were the prime obstructors of the Act for
the ascertaining and satisfying of the debts of the Nation, and were averse to
all discoveries which should be made for the benefit of the Commonwealth
(saying, Tush, they will come to nothing) as if they feared lest themselves, or
some of their relations, should be called to account concerning the Public
Revenue, although they had passed the Act of Oblivion.

And the pretenses of such corrupt men in great places being foreseen by the
well-affected, diverse fair Proposals were made and presented to the Committee
of Parliament for matters of great importance, with the engagement of the
undertakers, tending to the full and speedy satisfaction of the debts of the
Nation, to be satisfied out of Delinquents estates undisposed of, and not
remitted in the Act of General Pardon and Oblivion, And all the concealed
estates of the late King, Queen, and Prince, Bishops, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, and Prebends, etc. and All moneys in Treasurers and Collectors hands,
which they have not yet accounted for, but concealed from the Commonwealth; And
(every particular man's just right and legal interest preserved, and industry
considered) the Mines, Forests, and Waste lands, and other particulars justly
belonging to the Commonwealth, and of little or no use or benefit to the State
(as the Popish Cathedrals) were proposed for the satisfaction of the public
Debts.

And by the Order of the House April 27. 1652. the aforesaid Committee was
appointed to sit in the Court of Wards, to receive Proposals for the Public
Faith; and according to the appointment of the Chairman of the Committee, the
Undertakers (which were Thomas Pride, Dennis Gourdaine, Daniel Norman, Francis
Finch, Francis Bloomer, Roger Smith, Thomas Sherman, Robert Mallory, Clement
Oxenbridge, Esquires; William Allen, Hoogan Hovel, and Praise Barbone, Citizens
of London) had notice given them to meet in the Court of Wards; and accordingly
coming there, where they sat in Committee upon the business, there they owned
the Engagement, which they subscribed and undertook, in relation to the
satisfaction of the debts of Nation, to manage the business, and disburse all
sums of money requisite for all incident charges whatsoever thereunto
belonging; provided they might be reimbursed out of the discoveries; for the
undertaking of which worthy work, they deserve to be had in perpetual
remembrance. For whose encouragement, diverse other Gentlemen of good rank and
quality engaged to disburse one moiety for promotion of so good a work, and to
be reimbursed with them, and to take the security of the aforesaid Undertakers
for the same.

The engagement of the Undertakers, and Proposals being received by Order of
the House, it was expected that the Committee would have made a speedy
progress, and that the House would make an Act to empower the said Undertakers
accordingly for ascertaining and satisfying of the Public debts, according to
the former Proposals.

But contrary to expectation the Committee took no care of this weighty
business of the Commonwealth, neither could they be got together without great
difficulty, at the times and places appointed by the House; for one or other
would be still wanting: and when there was a full number for a Committee, the
Chairman would be absent, and they would not appoint another in his room; and
people in waiting on them were put to much difficulty to keep some of the
Committee together, whilst they fetched more. And when they had brought them in,
then sometimes the first would slip away, pretending other business. Many a
weary step have some of them taken, to find them out in their nooks and
crooks; with lanthorn and candle light have they been sought; by night and by
day have they been followed; whether Frost or Snow, Wet or Dry, 'twas all one.
The necessicies of the people were such, that they could admit of no delay:
Their patience was used, and also abused; with much ado, were they persuaded to
hold it fast, without using violence to the violators of their promises, but
that the Solicitor for the public Faith pacified them with his constant
attendance and great patience, for experience sake, to see the end of their
many Orders, promises, and fair speeches, which most deceived the people, and
did the greatest injury, as is thought by some who admired at the patience of
others: but Solomon says, Better is the end of a thing, then the beginning of
a thing; and the patient in spirit, is better the preud in spirit.

But though it was more difficult to get a Committee together to do us any
good, then to hale five Bears to a stake; yet we had Committees diverse times,
through much industry and importunity, but when they came they did little or
nothing but trifle, and spin out the precious time, and took upon them to amend
the Bill, when the House and pressed no such thing in their Orders, but only
for the names of the Commissioners; And they razed out such lines which most
savoured of honesty, and tended best to the satisfaction of the people, that
the Act might begin with these words, Be it Enacted, without expressing a
ground for it, so making as if the Parliament were to rule by their own Wills,
and not (like the best law makers) to render a Reason for the Laws they make,
whereby the people should be informed, and have some ground work to obey
through love, as well as serve in fear.

And when the Committee mer, and altered a few lines, they thought they had
made a large progress in it, enough for a whole week; a line or two to be
mended was well the week following: another day to mend a word or two was
something; at another meeting to change or alter a letter was good. But all was
as good as nothing: what catches and snatches, was at it! one while they were
of one mind, at another meeting of a contrary opinion, doing and undoing,
playing fast and loose, as if they had a mind to undo the Creditors of the
Commonwealth, and had agreed together to weary them out, and keep the
Solicitors for the Public Faith to serve apprentiships, to follow their
footsteps in their delatory proceedings. And when the business depended before
the House, much ado there was to get any thing done to good purpose, for they
resolved to pass Acts for Delinquents Estates, upon doubling; and do other
things that might prove as spoaks in our carriages, and thereby strike off the
Chariot-wheels of that gallant Bill, depending before them (and lying now in
the Speakers Box) for general satisfaction of the debts of the Nation, relief
of the poor, and other Public uses, in order to the easing of the people,
which they read 30. November. and by several Orders, Ordered it be read again
the second time, the first business and nothing to interveen, the first
business and nothing to intervene, yet they never did it first nor last, when
they could they would not, and now if they would they cannot, God has removed
them, and now I find the words of understanding men to be true, which they have
often spoke at the Bell-savage, and elsewhere; and which I desired might have
proved otherwise, That the work which I had in hand was too good, and too great
for God to honor this Parliament with, And whereof I did admonish them in my
printed books which I delivered at the Parliament door. But I thought I would
never give over, till I saw the utmost of it, believing the words of the wise
would prove true, He that being often reproved, and hardens his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy. For I had a design in it for
God (and for the reputation of the Nation) beyond the satisfaction of a
thousand men, who under their hands entrusted me to act and manage their
business for them.

But the Parliament still pretended other weighty business, and that something
else must be done before; and to say the truth, they sat so little a while
together, but three hours in a day, and four days in a week, that is twelve
hours in a week, but a days work at the most, but fifty two days in a year,
that they could not do much good for the Nation, so that justice at the most
came by drops, and did not run down as it ought, like a mighty stream. And how
was it possible for weighty matters to be well done and dispatched, when there
was so much time spent in idleness between? And by Calculation they have not
sat of this thirteen years, the space of three; for twelve hours in seven
days, is but according to one year in seven years. Therefore the Triennial
Parliament, upon this account, would not have ended their three years sitting,
till the time of three Apprentiships were complete and fully ended.

The Appendix.
YOu welaffected and valiant Soldiers, that have born the burden and heat of
the day; You bear not the Sword for naught.

And you that have lent Money, Plate, or other useful materials for the
Commonwealth; do not repent your bargain.

You welaffected Creditors of the late King, etc. The right Successors must pay
their Predecessors lawful debts.

And you that have been plundered by the late Kings party, and lost upon the
public account; The Parliament gained when you lost, and now their loss is
like to be your gain.

I suppose many of you are not unacquanted with the Parliaments propositions,
promises, and invitations in their many Declarations, when they were in
distress and fear, they promised very solemnly that they would be willing and
ready upon all occasions, to assist and protect all those that were employed in
the service of the Commonwealth in the Battle at Edgehill, with their lives
and fortunes, to the utmost of their power: and ordered the same to be recorded
in Parliament. Book declar. page 744. The 29 Sept. 1642. They promised that the
lenders upon the public faith should be repaid their money with interest at 8.
per cent. and should be taken into consideration for a further recompense for
their forwardness. Jan. 7. following; they acknowledged the peoples
forwardness, and promised to be as careful of their safety, welfare, and
reimbursment with interest accordingly as of their own, The 30 of Jan. 1643.
they declared that those who have the public faith engaged to them for their
security, and have been faithful and so continue, should be publicly
considered, their losses fully repayed, and such persons regarded and
honorably rewarded, and not slighted or neglected; but one way or other should
be remembered to their own honor and good of their posterity, and that the
Delinquents Estates should be employed for payment of public debts, relieving
of the common burdens, and repayring particular losses: Theys have promised to
Order the revenue in such a way, that the public charge might be defrayed; the
Soldiers pay justly and duly settled, and the debts of the Commonwealth
satisfied, and to remove all grievances and oppressions of the people, and to
establ^^^ peace and righteousness in the land, and this they say they declare
not in word only, but really and speedily they intend to effect, and
accordingly they expected Gods blessings on their proceedings.

What could they say more then they said? or what could they do less then they
did, in pursuance of what they promised? What encouragements was there upon
their promises? and what a multitude of discouragements in driving them to
performance thereof? They made the people feed upon the ^in^e, and follow after
the east-winde, and fed them with the bread of tears, and gave them vinegar and
gall to drink, and made them live in misery and dye in distress, crying to God
against them in the bitterness of their souls.

While I was your solicitor at the Parliament-door I learned experience, and
was more acquainted with the sorrows and grievances of the Nation then before,
and sympathized with the peoples afflictions: And who was more sensible thereof
then my self? How many have come to me with sighs and groans in their spirits,
and tears flowing from their eyes, enough to melt the stoutest heart, unless he
were without all sense of humanity! In my Parliamentary pilgrimage, I saw so
many objects of misery, (and to me they made their mournful applications and
pitiful complaints) which caused me to expostulate with my self in my mind at
the Parliament: Am I the messenger of tears, traveling as it were in the
valley of Megiddon, between the high and shady rocks of Adamant, inhabited with
Satyrs, under the sable clouds of affliction? And must I be laden with bottles
of precious tears, in evil times, times of war, in mourning times, in such
times wherein one man rules over another to his hurt? Then said I to Laughter,
Thou art mad; and to Mirth, what does it? For the red ^o^e of war prevails,
and peace is taken from the earth, and the chambers of the world are hanged
with discontent. Nevertheless I was resolved not to fear, though the mountains
should be moved in the midst of the seas. But I wished for some man, like Job,
who sat as a King in the Army, to search out the cause he knows not, and
pluck the prey out of the jaws of the wicked, to relieve the fatherless, and
make the heart of the widow to sing for joy. This is the Nations expectation;
And although my desire is not fully accomplished, yet to that man, or those
men, whom God raises up to be the Supreme Authority of the Nation, I shall
make my application, upon their declaration or manifestation, and rest,

Your friend and Procurator, to his power, Samuel Chidley.
Belsavage, April 22. 1653. GOD Grant Repentance to our Enemies, GOD Give
Salvation to the holy Separated Church, GOD Preserve the peace of the
Commonwealth of England. Amen.
FINIS.

