A Christian PLEA Against CHRISMASS AND An OUTCRY against Chrismas-mongers.

2 COR. 5.16. Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
know we him no more. TITUS 1.16. -- Their mind and conscience is defiled.

They profess they know God, but in their works they deny him; being
abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

1 COR. 10.7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them: as it is written,
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. LONDON, Printed for
the Author. 1656.

To his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector AND To the Parliament of England, etc.
O ye Assembly of Mortal Gods,
I Formerly presented you with a Treatise against Idols Temples; Here is a
Tractate against Idols Times: It Is in your power to demolish the Idols Temples,
and abolish the idolatrous Times, and to suppress the profane crew of
Chrismas-mongers, and expel such unclean Spirits from your coasts, and destroy
the names of the Idols out of these places.

The Antichristian sect of Chrismas-mongers is of many hundred years standing,
and to be rooted out; especially considering that it has overspread the
Nations like a Gangrene; and this their way is their folly, yet their posterity
approve of their sayings, Psalm. 49.13. And although their forefathers have
inherited lying vanities, yet they will not be wiser: But you (Legislators)
have a restraining power over them, and therefore I am bold humbly to present
these lines following unto you who are the Heads of the People, and leave you
to do as God shall persuade your hearts, and so rest,

Your Friend and servant Samuel Chidley.

A Christian Plea against Chrismass.
SInce the Mass is put down by the Supreme Authority, and that Christ is no
Masse-monger, It concerns you (Noble Senators) not to keep Christ's Mass
falsely so called, for it is Antichrists Mass, and I think then it will appear
that there are many Antichrists, and more Papists, besides Roman Catholics;
for they are Papists and Masse-mongers, who solemnize the Mass; or swear by
it, as the Israelites of old by the sin of Samaria, or keep Chrismas (vulgarly
so called) though they would be all counted Protestants.

If you say it is Christ's time, tide, or birthday, Wot you not, that Christ's
tide or time is the first day of every week? which well-informed Christians
observe from Even to Even, two and fifty times a year, still keeping in
Remembrance the Lords birth, death and Resurrection; whereas Chrissmas comes
but once a year, (as say the Masse-mongers themselves) only there is ten days
difference between the old Style and the New; the Hollanders observing it ten
days before the English; for Christ indeed foreseeing the vanity of the
Gentiles, has hid the day of his birth; so that all the Christians in the
world cannot find that time, more then the Jews the place of Moses Sepulcher.

Nevertheless the supreme Sabbath, even the Lords day, the first day of the
week, Joh. 20.1. rightly called by the papists the Dominical day, in the
Rhemish Testament, Rev. 1.10. is known throughout all Christendom; It is the
day which God has made, Psalm. 118.24. a holy convocation, Lev. 23.7. a day of
better acceptance, v. 11. the day of Christ's resurrection, Mar. 16. and of the
holy Ghosts descension, Act. 2. (as is showed by Chidley in his book called the
Evening Star,) this is the day wherein we are called to rejoice, Psalm. 118.24.
and one day of solemn assembly in the Lords Courts, is better then a thousand,
Psalm, 84.10 and a thousand, then a thousand thousand.

And although our enemies (and the Hollanders) keep their Chrismas-day more
solemnly then the Lords day, and profane the sacred time which God has so
highly honored, yet the Apostle of the Gentiles, who had the mind of Christ,
says, Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more, 2 Cor. 5 16.

For if the day of Christ's death were better then the day of his birth, how
much more then his resurrection. St. Paul says, If Christ be not risen, then
is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. And again he says, If
Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins, 1 Cor.
15.14, 17.

Why then do the fleshly-minded Gentiles feed themselves with such fancies, of
their own imaginations, and reproach others that will not dance with them about
such Calves of invention? A foolish people! Who has bewitched them? For they
have not the true Christ neither do they serve him, but their own bellies; For
Christ was not as they set him forth to be, He was no Mass-monger or belly God,
No drunkard: He wanted neither cards, dice nor Tables to play with, to pass
away the time; nor Lord of mis-rule to take his place, He needed no new Games
to make him merry, no Holly or Ivy to dress his windows, nor Misletow to
conjure his lovers, nor other toys to please his fancy, or blindfolded fools,
or Hot Cockle payers to make him sport, But was born in poverty, lived in
affliction, and died in distress; A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief,
as a worm and no man, Yet not without hope, for God had caused him to trust in
him from his mothers womb; And though he was crucified through weakness, yet
was he raised up with power, and made an high Priest, not after the law of a
carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless life.

Therefore it is humbly desired by the well-affected, That the Parliament would
with great severity punish the profanation of the Lords day, and decree,

That no Chrismass-day, or such like fooleries, be set in the Almanacks, or
observed.

That the names of Idols may be no more in remembrance throughout the Dominions
of the Commonwealth of England.

And it is also humbly desired, that the High and Mighty States of England would
not adjourne, but sit all the idle time called Chrismass, in direct opposition
to the vanity of the Gentiles who profess that they know God, but in works deny
him.

Nevertheless it is in your Honors liberty, So that if any one bid you to a
Feast, and ye be disposed to go, you may eat that which is set before you,
asking no question for conscience sake. But if any one say unto you, This or
that is offered in sacrifice to an Idol (as the Mass is an abominable Idol) eat
not, for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake, but rather feed with
bread and water, Consider Daniel, and his fellows, whose health and
countenance in holy abstinence was well, and their wisdom transcending all the
wisest men in Babylon; and God delivered them from all their enemies, and he is
able to deliver us. If we will seek for experience the right way, we shall
find much of God in Jesus Christ, whilst Mass-mongers feed their bodies with
Anti Chrismass-Pies, and famish their souls, and perish eternally, being
without Christ the bread of life, which came down from heaven.

An OUTCRY AGAINST CHRISMASS-MONGERS.
CHrismass-mongers are the worst sort of Christians; when Antichrismas comes,
they show themselves by their fruits, to be Christians in name, but
Antichristians in nature; and their hearts not worth a halfpeny, ( Prove.
10.20.) for they are the Popes Imps, Malignants in soul and flesh, polluted in
lips and life.

Their Religion at the best is but like a threadbare cloak out-worn, and their
Conversation spotted by the flesh; they are not filled with grace, but with
meat; Chrismass cheer is their charity, and their hope is in this life, and
their faith no better then the faith of devils, who believe and tremble, Jam.
2.19.

They are often drunk with wine and strong drink, but never filled with the
Spirit, but with the spirit of envy; their Hymns are carnal, not spiritual,
unless spiritual wickednesses set up in their high places; Their songs are
Chrismas Carols, not of the Lamb Christ; their contemplation is on their Cards,
to play at 31. a fraction of Antichrist's number. They make use of Christ Jesus
his name (chawing it in their mouth as common beggars do) for their private
advantage, but care neither for him nor his substitutes here on earth, but for
their Sovereign Lord their belly, that is their God, and their glory is their
shame; shall not their end be destruction? for they are enemies to Jesus
Christ, and mind earthly things, and make the devil their play-fellow. And yet
these children of wrath will needs be called Christians, and fly unto Christ
the Savior of Saints, to rescue them from the wrath to come, without bringing
forth fruits meet for repentance.

O thou earthly Protector and Parliament of England, not of Israel, Was not
Sion called Sodom, because of the Crying sins therein, Pride, Idleness,
Gluttony, and Cruelty? And now at such Massing times these abominations are
cloked under the pretense of Chrismass.

What greater patcht impiety, and impurity then now? the Protestants mangle
Christ with their minced Pies, the Papists like Caniballs eat him up, flesh,
blood, bones and all, if they may be believed

For Chrismass sake, the Parliaments Orders have been contemned, tumults
raised, the Ten Commandments broken; Yea, the Thief will steal and rob his own
father against Chrismass, though it cost him dear; and the poor will pawn all
to the clothes of their back, to provide Chrismass Pies for their be lies, and
the broth of Abominable things in their vessels, though they starve or pine
for it all the year after. Is not this religion rebellion, O ye rulers of this
people? yea, it is so; And he that refraineth himself from these evils, makes
himself a prey.

Samuel Chidley.

A lesson for the whole sect of Chrismas-mongers.
MAsks, Mummings, Massings, are made Coverings
For Chrismass-mongers to do evil things.
There Is carding, diceing, drinking, bellowing, roaring,
And under Chrismass cloaks rogues go a whoring.
In fudling Schools amongst fools, there Bacchus bears the Bell,
And Chrismass-mongers dance and prance away to hell.
S. C.

Postscript.
SInce this was in the press, I understand that the Right Honorable Sir Robert
Tichburne Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London, has taken Order for the
protecting of those who shall open their shops on Chrismass day: good reason it
is that the Parliament should give due encouragement to such zealous
Magistrates, in the execution of their duty, and by one Act put down Chrismass,
(wholly) throughout City and Country.

Here follows an order of the first Parliament against Chrismass; which order
the Malignants condemned, and abused the honest Citizens in their shops on
Chrismass Day, for want of an effectual course against Chrismass.
Friday, the 24 of December, 1652.
REsolved by the Parliament, That the Markets be kept to morrow being the 25
day of December, and that the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs of London, and
Middlesex, and the Justices of Peace for the City of Westminster, and liberties
thereof, do take care that all such persons as shall open their shops on that
day, be protected from wrong or violence, and the offenders punished.

Resolved by the Parliament, That no observation shall be had of the 25 of
December, commonly called CHRISMASS DAY, nor any solemnity used or exercised in
Churches upon that day in respect thereof.

Ordered by the Parliament, That the Lord Mayor in the City of London, and
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and the Justices of the Peace of Middlesex,
respectively, be authorized and required to see this order duly observed within
the lines of Communication, and Weekly Bills of Mortality.

Hen: Scobel, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

