AN ADDITIONALL REMONSTRANCE To the Valiant and wel-deserving SOLDIER, And the
rest of the CREDITORS OF THE COMMONWEALTH: CONCERNING The Public Faith;
Soldiers Arrears; AND Other Public Debts, and GRIEVANCES of the NATION.

With a little friendly touch to L: Coll: JOHN LILBVRNE.

Written by Samuel Chidley of London Gent.

2 King: 6.5. And he cried, and said, Alas master, for it was borrowed. LONDON:
Printed for the Author. 1653.

AN ADDITIONALL REMONSTRANCE TO The valiant and well-deserving Soldier, and
the rest of the Creditors of the Commonwealth; concerning the Public Faith,
Soldiers Arrears, and other Public Debts and Grievances of the Nation. With a
little friendly touch to Lieut: Coll: JOHN LILBVRN.
WHereas upon the dissolution of the lare Representative, I published a
Remonstrance, the 22th of April last, which was resented beyond my expectation,
and acknowledged as a true token of my real affections to the Public. The
Peoples daily experience of the sad condition of the Creditors of the Common
wealth of England, to whom it was principally directed, confirming the same.
Yet affecting brevity therein, because I expected a Declaration from the
Officers, I did forbear to enlarge my self, lest I should stand in their way,
who are furnished with variety of intelligence, and better able to make a
rehearsal of the transaction of affairs from the beginning to the end. And
therefore resolved to meddle with nothing for that present, but what most
specially, and particularly concerned the business of the Public, relating to
my Trust.

But it seems multiplicity of affairs taking up the Generals time, with the
Council, matters are not yet in such a forwardnes as was expected: And
therefore necessity constrains me to publish this Aditional Remonstrance for
further satisfaction to the People, and to ease my self of the trouble of
making answers often times, again and again, to so many persons particularly,
who are very inquisitive from time to time, to know what is become of the
Public Faith, and Debenters, the price of their blood. And truly were it not
to satisfy an afflicted, poor, distressed, and needy People, who are almost
spent for want of pure Justice, and continually annoyed with the poisonous
vapors of corrupt, and wicked Laws, and have spent their money for that which
is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not, I should not be
so forward to write, and print Books to fill the world more full, who are so
glutted already, but rather sit and see at distance, and hold my peace till I
have learned wisdom, esteeming it better to live in quietness, and remain
private in the watch tower of observation, to take an exact view of all things,
by the Rule of Reason, considering, comparing and thereupon concluding, then to
spend my time, and strength as publicly as I have done, without more
probability of prevailing.

For whilst Reason is creating new presidents, and working wonders, to set the
world in a maze, and put to silence the ignorance of the foolish, producing
peace by war, to make men live and learn. It is not for me, the weakest amongst
10000. to power out all my mind at once, but to ponder of that which is
represented to my understanding, That my heart may be replenished with wisdom,
whereby I may discern both time and judgment, and be enabled to answer the
expectations of such a considerable number of the good people of England, who
have by word, and writing under their hands, desired, and entrusted me, to
agitate their business for the obtaining of their just debts, upon the public
account, Looking upon me as their Intelligencer, and sole director, how to
steer their course, and to whom, and when to make their applications, who have
thought much at my forbearance in not being so forward to press these who are
at this present in chief power, as formerly they admired at my patience, and
importunate solicitations of those who were in supreme Authority, for the
accomplishment of their many fair promises, Declarations, Protestations, and
engagements: All of which are now also at this present time expected to be
performed, though not by the power that is gone, yet by their Successors, who
saw their departure, and remained behind, and have in their Declaration put in
a cautious caveat of Administration. And indeed it is but reason that they
should administer upon the Estates, and pay the lawful debts of their
Predessessors, who had not time to seal their will before their dissolution, Or
else declare who are to do it, and that speedily. And to pay al Bonds, and
Bills, and other just Debts before Legacies.

And what lets, but that the Public Faith, and old Arrears of the Soldiery,
etc. should be paid with all convenient speed? I hope the Officers of the Army
who found fault with the Parliament for neglecting such things of great
importance, will not hinder, but rather further it, as much as men in their
condition can do, lest the world should brand them for notorious Hipocrites:
For who stands in their way to oppose them now the Tree of Regal Power is cut
down, And the Branches of Parliamentory Authority cropped off, the leaves thereof
shaken to the ground, and the fruit scattered And the Beasts of the field, who
had shelter thereby, and the fowls of the Heaven which lodged in the branches
thereof, and were continually fed therfrom, all gone to shift for themselves
elsewhere, and nothing left but the stump of the three States, King, Lords, and
Commons, I say the very stump, fastened (as it were with a band of Iron, by the
decree of the watchers, and according to the words of the holy ones, to the
intent, that the living may know, that the most high rules over the Kingdom of
men, and gives it to whom he will, and sets over it the most abject among
men. Dan. 4.14.17.

The Lord General, and his Council of Officers in their Declaration of the
22th. of April last, manifested their intentions, to call to the Government,
persons of approved fidelity and honesty, and in a short time, more
particularly to show the ground of their proceedings, and the reasons of the
late action, and change.

Hereupon I was resolved to have a little patience, for a short time to see
what would be more particularly produced, it being a matter of great
concernment to the whole Nation, that such a Narration should have been
published to the People, which might be both seasonable, and satisfactory, and
so skilfully contrived, and wisely composed, that every sentence might be full
of substance, to the rejoicing of the hearts of all the good People of England,
and striking the Enemy with amazemrnt and terror, and weigh down in worth, all
the Acts and Ordinances which have been made by any Parliament from the time of
the 25. Kings of England.

This being done, there might have been ground enough for us to us to have
builded upon.

For who knows not that the Parliaments neglecting of Justice, The cau^se of
the Parliaments dissolution.
and not regarding the payment of the Public Faith, Soldiers Arrears, Kings
debts, and particular losses upon the Public account, alienated the hearts of
their old, and best Friends, and fellow soldiers, and sufferers both in Town,
and Country from them, so that they had none to stand by them, and God had
forsaken them: for they had sinned against him, and deeply corrupted
themselves, all which made preparation for their removal without the least
resistance, yea and I am confident, if Joab and all his Train had been 100
times weaker then they were, they might have done this work with ease, no man
would have risen up against it, but rather have taken up this Proverb against
them.

How has the Oppressor ceased! Isa. 14.4.

The golden Parliament ceased!
And whereas it is supposed, The Generals Declaration of the last of April how
to be understood.
That the Generals Declation of the last of April last, is a sufficient ground
for us to proceed in making applications to the Council of State for the
Public Faith, as before to the Parliament, yet upon serious perusal thereof,
I find no such visible power conferred upon them, further then, to take care
of, and intend the peace, safety, and present management of the affairs of the
Commonwealth.

But waiting for the Narrative mentioned by, What is expected next.
and expected from the Lord General, and his Council of Officers, I have no
mind to interrupt their serious thoughts, with frequent applications, but wait
still till the same be published.

Nevertheless, in the mean time, I shall prepare things in relation to our
public business, and lest this should not be thought sufficient, for
peradventure some will say, what if their Narrative never come forth, shall we
therefore be neglected, and prejudiced by your forbearance? Therefore to
manifest to my integrity, I do here declare by the assistance of God, that if
the Ld: Gen: and his Council of Officers do not publish their Relation within
the space of 40 days after the printing, and publishing of this Remonstrance,
I purpose (by the advice of a certain number of men, whom you the Creditors of
the Commonwealth shall make choice of, to consult and advise withal)
immediately without delay, to proceed as formerly I did at the Parliament, and
if possible in a more effectual way, to make my application to that man, or
those men whom God raises for the supreme trust of this Nation, as I promised
in my Remonstrance of the 22th. of April last.

In the mean time I desire you to live in peace, Good Counsel in your
applications.
and arm your selves with patience, to bear your burdens as cheerfully as you
can, without murmuring, or repining, knowing that affliction arises not out of
the dust.

And let all wrath, and bitterness be put away, and put on the ornament of a
meek, and quiet spirit, and use gentleness, and moderation toward all men, for
the wrath of a man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.

My council is when you apply your selves to the General etc. his Council, or
his or their successors for justice, Be unanimous, Pro. 25.23.
Turn away the backbiter and breedbate with an angry countenance: Fall not out
among your selves, but stand for one another good, And be not unequally yoked
with troublesome persons. If any dog does wag his tongue against you, suffer
him to bark so long as he does not bite. 2 Samuel 16.5. -- 14.
A better man then the Capt: General of an Army of a thousand thousand valiant
men, has been exposed to the teeth of envy, and the jaws of malice. Its no
news for the best of men to be afflicted with the scourge of the tongue, 1 King
2.9.
therefore suffer such evil doers patiently for a while, when your work is
done, you may find a time to talk with them; Then cursing Shemey will go near
to crouch, and cast no more stones, nor fling dust in your faces, but rather
fall down before your feet, and acknowledge his offense in discrediting such
Persons of credit, who have so much credited the Commonwealth. Let Rabshakah
rayl, 2 Kin. 18.36. Zech 3.2.
but you may refuse to answer him a word, let the Lord alone to re^uke him, and
so for the rest, doubt not but every sinner shall be served in his kind, and
the same measure which men measure to others, Mat. 7.2,
shall be measured to them to the full, heapt up, and running over, therefore
have a little patience, be merry and wife, though the malignant People mock and
despise you never so much, for your forwardnes at first, and slender
satisfaction, and poor rewards now.

And let me advise you, not to make your selves work, Be individual, and joint
in one Petition, and not several in many Petitions, for the Persons to whom you
Petition are flesh and not spirit, and if you break their hearts with too much
work, before your business is done, you may be broke your selves thereby.

One man with an Engine, may do more then 100 without.

Ergo. One thousand may do more then 100000.

And so strong you are, if you be wise.

And be not discouraged by any Diffidents, who commonly affirm that the
Public Faith will never be paid. For what you ^en^, has done the
Commonwealth more good, then if it were given them now. And there is enough to
pay you, fear not, think your penny good silver, you will have it, at last, for
the Rulers of the Earth must be honest, or else the just God will bury them in
the dust, Only have a little patience, And have honorable thoughts of those men
who are in present power, till there be ground to alter your opinion, and in
your addresses save them, and your selves, as much labor as may be; And let
all your actions savor of discretion, And observe an orderly course in your
proceedings: And be not too hasty, lest you stumble in the way. You were better
fit still, then walk in the dark, In the light you must look before you leap, I
would not have you to run in vain, but obtain, And so speak as to speed,
knowing that there is a time for all things, Eccles 3.7.
yea, A time to keep silence, and a time to speak.

Take heed of boasting, which is not seemly for an afflicted People.

Believe not an accusation against them from any one, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
When you admonish the Supreme, order your speech that it may not savor of
pride, or passion, or contempt of their person, Pro. 17.10.
or Authority. A word to the wise is more, then an hundred stripes to the
foolish.

When you rehearse your cause, be not too tedious in your relation, Let others
have time to speak as well as your selves.

But prefer matters of life, before liberty, and Estate; And whatsoever the
supreme does, If it may bear a charitable construction, where there is no cause
of jealousy, trouble not your selves with it, Nor find fault without a cause.

TAke heed of that dangerous practice of flattering men in high degree. For the
places whereon such great men are set, are slippery enough, without dropping
butter and oil, Job 32.21, 22.
instead of tears, upon their footsteps. Give not flattering titles, lest it
cost you dear, lest your maker soon take you away.

Put no confidence in Princes, Psalm 62, 9. Prove. 29.25. Isa. 23.9. 1 Cor. 1.31.
Deuteronomy. 22.10.
nor be afraid of an arm of flesh, lest you be deceived and ensnared God has
purposed to stain the pride of all glory, that he who glories, may glory only
in the Lord.

Use no comparisons between one man and another, unless you be very well
acquainted with their Natures, and dispositions, their actions, and affections,
and the Laws by which both must be tried, with their callings, works, and
maintenance, which will much help you to make, and mend, if you be an exact
observer, and that with ease.

I shall not spend much time to contend with those Ministers who would make the
Lord General Cromwell like unto Moses.

It may be he is more like unto Moses, Romans 13.1. Ephe. 4.11, 12, 13.
then they are like unto Aaron.

Moses was the meekest man upon the Earth, zealous against idolatry, and for
the setting up of Gods public worship, Numb. 12.3. Levit. 24.12.
A merciful man, and very cautious of putting men to death, contrary to the
right manner, and was a lover of the People, and would have them saved, though
himself were blotted.

By faith Moses when he was come to years, Heb. 11.24.
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter.

Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.

Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt:
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.

By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, for he endured
as seeing him who is invisible.

Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that
destroyed the firstborn, should touch them.

Now I do profess that God has not revealed it unto me, nor do I see how it
can be proved, that his Excellencies Declarations are like unto Moses Law,
Deuteronomy. 33.4. Psalm. 119.
Or that the Acts of Parliament (confirmed by him) are like unto the Statutes
and Judgments of the holy and blessed God; Or that Moses hanged the poor
thieves merely for theft, Exodus 22.3.
and let the rich thieves go free, I find not that he ever was so unworthy as
to press his poor Contrymen to death for not pleading guilty, or not
guilty; His meeknes and gentleness would not admit of forcing any in a
tyrannical way, to accuse themselves;
He scorned to cut any man off upon one single testimony; He was no Libertine,
Deuteronomy. 12.30. -- 32.
nor gave any loose liberty for the Magistrates to follow the old Cananitish
customs; He had more compassion in him than to suffer the prisoners to starve
in his sight for want of bread.

Now until it be made appear, that the Lord General is more then a Prophet,
and has talked face to face with God, Numb. 12,6-8
and beheld his similitude, I hope no godly man will be offended with me for my
negative voice, Matt. 22.21.
but give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things which
are Gods. Let Moses have his wages for his work, Heb. 3.5.
for he was a faithful servant. And let Cromwell be Crowned with the honor that's
due unto him, and suffer me to declare my opinion, and afterward let the
flatterers speak.

My mind gave me long ago, that the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL was like THE KING, 2
King. 9.20.
THE LORDS ANOINTED; I mean Nimble John the son of Nimsby, who drove furiously,
and said, come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD, Doubtless he was a brave,
stout, valiant Soldier, and a victorious Conqueror of Gods enem^es, Chap. 10.
an utter enemy to the ways, and ruiner of the House of his Master Ahab. The
destruction of Jezebel, and rooter out of Baal, and made his great Cathedral a
very jakes; A man who wrought much by policy, and was very honest, and for
ought I know, observed THE LAW OF GOD much. But he walked in the sins of
Jerohoam, and yet God remembered his good old service, and let him sit upon the
Throne to the fourth Generation. And who knows what good things God has laid
up in store for our Capt: General.

But the best provision which I can make for him, Psalm. 141.5.
for the present, is the precious balm of plain and righteous dealing, which
shall never break his head.

And (humility adorning him like the lillies which grow best in low places) the
entertainment which I shall give him in these sad, and unsettled times is to lead
him by the waters of Marah, in the valey of weeping, to the house of mourning,
the storehouse for tears, where the hearts of the wise frequently retire, and
the Widows by the sides of the house, are set like weeping Vines, and the
Fatherless children, like the plants thereof, round about the tables of
contempt, feeding on the bread of sorrows, and drinking tears in an abundant
measure, Where the rooms are paved with love, and the flooers strowed with
ashes, the Chambers hung with sackcloth, the flat battlements for defense,
covered with coals of fire against the approach of the Enemy, in the wardrobe
sheeps kins, and goats skins, the outhouses dens, and the chambers caves, to
lodge pilgrims, and strangers who feed continually on the bread and water of
affliction, to whom a prison is a palace, death life, and the reproach for
Christ great riches, the sellars beneath filled with bottles of tears to quench
all Tyrants thirst. There is the cup of trembling, and the wine of astonishment
for the King of Terrors.

NOt far from this Mansion House, there is a place where is the throne of
Judgment, with six steps, but he that goes up must put off his shoes from off
his feet, for the place where he stands is holy ground; and every step has
its particular name.

The first step is called Repentance from dead works.

The second is Faith toward God.

The third is the Doctrine of Baptismes.

The fourth is the laying on of hands.

The fifth is, The resurrection from the dead.

And the 6th. is, Eternal Judgment. And there above, is the Throne of Judgment
set.

At the end of the said steps are twelve Lions, six on the one side, and six on
the other, answerable to the 12 Princes of the Tribes of Israel, or the Lambs
twelve Apostles: And there is no other Jury. Privilege of Parliament cannot
here be pleaded, there being a prerogative power above it.

The Statutes of Omri are all here condemned to be burnt in great contempt.

And a Law established which will serve all Nations.

This is a Court of Justice and Equity too, where whores and harlots, and all
others may have free liberty to plead their causes without feeing a Lawyer, and
may have a speedy dispatch there, without going elsewhere.

ANd now to conclude: Whereas at the end of my last Remonstrance, I prayed for
the holy separated Church, and some think it strange, that I did not mention
the CATHOLIC, I did it purposely to distinguish between the Separatists on the
one part, and the ENGLISH AND ROMAN CATHOLICS on the other part. The term
Separate being frequently used in the Scripture in the best sense, Exodus 33.1^.
Levit. 20.24. Numb. 19.20. 2 Cor. 6.17. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2,
and especially by the greatest penmen of holy Writ, Moses, and Paul, clearly
demonstrating that Gods people have been from the beginning, and ought to be an
holy, special, and peculiar people, separated from sinners, though not always
in temporal government, yet in spiritual worship. Now seeing the Chuech of
God are not Catholic Papists, but separated Saints, therefore I thought it
most meet, and very seasonable, publicly to give them this title of Holy
Separated Church, because they are clearly separated from the Papists, of which
there are 4 sorts.

The first sort are Catholic Papists worshipping by the Lattin Mass, and
persecute the other.

The second, Prelatical Papists, worshipping by the English Mass, or Common
Prayer, or Liturgy, and persecute these following.

The 3d. sort Presbyterian Papists, worshipping by a Sinodicall Directory, or
prescripts of men, and are persecuters of the Independents, etc.

The 4th. sort are Independent Papists, who will hear the Ministry of some of
the former, and join in prayer with some of the former Sects whom they account
to be godly, and frequently worship in the Idolatrous high places which the
Papists builded, dedicated and consecrated to Idolatry.

And every one that pretends never so much sanctity, and joyneth in the
worship of the first Table, with anyone of these Papists, becomes a Papist
with the Papists, for he that touched the unclean thing in the time of the Law,
Numb. 19.
was unclean, cerimonially, And in the time of the Gospel, he that worshippeth
God with a wicked man is unclean,
And he that worshipeth with him, who worshippeth with him, is unclean;
although they pretend never so much knowledge of God, Isa. 58.2.
and seek him daily, and delight to know his ways, as a Nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of Justice, and ask of God the
Ordinances of Justice, and take delight in approaching unto God, Yet when they
spread forth their hands, Isa 1.15.
God will hide his eyes, and although they make many prayers, he will not hear
them. For the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, how much
more when he brings it with a wicked mind. Pro. 21.27.
Yea he that sacrifised an Ox, it was imputed as if he flew a man, he that
sacrificed a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck, Isa. 66.3.
he that offered an oblation, as if he offered swines blood, and he that burned
incense, as if he blessed an Idol.

And when they fast (says God) I will not hear their ery: Jer. 14.12. Isa.
1.14.
And their solemn Feasts my soul loatheth.

As good therefore never a whit as never the better.

For we know that God hears not sinners, Joh 9, 31.
but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will him he hears.

God accounts Religious men's Preaching, no better then prating, and their
praying vain babbling, Isa. 58.9. O mind this well.
till they remove from them the yoke the putting forth of the finger, and
speaking vanity.

THe Lord General, and his Counsel of Officers, in their Declaration of the
32th. of April last, gave Order for all Judges* Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Majors and all other Officers to proceed at large in their several
places as formerly, but they forgot their old, and honest principles,
Agreement, See their Agreement of the People.
and Engagements, mentioned in their book Declaration, wherein they declare
against hanging men for stealing, and against pressing men for not accusing
themselves.

Hereupon the same day, even the 22th. of April last, a man was Pressed to death
in a tyrannical manner, for not answering guilty or not guilty, And two more
were put to death the week following for theft, And the last Sessions after
that, six stout men were hanged for stealing, which might have done good
service for the Commonwealth at Sea, instead of pressing honest housekeepers
against their wills, And some of these poor thieves suffered the pains of death
for very small matters, All which is against the most righteous law of God, and
is no better then murder, as I have proved in my CRY AGAINST THAT CRYING SIN,
and in my black book which I delivered in at the Parliament door, And if so
much was done at London, what has been done elsewhere.

Thus the streams of blood are powered upon the head of the Army, and how can we
expect the Wars to be ended, before the World is amended. But it is hoped that
the next Representative will take better care, to put Gods Laws in execution
concerning men's lives, liberties, and estates, then the former have done, And
so there will be general satisfaction to the People.

THE APPENDIX.
YOu well affected and valiant Soldiers, who have made way of old for your
fellow Soldiers: I know you are discontented, and indeed I do not see how you
can be well pleased without satisfaction for your Arrears, the price of your
blood, which is precious; There is something in agitation for you by the
Counsel, prepare the chambers of your heart for content, for I hope it shall
not be long, but you will have your wages for your faithful service, and be
content therewith.

And you that have lent your estates, moneys, plate, etc. for the
Commonwealths use, when a new Representative is established, you will have it
all again with advantage, doubt it not. And he that regards not the Public
Faith, you know is not meet for public trust, but has denied the Faith, and
is worse then an Infidel, And so is not qualified aright, according to the Lord
Generals Declaration: for such a man has neither fidelity nor honesty, If such
take the trust upon them, they should be taken notice of, as Enemies to the
Commonwealth.

And you well-affected Creditors of the late King, etc. and you Sufferers who
have bin plundered by his party; Consider what I told you in my former
Remonstrance, and declare your mind freely, For such loosers must have leave to
speak.

And all you that are weary, and heavy laden with the unrighteous decrees, and
grievous prescriptions of unrighteous men, whereby the needy have been turned
aside from justice, and the right taken away from the People, that Widows may
be the Tyrants prey, and they may rob the Fatherless. O how have you been
afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted. But now pluck up your
spirits, and Petition presently, and I do promise you shall not want my
assistance freely, if it be requisite, without expecting any satisfaction from
you, but acceptance only of my good will for you, looking for a better
recompense of reward, then all the earthly Generals in the world can give.

My opinion is that you need not trouble the Lord General or his Counsel with
many Petitions, but make a forlorn List of your names, (and places of abode)
who groan under oppressions by false and pretended actions, and illegal,
chargeable, and delatory practices, and proceedings in the Law; And let there
be one general Petition drawn up, which is as good as a thousand, and let it
contain the substance of your complaints, and what you desire; and let the same
be presented with speed to them who have power to redress your grievances; That
they may appoint a certain number of honest, and faithful men to sit early and
late, as Commissioners; Fully to hear, and finally to determine all manner of
grievances depending in suits of Law, which shall not happen to be ended by Law
within a certain convenient time limited, and thereby they may probably
dispatch 100. Causes in a day, which will be a great ease to the People, they
sitting daily, so long as there is any business for them to do, that all men may
enjoy their just rights without molestation. That Justice may be no more
clothed with sackcloth, nor judgment turned into wormwood, and gall, That
truth may be no more blemished by falsehood, nor equity kept out by inquity.

O ye mighty ones who sit as Gods, defend the poor Widows, and the
Fatherless: do justice to the afflicted, and needy. Deliver the poor and needy:
rid them out of the hand of the wicked; It concerns you to double your
diligence in well doing, for all the foundations of the earth are out of
course, and the dark places thereof are full of the habitations of cruelty.

Shall the desolate Widows, and Fatherless be made the chief marks for
injustice to shoot at* And be continually vexed, and tormented by the most
cruel, illegal, and delatory proceedings in the Law, and the Woman, though she
brought 10000 l. portion to her Husband, and could have no claim in his real
estate, but for her life time, and that but a third, and though never so aged,
yet upon the death of her husband, she required by the Law, to deliver up all
to the Heir, saving the dwelling House for 40. days, and if she pass the time
of 40. days, must still be liable to action; And before she can compel the
Tenant to plead, with terms of Law called Assoynes, Adjournments, and Views,
shall a whole year be spent then in the fire of contention, to make them spin
out the rest of their days in vanity, and years in trouble? and then if the
Sheriff or Crowner fail to return the Jury, (which is a common thing) a fine is
set upon them indeed, but a four penny matter will take it off, and this is
enough to put off the poor Widow another year, Shall such evil customs still
remain up and down the Land?

As for her personal Estate, the Executor he possesses all, although it be
never so many thousands: And then in the mean time the poor widows have no
relief but in Chancery, where they must serve a complete Apprentiship, before
they can be made free by Law. And thereby the poor desolate widows, through
extreme necessity are forced to borrow, and pawn, yea and sometimes to beg
their bread, and sue in forma pauperis, and so the remedy is worse then the
Disease; And if the widow dye while the Suit is depending, all is lost, and then
the Heir, or Executor robs all the rest of her children of al, And the
Fatherless are constrained to sue for their portion, 21. 22. years, yea
sometimes 23. years, before they can recover it. Thus as I said before, the
Widows are their prey and they rob the Fatherless. But we unto the
Oppressors, what will they do in the time of their visitation?

O Cromwell the Lord of the Land, lay it to thy heart, Look to these things,
redress these grievances in time, unless the prize be gone out of thy hand,
and the Crown be fallen from thy head, Work now, O now, before darkness, and the
shadow of death seize upon thee in the Land of oblivion, where the light is as
darkness, for thou art here to day, but thou do not know where thou shall be
to morrow.

A word for L: Col: JOHN LILBVRNE.
LEt Lilburne live, and not dye, O let him live, and see better days: For most
of his days hitherto have been sorrow, and his travel grief.

How often has this pitcher been at the Well! and will it still go well with
it?

And how many knocks has it endured upon the hard stones, and yet is not
broken, but holds tack, and as tough as a lether Jack! But beware lest the fire
of contention scorch it, and make it useless.

O Lilburne, Lilburn, hear what he says, who said he would be wise, but it was
far from him.

If thou had as much wisdom as courage, If as much prudence as confidence, If
as much meeknes, and gentleness, as strength of memory, If as much depth of
apprehension, as ready delivery, Thou would be a rare Phoenix, or Bird of
Paradise. But every man has his proper gift, one after this manner, another
after that. And yet thou have all these in a measure.

Thou have done and suffered much, yea so much, that an Enemy of Satan is sent
to buffet thee, that thou may not be exalted in thy self.

And why wast thou so ravished with the routing of the Parliament?

Thou art not the first wise man deceived through confidence in man.

Be not overcome, or drawn in by every one that speaks thee fair, and faineth
himself just to entrap thee. Believe, not every spirit, first try, and then
trust, lest they prove as broken teeth and feet out of joint.

Thou outcast of England, did not thou know that the Parliament had erred?
And did thou think the Lord General, and his Council of Officers did well, in
confirming their Acts, and denying to break such yoaks, or to go against any of
them, after their dissolution of a Parliament, or no Parliament, who made Laws,
or no Laws, Of force, or of no force, Then in Authority, or not in Authority.
And now the same, or not the same. Who had driven thee out, saying: go serve
other gods, 1 Samuel 21.11, 12, 13. and 28.2. and 29.8.
as if they had a design upon thee, to force thee for thy preservation to fain
thy self to be that which thou wast not, and to take upon thee, to do that
which thou did not, nor dare do.

And how did thou come into this Wilderness, to tread upon English ground to
defend thy self, with a sword without a hilt, before thou had made thy peace,
with men of War, who had armed themselves, and forewarned thee, Will the falling
out of lovers be the renewing of love; it has moved thee to seek to them, and
may persuade them to embrace thee.

If thou desire the Mercy of God to preserve thee, the Assistance of Saints,
and Angels to protect thee; If thou would have thine Enemies at peace with
thee, Let thy ways always please the LORD, and strive to outstrip all the world
in the choicest wisdom (if possible) Forsake the foolish, and live. My son,
fear thou God, and the Supreme, Pro. 24.21.
and meddle not with them that be given to change.

Some men have been almost distracted through oppression, others have learned
wisdom by affliction, and thou have bought experience at a dear rate; and thine
enemies have not escaped scot free: Therefore be not passionate, but patient. And

When thou art escaped with thy life for a prey, refine what is worth the
refining; and when thy cup is full, carry it even, very even.

Moreover my son, Ecles: 12.12.
by these be admonished, of making many books there is no end, and much study
is a wearines to the flesh.

Belsavage, 22th. June. 1653. S: Chidley.

GOD Grant Repentance to our Enemies. GOD Give Salvation to the holy Separated
Church. GOD Preserve the peace of the Commonwealth of England. Amen.

