A CHRISTIAN PLEA FOR CHRISTIANS BAPTISM: Raised from the grave of Apostasy.

OR, A SHORT TREATISE, Being a reproof of some things written by A. R. in his
Treatise, entitled, The vanity of Childish Baptism.

In the Answer whereof, The lawfulness of Infants Baptism is defended, the
sufficiency of our Baptism received in the state of Apostasy, showed: and the
deficiencie of the Arguments brought against it manifested, by sufficient
grounds and reasons drawn from the sweet fountains of holy Scripture.

S. C.

Ezekiel. 37.12, 13, 14. O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to
come up out of your graves, etc.

2. Chron. 30.18 19. The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to
seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the sanctuary.

Jer. 9.25.26. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will punish all
them which are circumcised, with the uncircumcised. Egypt, and Judah, and Edom,
and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are cut off into corners,
that dwell in the wilderness: for all these Nations are uncircumcised, and all
the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.

Rev. 11.1, 2. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel
stood, saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein. But the Court which is without the Temple cast out, and
measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, etc.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. and are to be sold by Ben. Allen in
Popes-head-Alley. 1643.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, etc.
HAving considered, that the weakness, and frivolousnesse, of the Arguments
brought by A. R. against Baptism, deserved no Answer; and conceiving that most
of them were publicly confuted in print By Ainsworth, Wilkinson, Clifton,
Robinson, and diverse others.
, before any of them were thus published, I thought not to have meddled with
them in such a public way.

But further considering, that the said Arguments of his, were divulged in
print, and might do much hurt amongst some ignorant people, who would do better
if they knew better; I thought it meet to help to take off this new vizard, put
upon the Anabaptists old out-worn arguments, and so to pull down this little
tottering turret of Babel; because that in this false fire, and light of the
sparks of these crackling thorns, the makers thereof delight still to walk,
and some are yet deluded, by such frothie Divinity, and smokie clouds of subl
me sophistry; without due trial of them, by the light of Gods Word; or
weighing them in the balance of the Sanctuary.

Wherefore, in obedience to God, and love to his people; I have here undertaken
to use my talent in vindicating the lawfulness of Christians Baptism, raised
with them out of the grave of the Apostasy of the man of sin, which has
been for many years, in which Apostate estate, and wretched condition, the name
of God has been greatly profained, his institutions (though not destroyed) yet
highly abused, to the destruction of many souls; out of which state, God has
called some, who have obeyed his voice, and come out of Babel to Sion; and are
as dearly beloved of God, as the penitent Israelites, whom God in former time
brought from Jeroboams apostasy to Judah, where they kept the feast, unto the
Lord, and were both young, and old, accepted of him, though they retained the
Circumcision which they received in that apostate estate, where there was
neither true visible Church, ministry, worship, nor government, but all
diabolical, and Apostaticall: yet (God having reserved his own ordinance pure
unto himself) the evil of the manner being repented of, by them; the thing it
self was not commanded to be administered upon them again.

And surely, God could have commanded that Circum^ision [done in Apostasy, by
a wrong administrator, and by a false power, and upon a wrong subject,] to have
been esteemed as not done at all, and that the parties when they returned from
that Apostasy, should have been circumcised again; but he would not, no more
has he commanded us to be baptized again, though we were baptized in an
Apostate state: for Baptism is as durable as Circumcision, and God is as able
to purge baptism now, as he was to purge Circumcision then.

But Mr. A. R. has taken upon him to prove the Baptism which we Christians
received (in the state of Apostasy) to be none of Gods Baptism; but
insufficient; In the prosecution whereof, he alleges several particulars, by
which he would disprove the same: which particulars are examined, and his
inferences from thence answered in the ensuing discourse.

But it would not have been amiss, if he had well considered (for abridgement
of his work) that baptism, being (by his own confession) a great ordinance of
the New Testament; To make it less general, or less durable then
Circumcision, or inferior thereunto, would be to make Christ less faithful
in his house then Moses; and inferior to him: But baptism is more general
then Circumcision: And Christ is more excellent then Moses, and Baptism is as
durable as Circumcision. Therefore seeing Circumcision was not worn out by
those; Baptism is not worn out by these.

Think not (Christian Reader) that I intend to plead for the Apostaticall
Church of Rome, or any of her daughters, or for their ministry, worship, or
Government! So far am I from this, that I utterly renounce, and disclaim the
same; and leave the Justification of them to the disposition of those who
account them no worse then Heathens that never knew the truth; and seek to
lessen their sin by laboring to vindicate their supposed innocence,
teaching them [in this] to plead ignoramus, and not guilty, when they are
justly accused for committing of sacrilege. Yea, and Gods definitive sentence
pronounced against them, and his just judgments executed (and daily executing)
upon them, as appears at this very day, since the sharp arrows of the
Almighty have been (and are still) so generally scattered abroad, to the
destruction, and ruination of those persons; not only for their abuse of
common meats, and drinks, and other temporal blessings; but chiefly (and above
all) for the abuse and profanation of spiritual things, as (the profanation
of) Gods holy word, and ordinances, which they distribute to all sorts of
sinners that come under the notion of a verbal profession, though very vile in
their life and conversation. All which is of us not to be lessened, or excused,
as if it were not sacrilege (or theft in an high degree) but rather to be
lamented, that those persons who draw near unto God with their mouths, and
outwardly pretend to stand for Christ, and fight for his true Religion; (taking
upon them to defend the same, some with the Word, others with the sword)
against those who do oppose them) should have their hearts so far alienated
from God, as so much to take his holy Name in vain, and profane his Sabbaths,
as those do who on that day power out their meat offerings and drink offerings,
in the idolatrous high places, which being a defilement unto the Land, are by
the laws of God destinated to destruction. For these and the like abominations
(I say) we ought to mourn Ezekiel. 9.
: and that they should so steal his ordinances, and abuse his Word, to the
destruction and ruination, spuing, and rooting out of themselves, and their
posterity, from those good and fruitful lands wherein God of his mercy had
planted them.

These and the like evils, were the causes why God did bring upon his people
Israel of old, diverse heavy and sore judgments, as pestilence, famine, and
sword, and wild beasts to devour both them and theirs, yea though they were
circumcised in flesh, yet because they were not circumcised in heart, God
threatened to visit them with the uncircumcised in flesh Jer. 9.25, 26.
, and make their Cities desolate without inhabitants, and their houses without
man and their land utterly desolate: and that he would remove them far away,
and never promised to bring them again from captivity, nor prophesied good
unto any but those who were upright in heart; even the tenth part, (or rather
less) which were the holy seed, the substance Isa 6.11, 12, 13.
, and the remnant Cap 10.21.
.

Wherefore, it evidently appears, that in an idolatrous estate, and Apostate
condition, there is no true comfort, or consolation to be expected; though they
have and enjoy baptism as of old the Jewish Apostates had, and did enjoy
Circumcision, but as these are sinners in like manner as those were; so these
may expect the same measure of punishment (from the hand of God) as those had:
yea, considering that these have their own actual sins, lying upon them Rev.
9.18.20, 21. Rev. 18.24.
; and the sins of the wicked Jews both active and imputative, statively
imputed unto them Mat. 23.34, 35, 36.32.33. Rev. 11.8.
: It should make them to tremble at the Word of God, which must be fulfilled,
which has declared, that judgments are prepared for scorners Prove. 19.29.
; and that the portion of the wickeds cup, shall be snares, fire and brimstone,
burning storms and tempests Psalm. 11.6.
: and that hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure;
and that their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that
rejoices shall descend into it Isa. 5.14.
.

But as the Lord has called us out of the sink of Sodom, and grave of
Babylonish and Egyptian Apostasy (where our Lord was crucified;) so we must
not dishonor him so far as to cast away his holy vessels, or any good thing
of his which we have received; for God is able to purge those things which are
his own; upon our repentance; So that the evil manner of receiving Baptism
does not argue but that the thing in it self is good, and may be applied to the
same end and use for which it was first given. Therefore as we are come out of
Babel, so let us labor to imitate Sion, set forth unto us in the Scriptures;
which does teach us not to lay again the foundation, but to go on unto
perfection Heb. 6.1, 2.
, [even as the children of Israel did when they went up from Jeroboams
apostasy, to keep the feast in Judah;] and not (Babel-like) confound both our
selves and others, as those do, who deny, and disclaim the ordinance of
Baptism, which they have received in Apostasy; which Baptism they conceive
to be no more then a natural, or moral act, and not a divine ordinance:
thinking to take more advantage against the same, in the prosecution of it,
then is given them either from their doctrine, or practice, or any rule
revealed in Gods Word.

Yea, they entangle themselves so in the briars, and thorns of the wilderness
(not knowing by their own grounds which way, or how to take up baptism) that
they are driven now to hold a Church all of unbaptized persons; and that though
none of them be baptized, yet the said Church may set apart one or more of her
unbaptized members, and give them authority to baptize themselves and others
For this see Mr. Spilsburies treatise of Baptism, p. 38 li. 7.8. 9. 10. lin.
33. to li. 40. p. 39. lin. 31.33.
; and yet they grant that baptism may be where there is no Church, and so
(casting away the baptism which they formerly received) they are driven (in
taking up their new baptism) to affirm that an unbaptised person or persons
may and must baptize themselves, and after that baptize others, else true
baptism can never be had: but I wish they would apply the counsel to
themselves which they give unto others not to depend upon human and unwritten
traditions, but upon the Word of God, which is the only rule for every divine
action. Here you see after what manner they lay down, and take up baptism. But,

Touching Mr. A. R. his manner of baptizing, he does not tell us in particular,
but in general, he says, Men and women must be dipped; he does not declare the
particular manner how they must be dipped, but reserveth that; which thing would
be known: In the mean time seeing this subject by way of answer and opposition
to them is treated on, by diverse persons; amongst whom, one of them is a Poet
of their own M. Fleetwood against dipping.
, I insist not much thereon.

In bringing his last particular (concerning the subjects of baptism) he
shoots so awry that he misseth the mark, and does not speak clear out: for
he speaks of Infants in general, without putting a distinction between the
Infants of Idolaters, and the Infants of true Christians.

By which it appears (as also by the rest of his words touching this matter)
that he judges all Infants to be in one visible estate, which to think is very
erroneous.

If God had commanded the Infants of Idolaters to be circumcised, as he
commanded the infants of the faithful Jews and prosolites. And Exodus 12.48.
if God in baptizing the Israelites infants in the Red sea 1 Cor. 10 1.2. Psalm.
77.16.17.19.20.
, had baptized an Infant of wicked parents; if God had destroyed the infants of
Abraham with the infants of Sodom Genesis 18.24.
, and the infants of Israel with the infants of Egypt Exodus 12.29.
in that extraordinary way: we might have thought the infants of Idolaters and
the infants of true Christians to be all in one visible estate; But God
commanded no infants to be circumcised but those which were in Covenant with
him Genesis 17.14.
, neither did he baptize any other infants, but put a difference between the
holy and profane, both by his words and actions Genesis 18.17.19 20.25 32. Cap.
19.12.13. Exodus 12.26.27.29. Josh. 1.13.14. 1 Samuel 15.3.
. Therefore we have no warrant to judge both infants of believers and the
infants of unbeleevers to be all in one visible estate. For though God visits
the iniquities of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation of those that hate him; yet he shows mercy to thousands of those
that love him, and keep his Commandments Ver. 6.
.

The denial of Baptism to the infants of believers arises from many gross
and ignorant mistakes of the true sense and meanin^ of many texts of
Scriptures, as also from many foolish conceptions and idle dream^s, wherewith
persons have intoxicated their minds, and wraped themselves into grievous
absurdities. As in other things they bewray a great deal of ignorance, so do
they in this about infants, and are driven (in maintenance of this error) to
discover more errors in themselves, Exodus 20.5.
and to strike at the fundamental principles of Religion.

They suppose that those Scriptures which set forth the excellent privileges
of the faithful and their seed, concern not infants at all, but only persons
of years that are capable, and do profess faith, and repentance; limiting the
seed to them of years only: or to Christ's person, barring out infants in their
conceptions from visible union and communion with him.

Where it is said that the Covenant of Circumcision was to be in their flesh
Genesis 17.13.
, they interpret that flesh to be Christ, where Circumcision in Scripture is
called the sign Gen 17.11.
and seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.11.
, they limit that to Abraham only, and Gen 17.10. (these words) this is my
Covenant For this see A. R. his second book. pa. 24 lin 13. 14.
, they take literally to be a real Covenant, without taking the exposition,
verse. 11. even as the Papists expound Matthew. 26.26 This is my body, for his
real and corporal presence. They also would (most absurdly) make Baptism
less general, and more general then circumcision, which implies a flat
contradiction.

Whereas it is said, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, etc.
This they say cannot be applied to any infants; for, say they, infants have no
faith either by action, or imputation: then they are driven forcibly to run
upon another absurdity, that either Infants are saved without faith, ar else
that they are not saved at all.

Circumcision they conceive was not a seal of the new Covenant; but of some
carnal thing; but this is a carnal affirmation, like the judgment of him
that says, the Church of the Jews was constituted upon nature, and carnalitie;
opposite to the spirit, and far different from the Churches of Christ Page
22.17.18.19.20.
.

These absurdities with many more, follow one another like links of one chain;
yea this is an evil under the Sun, that those things which are old errors, by
some now adays are esteemed as new truths. Amongst whom some there are in
particular, who deny the heavenly state, and baptism of holy infants, and also
the baptism of Christ received in the state of apostasy, not distinguishing
between a thing well done, ill done, and not done at all: which distinctions
ought to be observed, both in spiritual and temporal things.

And considering (Christian Reader) that in many things we sin all, and are
subject to err in our best actions, I earnestly desire thee to take nothing
upon trust, which I set down, but duly try, and discreetly weigh the same in
the balance of the Lords sanctuary; and if thou reap^st any profit by my poor
endeavors, give the glory to God: and wherein I miss it, let me be informed,
that the same may (by me) be reformed; for the unchangeable truth of Jesus
Christ we ought to love dearly, prize highly; and purchase it without ever
parting from it, and cherish it, as the Lord does put it into our bosom, and
so become one with it, even like unto Jesus Christ who is the way, the truth,
the life, and the light of those who in his light do see light; whose
unsearchable riches I desire with all Saints, every way to comprehend: and
therewith bid thee farewell. And so remain,

Thy Christian Brother in the fellowship of the Gospel, S C.

A REPROOF OF SOME things written by A.R. in his Treatise entitled, The
vanity of Childish Baptism. In the Answer whereof, The lawfulness of Infants
Baptism is defended, the sufficiency of our Baptism received in the state of
Apostasy showed, and the deficiencie of the Arguments brought against it
manifested by sufficient grounds and reasons, drawn from the sweet fountains of
holy Scripture.
Mr. AR.
YOu have (in your title page and Epistle to the Reader) taken upon you to do
that which you are not able; and promised that which you cannot perform, and
affirmed that which you cannot prove, by Scripture: which is, that the Baptism
of Infants is unwarrantable, and a mere device, brought into the world for
politic and by ends, etc. and that therefore (it being the baptism in the
Church of England) you have undertaken to prove it to be deficient, and none of
Gods Baptism.

IN the entrance of your discourse you confess, Page 1.
That Baptism is a great ordinance of the new Testament.

To which I add, that though every ordinance of the new Testament be great,
yet there is a difference between them; for some ordinances are active (both in
respect of the administrator and partaker thereof,) other ordinances are merely
passive (in reference to the parties upon whom the same are administered)
amongst which passive ordinances Baptism is one So Mr. Spilsbery says, the
subject of Baptism is to be passive: See his Treatise, pa. 26. li 7.
.

That Baptism is so (as I have here declared) the Scriptures ( Mat. 28.19.
Acts 2.38.) which you have quoted, d^ ^xpresse, where the Apostles were
commanded to baptize others; And the Disciples are not bidden by Peter to
baptize themselves, but to be baptized by others. And (you may know that) the
Eunuch baptized not (himself) but Philip (a baptized person) baptized him: Act.
8.38. And therefore (in this respect) baptism is unto us, as circumcision was
to the Saints of old, (to wit) an ordinance, not acted by the subject (or
receiver) but submitted unto, Josh. 5.
and suffered; so it is said, Joshua circumcised the children of Israel the
second time, for they were uncircumcised. God did not require them to
circumcise themselves, but Joshua (a circumcised person) was to circumcise
them. Jos. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9.

And as to circumcision then, there was required, a right instrument, a right
subject, and an enrighting power; so there is now required to baptism. But as
circumcision was Gods, though the subject, and instrument, and power was not
right; So is baptism now Gods holy institution, though done by a false
minister, upon a false subject; and by a false power. And though these
Antichristians have no command (or warrant) from God to baptize Apostates (or
any other persons) no more then the idolatrous Israelites had to circumcise,
yet as that circumcision then administered, after that manner (contrary to Gods
revealed will) was not changed from being Gods, nor done over again, upon those
that returned out of that Apostasy: So baptism now though it be administered
by these Apostates, after such an idolatrous manner, and upon such idolatrous
subjects, yet it does not make a nullitie of the ordinance.

By this it appears, that you have laid the ground of your reasoning amiss
(in bringing your five particulars) to make a nullitie of our baptism which we
have received in Apostasy, the insufficiency of which grounds of yours, shall
be further showed in the examination of the particulars which follow.

Your first particular ground (by which you say you will disprove the baptism
in the Church of England) is, Page 2.
because (as you affirm) that the end for which baptism is there administered
is to regenerate the infants there baptized; for proof whereof you repeat their
form of words before, and after baptism, [but you mention not the (...) of
institution, which they pronounce in the act of baptising] and you would argue
that because they declare that all men be conceived and born in sin; and
because they say, that our Savior Christ says, none can enter into the
kingdom of God, except he be regenerated, and born anew, of water and the holy
Ghost: and because the Minister beseeches the people to call upon God (...)
Father through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bountiful mercy he will
grant to the children that thing which by nature they cannot have, that they
may be baptized with water, and the holy Ghost.

And because the Minister and people pray thus We beseech thee of thine
infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully look upon these children; sanctify
them, and wash them with the holy Ghost, that they being delivered from thy
wrath, may be received into the Ark of Christ's Church, and being steadfast in
faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in charity, etc.

We call upon thee for these infants, that they coming to thy holy baptism,
may receive the remission of their sins, by spiritual regeneration, etc.

Give thy holy Spirit to these infants, that they may be born again, and be
made heirs of everlasting salvation.

Also because the Minister (after he has cast a little water on the childrens
faces openly forthwith, (without blushing Lin. 28.
) says: Now seeing that these children be regenerated, and grafted into the
body of Christ's congregation, etc. And then exhorts the people to give thanks
to God, for that it has pleased him to regenerate the infants with his holy
Spirit, and received them for his own children by adoption, etc.

From these premises you would infer that the baptism is false, which ground
of yours is very weak; yea the ground of your reasoning is amiss, and contrary
to reason.

For it is no right arguing to bring the mixing of their traditions as a
nihilation of Gods institution.

And their confession that all men be born and conceived in sin, and repetition
of the words of Christ, and the exhortation to call upon God the Father through
Jesus Christ, that he will give them that of his mercy which (they confess) by
nature they cannot have, that they might be baptized with water and the holy
Ghost. Does not argue that the baptism is not Gods ordinance, for it is
neither their high conceptions, or great estimations, or such verbal
pronuntiations that does destroy or make void Gods holy institutions: yet it is
a profanation of the Name of God, and so it is of the ordinance, because the
persons who administer the same, are Idolaters, and the subjects upon whom it
is administered, are the seed of Apostates.

Neither is it their beseeching God of his infinite mercies, that he will
mercifully look upon these children, and sanctify them, and wash them with the
holy Ghost; that will disanull the ordinance, and make it of none effect.
Neither does their praying, that the children may be delivered from Gods wrath,
and that they may be received into the Ark of Christ's Church, and be steadfast
in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in charity, etc. overthrow Gods
ordinance, and make the Baptism received no ordinance of God. Neither does
their acknowledging of baptism to be Gods, and to be holy, and there praying
for remission of sins for the Infants by spiritual regeneration, (nor their
ascribing regeneration to the holy Spirit) prove the baptism there administered
to be no true baptism.

And it is not their sprinkling or casting water upon the face of the children
that makes a nullitie of the ordinance; though he without blushing say
afterward, that the children be regenerated; for whether he blush or not
blush, that is not material; to prove the point which you brought it for.

And though the exhortation which the Minister gives to the people together
with the rest agrees with their Catechize, the particulars whereof (concerning
infants regeneration) though they were confirmed by these Fathers Jerome,
Augustine, Zanchus, Peter Martyr, Dr Whitticar.
(which you have cited) to be noted Page 3.
instead of many more, yet it does not argue, but that the baptism holds
firm, though in respect of the manner we allow it not, neither their additions
thereunto; and though it be done by a wrong administratour upon an apostate,
yet if that Apostate return from his apostasy, the evil of the manner being
repented of, the action has no need to be done over again, neither does God so
require it, any more then he required the apostate Israelites (when they
returned) to be circumcised again; this you cannot deny, except you could prove
baptism to be less durable then circumcision; as if Christ were less
faithful in his house then Moses.

Again you say, the end for which Infants are baptized in the Church of
England, is to regenerate them, and that they may be born anew, and accordingly
it is concluded in the Catechism; Page 3.
and confirmed by all these Authors, and diverse others well known to your
Ministers, the maintainers of this doctrine, that in Baptism they receive the
holy Spirit, that they are regenerate, and born anew; that they are made the
members of Christ, the children of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven. In
answer to all which (you say) you shall say nothing, but only reason this with
some other of their own principles, and practice, and thereby (you say) you
doubt not but it will appear to all, how unfaithfully they have, and do delude
the Nations in this particular.

I answer. As for their unfaithfulness, and their deluding the Nations, I
doubt not of it; but with what do they most delude? if not with that which they
have (like thieves) stolen away; So the whorish woman is said to delude, by
commending the stolen waters, and hidden bread for sweetness and
pleasantness, (and so enticing her lovers to commit fornication with her Pro.
9.1.7.
;) so the Philistines thought the Ark to be a rare thing 1 Samuel 4.7, 8, 9.
, and so indeed it was Ver. 22.
, for it was God's Ark, and not theirs, but sacralegiously taken by them Ver.
10.11. etc.
, and put in their idolatrous high place for the honor of Dagan their God Cap.
5. 1.2.
; yet it was not effectual to save them from enemies, but rather to destroy
them Ver. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 9.10.12.
: yet notwithstanding after it was brought back again, the people of God
enquired of God by it, and had an answer from him, which was effectual for the
delivering of all Israel whether they were Jews, or Prosolites of Palestina, or
any other Nation.

And though the Israelites in their apostasy deceived both themselves and
others, by retaining still an outward profession of God, and practicing his
outward ordinances, yea, and though they sacrificed unto devils, yet
circumcision was not worn out by them, nor repeated, when the Apostates
returned, but remained true circumcision both to young and old: and they, and
their holy seed, were p^rpetually, to have a part, and portion, in all the holy
things of God, and always as their children came to be capable, they were to
manifest (actually) the fruits of ^ods Spirit, both faith, and love, and all
other graces: but if they afterward fell away, and so embraced the apostate
condition (in which their forefathers formerly had been) though repentance and
regeneration might be preached unto them, yet they had no part in Christ's
kingdom except they did repent, and become new creatures again; like the
incestuous person in the Church of Corinth, when he was renewed again by
repentance. And if any of the members in the visible Church (though never so
eminent) commit sin, they both may, and ought then to be admonished to
repentance; Therefore it is no sufficient argument to say, [that because the
Ministers preach repentance, etc. to them] that therefore the baptism which
they received is false. Simon Magus after he had believed, (and therefore was
in all visible account saved) was (upon committing of sin) admonished by
Peter to repentance; (yet his baptism was true) and so Judas Iscariot though
(he was) a Saint outwardly, yet afterward he appeared to be a devil.

And so far as the Church of England both have, and will defend the doctrine
of perseverance in the regenerate, and members of Christ, they are in the
right, though all the good deeds which they do (either in point of
justification, or sanctification) shall not avail them, in that estate; for the
Lord abhors their best actions, as he did abhor the best actions of the
Apostate Israelites, and therefore circumcision [as it was acted by them] was
abhorred by him; but when any of them returned, he bound them not to be
circumcised again, but accepted of his own jewels So Mr Spilsburie grants
that the vessels of the Lords house, they were Gods ordinances, and that whiles
they were in Babylon, etc. Dan. 5.2, 3. but not in respect of the use and
service the Babylonians applied them unto, etc. Though in themselves, simply
considered, they were Gods ordinance, ordained by him to a holy use, in which
consideration (says he) baptism may be said to be Gods ordinance in the
Church of Antichrist. For this see his Treatise of Baptism, pa. 35. lin. 20.
to lin. 27.
, though brought out of the sink and grave of Apostasy.

And so whatsoever good these Antichristians do is evil (as they do it) but if
God give any of them a sight of their sin, they are to repent of the evil of
the manner: but for the good thing they have received, they ought not to throw
it away, but own it as Gods.

And surely a person may be esteemed to be regenerated, and born again, though
in Gods secret decree he was never elected. And yet these learned Divines (as
you term them) are not in such a great strait in defending this, though it be
against the Arminians; for truth is more easy to be defended, then error.

Touching that all likelihood (which you bring, by entering into their heart)
because it is brought only as a supposition, as it is sleig^tly proved, so it
deserves to be slightly passed over. And your answer thereunto i^ somewhat
like it, Page 5.7.
being an answer to such a likelihood, therefore it deserves no reply: though
in answer to these speeches of yours (which you bring as suppositions or
likelihoods) you advise the authors thereof to leave off such juggling Page 7. l.
16.
, and give glory to God in acknowledging the truth.

But after all this you make a simple objection on their behalf, thus Lin 21.
22.
Infants are elected, and therefore they may be baptized.

To which you answer Lin. 23.24.
, that all Infants are not elected, and therefore all infants ought not to be
baptized.

To which I reply, that as the objection is without distinction, so is your
answer thereunto; and therefore except they were explained, it were folly to
answer either of them. For a man may be in Gods secret election a Saint, and
yet an Idolater, and so are the infants of idolatrous parents idolaters, (in
regard of their visible estate) yet we know not but that God has elected
diverse of them, and will in his due time manifest them.

But you make another weak objection for them: for you say, they will reply,
That in regard some infants are elected, and none can say that this or that
particular infant is not elected, therefore Baptism must be administered unto
all, because we may not deny the elect their privileges, for fear of giving to
others, that which belongs not to them.

And to this mad and foolish objection (which you father upon others) you make
answer, that if it be a warrantable ground for you to administer baptism to
all infants, because that some particular infants are elected, then by the same
reason it will follow, that baptism may lawfully be administered to every man
and woman in the world, because amongst them also we may judge that some are
elected: But this (say you) contradicts the order and rule of Christ. (Matthew.
28.19. Mar. 16.16.) and must be ranked amongst other of their sophismes before
detected P. 8 l. 6. 7.
.

To which I reply: That [some] infants are elected cannot be justly denied; But
to administer baptism to [all] infants for fear of omitting it to any of the
elect, is to do evil that good may come thereof.

Moreover, all the elect are not privileged to have the outward ordinance of
baptism, nor any of them till such time as they are manifested unto us to be
visible Saints; Again, we know Judas Iscariot, and Simon Magus were baptized,
though not elected.

Now the reason which is annexed to the objection, is nonsense, which is for
fear of giving to others that which belongs not to them: for in administering
Baptism to [all] they give unto others (besides the elect) that which
belongs not to them; therefore such manner of reasoning will not stand; I
seldom have heard the like reasoning, except it were amongst those who deny
Infants baptism to be Gods holy institution.

Now in your answer to this you cross your self; in page 7. lin. 9, 10, 11.
where you say, that God has not said he will destroy any infants in hell, and
it would be censorious for any to judge that they shall be damned, and yet you
grant concerning persons of years that they are under the censure of damnation.
Therefore by your own ground you cannot so freely baptize all men and women as
you can all infants, and therefore it appears that what you build up with one
hand, you throw down with the other.

In the second part of your answer to this objection, you grant (for arguments
sake) that baptism is to be administered upon the elect before they manifest
faith, in which affirmation, you want a distinction, and explanation, for you
ought to have made a distinction between faith inherent, and faith professed;
that is, you should have declared that faith may be inherent in some only; and
professed in others.

Secondly, that all that profess faith verbally have not faith really; and all
that have faith really, do not profess it verbally, or manifest it themselves
actually.

Again, you should have explained your self, whether you mean by the elect,
all the elect, or but some of them, all which you have omitted: wherefore I
omit to answer you till you further explain your self. But in the conclusion
you affirm, that its true faith only manifested, and made known by confession
of the mouth, that gives the elect admission to Baptism.

To which I answer, that though we cannot know invisibly because it is the
only office of the invisible Spirit, to whom all things are visible, yet we
may judge of invisible things, by visible demonstrations; as the Saints before
us have done; so God leaving unto us a rule whereby to judge the infants of
believers to be elected, it is want of knowledge and charity which makes some
persons that they cannot judge so of them, nor put a difference between the
infants of heathens and the infants of believing parents; for the infants of
believers in the time of the Law could not be circumcised (according to Gods
will) without a confession; but if their parents made a confession, it was
sufficient to bring both them and their infants to have right to circumcision,
and those infants were Jews (that is, confessors) though they could not make a
verbal confession themselves actually and the like privilege the infants of
believers have now under the Gospel, to have baptism, as the other had
circumcision, which is one and the same in effect. But when any of the Jews
apostated, they lost the name; and so these idolaters of Rome, and England are
as those Apostates then were, and so is their offspring. And when we call the
unbeleeving Hebrews by the name of Jews (or Israelites,) it is but only for
distinction sake: for as the dumb Idols were called Gods, and yet were no
gods, so those are no Jews which confess not Christ Romans 9.6. and 2.28.
; but if any do embrace Christ in purity, both they and their infants have
right to baptism, (as really,) as the infants of the believing Jews had right
to circumcision they being in the covenant. Else Christ should be less
faithful in his house then Moses. For infants were by God counted worthy of
the sign Genesis 17.11.
and seal Romans 4.11.
of his righteousness both before Genesis 17.7.9, 10, 11.14. Exodus 12.48.
and under the Law Jos. 5.7. Luke 1.59.
; and Christ coming into the world, came not to take away any privilege from
any infant which formerly enjoyed the same, but placed as great a one (if not
greater) in the stead thereof, he came not to take away the types from the
infants of believers, and bereave them both of substances and types, but seeing
baptism is come in stead of circumcision, as the infants of believers formerly
had right to circumcision, so the infants of believers now have right to
baptism.

Thus, though you have passed from your first particular, to your fifth, from
the end, to the subject, yet I have given you a direct answer unto both.

THe second particular, Page 9.
which you bring (for disproof of the baptism in the Church of England (is,
the manner in which baptism is there administered, which manner (you say) is
sprinkling, or casting a little water upon the head or face of the child
baptized, wherein (you say) they show themselves as contrary to Christ as in
the former particular. Forasmuch as the institution of Christ requires that
the whole man be dipped all over in water.

To which I ^nswer, that there is little weight in this confused exception of
yours, as may plainly appear in observing the particulars; for you lay it down
ambiguously, in saying the [head] or face of the child; If you mean that
because the face is a part of the head, that they in baptising the face,
baptize the head, in it I assent unto you; but if by the head you mean the
scull, (or hairy place of the head) if you say they baptize that part by
sprinkling or casting water thereon, I doubt not but you are mistaken.

But you would have the whole man to be dipped all over in water, and this
institution you would father upon Christ; But in this your own bare affirmation
(though not yours only) the Scripture will not bear you out.

But for confirmation of this your opinion of dipping every part, you quote
diverse Scriptures, as Matthew. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Joh. 1.26. Act. 11.16. and you
tell us they point out a baptism [in] water, but not a baptism [with] water
Lin. 21.
.

To which I answer, that if they point not out baptism [with] water, then they
point out a baptism [without] water, but I thought you had intended to speak
here only of the baptism of water (for so the Scriptures quoted do) and if
that be your meaning, I pray you to show (if you can) how these Scriptures (or
any other) do point out such a baptism [in] water, and yet not [with] water:
To say it is the baptism of water, and yet not [with] water, argues an
impossibility, and is (in the self same respect) a flat contradiction, yea,
and contrary to reason.

Indeed if you had not repeated it again Lin. 24.
, and that in the same terms without alteration, I might have thought it had
been only an oversight of yours. But finding the same thing insisted upon
again Lin. 27. 29.
and again Pa. 10. lin 8.
, charity it self would not permit me to judge otherwise, but that your words
seem to import, that persons may receive the true baptism of water [in] water;
and yet not [with] water. For (after you have quoted Matthew. 3.11. Ego men
baptizo humas en hudati, I indeed baptize you in water, Mar. 1.8. E^o men
^baptisa humas en hudati, I indeed have baptized you in water. Also Joh. 1.26.
Act. 11.16.) you say, all these point out a baptism [in] water, but not a
baptism [with] water.

And whereas Page 9. li. 22.23.
the word [en] (in Rev. 19.21. Kai hoi loipoi apoct athesanente romthaia)
signifies with.

You answer, that it never signifies with, after this word baptizo.

Another reason you allege from Christ's being baptized into the Jordan. Page
9. Page 10.
Therefore you conclude again that this word [en] ( as used after this word
baptizo) must signify [in] and not [with.]

But you should take notice that if Christ received the baptism of water, he
was baptized not only when he was in Jordan, but there was he baptized [with]
the water of Jordan. Wherefore it plainly appears that the word [en] in this
place signifies [with] and therefore you have not done well to say it does
not. You allege Greek and Latin) Authors to prove that the word en (as used
after this word baptizo) must signify in and not with.

Which thing is contrary to the Scriptures which speak of the baptism of
water, neither can such an affirmation stand with reason, but is contradictory
to it self, and therefore not to be believed.

But the dipping of the whole man all over in water is that you stand for; but
yet you have not proved it to be of Christ's ordaining, you deny both washing
and sprinkling with water, to be Gods ordinance; and affirm dipping is the
only right way: but seeing you deny the former, how will you take (or how
have you taken) up the latter: if you hold it successively, to the successors
you must then go, if you have not found (or cannot find) them which way then
have you taken (or which way will you take) it up? But by one whom you judge to
be an unbaptised person. Moreover, you tell us that the whole man must be
dipped all over, but you declare not unto us the way and manner thereof;
whether the subject must go into the water himself, or whether he must be put
in by another, or only led in, or carried; or (if the party must go in)
whether he must be lifted up, out of the water, and so dipped down again, or
no; or whether, only that part that is above the water, (must be dipped, and
that part under the water let alone) or if the subject be dipped all but a
part, whether he must be dipped again in whole, or in part, or if there be any
error in your dipping, in omission or commission whether it makes a nullitie
of your ordinance, how your judgment stands in these things I know not: you
stand for dipping, yea and dipping the whole man all over in water; not only
the feet, but also the hands and head; but what if some part or parts be
missing? is it not true baptism? But furthermore how shall this baptism be
done by a weak person, especially in great and deep waters (which thing you
urge in your discourse) how shall this dipping of every part be done in such
rivers where the stream is ready to carry them away (especially when he who
is the baptiser is weak of body, and lifts up the (man or woman) above the
water) these things are to be observed also.

But surely it is not good to presume above what is written in the Word of God,
either in justifying of our selves, or condemning of others. And if you do but
well observe the manner how Philip baptized the Eunuch, Act. 8.36.38.
peradventure you may receive some light in this point, whereby you may be
dissuaded from your total dipping: for it is said that Philip and the Eunuch
went both down into the water, and there Philip baptized the Eunuch, which does
plainly demonstrate, unto us, that going into the water is no part of baptism;
because the baptism was administered after their going into the water; for if
it had been a part of baptism, then the Eunuch baptized himself, for he went
into the water. But the Scripture says, that they went down both into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Neither is it said,
that Philip baptized himself (which by the same reason we may conceive he did,
if going into the water were a part of baptism) but the Scripture notes the
going down into the water, and the being baptized with the water, as two
distinct things. Neither is it said, that Philip baptized the Eunuchs feet, or
legs, for the Eunuch was in the water before, and at the time of his baptism,
but it is said, Philip baptized him; to wit, a part of him for the whole, which
part in reason must be conceived to be his face, under which external noble
part is comprehended the whole man, and all the senses of his body. So the
Scriptures in diverse places teaches us to understand, that a part sometimes is
to be taken for the whole; so it was prophesied, that the Son of man should be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth Mat. 12.40.
, and yet he lay not there so long, but rose before three days or three nights
was totally expired; as appears by Matthew. 27.46. and 28.1 6 7. Mar. 15.42.
and 16.2.9. Luke 23.54 56. and 24.1 36. Joh. 19.42. and 20.1.14.19. All which
does teach us in some cases of great concernment (as this was about Christ's) to
understand that sometimes when the whole is spoken of, but a part is meant: For
to confirm this, you may see here, that we have the words and testimonies of
Angels, Apostles, Prophets, and Saints, yea and of Christ himself: If then in
some things of the greatest concernment we may and must take a part Luke 24.
Mat. 17.23.
for the whole Mat. 12.40.
, sure then in some things [of lesser moment] we may, and must take a part for
the whole. For it is not to be thought that God has tied to baptize every
member of our body, (which shall be raised at the day of judgment) that the
Apostles so did baptize; neither can you prove, that the Apostles did so
baptize, except you mean that a part is to be taken for the whole, as I have
showed before. And seeing that Act. 8.38, 39 (concerning Philips baptising the
Eunuch) is brought by you See his book, pa. 11. lin. 1.
to prove (as I suppose) that Philip baptized every external part of his body,
and that by way of dipping) prove the thing, I say, (if you can) and then you
will speak to some purpose in maintenance of your total dipping. If you cannot
do it, to what end then have you brought this Scripture which makes against
you?

Consider, I pray you, that Paul after the Lord had smitten him down Act. 9.4.
, was without his sight, but was led unto Damascus to the house of Judas, and
there remained, in a weak condition, (not having his sight) nor taking any food
for the space of three days Ver 8 9.11.
, his body being so enfeebled Ver. 18.19.
shall we think that it would not have been an act of cruelty (Egyptian like)
to have dipped him over head and ears in cold water? which thing I suppose you
hold. For you cry out for dipping the whole man all over in water, and why will
not the same rule which you have for dipping every part serve for washing, or
sprinkling the same parts?

O but (say you) Baptism in the Church of England is not Gods ordinance,
because it is administered by sprinkling, or casting water upon the subject: and
you except against infusing or pouring the water upon (and therewith washing)
the subject See A.R. p. 9 li 16. p. 1^. l. 3.
But if you did but consider and read the Scriptures with understanding, and
good judgment, you might perceive this manner to be right according to the
rules and coherences of Scripture; for sprinkling (or putting water upon
persons in baptism) has been not only an ancient custom, but an act of Gods
own acting and ordaining. God opened the windows of heaven, and powered down
water in the time of Noah, and this was his manner of baptising then.

And God himself baptized the children of Israel in the Red sea, not by
overwhelming them with water, as he did the Egyptians, but by sprinkling or
infusing water upon them Psalm 16.17.19.20.
; and yet Paul gives it the denomination of baptism 1 Cor. 10.1.2.
, and therefore though baptism be administered by sprinkling it is the very
right baptism.

And surely you have not well considered (or at least not explained your self)
in saying, that the washing of cups is not a putting or infusing water upon the
cups See A. R. p. 10. li. 21. 22.23.
; If you mean that it cannot be done by imposing water upon them, I affirm and
will prove that it may be done by washing without dipping: whether they be cups
or platters. But you should have considered that persons wash their faces by
putting water thereon, this common experience teaches us: so the Prophet Eliah
washed his hands by water powered upon the^ 2 King. 3.11.
, done by his own servant Elisha; and in reason a man may with more ease and
less trouble dip his hands, the^ his face: yet you may see the Prophet made
clean his hands by having water powered upon them. And therefore (if reason it
self would not teach us) the Scripture would, that cups may be wash d by
pouring water upon them, and made as clean, yea cleaner then if they were dipped
without cleansing or washing: but by this objection of yours you would intimate
that so far as you dip so far you wash: or else of what weight is your
speech of washing cups by putting them in water after your manner of dipping.

Again, we may consider that sprinkling was appointed of God in the time of the
Law; the ashes of the Red heifer mixed with living water Numb. 19.
was for this use, of sprinkling the people.

And I suppose you cannot deny but ou^ baptism answers that, as well as the
baptism of Noah in the A^k or Israel in the Sea. And I doubt not but that the
baptism of Noah was a resemblance of our burial with Christ: neither dare I
affirm otherwise, but that the baptism that now is, is a like figure
answerable to that; but Peter tells us it is not the washing away ^f the
filth of the flesh, but it is a baptism which saves us by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 3 20, 21 And sprinkling and washing has a similitude with
the death, burial, and the resurrection of Christ: for those that are
sprinkled and washed with the blood of Christ, are dead unto sin, and do live
unto righteousness. The Law was their Schoolmaster to lead them unto Christ;
but sprinkling was a part of the Law, an action of Gods appointment, therefore
it was to lead them unto Christ: and if we do but observe, we shall understand
that the Red heifer Number. 19
was a figure of Christ, the killing of it, and burning it on the Altar,
signified the death of Christ, and his bitter passion; the Ashes being to be
mixed with living water, and so that water to sprinkle the people set all this
forth unto them: It was to teach them that the blood of Christ was only
sufficient to purge sin, it was therefore to teach them mortification of the
old man, a dying to sin, and a living to righteousness, through the mercy
of God, and the Messiah who was then to come; yea, and it did also really
figure out unto them, Gods gracious acceptance of them, and of that sacrifice
for them, for so the turning of the burnt offering unto ashes did signify
Psalm. 20.3.
, and so the sprinkling was to put them in mind of the same; and whereas it was
mixed with living water, and so imposed upon them, it was to teach them, that
so their sins should be washed away through Christ: and to this the Apostle
alludeth, where he mentions pure water. Now he that is a self-denying
Christian, dead unto sin, and so mortified, he is buried with Christ by a
baptism without hands; And when he apprehends Gods gracious love and mercy,
and free acceptance of him through Christ, he may well be said to be risen with
Christ: all these things the sprinkling was to teach them, to behold Christ's
day afar off; And yet you presume to say, that sprinkling or washing without
dipping has no [similitude] with death, burying, and rising again Treat. A.R
p. 11. li. 24.25.
: But why then does the Scripture so plentifully set forth our mortification,
repentance from dead works, dying to sin, and living to righteousness under such
terms Heb. 10.22.23. and 12.24. Eze. 36.25
as washing and sprinkling, if sprinkling and washing did not bear out a
similitude thereof. And why does the Scripture give that the denomination of
baptism 1 Cor. 10.1.2. Luke 12.50. Isa. 52.14.
, which was not done by dipping them (or plunging them) in the element. Surely
these things being rightly considered, it will evidently appear, that the
baptism done by sprinkling and washing is not only a full resemblance of our
mortification or washing from our sins, and the cleansing of our souls by
Christ's blood, and so a dying to sin, and a living to righteousness 1 Cor.
6.11.
; a putting on of Christ Gal. 3.27.
, etc. but also holds forth unto us the death of [Christ] and his bitter
passion Luke 12.50.
, yea self-denial, and forsaking of all for Christ's sake, as much, yea, and
much more then dipping the whole man without washing can do.

Yea the Apostle Peter intimates that the external baptism is a washing away
of the filth of the flesh (holding forth no more then an external ordinance
can hold forth. This Peter could speak by experience, for he knew that Simon
Magus, who believed outwardly had the outward washing, and yet manifested
himself afterward to be in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of
iniquity Act 8.23
;) but the baptism which is only available to salvation, is the answer of a
good conscience toward God, that is the baptism indeed which saves by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 3 21.
: Now he that has his heart sprinkled with the blood of Christ, he may fully
assure himself that he shall be saved, and so he is risen with Christ though he
want the outward baptism (which you grant is nothing in comparison of Christ
In the second Treatise, pa. 17.
) and so he having part in Christ who is the resurrection and the life Joh.
11.25.
, he shall not be hurt with the second death. Rev. 2.11. and 20.6.

But this your dipping of the whole man all over in water, you would have to
hold forth not only death and burial, but also a rising again: and for this
end you mention some words of the Apostle Paul, Col. 2.12. Buried with him by
baptism, wherein you are also risen with him, etc. Romans 6.4.5. We are buried
with him by baptism into his death. And if we have been planted together in
the likeness of his death, we shall also in the likeness of his resurrection.
And in 1. Cor. 15.29. St. Paul amongst other arguments to prove the
resurrection has these words, What shall they do which are baptized for dead,
if the dead rise not at all; why then are they baptized for dead?

Col. 2.12.) speaks of a resurrection then present, and the other Scriptures
( Romans 6.5. 1. Cor. 15.29.) speak of a resurrection to come. Now in the
resurrection at the day of judgment the blind shall receive their sight Rev.
1.7 Job 19.24, 25, 26.27.
, though the eyes which are the instrument of their sight are perished; and
though a person have lost his legs, or his arms, or any external member of
his body, (that is not superfluous) yet he being not thereby killed is
(according to his capabilitie) still to believe, that all those breaches shall
be made up in the resurrection: now if you should happen to baptize such a one
by dipping which has such defects in nature, as the want of his legs, arms,
or eyes, etc. will you say that that baptism sets forth unto him no more
but only the raising of those external parts which you then dip; then you
will have it to set forth a blind (or lame) resurrection. But if you will say,
the baptism he receives at your hands sets forth the resurrection of all
the parts, both those parts that are missing, and those parts that are not;
those members that are baptized and those members that are not baptized: then
the case is evident that (the eminents part (or parts) of the body being
baptized) the said baptism sets forth the same benefit unto the rest of the
members; for in the resurrection if one member be had in honor, all shall be
had in honor.

For further explaining of the matter, I put this ordinary case unto you, (and
desire you to consider thereof) Suppose a man come unto you to be baptized, and
wants one, or both of his legs, arms, eyes, or other external members, what
now is to be done in this case? Peradventure you will say that you cannot
baptize those members that are not to be found; So say I too: But what then? if
those members were (or are) to be found? must you needs seek for those; to
baptize them with him? You will say, No! that would be a senseless thing to
baptize that which has no more life in it then a stone! I also affirm the
same. But what is further to be done? will you proceed and baptize this
believer, or leave him unbaptised? You will say, He is a believer, though he
want his eyes, legs, arms, etc. and therefore he must be baptized, though he
want those external members. Yea, but then I ask you whether you do not
conceive that your baptism is a burial, and a rising again, and whether you
do not believe that it sets forth unto the lame man the resurrection of
[all] his members, as well as if all his members had been baptized; I suppose
you will say, Why not? there is no reason can be given to the contrary,
considering that those members shall be raised with the body at the
resurrection. But then I desire you to remember this, and bear in mind what
will follow, namely, that baptism sets forth the resurrection of those
external members which were never baptized, and therefore that which you
esteem to be no baptism, or but a baptising [in part] sets forth the
resurrection of the [whole] body; and so totally of [all] the members thereof,
and belonging thereunto; so that the face (or eminents part of a man) being
baptized though the rest of the members are not wet with water, yet this
baptism holds forth the resurrection of the whole body. I mean not only a
spiritual resurrection, but a translation of the natural body into a
spiritual body, and this is the resurrection the Apostle speaks of when he
says, What shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not
at all? why then are they baptized for dead? 1. Cor. 15 9.

Your conclusion of this point Pa. 12.
which is grounded upon a supposition, I reject, because it openly
contradicts the Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.2.1. Pet. 3.27. Matthew. 20.22. Luke
12.50. Isa. 14.15. For you say, that he that is not dipped, is not baptized;
and that all those that have the administration of baptism by sprinkling, or
by any washing without dipping are unbaptised. Which I deny, and that from the
grounds before alleged; remember (I pray you) how you urge the greatness of
the quantity of the element, to be of such necessity to baptism, that except
a person have so much, wherein he may dip the whole man all over, baptism
cannot be rightly administered upon him; and so by your grounds not administered
at all.

And this is one of the particulars, by which you would disprove the baptism
in the Church of England.

Now, though in the Church of England the manner of baptising is by sprinkling,
washing, or pouring the water upon the most eminent part of the subject, which
is there presented to be baptized, yet in the Church of Rome, and in some
places of England, and the dominions of Wales, they have used, and do use
dipping of persons in the ordinance of baptism; which is a thing [in respect
of the manner] pleasing unto you (and therefore in this second particular not
here excepted against by you) for in striking at the manner, you have in this
touched nothing, but [onely] their washing, sprinkling, or pouring of water
upon the party, whereon it is administered.

Your third ground (or particular) by which you labor Pa. 12. at lin. 26.
to disprove the baptism in the Church of England, and make it to be of none
effect, is, because of the Antichristian power, authority, and office of
ministry by which it is administered: and so you conclude, that because their
power and authority is not of Christ: therefore the baptism is not from Christ
Pa. 13. lin. 1.2.
.

To which I answer, That I grant they have no enrighting power to administer
any of the holy things of God, no more then the Apostate Israelites, yet as
that Antichristian power by which they did administer, destroyed not
circumcision, but that it remained true circumcision: so baptism, (being as
dureable as circumcision) it cannot be worn out by these Apostates, no more
then circumcision was by the other.

And what right had the Philistines to the Arc? or what authority had the
Babylonians to steal the vessels of the Lord? or what power had Idolaters to
lay sacralegious hands upon any of his holy institutions? Surely they had no
such commission, either from God or Christ, so to do; yet, I hope, you will not
say, that the Arc was no Arc, the vessels no vessels, the institutions (as in
themselves) nothing at all; for then you would openly contradict the Scripture
1. Sam. 4. and 5. Dan 5.3.23. Ezra 6.5. Ezekiel. 43.8. Rev. 11.2.
. The like may be said concerning Gods institutions under the defection of
Antichrist, the marriage, is marriage; though the manner be not performed
lawfully: the Word is the Word of God, and baptism his own, though in
apostasy.

And whereas you say Pa. 13. at li. 25
, that as the Lord Jesus Christ has no where in his Word ordained or appointed
any women to administer his baptism. Nor no more has he any where in his Word
authorized any men by any false power to administer his baptism.

I answer. The like may be said concerning circumcision; We read not that any
woman had authority (from God) to circumcise And yet Mr Spilsbery in his Treat
se of Bap p. 33. lin. 47.48. says, he sees not but that in case of nec^ssity
a woman might lawfully circumcise, she being no where prohibited. But by the
same rule of his, a woman may lawfully baptize.
: yet the act being done by Ziporah [a woman] it was not false circumcision;
and God (who is the God of order) never gave wicked men any order to
circumcise, or any one by any false power to administer his sign, and seal of
the righteousness of faith; and yet though it were administered in that
Apostate estate, of Israel by apostates, and upon Apostates, yet it made no
anullitie of the ordinance, but was the sign and seal of the righteousness
of faith to those that returned out of the grave of that Apostasy.

Therefore the ground which you draw by similitude from the civil ^ates
(applying the same comparatively to the spiritual) will not serve your turn.
For the Kings Proclamations are his, though proclaimed by any: which thing you
would have to be nothing Pa. 13. p. 14.
; for in speaking of the ordinances of the commonwealth, you include them all,
and so you would infer that what an Antichristian ministry does, if it be
done by a false power, the action (whether it be baptism, or any other thing)
it is false: but this your ground will not hold. For the Kings lawful acts are
real, and substantial, though the dispensation of the same (in respect of the
party dispensing) be contrary to his mind and will. As if the King command that
none in his Realm shall marry persons together, but the Christian
Magistrates. But if the Priests do the same contrary to the Kings command,
shall we say the Parties are not married, and that the marriage is false and
counterfeit? this I conceive you will not affirm For then their children
begotten (in the estate) are bastards.
So your former ground being groundless, your comparison is frivolous.

And considering that Gods ordinance of circumcision was real and effectual,
though administered by a false power, you cannot say that it was none of Gods
ordinance, for then they should have been circumcised again: so the like may be
said concerning baptism. Therefore your other comparison and application Pa.
14. at l 26
[in this case] about Jannes and Jambres rods, etc. (2. Tim. 3.9. Exodus 7.10.
ver. 11.12.) is of no weight, but rather a wresting of the words of the
Scripture, for you can gather no such conclusion out of Paul's words, neither by
any part of the Scripture it self, or necessary consequence; for though these
Antichristians (in opposing the truth) are like Jannes and Jambres, yet because
they draw near unto God with their mouths, (and their hearts far from him)
they are rather like the Apostate Israelites.

For which Papist (of the grossest of them) will deny verbally that Christ is
come in the flesh, that there are three persons in the Trinity; etc. so far
are they from denying it, that they abhor those that say to the contrary, and
are ready to burn them with fire and faggot. Such a kind of zeal have they for
him whom they know not rightly, but in their superstitious works deny him: And
(by your own confession Pa. 15. l. 20.
) the Church of England does in their nineteenth Article profess, that the
visible Church of Christ consists of faithful men, etc. this is a real
truth; And yet these persons (I say) do deny Christ, because they submit not
unto him as he is Prophet, Priest, and King. And yet notwithstanding we will
not say but that these Apostaticall persons have baptism, and as much right
unto it, and power and authority to administer it, as the Apostates of old had
to receive and administer circumcision. But the Temple, and the Altar, and the
worshippers must be measured, when the Court which is without (by Gods command)
must be left out, and not measured, because it was given to the Gentiles. Rev.
11.1, 2. Christian Reader, understand that whereas Mr. A.R. has (in his
treatise of Baptism, p. 12. to 22. p. 31.32.) spoken against the power and
authority, and office of ministry, which the man of sin has given to the
Ministers of Antichrist, I contradict him not in this, but do judge them (in
the same visible estate) as Ieroboams apostaticall priests were, though they
have baptism as the other had circumcision.


Fourthly, (you Page 23. to p. 24. lin 4.
say) the ground from which baptism is there administered, is the repentance
and faith of the sureties; the evidence whereof you bring out of the
Catechism: where they declare, that repentance and faith is required to
baptism; and that the infants perform it by the sureties, who take upon them
to answer for the infants.

Answ. That repentance and faith is required to baptism is true; but seeing
the sureties are not able to perform it for themselves, much less can they do
it for others; It is not Noah, Daniel, or Job that can save any sinner from
Gods wrath Ezekiel. 14.14
; the righteous are scarcely saved themselves 1. Pet 4.18.
; how then shall the wicked undertake, so presumptuously to answer for any,
especially for those whom God (in his revealed will) has made no promise to
save; yet though the members of the Church of England do presume so far, it
does not make a nullitie of the ordinance, no more then the Philistines
presumption in taking the Ark of God 1. Sam. 4.10, 11. and 5.1.
, or the men of Bethshemosh their looking therein and 6.19.
, made it to be no Ark of God; neither does men's traditions destroy Gods
institutions; for Gods pillars and posts are still his own, though Idolaters do
set theirs thereby Ezekiel. 43.8.
.

But though some in the Church of England do baptize by sureties, (which they
commonly call godfathers and godmothers) yet others see it to be vain and
popish, and do baptize their children without them, these [in respect of the
ground which you have here instanced] you cannot object against.

Now, the ground wherefore the Church of England does administer baptism, is
taken out of Gods Word; (at least pretended (by them) so to be) how Christ
declared that little children belong to the kingdom of God; and he took them up
in his arms, and laid his hands upon them and blessed them, etc. yea from the
very institution of Jesus Christ unto his disciples, Matthew. 28.19. Mark. 16.16.
this I say (though it be the ground whereby they administer baptism, as
(peradventure) the ground of the Apostates of Israel circumcising, was taken
from the commission of God given to Abraham) yet these Idolaters (like the
Apostate Israelites) are sacralegious abusers of this holy institution of God.

Thus having answered directly to your four particulars, which you have
brought against the baptism in the Church of England; I now proceed to answer
your fifth and last particular; (to wit) concerning the subjects which you
treated of, in your first particular, where you passed from the end to the
subject.

Page 24.
THe subjects (say you) on which baptism is there administered are infants.

To which I answer, that you have omitted a material word, for you should have
said the infants of [Idolaters] but when you speak of infants [in generall]
without denoting what sort of infants you mean; you speak in the air!

But you grant that the Scripture holds forth, that disciples (or believers)
only are to be baptized; which is really my judgment, that only believers
(or disciples) are to be baptized, as formerly they were to be circumcised; and
as Abraham himself had no command to circumcise all nations, or seeds, (or any
apostate whatsoever, though the offspring of his body) but those that were the
seed in covenant with God Genesis 7.14.
, so the Apostles had no warrant to baptize any other, but believing men and
women, and their holy seed; according to the great commission of our blessed
Savior, where all nations were commanded to be baptized, only upon this
condition, that they should become disciples, Matthew. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. Act.
2.38. And I grant with you, that to be a disciple of Christ is to abide in him,
and to continue in his words, Joh. 8.31. such are Christ's disciples indeed, and
are made free by Christ Joh 8.36.
; such as bear the cross, and come after Christ, forsaking all that they
have; But know this, that free Justification comes not by any act of our own,
but by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed unto us Isa. 63.3.5 and
53.10, 11, 12. Romans 3.6. Rev. 1.5. and 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
. And therefore holy infants may be said in one respect to do all these things;
Christ himself has declared, that they receive the kingdom of God; and such
holy infants are his disciples indeed; such have born the cross diverse times,
suffering with their holy parents, for the same cause; and they resist not the
will of God in any thing; these are not all infants, but only the infants of
believing parents, whom we ought to judge as righteous, and as holy (till they
manifest otherwise) as any other Saint on earth, though he profess great
things; these are those heavenly creatures, to whom the Gospel ought be applied
though they are incapable to receive it actually; yea when the Gospel is
verbally applied to the parents, their infants are not exempted, but received,
according to Christ's words unto Zacheus, To day is salvation come to this
house, for as much as he also is the son of Abraham Luke 19.9.
. Christ has promised life to those that choose life, and also to their
infants; and therefore the same infants have faith imputatively, for he that
believes not, shall be damned. So that it appears, that salvation comes not
but by faith in Christ.

For as much then as the Scripture is so clear, that these holy infants are
saved, and seeing that salvation comes not without repentance and faith: It is
too much presumption to say, that infants are destitute of faith and
repentance; though all the men in the world would grant it.

But I do wonder what is the maine ground that does drive you, or, the greatest
reason (or conceit) that does draw you so to determine concerning infants Page
25.
, as if they were destitute of the heavenly gifts and graces of Gods Spirit; Is
it because they cannot verbally express (or actually perform) such things, as
those of riper years can do? If this be your greatest reason, it will not bear
down the least weight in the balance of Gods sanctuary; as may easily appear.

But though baptism in the Church of England be administered upon the wrong
subjects (namely the seed of Idolaters) and though eternal life be sought and
promised by them another way then God has appointed; yet to affirm, that
because some infants are not meet subjects of baptism, that therefore no
infants are, is a saying founded upon the sands, and fetched out of the fond
fictions of men's brains, and not from the word of God.

Your best way had been this, to have searched into the records of holy
Scripture, and observed the nature of the ordinance of circumcision, and
compared the same sign Genesis 17.13.
and seal Romans 4.11.
of righteousness with baptism Col. 2.11, 12.
, and so to have found out the equivolence which the one has with the other,
and then you should have examined whether the circumcision of Apostate Infants
were according to the will of God, and if it were not, whether they were
commanded (by the Lord) at their returning, to be circumcised again; If it had
been so, then you might have had ground to have beaten down the baptism, which
is received in the Church of England: but this is not the way you take; but
instead of this you shoot at rovers; not keeping to the matter in hand. And
till it can be proved that the circumcision of infants was none of the Lords
circumcision, I must still say, that the baptism of Infants is the Lords
baptism; wherefore stand to your cause, and bring forth your strong reasons.
For as yet your reasons are very weak, though you conceive you have brought
them to such an issue, that, you say Pa. 26.
, you shall now proceed no further therein: yet (I say) except you can make
void the covenant of Abraham so much, that it does not appertain to the infants
of believing parents, as well as to the parents themselves, and that the
application of the Gospel appertains not to them also, and that the general
commission of Christ includes not infants, [which you can never do while the
world stands, seeing the Scripture (in this point) is so clear against you] I
must still say, that the baptism of such infants is lawful, and warrantable;
yea for as much as it was acted by God 1. Cor. 10 2
, and instituted by Christ Mat. 28.19 M rk. 16.16.
, it ought to be practiced by his Saints, perpetually to the end of the world
Mat. 28.20.
; and the further you go on in gainsaying this truth the greater is your sin.

For, all unbaptised persons to whom the application of the Gospel does
appertain, are expressly commanded (by Christ) to be baptized.

But the application of the Gospel appertains to the infants of believing
parents.

Therefore all such infants (if they be not already baptized) are expressly
commanded (by Christ) to be baptized.

The first part of this argument is proved from Mar. 16.16.

The second, namely, that the application of the Gospel appertains to these
infants is proved.

1. By the covenant of Abraham, which was a covenant of life, Genesis 17.7.
generally made with Gods visible Church both young and old.

Secondly, by the testimony of Christ, that they are part of the furniture of
his Fathers kingdom Mar. 10.13.14.
, and these vessels though they be but of [small] quantity Isa. 22.24.
, yet they are spiritually holy, and therefore have a right to baptism, the
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, (as really) as the infants of
the believing Hebrews had right to circumcision the sign and seal of the same
righteousness of faith.

Therefore this administering or baptism upon such holy infants, does not
prevent the administering of baptism upon disciples (or believers) as you
falsely speak Pa. 27.
.

For seeing the infants of believers are not placed among dogs, and
whoremongers without, they are within the new Jerusalem, and have right to the
holy City, and the privileges thereof Rev. 22.14.15.
. For Jesus Christ (who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, Hebr. 13
8.) never gave them such a dismissi n, that they should not be members of his
visible Church, as heretofore they have been, ( Exodus 12.48.) but rather he
has confirmed them therein, ( Jer. 30.20.) for all the promises of God are
yea, and Amen, in Christ. 2 Cor. 1 20.

Therefore, I desire rather to magnify the mighty power of God by which the
infants of Israel were baptized 1 Cor. 10 1 2.
in the days of Moses, (before the Law was given on mount Sinai Joh. 7.22.
) then deny them baptism now in the days of the M ssias, or call the baptism
of such infan^s a device of man's brain, and no baptism of Christ, as you have
here presumptuously (or (at least) ignorantly) done Pa 28.
, you plead Pa. 28 li. 15 16.
against the baptising of infants destitute of faith.

But those infants are the infants of idolatrous parents, whom we are not to
name among the living in Je^usalem ^sa. 4^
till either one or both of their parents repent, or till they renounce their
parents sin, according to that in Ez k 18 14.17. And the baptising of those
infants I do not allow of, but would have them to be put by; but some of them
being baptized (though not aright) shall we say that that baptism is no
baptism, or that it is another baptism then the baptism of believers; no
surely, there is no more external baptismes of water, then there were
external circumcisions. Now if you can prove, that there were (appointed by
God) diverse external circumcisions, both in respect of the nature, end, and
use thereof, (one circumcision for infants, another for elder persons) and that
the circumcision of infants prevented the circumcision of Believers; then you
may with more color of truth say, that the baptism of infants preventeth the
baptism of believers, and make the baptism of infants a different thing from
it, which thing you can never do.

But peradventure you will say, (by infants here) you mean the infants of
wicked and idolatrous parents, and not the infants of the faithful.

To which I answer, that then you should have so expressed; But I would have
you to mind, that though the act of baptising idolaters be different from the
[baptising] of true Christians (in respect of the manner, effect, and
application thereof) yet the [baptisme] is one and the same, even as the
circumcising of the apostate Jews, and of those that were not Apostates, did
not argue but that the circumcision was one and the same, but differed in the
manner of administration, and in the application thereof.

Pa. 28. lin. 19. to lin. 28.
Whereas you say, that the baptism of infants as it is by authority ordained
in this kingdom, does thus far prevent the baptising of believers, that
hereby no native can be baptized upon faith, seeing all are to be baptized in
their infancy, when they are destitute of faith: wherefore if all other
Kingdoms and Nations did the same, then the commandment of Christ, for the
baptism of disciples (or believers) would be quite prevented, and destroyed
out of the whole world, as well as it is out of this Kingdom.

I answer, that though the natives infants in the Church of England be not
baptized upon their faith; because Idolaters have no faith Rev. 22.15.
; yet if any do return out of that Apostasy, they are not to be baptized
again, no more then the penitent apostate Israelites were circumcised again;
because ( God having purged the evil of the manner of administering his
ordinance) the ordinance is really accounted with God, (and ought so to be
esteemed of his Saints) as done upon a right subject. Christian Reader, see Mr.
Henry Barrow [a Martyr in Queen Elizabeth's time] his discovery, (pa. 114. and
so forth to the end of the discourse concerning this matter) where he handles
this particular point at large.
.

And though we had no right to baptism (as we stood) in that estate, but
wickedly usurped the same, yet being come out of Babel, that which is Gods, we
have a right unto; although we received the same before we separated from
Babel; Even so the Apostates of Israel (in their apostasy) had no right to the
circumcision Psalm. 50.16. Hos. ^.2, 3, 4. Jer. 9.25, 26.
they received in that apostasy, but when any of them returned to Judah 1.
Chron 30.13.
, they were not commanded to be circumcised again, because they then had a
right to that circumcision which they had formerly received in that idolatrous
way in which they had walked.

Even as a man which steals goods from the owner thereof, has no right unto
them; but if he bring the same back to the owner, and the owner give him that
which he formerly stole The stealing of a thing does not alter the property
thereof, or make the thing to be nothing.
, then he has a right unto them.

So when we were in the idolatrous assemblies, we were run-awayes, and
apostates from God, and thieves to God, like Jeroboam and his crew, but when we
returned, we came and tendered to God that which we had stolen from him; even
as the penitent Israelites did their circumcision; and as God did not command
them to be circumcised again; no more has he commanded us to be baptized
again; but is graciously pleased to bestow upon us those false gotten goods,
which we unjustly did reset, and receive, from the hand of our old mother,
Prove. 9.17. Rev. 9 21.
that whore of Babylon, which stole them from God: who ordinarily does mix her
own traditions with Gods, to make her own ware to pass in sale.

Whereas you say, that the baptism of disciples (or believers) is out of this
kingdom of England: Indeed I hope it is not so. For there are a number of
baptized believers who do baptize their infants, and so long as they so do, the
ordinance of baptising disciples (or believers) will not out of the land where
they are now, or wheresoever (by Gods providence) they shall be cast.

And you should mind that the baptism in the Church of England appertains to
believers, therefore, it is theirs properly; and though idolaters (by Gods
permission) sacraligiously abuse it, yet they do not destroy it, but rather
destroy themselves with it, as the Philistines 1. Sam. 5.9, 10.
in retaining the Arc. But I could wish that you would put a distinction
between [baptisme] and baptising, the manner of baptising being theirs, but the
baptism properly Gods; appertaining to his Church, as well as the outward
court (in the Law) appertained to the Temple 2. Chron. 4.9
.

Further (you say) that if any shall here object and say, the discovering of
the evil of this form of baptising is needless, seeing diverse persons see it
already to be so frivolous and naught, that they much dislike it, and will not
have their children baptized with godfathers, but upon other grounds, namely,
from the covenant made with believers, and their children, upon which ground
also, they of the separation use to baptize their children, wherefore their
arguments should have been likewise answered.

To this you answer:

1. Although some few see this form of baptising to be sinful and naught, yet
what is this to the rest of the whole Nation, who yet make conscience of that
Idol to this day?

2. Although they of the separation, and some others, do mend the matter (as
they think) in the baptising of their children otherwise, and upon other
grounds, yet what is all this to their own baptism, being naught by their own
confession; and a nullitie also, even from their own grounds: for they grant,
that no children save only believers children, are in the covenant, or have
right to baptism; then most of themselves had no right to baptism, their
parents (by their own acknowledgement) being ungodly: whence it will follow,
that they themselves being baptized in their infancy, had not the baptism of
Christ, and so by consequence are yet unbaptised persons: Thus is their own
baptism clearly made void from their own grounds, and how then can their
children be now baptized in the right of such parents, who are yet unbaptised
themselves?

To all which I reply: That though I hold the discovering of the evil form of
baptising to be needful, yet I dislike your evil proceedings in the discovery
thereof.

But whereas you speak of the form of baptising, and the form of baptism
both in the objection Pa 28. l. 33.34.
and the answer which you make P 29 l. 6
, I suppose, you intend the set form for baptising, mentioned in the Common
Prayer Book, and this (I conceive) is the Idol, which you say li. 8 9.
, many make conscience of to this day; and if this be your meaning, I will not
oppose you, because I am of that mind, and so are the best informed Christians
that the Common Prayer Book is vain and Popish, and meeter for [Babels brats]
then for [Simons babes], and better beseeming time-serving [Masse-mongers] to
be occupied therein, then the faithful, laborious, and painful Ministers of
the Gospel.

Whereas you say, the separation and some others do mend the matter (as they
think) in the baptising of their children otherwise, and upon other grounds.

I answer. If by the separation you mean those that are come out of Babel, (I
say) I know none (either young or old) that have right to baptism in Babel, or
if they walk in any of the sins of Babel, and will not be reclaimed; they
have no right to any of Gods ordinances, because they are not visible Saints.
And therefore they cannot have such grounds for baptising their infants, as the
Saints have for baptising theirs: for those that are out of covenant
themselves, as they cannot lawfully apply the covenant to their seed, (nor to
themselves) no more can they apply the seal of the Covenant; neither is it
lawful for them to baptize any at all, whether believers or unbeleevers, for
it is sacrilege for any that are not visible Saints to administer or partake
of any of Gods ordinances.

And whereas you ask the separation (and these some others) what all this is to
their own baptism, which (say you) is naught by their own confession.

Answ. Here I suppose you do not take along with you the distinctions of the
separation; for we say that when we were in Babylon, the baptism we received
was not properly ours, but Gods baptism, appertaining only to visible Saints.
And though we hold the manner of [baptising] to be naught, yet the [baptisme]
in it self we affirm, and have proved (and will still further prove upon
occasion) that it is good; but the baptism of the holy Infants of believers
administered upon them out of Babel, we hold to be good in every respect, and
that it has no need of any purgation. And I suppose you allege nothing
against the baptism we administer now, but only the minority of the subject
(which you account in no better an estate then a heathen.) And because we have
not such a multiplication of the element as may dip a man in, all over.

As for those some others besides Separates, which, you also say, do mend the
matter, I know not who they be, if they are not separated from the unclean
thing, they are unclean; and how do they mend the matter, that are not amended
themselves?

We do not say, that no children, save only believers children, are in the
covenant, or have right to Baptism; you here mistake us (or else mistake your
self) for we affirm that some unbeleevers children are in the covenant, though
their parents are out of the covenant; and we also hold, that some believers
children are out of the covenant, though their parents are in the covenant; but
such of their children as are infants, and (also such of years) which depart
not from the steps of their righteous parents) we judge to be in the covenant;
Now, I say, if by children you mean infants, then we still affirm, that all the
children of unbeleevers [in their infancie] are out of the covenant, (so far as
men can judge) and have no right to baptism, [their parents being ungodly.]

For how can the infants be said to be godly, in visibilitie, [either by
action, or imputation] so long as their parents are visible idolaters, either
personally, or statively: Surely, where the guilt of original sin is not to
be judged to be imputatively done away by Christ, the visible seal of the
forgiveness of that sin ought not to be applied, but their guilt of
original sin is not [in Gods revealed will] declared (and therefore is not
of us to be judged) to be imputatively done away by Christ.

Therefore baptism (which is the visible seal of the forgiveness of that
sin,) ought not to be applied unto such persons.

And though we affirm, that we had no right to baptism in the state of
Apostasy, (our parents being then Antichristians) yet it will not follow (as
you would infer) that we had not the baptism of Christ: neither by our own
grounds, nor from any ground you have, or (I suppose) can allege against the
same; And therefore there is no place for you to build any just consequence
that we are unbaptised persons; yea though you upon this unnecessarie
consequence build an affirmation, that our own baptism is clearly made void
even from our own grounds; and upon this conceit of yours, you ask how then can
their children be now baptized in the right of such parents, who are yet
unbaptised themselves? and so you take for granted, that which you cannot
prove. For I think in this particular concerning the baptism of such infants,
you may seek your opposite among the Babylonians, for I conceive no Separate
will in this oppose you.

But (you say) the grounds which Seperates and others do urge for the baptising
of Infants, shall be further examined and answered (if God will) in another
Treatise.

To which I answer, that there shall be a Reply made thereunto with all speed
(God willing) in another Treatise.

Next you add, that if any shall think it strange and unlikely, that all the
godliest Divines, and best Churches, should be thus deceived in this point of
Baptism for so many years together.

Let them consider (say you) that all Christendom (except here and there one,
or some few, or no considerable number) was swallowed up in gross Popery for
many hundred years before Luthers time, which was not until about 100 years
agone.

To which I answer, that all this is nothing at all to the point, for the
apostasy of Israel was for many hundred years; and yet the Saints, I suppose,
did not doubt but the Apostates were deceived in the point of circumcision;
howbeit not simply in circumcising, or in circumcising of Infants, (for that
was the ordinance of God) but in circumcising in apostasy, and imposing the
sign upon Apostates, and their apostate seed, Therefore (the Prophet Isaiah
says unto God) thou have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob: because they
are replenished from the East, and are southsayers like the Philistines, and
please themselves in the children of strangers. Isa. 2. So these Apostates are
not deceived (simply) in the act of baptising, or in administering it upon
infants (only as they are infants) but because they baptize in that Idolatrous
and Apostate state, and administer the sign upon the infants of ungodly
parents.

In comparing the Baptism of Infants with the abominable hierarchy, you
foulely miss, (especially if you mean the infants of godly parents;) you
might as well have said, that the circumcision of Infants was as bad as
Jeroboams hierarchy which he made of the lowest of the people 1. King. 13.33, 34
. But considering that the circumcision of holy Infants was the same sign Genesis
17.11.
and seal Romans 4.11.
of the righteousness of faith which Abraham had; and considering that
baptism is come in the stead of it, and that it is no less general then
circumcision, nor inferior thereunto Col. 2.11, 12.
, you may perceive that the baptism of Infants is an ordinance from heaven.

But the hierarchy are the army of Locusts, which came from hell, and were
hatched in the [smoke] of the bottomless pit Rev. 9.3.
, which smoke is somewhat like to Bishop Hals foggie Divinity, which you have
set down Pa. 30. at li. 8.
for memorandum. In whose judgment (you say) the baptism of Infants has
less warrant, then the hierarchy; but this his erroneous judgment, will stand
you in no stead, neither will his challenge Lin. 27. 28, 29, 30.
nor the judgment of any other (though never so much noted) avail you any
thing at all, in this your opposition of the baptism of the infants of
believers. Neither can Bishop Hall on the one side, nor you on the other side,
(with all the help you can get) overthrow the baptism of Infants; for all your
words without the authority of Scripture is but wind; for it is presumption
(or ignorance at the best) in Bishop Hall and you: so to speak concerning
Infants baptism, as if the Scripture owned it not.

But all which you have here said does not overthrow our baptism which we
received in the Church of England; for if Apostates should wear out Gods
ordinance of Baptism, any more then the Apostates of Israel did wear out the
ordinance of circumcision in the time of Isreal's Apostasy (before Christ was
manifested in the flesh) it would argue a great weakness, and imperfection in
Christ, as if he were not so faithful in his house as Moses, or as if Baptism
were of smaller value, and sooner worn out then circumcision.

But you (in the entrance of your Treatise) have granted it to be a great
ordinance of the New Testament. To which I further add for conclusion, that as
circumcision was not worn out, but was so permanent that it remained till
Christ's first coming, and till he took away the beggarly rudiments of the old
Covenant: so baptism has not nor shall not be worn out or taken away, but
remain as permanent, till Christ come to give us the substance of all his
ordinances; the accomplishment of all his promises, the enjoyment of that
immortal and unchangeable inheritance which shall never be worn out, or taken
away, but remain from everlasting to everlasting.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 12. lin. 7. for Christ's, read, Christ. li. 15. leave out these words,
that the Apostles so did baptize. p. 13. l 8. in the Marg. for Psalm. 16.17, r.
Psalm. 77.16.17.


