To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
SIRS,
YOu know how that after Gideon had slain the Kings of Midian, Then the men of
Israel said unto him, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's
son also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian: And Gideon said
unto them, I will not rule over you, Judge. 8.22.
neither shall my son rule over you: Jehovah shall rule over you. And the
Country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon. verse. 28. verse.
33, 34, 35.
But afterward when they forgot Jehovah their God, Chap. 9.6.
they made Abimelech (the concubines son in Shechem) King, verse. 57. verse. 14,
15, 16, 21. verse. 7.3.
upon whom God brought the Curse of (Jotham) Gideons youngest son, who called
Abimelech the Bramble, and his ambition after the Kingship the Brambles choice,
and others leavings.

Therefore O ye chosen and betrusted Princes of England, what is in your
minds, that ye now are about to set up a King over us again, since we have
been and still are set free by your predecessors, the former Parliament, who
after long and large experience abolished the Kingship, which you are about to
establish? And Oliver Lord Protector, then Lieut. General, consented heartily
thereunto, as in (charity) we verily believed.

And it is remarkable, that in the time of the late wars the LORD of Hosts
never wrought more powerfully for England then when the Parliaments Commissions
were most effectual against the King, and his Malignant party: Then were the
enemies of God broken in pieces, dissipated and dissimated, and their King cut
off, as the foam upon the water: And the Kingly Office being utterly abolished
with the house of Lords as useless and burdensome, God went on with his
mercies, crowning this Commonwealth with many Victories.

Since which time (before the late disaster at Hispaniola) Peoples have been
subdued by us, and nations under our feet. As if the most high God had taken
upon him to be King of the good people of England as formerly of Israel (in the
days of the Judges till Samuel the Prophet) who under specious pretenses said,
1 Samuel 8.
Make us a King, 1 Samuel 8.5. there shall be a King over us, verse. 19, 20.
that we also may be like all the Nations, and that our King may judge us, and
go out before us, and fight our battles. For the Philistines and the Ammonites
were enemies to them, as the Spaniards and the French to us; and what reason
have we to ask a King more then they? But the thing displeased the LORD and
Samuel; and it was accounted no better then a rejecting of God: and Samuel
declared the sore oppression which the King would exercise over them by his own
will, and that the Lord would not hear them when they cried unto him by reason
thereof. verse. 11, 18,


Nevertheless they waved the religious counsel of the Prophet Samuel, verse. 19.
and proceeded in their politic resolutions, and the Lord gave them a King in
his anger, Hos. 13.11.
and by thunder and hail from heaven convinced them of this their wickedness:
Judge. 12. verse. 19.
and they confessed, saying, Chap. 9.13.
We have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a King, although they had
not ought to say against their King, for King Saul was a member of the Church,
and a man well fitted and qualified both in body and mind, for the Kingly
Office, and sought not the place, but in humility said, Am not I a Benjamite,
verse. 21.
of the smallest of the tribes of Israel, and my family the least of all? and
he was so wise, and prudent, and so far from vainglory, that he told not his
uncle of the matter of the Kingdom, Chap. 10.16.
whereof Samuel spoke unto him; and in modesty, being little in his own eyes,
not counting himself worthy or fit for, the Kingdom, which fell unto him by the
Lords Lot, he hid himself among the stuff, verse. 22, 23.34.
till by the direction of God, the people fetched him thence, and proclaimed
him King. Since which time, when the Israelites revolted more and more from
God, he has complained against them, saying, They have set up Kings, Hos. 8.4.
but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not.

The premises considered (O ye Senators of England) take heed of setting up the
Office of a King again, lest you entangle this Commonwealth again, with the
grievous and intolerable yoke of Regal and Tyrannical bondage. For God has
said what the King will do, he will oppress the people, though chosen by the
most High. 1 Samuel 8.11.18.


But as touching Kings set up by men, O how disgracesully does the Scripture
speak of them! 1 Chro. 16.19, 20, 21, 22.
God reproved Kings for the sakes of a few.

Many such kings have come justly to untimely ends.

What became of the Kings of Sodom, Gomorrha, Adma, Genesis 19.
and Zeboim? were they not all burned?

Pharaoh King of Egypt, drowned. Exodus 15.


One and thirty Kings all destroyed by Joshua, many of which were hanged. Josh.
12.


Eglon King of Moab, killed by Ehud. Judge. 3.


Zoeb and Oreb, Zebah and Zalmunnab perished, and were made as the dung of the
floor. Judge. 8.


Abimelech (aforesaid) who by cunning contrivances, and threatenings, sought to
be King, came to an untimely end, by means of a woman.

Ambitious Absalom (that said, Oh that I were King, Chap. 9.53. 2 Samuel 15.
Chap. 18.
that I might do Justice) and other aspiring Princes, perished utterly.

And what became of most of the Kings of Israel from Jer^boam the first, to
Hoshea their last King? The Lord said concerning them, All their Kings are
fallen; yea, God appointed many of them to the slaughter. Hos. 7.7.


The holy Scripture does speak very much in the disparagement of such Kings,
threatens them with the sword, pestilence, famine, captivity. etc.

And in battle, Kings of the Armies (its said) did slay apace: The Almighty
scattered Kings, Psa. 68.12, 14. and 110.5. and 135.10. and 136.17, 18.
and will strike through Kings in the day of his wrath.

He sl^w mighty great and famous Kings, and is said to be Terrible to the Kings
of the earth; especially in the latter days, when the times draw nigh that the
Kingdoms of this world shall become, the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ
and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15.
with the Saints on earth, Rev. 5.10. the rightful possessors thereof; Dan.
7.21.
To whom he has given power on earth to bind Kings with Chains, Psalm. 149.8,
9.
and their Nobles in fetters of iron, and to execute upon them the Judgment
written. Yea, and John says (in the Revelations,) I saw an Angel standing in
the Sun, and cried to all the fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Rev.
19.17.21.
Come and gather your selves together to the supper of the great God, that ye
may eat the flesh of Kings, and their Armies: and Tophet is ordained of old,
for Kings in a special manner. Isa. 30.33.


These things being considered, surely it will not be for the honor of this
Free State and Commonwealth to set up a King over us like the rest of the
nations.

It God has set us free, why should we return into bondage, and take upon us
such an insufferable yoke that neither we nor our forefathers were ever able to
bear?

Had not Israel as great and as many pretenses for to set up a King in the
days of Samuel, as we have now? But it was sin in them to ask a King, and is
it not a sin for any to offer such a thing to us?

What warrant is there for it in the word of the Lord you cannot make it an
action of Faith: and whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, and the wages of sin is
death.

Is there any necessity for us to have a King?

What benefit or happiness may the Commonwealth expect thereby?

Shall we ease our Taxes therewith?

And what safety or security can we expect by the King whom you shall choose,
whose life is but a vapor? and are you sure his Children will be right and
just? Who knows whether he that shall come and reign after him, Eccles. 2.19.
and 10.16.
shall be a wise man, or a fool? Then woe to this land, when thy King is a Child.

Consider the great danger mischief, and inconvenience which may happen upon
this evil choice of a King: For it is not to be doubted but that the hearts of
all the well-affected, and well-informed Ministers and People will be against
it, as they have been at the beginning; And it may well be feared that such a
Regal choice will involve the Commonwealth in a Chaos of confusion, and the
same may prove of dangerous consequence, and beget a Triangle division, a
second most cruel bloody and unnatural war, and lay the Land open to a foreign
enemy, and so the last error will be worse then the first.

Pity it is that all the blood which has been spilt and treasure spent to
purchase our freedom, should be made ineffectual, to the gratifying of our
enemies, and grieving our friends, trifling out the precious time, to twist
briars and brambles, in stead of taking off the yoke of oppression and letting
the oppressed go free, Isa. 58.

Much more might be said against the aforesaid Regal choice; but you know the
Scripture, Law, Reason, good men's writings, Parliamentary Sermons, the nations
Engagement and Articles of Government, to be all against it; and so is an
honest and unperjured English heart.

Samuel Chidley.


