The SEPARATISTS ANSWER To the ANABAPTISTS ARGUMENTS Concerning BAPTISM.

OR, The Answer of SAMUEL CHIDLEY to JOHN SPILSBURY, concerning the Point in
difference.

Psalm. 116.16. O JEHOVAH, surely I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the
son of thine handmaid.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1651.

The EPISTLE To the READER.
Reader,
THis Answer to M. Spilsbury has been of about ten years standing; but he
having made no Reply, I publish it. And although M Spilsbury is not of my
judgment in all the Fundamental points of Religion, and I oppose him in those
things wherein I judge he swerveth from the rule of righteousness, and
particularly in this; yet doubt not but that we are both of one mind for the
good of the Commonwealth, and shall be ready still to join heart and hand
against the Common Adversary. And when the time comes that God causes the
Nations to beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning
hooks, that nation shall not lift sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more; God will put an end to the Controversies amongst men in
matters of Religion, and God shall be one, and his Name one. In the mean time,
what light the Lord has made known unto me, I hold it my duty to discover, as
I find a seasonable opportunity.

S. C.

The SEPARATISTS ANSWER To the ANABAPTISTS ARGUMENTS.
The Anabaptists Arguments.
THe Church State being false and Antichristian, it thus follows: To believe a
true external Church-ordinance in the Administration, where there is neither
true Church, Member Power, Minister, nor Subject; this we cannot do, without
some Rule in the Word of God for to build our faith upon.

The Separatists Answer.
LEt Gods Word be man's Rule for every action: for it measures all things, and
yet is not measured; it binds all things, yet is not bound.

In Isreal's deep Apostacy, though there was neither true Church, member,
power, Minister, nor subject amongst them when Circumcision was by them
adm^nistred; yet those that received Circumcision in that Apostacy, and
returned and kept the Passover in Judah, were not commanded to be circumcise
again: Therefore, the Circumcision so received Apostacy, did stand in force as
an Ordinanc^. God. And though the evil of the manner of it was not commended
but condemned, and to be repented of; yet the thing it self was not commanded
to be repeated again. So it appears, that the holy Ordinance of Circumcision
was not worn out by those Apostates, but was effectual either to the salvation
or damnation of every one that received it.

And surely Gods Ordinances are as durable now under the Gospel, as they were
before and under the Law: for Christ was not inferior to any. He that was
greater then Moses, or any one of the Patriarchs or Prophets, said he was not
worthy to stoop down to unloose the latchet of Christ's shoes, Mark 1.7.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And we dare not believe that Antichrist could either steal or usurp an
Ordinance of God: we dare not impute such folly to Christ, as to judge him so
unfaithful as to suffer such an Ordinance of Baptism to be stolen out of Gods
Treasury.

The Separatists Answer.
And we may and dare believe that the Philistims stole away Gods Ark 1 Samuel
5.1, 2.
; and that the holy Vessels (belonging to Gods house) were taken away with Gods
people into Babylon Jer. 42
, though they (that laid such sacrilegious hands upon them) had no right unto
them; yet did use them or rather abuse them, to their own destruction.

And if Baptism cannot be usurped, or stolen out of Gods treasury, th^n Simon
Magus, after he was baptized, Act. 8.13. left it behind him when he departed
out of the treasure-city.

But I suppose that Apostates who apostate now do not leave their Baptism
behind them, neither have they right unto it: yet it shall be so effectual,
that it shall rise up in judgment against them.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
But o^ (...) ^ary, (...) Antichrist has counterfeited a S^ate or Church of
Christ, and the Power and Laws of Christ; a Gospel and Ministry: even so has
he counterfeited the Baptism of Christ, to deceive the people.

Or else why should he have all the rest from himself, and this one Ordinance
from the Lord, who has disclaimed all Communion with him.

The Separatists Answer.
And although Jeroboam and his people counterfeited a State or Church of God,
and though his Priests counterfeited, alleging that their Power and Law was
the Power and Law of God: and though his Prophets counterfeited also, affirming
that their Gospel and Ministry was the Gospel and Ministry of God: Yet still
Circumcision was Gods Ordinance, wherewith they deceived the people, even as
the whorish woman does her friends and lovers with the sweet stolen waters,
and pleasant hidden bread which he has.

But as the Apostate; of Israel (whose communion God disclaimed) did mix their
own Traditions with Gods Precepts and their Ordinances with Gods Ordinances;
and so set up their pillars by Gods pillars, and their posts by Gods posts: so
have these locusts done which are now; whose communion God does also disclaim:
which though they have and hold a general profession of Christ, and draw near
unto God with their mouths, yet they are counterfeits, (like the apostate
Israelites) their hearts are far from him.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And that he is a forerunner of Christ, as Joh. 10.8. it is evident thus, In
his taking such subjects to administer his Ordinance upon, that are not capable
of it, nor able to resist him; being young infants, which there is neither
precept nor example for.

The Separatists Answer.
And though Jeroboam and his Crew were in a manner Antichristians, and
forsakers of God; yet it was not because they circumcised young infants but
because they were replenished from the east, and were soothsayers, like the
Philistims, and pleased themselves in the children of strangers, Isa. 2.6. So
these Antichristians are not Antichristians for baptizing Infants, but because
they are apostatized and degenerated from the Faith and Order of Christ, and
baptize such Infants that are the children of whoremongers and adulterers,
thieves and murderers, and all sorts of wicked persons.

And the Prophet Isaiah did not desire the Lord not to forgive the apostate
Israelites because they circumcised young children; for that was the Ordinance
of God, Genesis 17.10. which if they had done in the right way and manner, it
would have been pleasing to God, verse. 11. but the Prophet says, Because their
land is full of idols, and they worship the work of their own hands, that which
their own fingers made; and the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbles himself: therefore forgive them not, Isa. 2.8, 9. The like may be said
concerning these Antichristians. And though there be neither precept nor
example in the Scripture, that these Antichristians should baptize, no more
then the Idolaters in Jeroboams time had to circumcise; yet the Church of God
has as much warrant to administer the Sign and Seal of the righteousness of
faith upon the infants of believers, even as well as the Church had to
administer the Seal upon their infants in former time. But as they had no
ground to circumcise all Nations or seeds, or any apostate, though the
offspring of Abraham, but those that were the seed in Covenant with God Genesis
17.14. so we have no warrant to baptize all nations but believers and their
holy seed, Mat. 28.18. Mar. 16.16. That the infants of believing parents are
so, is plain, because they are not out of the New Jerusalem; they are not
ranked with dogs, etc. as in Rev. 22.11, 15. but are to be esteemed holy; and
written among the living in Jerusalem, verse. 14. Isa. 65.23. and 4.3. Such holy
infants, that most heavenly Prophet, which was like unto Moses, defended by his
gracious hand, Exodus 14. and by his power admidistred Baptism upon them and
their parents, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. before the Law was given in Mount Sinai: and
such are sanctified in their life, blessed in their death, and shall be also
glorified in their resurrection: for Christ is the same to day as he was
yesterday, and so he will be for ever. Hebr. 13.8.
He has died for them, and has given them eternal life, and has declared
that they are part of the furniture of his Fathers Kingdom Luke 18.16.
: he has entered into Covenant with them Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.
, and will faithfully perform the same Rev. 21.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And whereas he bears the people in hand that the promise is made to believers
and their seed, and taking his example from Circumcision; both which, rightly
considered, will strike him to the heart.

First, if he mean the promise in the second of the Acts, verse. 39. as commonly
he does; it is not said, The promise is made to believers and their seed; but,
The promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call: implying, that the promise belongs to
none, but only such as the Lord shall call: and for such children, see Acts
13.32, 33. Acts 3.25.

The Separatists Answer.
And it is evident that the promise is made to believers and their seed, as it
has been in the days of old Acts 2.39.
: and therefore seeing that Circumcision and Baptism are all one in effect Col.
2.11, 12, 13.
though they differ in the elements; as the Infants of believing parents were
to receive Circumcision in the days of Abraham, so the Infants of believing
parents are to receive Baptism in the days of Christ: But as God did not
require the Infants of both unbelieving parents to be circumcised, no more has
he required such to be baptized now. And if the right consideration of this
will strike Antichrist to the heart, even so let it be: I wish it may hit home.

And the same promise which is declared to be made to the children of the
prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, Act. 13.32, 33.
and 3.25. is declared in Act. 2.39. to appertain unto their childrens children,
according to the words in Isa. 69.21 As for me, this is my covenant with them,
says the Lord: My Spirit that is upon thee and my words which I have put in
thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
[seed,] nor out of the mouth of thy [seeds seed] says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. And this promise appertains unto none but those whom
the Lord our God does call. That the Lord our God does call the Infants of
believers with themselves, is apparent, Deuteronomy. 4.37. and 7.6. The work which he
calls them to, is to keep his covenant, Genesis 17.14.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
Again the promise is the Covenant or Promise of Grace concerning eternal life:
and to all such as God does enter into Covenant with he must upon his
faithfulness perform the same. Now if the promise belong to believers and their
seed, without exception; then all such seed must be saved, or else God does not
perform his promise: which to affirm, is Blasphemy.

The Separatists Answer.
Christ Jesus (that spotless Lamb) is said to take away the sins of the world
Joh. 1.29.
; I hope you will not say, any other world then the Church. Christ takes away
the sins of his Church; yea, of his visible Church Rev. 1.5.
. If any apostate from thence, Christ has not bound himself to save them,
unless they return Amos 4.11. Jer. 3.7, 8.
. Yet he performs his promise to his own Church Isa. 4.2, 6.
; and those that do abide therein, are to be esteemed holy Verse. 3
, and that their names are written in the book of life of the Lamb which was
slain from the foundation of the world. And Christ takes away the sins of the
world no otherwise, but as they are of the number of his Church: for time has
been, when all the world was the Church, and the Church was the world; and then
was the whole world redeemed, being the Church of Christ; so he reconciled the
same to himself. And as the Infants of believers have been visible believers,
as the body of Christ, so they are still: for Christ is no changeling; his
Covenant which he has made with them and their seed, is an everlasting
Covenant, that he will be a God unto them for ever: and blessed are the people
whose God is the Lord. But if any draw back, the Lord has testified that his
soul shall have no delight in them.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
But now the spiritual seed possesses the place. So Abraham and Sarah typed
out Christ and his Church, Gal. 4.22, 31. Isa. 51.1, 2.

The Separatists Answer.
And though the Infants of believers are generated and have bodies as well as
spirits, yet they are the Lords spiritual seed, regenerated by his Spirit, as
well as those which profess faith verbally, and yield actual obedience visibly.
Yea, the Infants of believing parents are in as good an estate as the greatest
and holiest visible professor of Christ, and are the true seed and children of
light, as well as Levi, which paid Tithes in the loins of Abraham, Heb. 7.9.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And all the seed of this husband and wife are to be baptized as soon as they
are born.

The Separatists Answer.
Now seeing that the Infants of believing parents were members of the Church of
God, and circumcised by Gods appointment, as well as their parents; the Infants
of believers have as great a privilege now: for Gods hand is not shortened.
But let none presume to say that all the seed of Christ are to be baptized so
soon as they are born, unless they could or would prove it: for persons may
have right to an Ordinance, and yet through some occasions and reasons may be
hindered from it. But there is a time for all things.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And such are only the seed of Abraham in the Gospel-sence; as Romans 9.7, 8.
Gal. 4.22, 23, 28. Gal. 3.16, 17, 18.

The Separatists Answer.
The Gospel shows that believers are the children of Abraham, even as Isaac
was: therefore they have the same privileges, which Isaac had; and their
Infants also (upon the same ground) have as large and precious promises and
privileges as Isaac's Infants had. But Isaac's Infants had right to the sign
and seal of the righteousness of faith: Therefore the Infants of all believing
parents have right to the sign and seal of the righteousness of faith also.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And we must have the Gospel to expound to us the Law: and such as the Gospel
sets forth to be the children of Abraham the seed of the promise to whom the
Covenant belongs; such only must have the Seals, and none else. We are not to
put the King of heaven's Great Seal to a blank.

The Separatists Answer.
And seeing that the testimony is bound up, and the Law sealed among the
disciples Isa. 8.16.
, we ought to walk by the light of the same Verse. 20.
; which declares, that believers and their offspring are in the Covenant of
Abraham; and to such only the Seals of the Covenant do appertain, and to none
else: for we are not to put the King of heaven's Great Seal unto a blank.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
As we are all born children of wrath we must have some better evidence then
the Popish conceit of the faith of others, to inright us into Gods holy things;
which nothing can inright us to, but only our own faith in Christ.

The Separatists Answer.
But as the Infants of believers are all the children of wrath by nature; so,
on the contrary, they are justified by Gods free grace in Jesus Christ: which
could not be, if they were as heathens still in the world, which Christ would
not pray for, much less die for. But Christ prayed for the Infants of
believers: Therefore he died for them and therefore they are not to be esteemed
blanks, but may lawfully be sealed: for where the invisible seal of the holy
Spirit of promise may lawfully be judged to be, there may the visible seal be
applied; for the subjects thereof have right thereunto, by virtue of Gods
everlasting Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, and all believers and
their seed for ever.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
And if we will follow Circumcision, we must have the like command as was for
that: and so we have for the baptizing of believers, but never for Infants.

The Separatists Answer.
And forasmuch as the Infants of believing parents cannot be taxed with actual
sin, or any sin at all, any more then their parents; let us not doubt then but
that they are spiritually holy as well as their parents, and have right unto
Baptism, as well as such holy and obedient Infants had right to Circumcision of
old, which was the same in effect with our Baptism, and grounded upon the same
everlasting Promise or Covenant. So likewise Christ gave a general Commission
to his Apostles, that they should make all nations disciples, and baptize them
into the Name, etc. and declared, that he that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned. See, here is the
Condition and the Promise: The Condition is Faith and Baptism; the Promise is
Salvation; And he that believes not shall be damned. So that it is plain, if
no Faith, no Salvation: and there is in a spiritual sense but two ways for all
mankind; which two ways are different, and in which are two sorts of persons
of sundry conditions. All those that are within Gods Covenant, Matthew. 13.14.
Rev. 20 14, 15. and 22.14, 15.
are within the new Jerusalem, and have right unto Christ that tree of life,
and all things therein with him. That the Infants of believing parents are in
this holy and happy estate, has been proved already by the Scripture; and
therefore it is evident and apparent, that they are the right subjects of
Baptism; included in the Commission for Baptism as really, as the Infants of
the faithful in the days of old were in the Commission for Circumcision.
Therefore it is better for us to magnify the mighty power of God by which the
Infants of believers were baptized in the days of Moses, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.
then to deny them Baptism now in the days of the Messiah who never came to
take away any privilege which of right belonged to such Infants, but to plant
as great in stead thereof.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
God made a Covenant with Abraham and his seed; of which Circumcision was a
seal. This Covenant was typical, and so was Abraham and his seed. The Covenant
had two parts, including two inheritances, unto which were two heirs, Isaac and
Ishmael, otherwise the spiritual and carnal seed of Abraham. The one part of
the Covenant typed out a temporal inheritance as the land of Canaan; and
Circumcision sealed this to all the carnal seed, as well as the spiritual. The
other part typed out a heavenly Canaan, or spiritual inheritance; and
Circumcision sealed this to all the spiritual seed.

The Separatists Answer.
Gen: 17.7.
God made a Covenant with Abraham and his seed, that he would be a God unto them
for ever. This Covenant was substantial, and never to have an end: Circumcision
was a Seal of this most glorious Covenant; and Baptism is the Seal of it now.
This Covenant was not two, but one, though Godliness had then the promise of
this life, and of that which is to come. Apostates had nothing to do with this
Covenant in their Apostacy though they were the seed of Abraham according to
the flesh; Circumcision sealed unto them neither spiritual blessings nor
earthly favors, but rather confusion, destruction, and damnation. Yet this
Ordinance of God, as it was in it self, was not without effect, no more then
the Baptism which Judas and Simon Magus received. Therefore, that Circumcision
sealed up the land of Canaan to the carnal seed is denied: for many of them had
no inheritance in the land of Canaan: Yea, the Proselytes themselves had no
inheritance, any more then the Patriarchs of old, who were pilgrims and
strangers in that land, looking for a city whose builder and maker is God.
Moreover, if God made a Covenant with Carnalists to give them the land of
Canaan, and gave them a Sign to confirm it to them in their carnality, then
God was bound by it to perform the same unto them, though they never embraced
his ways, but held on in their own wickedness. But God threatened to root them
out from the land of the living, and did as he said: Therefore Circumcision did
not seal unto them the earthly land of Canaan.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
The Covenant with respect to this part, was confirmed upon Isaac the true seed
of promise, proceeding from Abraham and Sarah, lawful husband and wife; from
which Ishmael, and with him all the carnal seed were excluded, Genesis 17. Gal. 4.
If any say, The Covenant being established with Isaac, it was also the same to
all his seed: Answ. Not so: the Covenant was established with Isaac only, as
he was he was the promised seed, and so typed out Christ, Gal. 3.

The Separatists Answer.
If because the Covenant was confirmed and established with Isaac, therefore
Ishmael was exempted before his apostacy; then, by the same ground, the rest
of Abraham's children were exempted from this Covenant. But it is to be
considered, that the Lord, establishing the Covenant with Isaac, did therein
declare, that all who cleaved unto Isaac in that true way of Worship, God would
be their God, and the God of their seed for ever. So that the Covenant was not
established with Isaac only and alone, but also with all those that were
members of the visible Church, which consisted both of young and old. God was a
God, and Christ was a Savior unto them all in an especial manner, so long as
they did not apostatize: But if any did go from Isaac's banner, they deprived
themselves of Isaac's blessing.

Even so it is said concerning Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, They shall hang upon
him all the glory of his fathers house, both the offspring and the issue, all
vessels of small quantity, Isa. 22.24. If any despise the Infants of believers,
because they are vessels of [small] quantity, and therefore think them to be no
vessels of God at all; let them consider, that they are either vessels of
honor, or dishonor. Vessels of dishonor they are not; for they belong to the
Kingdom of God: Suffer them (says Christ) to come unto me, Mark 10.14.
and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
In whom all the promises are yea and amen, and belong to none but only such
as first come to him by faith: and so never any by the Gospel were baptized,
but only believers.

The Separatists Answer.
And all the promises of God are yea and amen in Christ: so the application of
them appertains unto none but the members of Christ: and those that are not his
members, have neither right to him, nor any divine Ordinance of his; therefore
they must not partake of the same: for God never appointed holy things for
dogs, and such as are without the new Jerusalem; but those that keep Gods
Commandments, and enter in through the gates into the holy City, they are
blessed, and have right to all the holy things of God, Rev. 22.14.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
For all types in the Law ceased, when the substance came;

The Separatists Answer.
And those who had right to any typical things, had right to the substance of
that thing whenever the type of it was taken away: for Christ never came to
bereave any of the type, and leave them neither substance nor type. Therefore,
seeing the Infants of believers in former times had right to the types, the
Infants of believers now have right to whatsoever substance is left in the
stead thereof.

And those who have right to one substantial Ordinance, have right unto all:
Therefore the Infants of believers have as great privileges as their believing
parents: for Christ came not to give believing parents the substance, and to
bereave their offspring both of type and substance; but he came to fulfill the
promises made to the fathers, and to confirm them to their children, and their
childrens children, thorowout their generations.

The Anabaptists Arguments.
and so the carnal inheritance, the carnal seed, and the seal, as it respects
the same, all ceased together.

The Separatists Answer.
To presume to say, that Circumcision, the sign and seal of Gods everlasting
covenant, was a seal of a carnal inheritance, is a carnal affirmation: for as
the seal was Gods holy Ordinance, so it sealed up an heavenly inheritance,
spiritual blessings, and everlasting promises in Christ; and Baptism does the
same now. The uncircumcisedness and carnality of the heart, does not argue that
Gods Ordinance is not spiritual: for certainly Gods divine Ordinance is
effectual to the receivers, whether they apostate or not. If they apostate,
then it is effectual to their confusion and damnation; but to those that do not
apostate, it is effectual to their sanctification and salvation.

FINIS.

