THE Beacon Flameing WITH A NON OBSTANTE: OR A JUSTIFICATION OF The Firing of
the BEACON, By way of ANIMADVERSION Upon the BOOK entitled The BEACON'S
Quenched, Subscribed by Col. Pride, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller, and Published by the SUBSCRIBERS of the
Beacon set on fire, 1652.

To the READER.
IT is said Revel. 18. one of Babylons names is MYSTERY. It has been an
ordinary custom with Antichrist, when he has been unable to do his work in his
own appearance, to put on a Disguise. To that end the Romish Emissaries have
several times come into the Reformed Churches, under pretense of being
converted, some of them acting the parts of Arminians (as in the
Low-Countreyes) to the almost ruin both of that Church and State: Some of
other Sects, according to their instructions, and as their Design required,
that they might widen the Breaches, and foment the diseases of Protestant
Churches, like Sanballat and his Accomplices, they pretend to join in the
Building, that they may more effectually hinder it.

Nor has this Design been wanting among us, as is too too evident from their
footsteps. They have brought things to this pass, that Antichrist is exalted
by railing upon him; while the name is spoken against, but the thing hugged;
diverse Popish Opinions being already embraced by those that would be called
Protestants. As a skillful Gamester is willing to lose a Pawn at Chesse, that
he may take a Queen. And in this Design we believe many move out of the
simplicity of their hearts, Like a Bird that hastes to the snare, and knows
not that it is for his life: In which rank we place some of those with whom we
have to do. It is not long since, a Book was made A Beacon fired to give notice
to the State of diverse Popish and Blasphemous Books, printed and published in
England. It was hoped and expected, that the work would not displease any sober
Protestant, but rather that it would awaken all out of that strange Security
and Lethargy wherein they were. But behold there appeared some, yea of those
that have given up their Name to the Protestant Cause, that rendered us evil
for good, and writ a bitter Answer, and took upon them to plead the Cause of
the vilest of men, expressly desiring an Universal Toleration, and as it were
making a Proclamation, Ho all ye Jesuits, Blasphemers, come into England,
preach, write what you will, we fear you not! There are some men it seems that
hate Presbytery worse then Popery. Thus what was thought to be a slander is now
verified, That strong endeavors are used to tolerate Popery, Blasphemy, etc.
and what not? It was strange to us, that after the Parliament had appointed a
Fast, to direct them in the Suppression of Errors, any of their servants
should plead for a General Toleration. When we first saw the Book, we stood
amazed. But after serious consideration we beheld and adored the wisdom of God,
that has brought secret things to light, and has discovered the Design before
it was fully effected; we hope in mercy, that our Parliament may have the
honor to prevent it, and that all the people of the Land may be the more wary.
It was also another piece of Divine Providence, that so wretched a Cause should
be managed with as much weakness as could be desired. We thought it our Duty,
that such a Text should not want a Commentary, and such a Design of Darkness a
Light, that all men may see the Mystery and loath it, and Arm against it. This
is the great aim of our Answer (God who knows our Hearts can witness) and that
this may be effected, is the Prayer of

Luke Fawn. Samuel Gellibrand. Thomas Underhill. John Rothwell. Joshua Kirton.
Nathan. Webb.


THE BEACON FLAMING WITH A Non Obstante.
THe Humble Information of diverse Officers of the Army, and other well-affected
Persons to the Parliament and Commonwealth of England.



Nor can they be well-affected persons to Religion, for they plead for Baal; Or
to the State, for they idolize it by preferring the Parliament really or
feignedly above God, making it far more vile to publish Books against the
State and the Lord General, than against the jealous Lord of Hosts, provoked
thereby to destroy the Parliament and Army, as he did Herod when the people
magnified him as God.

Cncerning the Machiavilian Design of the Presbyterians now carrying on by the
Stationers of London.

Machiavil is on we hope before we have done.

He that shall read Mr Calamy and his party in their late writings, cannot but
read your glorious Titles, to be, Speckled vipers, murderers, etc. and page
14. more particularly M. Calamy in his late Epistle before M. Love's Seventeen
Sermons hangs out a flag of Defiance to the State, etc.

Calamy. That Epistle prefixed unto M. Love's Seventeen Sermons, where you say
such bad language is used, is not M. Calamies; it is not his style, has not his
name, himself has disclaimed both the Imprimatur and Epistle to that Book,
before the Committee of Plundered Ministers, and to a sub-Committee of that, the
Bookbinder that printed the said book did affirm, that M. Calamy had no hand in
either the Licensing or Epistle thereof: which that it may be fully believed by
all that shall read these lines, we will subjoyn his own confession, as he
gave it in writing unto the Sub-committee.

The Humble Acknowledgement of George Eversden Stationer,
Shows,
That whereas I placed the Imprimatur of M. Edmund Calamy before the Seventeen
Sermons of M. Love, which should have been only before M. Mantons Sermon
preached at M. Loves Funeral; and whereas I put the Letters E. C. at the later
end of the Epistle of the said Book, wherein I gave occasion to the Reader to
believe that it was written by M. Edmund Calamy, and find it accordingly
charged upon him in a late Book, called The Beacon quenched; I do hereby
acknowledge that herein I have greatly wronged M. Calamy, that he was not the
Author of the Epistle, that I added his Imprimatur to the whole, and subscribed
the Letters E. C. to the Epistle, not out of any malice to him, but merely and
only to make the Book sell the better, and therefore humbly desire this
Honorable Committee to pardon this great offense.

George Eversden.

By this it appears how far you have abused the Parliament (and wronged that
Reverend Minister of the Gospel) as to inform it that M. Calamy called the
Members speckled Vipers, Murderers, etc. For the sake of your souls learn to
be more honest. And you our dear Countriemen learn from hence not to believe
every bold and scandalous report that is cast upon the Ministry.

Speckled Vipers, Murderers, Traitors, Rebels, Blasphemers, etc.

manners, more love to the Commonwealth, and care of their own welfare. But
what is all this to the Subscribers, or to the Presbyterian Party? as for us we
know no Presbyterian that has used any such language to or of the Parliament.

Your Honors have lately been Alarmed with the noise of Popish Books,
Blasphemous Books, etc. and had we heard and seen no more but such fair Grass
without a Snake, and the Plots of our constant Powder-Miners, we had held our
peace.



We cannot but in faithfulness tell your Honors the Plot is to amuse you with
the noise of Popery and Blasphemy, and in the interim to spring their Mines to
blow up your Selves, the Council and Army, etc.

viz.

For they hope yet for the day to steal the Sword out of your hands, 2. For can
your Honors imagine that such Licensers who write such Language abovesaid
will ever set your Honors Imprimatur to any lines, but of the same unclean and
treasonable Spirit.

Calamy we believe he might challenge all his ill-willers to name one Popish,
Blasphemous or Treasonable Book that ever was Licensed by him, and others can
say of him that he has Licensed as many excellent Books for his time, as any
that ever in this Nation were employed in that trust.

And for the Stationers subscribing to the Beacon, do all those golden
Characters of Zeal and Holiness spell any more then plain Presbytery?

then our modesty would permit us. And blessed be God that Presbytery Zeal
and Holiness are acknowledged at least to accord even by our adversaries
themselves.

Is not the sale of Popish books the greatest part of the trade of some of
them? and p. 13. who did lately quarrel with one of their neighbor
Booksellers, because he would not exchange the Holy Court for some of their
Presbyterian Books.



Who are also strongly reported to have a factor in Rome it self.

Rome, that neither he nor his Predecessors before him in the place and Trade
that he is in, ever had any dealings in any part of Italy: Nor is there any
need of sending to Rome for Popish English Books of which the Beacon gives
warning, for they are too numerous here at home.

Has not the most treasonable book that ever was printed against the State,
been certainly bought at the shop of some of them, even since they fired the
Beacon to the Parliament?



Do not these Mercenaries know, that a fair current for sober disputes and
writings in matters of God controversall, ingageth more Authors to write, then
a stop and stifling to the Spirit of God and men?

Idolaters and Blasphemers (whose Arguments are attended, where they are
predominant, with Halter and Faggot) as to expect from them any sober Disputes
and Writings. No man that is but meanly versed in history, and has but
competent intellectuals, would expect such things from the hands of Papists;
witness but one passage (which Mr. Squire relates in those Sermons, wherein he
De Antichristo, p. 110.
proves the Pope to be Antichrist, among many other sad instances) of the Duke
of Alva, who professed publicly that he killed by torment 18000 of the
Protestants in six years space, for the very cause of Religion. And yet
religious Vargas (one of that tribe, that must be admitted to dispute)
complained that he had made the Netherlands worse by showing them too much
mercy. And for your laying before us the consideration of the increase of books
by such writings and disputes, to abate our zeal against popish and blasphemous
books; let us tell you, that we so little regard increase of Trade by such
loathsome ware, as that we were quickened up for fear of that temptation to pray
against the publishing and increase thereof. And whereas you call the stopping
and suppressing of popish and blasphemous books, a stopping and stifling of the
Spirit of God: We wish from our hearts you would (according to the word of God,
and judgment of all the Churches that are come out of Babylon, and the
practice of the Army, that have sometimes severely punished Blasphemers)
consider, the punishing of men for their evil deeds, and a stopping the course
of Idolatry and Blasphemy, the proper work of the Magistrate.

And as to books of Heresy, Popery, Blaspemy, if there be equal liberty of
engaging, etc.

his own, yet there is a necessity in respect of the weal of a Christian State
to keep the multitude to the true profession, by whose suffrages Councels are
formed, and by whose strength the Magistrate rules; otherwise we shall quickly
be governed by Antichristian, popish, and blasphemous Magistrates; and then we
have brought our Hogs to a fair market! And though it were blasphemy to deny
the power and efficacy of Christ in his Word and Ordinances to conquer the
greatest of his adversaries, yet it must be affirmed also from Scripture and
experience, that he overcomes and rules by the use of means, and particularly
by his blessing upon the Power and Strength of Men, as his instruments and in
office under him. How otherwise did God give to Israel, the Land of Canaan, or
to any Christian State deliverance from Romish Errors, Superstition, Idolatry,
and thraldom? And how otherwise then by his two-edged sword did he pull down
Prelacy in these Nations, or will he pull down Antichrist? will it not be by
incensing the Kings of the earth against that Whore, and causing them to hate
her and burn her with fire? By your Doctrine you should have let the Cavaliers
alone (who fought for their opinions and way of worship, as well as any thing
else.) Do you think Jesus Christ was not as able to meet them in the field, and
quell them without your help, as ten thousand Popes and Devils? your Doctrine
is brave Doctrine, to justify our late war, is it not?

If there be equal liberty of engaging.

Munster in John of Leydens reign; which who will may read in Sleydens
History, or the extracts of it in English. Yet perhaps you would be accounted
valiant champions against Popery, because you do upon all occasions vent so
much heat without reason against Presbytery; for considering how the men of
your temper use to call it Antichrist, or Antichristianisme, we cannot but
think that is one of your Poperies that you mean, when you pray, page 7. line
30. That God would stir up able Writers against all sorts of Poperies, which
upon the title of your book having painted with the pictures of tyranny and
cruelty, you affirm to be worse then all other ways of Doctrine and Worship,
saying, Then which nothing is worse. But let us ask which of you did ever
convict the Presbyterian Government aimed at in England by the godly men
thereof, to have any tyrannical or heretical principles in it? Its easily
affirmed, but when or by whom was it evidenced out of the proceedings or
writings of the Assembly of Divines, or the Petitions or Books of any
Presbytery of this Nation, or company of men truly Presbyterian. Read Jus
Divinum. The Assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland. The
Provincial Assembly of Londons Vindication of Presbyterian Government, and see
if any tyrannical or heretical principles be in them.
And to make you so ashamed for all your bitterness against the Presbyterians,
as never to show your faces more until you have done penance at least in a
printed sheet of retractation, we do here for the glory of God, and comfort of
the Church, challenge any of you to show and declare any one fundamental
error either in Doctrine or Worship, that has been held forth or owned by any
Presbytery or company of Presbyterians in any part of this Nation, or so much
as by any eminent single Presbyterian; This Crown has God set upon the head
of that Party. To him be praise for ever in the Churches. Amen.

Yea, can it without amazement be remembered, that one of their Lords should
proclaim that blasphemous crack Stupor mundi clerus Britannicus, The amazement
of the world is the Clergy of Britain.

(i. e. Pastors and Teachers) and (to his praise we may speak it) we think
through his blessing upon their labors, there are not more glorified Saints in
heaven, called thither since Christ's Ascension, out of any so little spot of
ground in the whole world, as out of great Britain, and no question the great
number of our Ministers, so learned, pious and successful, maugre all the
malice of men and devils cannot but be the amazement of the world; The good
people of the world admire it and praise God for it, and those that be enemies
are amazed and envy them and the Island for it.

And yet our Beacons must be fired, and the Alarm given to the Magistrates
Sword, Arm, Arm, etc. for not a man dare stir of our British Clergy to receive
the charge of some few often conquered religious Adversaries.

Beacon on fire, now no man can be blamed for not putting on his Armor, before
danger appears; Our Beacon was intended to give warning not only to the
Magistrate, but to the Minister also, yea to all the Lords people of this Land:
for your parts you will take none, but quarrel with us, a shrewd sign that you
will either be taken prisoners by the enemy, or are resolved to revolt to
them. But for our Ministers they have given such good proof of their skill and
zeal in receiving and repelling the charges of the Romish adversaries in time
past, that we doubt not of them for the future, but Ill will never speaks well;
and the truth is, so much has been said in Print and Pulpit already, as
thereby it is put out of all doubt, That the Romish Religion in those things we
complain of, and to the practice whereof the Papists labor so much to seduce
men, is a false Religion, made up of Idolatry, Superstition, Will Worship, and
maintained and propagated by hellish cruelty, and that the practice or
promotion thereof is an abomination to the LORD. So that the Ministers have
upon the point done their work, the Magistrates only remains. The like may be
said of those opinions we call Blasphemy, as to the undoubted and unspeakable
wickedness and publishing of them.

We humbly conceive (not presuming to propose) that your (the States) former
care of the Printers name and readiness to produce the Authors or bringers of
their Copies, together with some convenient Regulations, cannot justly by any
just man be complained against.

When the Steed is stolen you will shut the Stable door.

Thus we have done with your first sheet, and are come to your second, which
begins thus:

The Humble Information of diverse Officers of the Army and other well-affected
Persons to the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, concerning scandalous
Presbyterian Books.

Army or well-affected we have examined already, we shall not meddle with the
Subscribers of it, supposing Col. Pride, and the rest of the Soldiers might by
some sudden surprise be drawn in to do it, concerning which they had done well
to have informed us that we might the better have vindicated them. But
concerning the Information it self, whose ever it is, we must truly say,
Gentlemen, it comes too late; most of the Books you mention having been
informed against by others long ago, and diverse persons punished though with
great tenderness for them, and now (upon our setting the Beacon a fire) you
would rob those of the credit of the work, who it seems were better lovers of
the present Government then your selves: the Books in your Catalogue long ago
discovered, and for which many have been in trouble, we shall note when we come
to them in order. And that considered, it may be without any uncharitablenes
adjudged, that had it not been to show your heat against Presbytery
(occasioned as you pretend by our Beacon fired, though in that we speak not a
word for Presbytery, nor against Independency, or any Sect or Opinion, but
Popery and Blasphemy) the Parliament had not been troubled with this your
humble Information, though proceeding (as you say) from conviction of duty,
which we can hardly believe; for had conviction of duty put you upon this
address, you would have equally complained of those bitter Books that have
been made and published by others (against the State) who have declared both in
Press and Pulpit as much Violence and Virulencie against the present
Government, and the chief men in it, as ever any.

Its conviction of Duty that puts us out to this humble Address.



We have had a sad experience of the Plots and Designs of a Presbyterian Party,
especially in and about the City of London, who have not only kept a
correspondency with those of Scotland, but also contributed moneys and other
encouragements to their several Invasions.



Affirming that the Army was a Popish Army and full of Papists and Jesuits,
and that Mr Peter's and others were Jesuits.

Paul's, that Adam Contzen a Jesuit in his Politics lays that down as one way
to bring in the Popish Religion. 2. Jesuits labor to throw down Protestant
Universities. They remember well how they were tormented with the Universitie
of Wittenberge at the Reformation in Germany, from whence learned men were
dispersed into all parts, who confounded the Popish party and Religion in the
several Provinces. They remember how our learned men have from time to time
unravelled their enchantments. 3. Jesuits labor to bring the Protestant
Religion into disgrace by the confusions, disorders, blasphemies and heresies
of Protestants, all which are abetted by a general Toleration, and therefore
they labor to hinder any settlement in the Church. Now this is all we shall
say to apply it, Wherever the Cup is found, let him be taken. And wherever
these designs are agitated, we may well say, Is not the hand of Joab in all
this?

And that such Lay People who had a Call of Spirit, and did dispense their
Gifts.

Quenchers call dispensing their Gifts: If the later, Show us the man, if you
can, among all the Lay-Preachers (as your selves call them) in England, that
can speak Tongues and Languages they never learned, work Miracles, and then we
shall seriously consider from whence they come, but until then we know who
sent them.

Without the Formal Humane Ordinances of Presbytery, were Popish Priests in
disguise.



This Party have opposed all along the Proceedings of Parliament.



And that these six Subscribers are of the same Tribe, will also manifestly
appear, as by the sequent Discourse, so by their setting the Beacon on fire.

Machiavil passes the sentence, and is no Presbyterian this year: No, Its
because they fired the Beacon; a strong reason it is, that does as clearly prove
us the Parliaments enemies, as your quenching the Beacon proves you their
Friends. But the better to discern the strength of your Argument, let us put it
into form, and then examine it; You argue thus: Those that inform the
Parliament and Commonwealth of England of the Vigilancie of Rome and Hell (the
two greatest enemies to every Christian Commonwealth) to introduce their
Doctrine, Worship and Government, and pray the Parliament to draw forth the
great Sword of Government that is in their hands (not to kill, hang, burn or
banish any man for his Opinion) but to guard the truth and to repel all the
Assaults of Romish and blasphemous adversaries made by Books or other actions,
are enemies to the Parliament. But the Subscribers of the Beacon have so
informed, etc. Therefore they are enemies to the State. We grant the Minor,
that we have so informed the Parliament; but deny your Major, which if you
make not good, and at the same time prove a Hare to be an Owl, your Conclusion
falls to the ground, and you may as truly say, men are enemies, because they are
friends; we pray you to consider what rare stuff flows from your pretended
Argument, supposing it strong, viz. You make the Parliament, Popery and
Blasphemy to be at such an agreement, that for any to seek the Suppression of
one of them, makes them enemies to the other; and whether the Pope or the
Parliament be most beholding unto you for such Doctrine, we leave you to them
to determine. But if the Parliament and Army should (though but by silence)
appear to be of your mind (which God forbid, and we believe not) and cause all
the Organs and Bells in Rome, and all the Romish Churches to make Melody, yet
we for our parts, and many thousands more, would pray God to give them
Repentance, for frustrating the expectations of those, who in the simplicity of
their hearts adventured their Liberties, Estates, Lives, All, with and under
them, for nothing so much, as to have the true Reformed Religion (then in great
danger) settled in Purity, and fenced against Popish and blasphemous Pollutions.

For they are true Salamanders in a State, and delight in nothing more then in
Persecution of tender Consciences by Fire and Sword.

Faith that was once delivered to the Saints? And do you think the Parliament
has not wisdom enough to do these without Fire and Sword (i. e.) burning,
heading, hanging? unless men be obstinately bent to be hanged.

They are Boutefeux in a Superlative Degree, whose chief content consists in
making Combustions in all well-governed Commonwealths.

to prove it; you must take it upon their bare words: It is below them to prove
any thing; and therefore we hold it not worth an Answer. Only thus much we
shall say; If there were no worse Boutefenx then we; If all men, Soldiers and
others, were as peaceably minded as we, and as resolved to keep within their
bounds and stations, there would not be such cause of great fear as is all the
Land over, of destructive Mutations and Alterations in this Commonwealth.

And that the world may the better know these Subscribers, take their Names and
places of Abode, as follows.

whose breath is in his nostrils, and so a Rush for your threats.

These were the Subscribers of the Pamphlet, but the Contrivers and Counselors
of it, we shall in due time and upon just occasion discover.

Good Lord be merciful unto us, and deliver us from such as you. Amen.

Their Preamble is embelished with much seeming Zeal, for Exaltation of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which were truly commendable if it came from pure
hearts, but we have too great an Assurance that Self-interest is their Aim and
Hypocrisy their Zeal.

enemies of the Reformed Churches, though you prove us not transgressors in any
thing.

They insinuate Proposals for effecting their Desires, and so would fain scrue
themselves into some Office or Monopoly for Licensing, Printing and selling
Books.



Their Preamble is embelished with much seeming Zeal for the Exaltation of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ which were truly commendable if it came from pure
hearts.



The Pamphlet says, the Parliament well knowing that the common People of this
Nation will be of one Religion or other, and if by public Authority they be
not kept to the Reformed, they will be easily drawn to the Popish. Hear they
speak plain English, and would have a coercive Power in matters of Religion, a
Presbyterian Classis would do well (but let it have some new name) that may
excommunicate, enjoin penance, etc. What would this be less than a Spanish
Inquisition?

And if by public Authority they be not kept to the Reformed Religion. Here is
a coercive Power in matters of Religion, which we from Scripture own to be in
the Magistrate, and which has been exercised by all the Magistrates that ever
were in the world to this day, unless they were by death or otherwise hindered.
And it is most famously known by all that know the History of the times, that
there were never any pleaders for a Toleration of all Religions, but they were
great persecutors of the contrary minded, if they once got into the saddle. The
History of the Arrians is famous, who once Athan.
were enemies to all persecution when they were under the hatehes, but when
they got power into their hands, were more bitter persecutors then the Heathen
Emperors. The Donatists were great Patrons of a Toleration, till under that
Apostate Julian, Optatus.
they got power into their hands, and then they filled Africa with blood and
desolation. The Story of the Germane Anabaptists is so famous that it needs no
mentioning.

A Presbyterian Classis would do well; but let it have some new name, that may
pronounce Censures, etc. and what would this be less then a Spanish Inquisition?

Some new name] to wit, a Parliament; for to them only we seek for redress.
Here you do more then insinuate, that if the Parliament shall punish men for,
or but hinder them from common swearing, offering their sons to Molech, open
rejection of the Lords day, worshipping the Sun, or a golden Calf, preaching
up Mahomet, preaching down Christ, or maintaining that the Pope has authority
to blow up Parliaments, change the Government of this Commonwealth, discharge
the people of Obedience to their Magistrates, or they suppress Popish and
Heretical Books (all which come under the notion of Religion) they are no
better then a Spanish Inquisition. We beseech our dear Countrymen that
subscribed The Beacon quenched (whoever were the Authors of it) to consider
what brave Doctrine this is; and whether they are not of another mind, as we
are persuaded they are, whatever they may say in a passion.

But they know the Parliament and Army have often declared against such
proceedings, to wit, (as we suppose your meaning is) the suppressing Popish and
Heretical Books.

Ordinances, Blaspheme God, Christ, and Scripture.

The weapons of fasting and prayer are more available and Christian, then those
of force.

Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 8, 9, 11. Zach. 13. Romans 13.

How simple are these Subscribers to imagine that the truth of Christ's holy
Religion needs the support of humane Arms to sustain it.



And how distrustful are these men of Gods Providence!



And doubtful of our own strength, to imagine that any Papist can say or write
more then we can answer.



We desire nothing more then that they and all dissenters should propound their
doubts in a Christian way.

Beacon meddles) these are but Dissenters with you: We wish your charity were
a Scripturecharity. Do you think such as they, will meet in the love of Christ
for better instruction? Or that those blasphemers that deny the Merits and
Divinity of Christ, will meet the Orthodox in the love of Christ? What
Grolleries are these!

They forget that at the beginning of July last, a Petition was presented to
the Parliament, by many thousand well-affected persons, one Branch whereof was,
That the press might be open to all.

Julian spirit put in this Petition among the rest, That Tithes might be taken
away, and no other maintenance established in stead thereof. Had those
Petitioners put in, And that the Tithes might come to those who pay them as
their own proper goods, they would not be such deceivers of the poor
Countryman, as otherwise they will be.

Now if it were worth the examining, we might certainly find many untruths
also in a few leaves of that Pamphlet, as that 1500. of each book were printed,
is improbable; and that they were all printed in England, is doubtful.

England, we are ready to make good, if the State should judge it worth the
while. We do not guess at that, but are sure of it.

The Subscribers rank the Christian Moderator among Popish books, because it
equally rejects Episcopal bondage and Presbyterian slavery.

Sancta Clara, that famous, or rather infamous Priest, presented one of them to
a Lady, who told it to a reverend Minister of this City; and withal, said
that he was the Author of the book. Beside, the very design of the book is
to vindicate the Popish Religion, it pleads for a general toleration, and
especially for a toleration of Popery, It pleads against all settlement of
Religion: upon which we shall propound but one Quaere by the way, Whether the
Jesuits (who are no fools) do not apprehend that a Toleration is their best
market, and a settlement in Religion the only way to suppress them? Whereas
its said the book has nothing against the State. It seems these men are of
that Religion, that they care not what men say against God and Christ, and the
truths of God, if they are but trueto the State. These men would do as the
Roman Emperors did: If any man forswore himself by their Genius, they would
be sure to punish them; but let him forswear himself by God, they would leave
him to God to punish. So let a man blaspheme God, dethrone the Lord Jesus, call
Moses and Christ Impostors, there are some Gallio's that care for none of these
things: but let men speak but a word against the Parliament, let him but
whistle against the Army, and these very men would break him in pieces like a
potters vessel. But we hope our State will scorn the service of such spirited
men. We hope they will remember what good Constantius did and said, when by a
stratagem he had found out the indifferency and carelessness of many of his
Courtiers in the matters of Religion, he presently dismissed them with this
noble speech, He that will not be faithful to God, will never be faithful to
me, but for his own ends.

And holds forth an absolute incoertion in matters of inward belief.



They say Christians of a different belief are not tolerated to profess their
Religion among Papists; are they not in France?

viz. For the world knows that those virtues never appeared in Papists toward
Christians of a different belief, who are not (that we know of) tolerated to
profess their Religion among them, except by the achievement of the sword,
taken up in their defense against popish cruelty. Nor does the Moderator in the
least demonstrate how the Protestants may be assured of a toleration, in case
the Papists shall at any time become the major part, as being impossible for
him or any others so to do, until a popish general Council shall cancel
some of their points of Faith about the Popes Supremacy and Churches
infallibility. We think you were afraid to meddle with us here.

As for the popish books mentioned in their Catalogue, we do believe (upon good
information) that the greatest part of them only hold forth Moral Divinity,
and rules of good life.

Rome is the only true Church, the Pope Christ's Vicar-generall, and the
infallibility of both? also Traditions, Prayer for the dead, Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, real presence in the Eucharist, Adoration and bowing to
the Host, Altars, Images, Relics, a perfect keeping of the Commandments,
merit of Good Works, Latin Service, with all the rabble of Popish Ceremonies
and fopperies, stretching their wits to maintain these by Arguments; and is all
this Moral Divinity? damning all that are not of their belief; and is that a
point of Moral Divinity so to do? If all this Rubbish must be so called, pray
take in with the rest The Directory for the Mass, lately put to the Press, and
call that Moral Divinity also.

And if those books have nineteen parts of good matter, and the twentieth part
Popery, it were great pity the much good should suffer for the little evil; as
was excellently said by a worthy Member of Parliament upon occasion of debate
concerning the Racovian Catechism, who upon that reason passed his vote
against the burning of it.

you shall see greater abominations then these. It denies the satisfaction of
Christ, pleads for justification by works, It ungods the holy Ghost: And above
a quarter of the book is spent in arguing against the Divinity of Christ. So
that we think these men have done a great dishonor to the Parliament, in
publishing to all the Nation that there is any there that should either speak
in so bad a cause, or use such weak and fallacious arguments. And it is no
credit to the Army, that any of them should speak for so devilish a book, and
that too after the Parliament had declared their hatred of it, and zeal against
it; for which the hearts of many thousands in England did bless God on their
behalf. Whether that Gentleman spoke excellently in the Parliament House or no,
we have learned better then to pass our censure, especially considering that
his speech was against the sense of the House. Certainly the time will come,
that the secret debates of the Members of the Supreme Council shall not be
commended or censured without the walls of the Senate House by private men in
public print. But we shall dare to examine in the spirit of meekness, whether
your notion of the twentieth part poison be an excellent one or no. Our answer
therefore is this: Things without life or sense are not capable of punishment
or pain, and so their sufferings no matter of pity, further then in relation to
the owners or users of them; and therefore when nineteen truths of God are
transcribed or collected out of the perfect Canon of the Scripture, on purpose
to put off (with them) one damnable error that is shuffled in among them, it
is no matter of pity to punish the spirit of error, and preserve people from
infection, by burning all that paper and ink (Gods truth for all that as a
fountain abides and is not diminished) unless the good were separated from the
bad and preserved, and the bad rejected; which may be done no way but by that
of Licensing, which we desire in our Beacon fired. Your selves will grant, that
a book containing nineteen parts of excellent Divinity or Policy, having but
the twentieth part seditious and treasonable against the Parliament or Army,
ought to be burned and suppressed with a witness. If a great man's picture
should be drawn never so well in respect of all the parts of it, except only
one of the members, and that should be so ugly, as to present that great man a
very deformed man, were it any pity to burn that picture? What madness were it
to suffer the people of a Town to use infected water, while there is enough
pure water in the common Town-well or Fountain? And if there were true weight
and reason in what you say of your twentieth part of Popery, it would prove it
pity and folly to throw away a roasted apple that has a dram, or a whole gile
of beer that has a gallon of strong poison in it.

For Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Sprig, they are very well able to answer for themselves;
only this we gather, that they are the more violent, as we conceive, against
Mr. Sprig, for being the Author of Anglia Rediviva or the History of the war
while Sir Thomas Fairfax was General, by whose success the Presbyterian
tyranny began to be abated.

Sprig, but (we think) zealous against his blasphemy, and that only because it
is blasphemy; and though it never can pull the sun of righteousness out of the
firmament, yet it indangers the total eclipsing of it in our horizon. And as
for the Presbyterian Tyranny to be begun to be abated by Sir Thomas Fairfax,
it is a silly fiction; the glorious Reformation that Presbytery purports, though
ever since the dawning of Reformation earnestly prayed for by all the godly
judicious Protestants, nicknamed Puritans, yet it was never exercised publicly
before Sir Thomas Fairfax was General, and by means of his success against the
great enemies of Presbytery: And not to this day, much less while he was
General, did Presbytery in any part of this Nation do any thing that might
have the least show of Tyranny; a foolish picture of a bugbear that you paint
upon good and wholesome Order in the Church of God. And pray whence did you
gather that we were violent against Mr. Sprig because he was the Author of
that History? when as one of us the Subscribers has the vending of that
particular book.

Now the truth is, this party of men make an appearance of zeal against Papists
and popish books, the better to disguise their designs, when as their malice
and spleen is against the well affected, whom they style Independents and
Sectaries.

zeal with you is but an appearance of zeal, and to disguise their designs;
and their malice and spleen is against the well-affected; Is this Christianly
done? read our Beacon fired, do we give you any occasion of these expressions,
and do we so much as name Independency or Sectary in all the book? Your
Catalogue of books we said before is such, that the most of them were
complained of formerly, and one or other punished for them, viz. The History of
Independency, Mr. Walker, the supposed Author, died prisoner in the Tower. The
Plea for Non-scribers, complained of, and a Bookseller imprisoned for it. The
same was done for Bonds and Bounds. Mr. Loves Sermons, the Epistle whereof you
say hangs a flag of defiance, charged upon Mr. Calamy, a notorious untruth; as
at the beginning is proved. Manus Testium, Lingua Testium, with a Narrative of
the mystery of State, long since complained of, and the supposed Author many
months imprisoned for them; with others. And for all these books, they are
unjustly charged upon us or the Presbyterian party; let the Authors answer for
them, if they have not already; do we deal so with you or any others? do we
charge the Army or Independency with popish, with Mr. Sprig's, Mr. Hobs's, or
the rabble of Ranters books?

These books we should not have mentioned, but through a necessity of quenching
the fire of this Beacon.

Beacon; to wit, the necessity of the Parliaments regulating the exorbitancy of
the Press; as the only way to prevent the publishing of such books as tend to
the dishonor of God, and disturbance of the State.

And of what more dangerous consequence such books are then any other sorts of
books whatsoever, we leave to all true lovers of their Country to judge.



We humbly hope the Parliament will not restrain any peaceable spirit from the
liberty of professing, nor shut up the Press from any godly persons having due
regard to the honor and peace of the Parliament and this Commonwealth.

Amen, viz. We humbly hope that the Parliament will not restrain any peaceable
spirit, that is a Prophet, from the liberty of prophesying, nor shut up the
Press from any godly persons while they write godlily, having due regard to the
honor and peace of the Parliament and this Commonwealth. Amen.

FINIS.

