AULICUS HIS HVE AND CRY Sent forth after BRITANICVS, Who is generally
reported to be a lost Man.

depiction of Mercury

LONDON, Printed in the dismal year of Britanicus. 1645.

AVLICVS HIS Hue and Cry Sent forth after BRITANICVS, who is generally reported
to be a lost man.
Oyez, Oyez, Oyez.
IF there be any person or persons that can tell any tidings of a petty penny
Clerk, sometime a writer of Writs for a penny a dozen, who has forgot his
own name, and has a long time answered to the name of Britanicus; he is a
man of a low stature full set, black hair, hollow-hearted, empty scull'd,
barren of invention a lover of baseness, void of grace, and lastly, a Traitor
to his King: bring news to Aulicus and expect a reward.

A Porter. Mr. Aulicus, I am very glad it was my fortune to come by, for I can
tell you tidings of the man you seek for.


Aulicus. Say thou so? (honest fellow) I rejoice much to hear thee, and be
thou well assured thou shall not go unrewarded.


Porter. Tush Sir I expect no reward, I desire (rather) to see him and all such
poyson-breathing Vipers made Hawks meat.


Aulicus. Honest Porter I love thee, for thou speak like a good subject, but
where shall I find this limb of Lucifer?


Porter. Sir if you please to walk with me to Westminster, you shall there
obtain your wished will.


Aulicus. Is he so near in faith? come let us hasten thither, and as we walk we
may discourse further of him.


Porter. I wait your leisure Sir.


Aulicus. Come then let us go. O how cheerfully I walk, me thinks I fly, I
am not sensible of my steps, not any pain, I take, to think what a greeting
we shall have when we meet.


Porter. I Sir, I think the sight of you will please him well, and be as
welcome to him as a saddle to a galled horse back.


Aulicus. Observe that when we come together. But all this while art thou not
mistaken? Do thou not take one man for another? art thou sure it is he?


Porter. O Sir make you no doubt of that. I know him full well, and can describe
him by many remarkable signs and tokens which you have not mentioned in your
Hue and Cry. I know what habit he wears, and where he bought it, the outside
of his doubles is black Satin, and I Am sure it is not long since one of his
skirts was lined with a Brokers bill: O how his clothes smell of Long Lane!


Aulicus. Well Porter, thou art a merry Blade and I like thy humor well,
prithee speak on, what know thou more of him?


Porter. Marry Sir I know that there is a great lamantation made for the loss
of him at many Tavernes in the City, especially at the Mere-maid in Cheapeside,
for they have lost a sweet customer of him. But though Masters of many Tavernes
mourn for the loss of him, yet the Drawers rejoice; for now they take their
rest, and sleep their fill, that were wont to fit up and wait on him at
unseasonable hours, now the young knaves can go to bed and dream of their
wenches.


Aulicus. In Faith Porter thou make me laugh, thou art a companion for a Lord.


Porter. Nay Sir seeing my discourse pleases you so well, I will tell you one
story more of him, and wherein I my self have had a loss, for many a shilling
and many a cup of Sack was I wont to get for carrying of him home when the
Frenchman and the Spaniard were at barley break in his belly: with many other
passages of such like virtues: but I cannot at this time proceed, for we are
now in sight of his lodging, I will therefore at present cease my discourse,
and after conducting you to his Chamber I leave you and him to your foresaid
greeting and salutation.


Aulicus. How now Britanicus, what make you here? is this your lodging? The
Gate house at Westminster.
have you changed your habitation? Prithee answer me: I am Aulicus thy friend:
why art thou so sad? hold up thy head, art thou not well?


Britan. No.


Aulicus. Indeed many report that thou art very ill.

Where lies thy grief? Look upon me, cheer up thy drooping spirit, thou
pretty fool: hold up thy empty bottle, and show thy brazen, thy rebellious
face. Have thou lost all thy understanding? Is thy invention grown barren and
thy brains turned to froth? Had thou no other matter to write upon? Could
thou spue out thy venom on none but the King? Thou fool Britanicus, thou
Ass, thou Drunkard, thou Sot, thou Knave Britanicus, could thou expect gain
or applause for thy so foolish and so wicked study? O ^ne Britanicus, O brave
Britanicus, a Rope for Britanicus. Well as ill as I love thee: I wish thee to
change thy lodging, the Air does not agree with thy constitution: I do not
like thy looks, I think thou will not live long: London air agrees best with
thee: leave this close place, and remove to Newgate-market, there is a fresh
air, and a fair strong house, where thou may take thy swing and not be tied
to this close inconvenience. There will also many benefits arise: for twice
every week the Sheriffs of London send in a plentiful basket full fraught
with Capons legs, and other delicates, and in time thou may be partaker of
that also. Leave then this place of Little-ease and repair thither: forsake
this Settle-bed I say, for there thy bed shall be new corded, and skiffull
Gregory is appointed for that purpose. And when thou have occasion to tide a
journey, he will closely attend thee, and be thy officious servant till death.
But when thou take thy journey to Oxford, leave Paddington if thou can for
there stands a scurvie triangular stop in thy way, which will hinder thy
proceedings. Besides I know thou love a cup of good liquor, and that Road
will not afford it; and I can prove by several examples that many a passenger
that has traveled that way, have for want of drink and somewhat else been
choked. Hearken therefore to my admonition for good counsel cannot hurt thee.

Now if all this be not sufficient to dissuade thee from that Road, take thy
own course: but so well I love thee that if thou give me notice of thy
journey, I will bring thee so far on thy way and there leave thee.

But before we part, prophecy when that day shall be, if thou retainest still
thy prophetic spirit. No, no, Britanicus thou can not, thou have already
showed thy self to be a false Prophet and art come basely off. Where are the
effects of thy divination? what one thing has happened agreeing with thy
presige of the Nobility, and diverse others? and amongst the rest I poor
Aulicus had many a jerke: Me thinks (quoth he) I already see Aulicus in Ely
House. But see how this Prophet is mistaken I Am sure I see Britanicus in the
Gate House. I am not in pound yet sirrah. Thou a Prophet, thou a hang-dog, the
most thou can make thy self to be, is but a Fortune Tellers, begotten by a
Juggler upon an Egyptian witch. What say thou Mungrel? can deny it?


Britan. No.


Aul. Well said, now thou deservest commendation, because that thou speak
the truth I will therefore reason with thee a little further, and I prithee
answer me: what is become of thy white Printer? have thou seen him of late?


Britan. No.


Aul. Why I can tell thee where he is, but I am loath to increase thy grief,
yet I will tell thee for thy case and mine (in that point) are much alike: well
I can hold no longer, but with a grieved heart and watery eyes I tell thee,
that he and my friend Royston are bed-fellowes in the Fleet; come let us
comfort one another, let us not grieve too much for them: why should we show
more love to them then to our selves? Hang them, let them go: and I do
earnestly persuade thee to hang thy self also, for fear thou come to a worse
end. What say thou Britanicus? do thou think thou shall die a better death?


Britan. No.


Aul. Then this is my last request unto thee, Prophecy of thy self as thou
have done of others, and then go hang thy self when thou will.


So farewell Britanicus.
Postscript.
What now Britanicus, do thou in thy Vindication vomit out thy poisoned
Crocodile tears in slanders, to brand those that are not of thy disposition,
in terming them to be Malignants? thou half-headed pesant, I would have thee
know they have to their powers, and do what lies in them for the general good
of the Parliament and Kingdom, and will to the hazard of their lives and
fortunes, and yet not endure thy base abusing his Majesty. I wonder that the
Parliament does not take some course against thy folly. First thou call them
Malignants, I grant Rebel, and who does punish thee but the Parliament then in
glorying in the name of Royallist, wherein thou slanderest many thousands who
are good friends to the State and Kingdom? then thou say thou do not
intend to justify thy self. No thou need not, but sue rather to the
Parliament with a two penny halter about thy neck, and that is the best
counsel I can give thee. And for thy pains thou takes in setting out thy
Pamphlet, what was thy aim Britanious? I tell thee only thy profit: And for
doing the State service, as thou calls it, I believe it has been to set the
Kingdom together by the ears. And for thy address to the Parliament, implore
them for some time of repentance and cry not, for they know thou art a
slandring Knave, and so adieu Britanicus.

FINIS.

