THE Sworn Confederacy Between The Convocation at OXFORD, And the Tower of
LONDON.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.

JUNE the 5th

The sworn Confederacy between the Convocation at Oxford, and the Tower of
LONDON.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
YOu are desired to hear what is the best News in the middle Region. I had
lately the honor to meet with one of the Secretaries of Art and Nature, who
assured me that there was pretty sport at Oxford. There are some Right Worthy
Doctors who are sick of the Kings-Evill, but dare not go to Holdenby to be
cured; for though they say the Kings hand works more Miracles since this Truce,
then it did all the time of the wars; yet he cures none but such as are
willing to be cured. It is observed by some, that there is most spiritual
wickedness in All-Soules at Oxford. Upon the 26. of May, diverse subtlle
Doctors had a meeting very late at night at Dr. Sheldens Lodging, to try
whether they could out-plot those, whom they could not out-pray upon the 26. of
May, being our Monthly Fast. On Thursday the 27. they met at Dr. Fell's house
the pretended Vice Chancellor, or Deputy of Marquess Hertford; and on Friday
the 28. of May, being the last Friday of the month, the Malignants common
Fasting-day, (a day strictly observed as I hear at Christ-Church in Oxford, by
the Dean, Sub-Deane, and Canons) they ealled a Vestrie, that they might choose
out some bold Delegates to oppose the Visitors (who are to meet June the 4th.)
and hinder a Reformation. But it seems they could not work Miracles upon that
Fasting-day; and therefore they adjourned to the 31. of May, an happy season,
for then they unanimously agreed to call a Convocation, which they did upon the
first of June; and being assembled, Dr. Fell made a Speech without Fear or
Wit, in which he called those that took the Covenant, perfidious persons and
Traitors. Upon a sad debate it was agreed, that certain Reasons, (called just
Scruples) should be tendered to justify such as refuse to take the National
Covenant, and the Negative Oath.

These Reasons were not communicated then, for they were not so much as read in
the Convocation House; but they were received with an implicit faith; and if
any man would question the fidelity or wisdom of Dr. Shelden, and the rest,
he was to have satisfaction in his private College; and yet (as I am informed)
in their private Colleges the heads do only use it for the strengthening and
arming of their own party against the Covenant, and corrupting of some Youths,
that are not able to distinguish between Pretenses and Arguments; For at
Trinity College, Mr. Vnet Fellow of the House could not obtain a sight of the
reasons. Haniball (P.) was not so great an enemy to Rome, as to divulge the
secrets of the Conclave to Mr. Vnet, a known friend to the Parliament.

The grand Design is to unite the whole University in a body that they may
join together as one man, to oppose a Reformation, and then they hope all to
escape by a general mutiny, The Ringleaders as well as their Followers: but
if the Parliament allow them the benefit of their Clergy, the Law of Decimation
may behead some Colleges, and make a perfect cure.

The Mystery of Iniquity. works highest in Dr. Shelden, who is the eldest
Son of Prince Lucifer, and who holds correspondence with honest Judge Ienkins
(in the Tower) who lent him money, when he run away into Wales in the year
1642, for fear of Pursevants, as Mr. Jones observed; the Scouts to convey
Letters or Intimations are Dr. Morley, who lies Lieger at London (as some
whisper here in the City) Dr. Stutville, who pretends to be in France; ^. the
Printer is suspected also, and so is our good friend and neighbor Lambert
Osbolston, (the Malignant Earewig to the Nobles) who plays falt and loose,
elects Scholars at Westminster, as if he were a friend to the Parl. intercedes
for Malignants, and carries Messages in stead of Letters for fear of being
searched, whereby it is evident that he is an enemy to the Parl. and therefore
it is fit that he should be sent once more beyond Canterbury.

You may take notice that the first scruple (in the New Scruple-House erected
at Oxford, June 1) is this, Whether the House of Commons should be owned and
acknowledged as a Parliamentary House? the reason whispered is, because there
are so many new Members chosen in by virtue of the new Great-Seale without his
Majesty's coment.

This design is smoothly carried, yet sufficiently discovered, and almost
confessed by that deliberate and advised omission in their Preface to their
other Just Scruples; the words run thus.

Whereas by an Ordinance of the Lords assembled Observe that have a no mention
of the Commons.
in Parliament for the Visitation and Reformation of the University of Oxford
lately published, Power is given to certain Persons therein named, to inquire
concerning those of the said University, that neglect to take the Solemn
League and Covenant, and the Negative Oath, being tendered unto them, and
likewise concerning those that oppose the execution of the Ordinances of
Parliament concerning the Discipline and Directory, or shall not promote or
cause the same to be put in execution according to their several places and
callings. We the Masters, Scholars, and other Officers of the said University
(not to judge the Consciences of others, but) to clear our selves before God
and the World, from all suspicion of obstinacy, whilst we discharge our own,
present to consideration the true reasons of our present judgment concerning
the said Covenant, Oath and Ordinances, expecting so much Justice, and hoping
for so much Charity, as either not to be pressed to conform to what is
required in any of the premises, farther then our present Judgment will
warrant us, or not condemned for the refusing so to do, without clear and
real satisfaction given to our Just Scruples.

This is just Judge Ienkins, the House of Commons must not be acknowledged for
one of the Houses of Parliament, so that the learned Dr. Shelden and Judge
Ienkins are entered into a Confederacy against the House of Commons, the
Directory, and the Discipline established by Both Houses of Parliament; and
therefore it is a Confederacy against the Lords also. They insist not much upon
the Introductory Preface to the Covenant; they pretend that they are not able
to say, that the rage, power, and presumption of the Enemies of God (in the
sense therein intended) is at this time increased, whereas their present
confederacy against the House of Commons makes it most clear and evident:
never did the Enemies of God rage more furiously in Oxford, then now they do.

Nay, they are so high and gallant, that they profess that they will not be
satisfied, although the Covenant should not be imposed upon them at all, for if
it be but only recommended to them and then left to their choice, yet being
subjects they cannot of their own Free Will enter into any Covenant wherein
his Majesty is concerned without his consent, it being in his power by the
equity of the Law, Nugmb. 30. to anull such a League as soon as he pleases.

Besides, it is contrary to the Proclamation the 9 of October 19 Caroll, and
they are obliged by their natural Allegiance to obey all commands of his
Majesty, which are not in their apprehensions repugnant to the will of God, or
the positive Laws of the Kingdom: From whence it will follow, that one
Proclamation of the Kings is ground susficient for them to oppose all Orders
and Ordinances of Parliament; whereas I was such a fool to conceive, that upon
the surrender of Oxford they did agree to submit to all Orders and Ordinances
of Parliament, or leave the Kingdom within 6 months: they may be fully
assured that the Parliament will not permit them to stay here, only to Rebel.

Concerning the first Article of the Covenant.
THey are not satisfied how they can in judgment swear to endeavor to
preserve the Religion of another Kingdom. 1. Whereof they have little
knowledge. 2. A Religion in respect of Worship, Discipline, and Government,
much worse, and in Doctrine not at all better (say they) then our own, which
we are in the next passage of the Article required to reform. 3. Wherein they
do already find something to their thinking tending toward Superstition and
Schism (viz. in accounting Bishops Antichristian, and indifferent Ceremonies
unlawful) that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them to
reform the same, then that they should call upon us to preserve it, considering
that they make their Discipline and Government (as they that are most
Prelaticall esteem Prelacy) a mark of the true Church, and the setting up
thereof the erecting of the Throne of Christ. Finally they all do tacitly
accuse Both Houses of Parliament of indeavoring to violate the Oath of
Supremacy: the whole pover of spiritual jurisdiction for the Visitation and
Reformation of the Ecclesiastical state, and persons, belonging to the Kings
Highness the only Supreme Governor of this Realm.

Concerning the second Article.
THey are much offended, that it should be so much as intimated, that Prelacy
is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness: And therefore they
have invented this Mock Article, intended as a Libell against the City of
London and the Government thereof, their words are these:

We desire it may be considered, in case a Covenant of the like Form should
be tendered to the Citizens of London, wherein they should be required to
swear, they would sincerely, really, and constantly, without respect of
persons, endeavor the extirpation of Treason, the Citie-Government by a Lord
Major, Alderm^n, Sheriffs, Common. Council, and other Officers depending
thereon, Murder, Adultery, Theft, Cozenage, and whatsoever shall be contrary
to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness, lest they should partake in
other men's sins: whether such a tendry could be looked upon by any Citizen
that had the least spirit of freedom in him, as an Act of Justice, Meekness,
and Reason? They think that they have reason to believe, That Prelacy (they
must understand it of such a Prelacy as we would have rooted out of England)
was established in the Churches by the Apostles according to the mind, and
after the example of their Master Jesus Christ; and that by virtue of their
ordinary Power (and Authority derived from him) as deputed by him Governors
of his Church.

Or at least, That Episcopal Aristocracy has a fairer pretension, and may lay
a juster title and claim to a Divine Institution, then any of the other Forms
of Church Government can do, all which yet do pretend thereunto, viz. that of
the Papal Monarchy, that of the Presbyterian Democracy (Aristrocracy they
should have said) and that of the Independents by particular Congregations, or
gathered Churches.

Moreover, They are assured by the undoubted testimony of ancient Records and
latter Histories, that Prelacy has been continued with such an Universal,
Uninterrupted, Unquestioned Succession of all the Churches of God, and in all
Kingdoms that have been called Christian throughout the whole world for 1500
years together, that there never was any considerable opposition made there
against. What they may prove by latter Histories I know not, but sure I am, it
is a folly to cite late Histories, to prove what was done 1500 years ago, and
I am most sure, that all the Prelates and their adherents in England, can never
prove, that such a Prelacy as we desire to extirpate, has been for 1500 years
established in all the Churches of Christ.

But their truest reason and saddest scruple, is this that follows:

We do (say they) Some of us hold our liveli-hood, either in whole or in
part, by those Titles of Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, etc. mentioned in the
Articles, being members of some Collegiate and Cathedral Churches. If they had
put this foremost I should have been sooner satisfied, but I must break off
being called to other service; you may have more hereafter if opportunity
permit: In the mean time, take notice how much the House of Commons is
slighted, as if not worthy to be named, in their Preface: 2. How grossly they
abuse the Church of Scotland, and City of London: 3. How they combine against
all Presbyterians and Independents, that is, against all the friends of the
Parliament: 4. How they declare all that have taken the Covenant, Lords and
Commons, to be perjured persons, men that have shaken off their Allegiance, and
renownced the Kings Supremacy: 5. (They say) what I cannot omit; That if we
receive not prelacy upon the grounds they offer, the judgment and practice of
the universal Church, we shall be at a loss in sundry points both of faith
and manners at this day firmly believed, and securely practiced by us, when by
the Socinians, Anabaptists and other Sectaries, we are called upon for our
proofs: as namely, sundry Orthodoxall Explications concerning the Trinity and
Co-equalitie of the persons in the Godhead, against the Ari^ns and other
Heretics, the number, use, and efficacy of Sacraments, the Baptizing of
Infants, National Churches, the observation of the Lords Day, and even the
Canon of Scripture it self.

But stay, may not the Scripture be sufficiently known by its own majesty,
light and glory, by the testimony of the Spirit, speaking in the Word to our
hearts and conferences? And are not the Scriptures perfect, and therefore
sufficient for reproof and correction without Ecclesiastical Traditions? And
are not all those Reverend Divines, and other Learned men who have taken the
Covenant, able to refute Socinians, Papists, Arminians, Anabaptists, without
the help of the Prelaticall party? If they be not, we will send to Doctor
Shelden and Judge Ienkin for their assistance. So much for the Oxonian
Ienkinisme.

FINIS.

