A CHARM FOR Canterburian Spirits, Which (since the death of this
Arch-Prelate) have appeared in sundry shapes, and haunted diverse houses in the
City of London.

With his Graces waftage over the Red Sea of Cocitus in Charons Ferry-boat; And
his magnificent entertainment into the Daemoniack Court.

depiction of Archbishop Laud as viceroy of Hell Laud played the Devil on the
earth so well.
That he is since installed Vice-roi of Hell.


Printed for J. C. February the 14. 1645 1644

A Charm for Canterburian Spirits.
WHo is there amongst us, that has not been amazed, or at least affrighted at
the strange apparitions, and horrid Appearances of these Malignant and
Canterburian Spirits, who like Ignis Fatuus, or Will with a Wisp, have led so
many out of the right way, into the intricate Laborinths of Malignancy and
folly; and so have begot a Viperous brood of Hydra-headed Cavaliers, whose
yeesty brains are in continual motion, and work higher, as they are filling
their bottomless and swinish carcases With Stigian Liquors, whilst themselves
become the shame of themselves, being odious to God, hateful to Man,
burdensome to Nature, and the root of much evil and disturbance to this poor
afflicted, and languishing Kingdom; the eye of reason and understanding seeing
them variously disguised, or Metamorphosed into Beasts of diverse qualities and
conditions.

The first appears like a Lion (though a ravening one) and swares so fast, as
if he had no more words then oaths, he makes great brags of the Rapine and
mischief he has committed on the Roundheads in diverse Counties, which he most
impudently attributes to the greatness of his Valor, and haughtiness of his
courage, his greatest discourse is of Swords, Rapiers, Daggers, Pistolls and
Carbines, which are the proper Instruments belonging to his trade, which is
cutting of Throats; and then raps you out some Twenty Oaths, and then begins to
swear, That Canterbury died a Martyr, and deserved to be sainted, and will
trace him in all the circumstances of his Sermon, till he comes to the Red sea,
his brains swiming in a sea of Ale, which he manfully disgorgeth with his
Sermon, where we will leave him dead drunk.

The second is metamarphosed into a Fox, this is a crafty slye companion, and
lies all upon the Catch, but will not prey near home, but farthest from his
den, least he should be discovered; he craftily preys upon the simple, and
tells them, That to take up Arms against the King, is to fight against God,
which we ingeniously confess, yet will nevertheless, as long as breath
remains in our nostrills, protect our King, and fight against, and Earth such
crafty Foxes, that by their Cunning sly insinuations, and pernicious
Counsels, have mislead so good a King, and almost undone so flourishing a
Kingdom.

The third does appear like a Calfe, but indeed a Cavee. He can maintain the
Miter to be above Crown, the Crosier staff above the Scepter, and the Cope
and Surplesse to be of greater Antiquity then the Parliament Roabe, and can for
a need, raise Controversies to little edifying, Chop-Logick and Philosiphie,
which he uses as the subtilties of Satan, to deceive the simple, to which
little-purpose, he relates unto you many profane humane stories, which relish
more of his own vain Ostentation, then of the Spirit. This Beast will tell us
of Imperiousness against Authority, both Spiritual and Temperall, because we
renounce and defy all obedience to evil and Malignant Calves like himself,
blind Bishops and their Antichristian vassalls, which were not long ago in so
fair a way to bring us under their slavish subjection, and cruel tyranny. He
tells us, No Pilate, no Prince, tells of Zealous Ignorance, calls us
Hypocrites, having all Zeal, and no Knowledge, all Purity, and no Humanity, all
Simplicity, and no Honesty, when indeed they are all his own proper Epethites
and bear greater rule in him, then himself over his Punck or Tobacco-pipe; this
Calf is a great bleater in our Streets of London, and if let alone, will at
last become a bellowing bull of Basan; but I, hope the Magistracy of this City,
will take order for the bayting of this Malignant beast, whose malice like
Phalaris Bull, makes that a torment first for himself, which he has invented
to punish others.

The Fourth, as fierce as a Goose, and is always bissing against the
Parliament, and because one of his breed preserved the Roman Capital, he
conceives he should sit in all great Assemblies, and nothing pass them without
his Ganderships approbation, if any thing please him not, he is presently in
such Choler, that he sputters again, which drives him presently to his proper
Lake the Alehouse, which he so loves and honors, that he does reverence it
with a nod or cringe as he enters the door. His Religion is most commonly his
pretense of discontent, though he can be of all Religions, but truly of none;
where he finds no cause to tax the State, he descends to rayl against the
Rates of Commodities, bitterly cursing the Excise upon his Ale and Tobacco.

The fifth, is a Goatish Cavaliere, borne in Worcestershire, and had his first
bringing up upon Mauburne hills, which he takes for so great an honor, that he
stands upon tip-toes, and brags much of his Gentility. Being a man of high
feeding, he is commonly illitterate, debauched and lacivious, and is often given
to quarrel at the innocence and simplicity of the sheep, because they want
the garb of a complete Gallant, which he takes himself to be; But the Great
Shepherd has decided the quarrel which is the better man, and has put him
on the left hand. He is very quick of hearing, but not so quick, as to hear
any good of himself, though every one cries out on him, Fie how he stinks,
which he neither regards, nor believes, by reason of his pride and
self-conceitednes, because he believes he has gained a place in the
heavens, though he have lived never so ill a life on earth; he was preferred
for his good parts to Bishop Wren, and by him put into a Viccarridge, with this
proviso, that he should drive all the Puritanes (as he termed them) out of his
Parish, and thanked God, That he had never a Lecturer left in his Diocese, and
so received from him his Instructions. To preach Altar Worship, Forgiveness of
sins by the Priest, Holy days to be observed before, or equal with the Lords
Day, That the Prelates had as much Power (without the King) to govern in
Ecclesiastical matters, as the King had in temporal, without the Bishops, and
to refuse to deliver the Sacrament to such as would not come up to their
Railes, and to excommunicate others for hearing Sermons in other Parrishes,
though they had none in their own for a month together, calling it Spiritual
Whoredom.

And is grown to that height of Impiety, that he compares the King to the man
that went from Jerusalem to Ierico, and fell among thieves, that wounded him of
his Honor, Robbed him of his Castles, and the hearts of his Subjects, the
Priest passing by, was the Protestant, the forward Professor the Levite; But
the Papist was the good Samaritane (especially the Irish Papist) and that the
Subject, with all he had, were at the Kings Command, and many such, and worse
Doctrines of Devils, were frequently preached, which spread like an infectious
Leprofie over the body of the whole Kingdom, and were supported with the two
Arches of Pride, and Lust, Cant. and Wren, that made their five senses the
Cinqe ports to traffic, with their Captain Satan, for the scarlet colored
Whore; though for it they were forced to pay the the Costome-tribute with their
souls.

The sixth is the Ass Cavaliere, that like an easy patient Beast, bears
burdens, or Arms against himself, and fights against his own Liberty, till he
enslaves himself to Tyranny and Opression; of these Beasts there are not a few
that Bray up and down this City, yea, few houses but are haunted with one or
more of these Spirits, which never discover themselves so far, as when they
sit on their Ale-benches in Tipling-houses, where they commonly meet together;
the profuseness and beastly sensuality of those houses it were fit were taken
into consideration, as well for suppressing the great number of them, as for
the redressing the manifold Abuses committed in them, to the great dishonor of
God, the abuse of his good Creatures, and the utter undoing and impoverishment
of most that frequent them. And how odious a fight is it in the eye of a
Christian, to see an Alehouse and a Brothelhouse, with painted Impudence,
preposterously bugger one anoanother, and so begit the bastard issue of a
Tobacco shop, which they breed up between them both, who receives such
instructions from his evil Parents that in a short time he out vapors them
both in wickedness: How many poor Mechanics have split themselves on these
fatal Rocks, and so consequently sunk themselves and families in the vast
Ocean of Poverty and misery? How many Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, etc. take
their original from that crying sin of drunkenness? And how needful it
were that there might be but a set number, which might be stocked by the
parishes in which they are, and honest men deputed for the keeping thereof, and
the gains arising therefrom to help to feed the poor, that has occasioned so
much poverty, as to prevent the abuses before mentioned, I leave to their
consideration, that have already suppressed two inseparable companions to these
houses, viz. the Swearer, and Profaner of the Sabbath.

The sixth and last, is the Apo Cavaliere, which is a right Mimick, made
naturally to play the Ape for his own ends: How many Moncky'sh Priests did Ape
that Arch-ape of Canterbury in cringing and bowing to Crucifixes, Altars, and
in wearing Copes and Surplices, some of which were not much inferior to Mr.
Jacks Coat, who in the Desert was content with that garb and coat that nature
had bestowed upon him, but being brought to the City, he must be clothed as
occasion serves? How many of our Priests at first, were coutented with a Cloak
or Cassack, but once coming to Rome, they must do as Rome does, and so Ape
one another till they become perfect Apes themselves? How did our Canterburyans
lately ape one another in their Altar-worship, Preaching, Titles, Postures,
Habits and the like, dancing even measures to Canterburies music, though at
last, like foolish apes, they broke all his strings, delighting to hear them
crack asunder? How did they ape one another in persecuting Godly Ministers,
Excommunicating, suspending, banishing, imprisoning, cutting off ears,
searring faces, slitting Noses, and the like, as if they would scale heaven by
murder, or (as Cant, Sermon. ult. observes) wade to happiness through a red sea
of blood; being not only cruel Persecuters and Tyrants, but great Poluters of
the service of God with superstitious inventions, and tricks of their own
devising, forcing conformity to their iniquity, impiety, cruelty, craft,
hypocrisy and deep dissimulation.

Canterburyes last Voyage, and Royal entertainment in the Infernal Kingdom.
HIs Grace being ready to take water in his Fatal Barge, ( Charon demanded his
Ferry-money) which the provident Prelate had ready for him, when presently he
hoysted up his black sails, which were presently filled with a Northern blast
of hideous Wind, which quickly brought him past Styx and Phlegiton to the
stairs Infernal; His Grace being landed on the Stygian shore, was presently
attended in great Pomp toward the Court of Pluto, with state little inferior
to his hellish Majesty, being met by multitudes of Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits,
Abbots, Monks, Priors and Bishops, amongst whom was Bonner, Wolsey, and other
his Predecessors, who did all Reverence his Grace, after their hellish manner,
which Pluto observing, shook with terror, knowing that a verier Devil was come
then himself, and feared he should be forced to resign his infernal Crown and
Scepter. But Canterbury perceiving the agony of Pluto, stepped forth from among
his Train, and spoke as follows.

MIghty Monarch, and Powerful Potentate of all the Infernal habitations;
though I am little inferior to thy self (thy terrible Titles only excepted) in
Devilish Policy, yet I have held it my duty, to give the Devil his due.
Therefore consider (Mighty Prince) by what means thy Royal Power has been
enlarged, and thy self become so great, thy Court so glorious, and thy
Dominions so populous; Or whether any of this numerous Train have brought more
souls to thy subjection then my self? or have labored more hard to make the
people understand, that they ought to understand nothing, and so led them by
the Noses to the Obedience of Rome, that there might be Room made for them in
hell? Have I not set Civil Wars afoot in England? Have I not stood stiffly for
my King, and went forward to the loss of my life, to maintain an unlawful and
unlimmited Prerogative, to the danger of my Countries ruin? Have not I cried
up Superstition and Formallity? I beseech your Deviship consider, Can there be
in your Infernal apprehension (my life and conversation considered) any
reason, but that (next your Majesty) I should bear rule in these your
Infernal Dominions The Devil fearing the great Policy of this Arch-Prelate,
though loath, yet condiscended thereto, causing Antonio Daemonibus his
Secritary, speedily to draw up a Decree to that purpose, and charged all his
Instruments of Horror, to give him the same Reverence due to himself, and the
best entertainment hell could aford.

FINIS.

