Le Chemin Abrege. Or, A Compendious METHOD for the Attaining of Sciences in a
Short Time.

Together with the Statutes of the ACADEMY Founded by the Cardinal of
RICHELIEU.

Englished by R. G. Gent.

LONDON Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard. ^^^^.

To the Worshipful JOHN SELDOM, Esquier.
SIR,
I Have often desired an Opportunity to testify both to your self, and the
World, how much I honor your transcendent Learning. This Piece coming to my
hands to translate, I pit ch'd upon your self to beg your patronage for it.
Some perhaps may urge, it deserves not your Acceptance: the greater then will
your Candor appear in desending at from the overhasty censure of rash
Critics. It was a Speech made to the famous Cardinal Richelieu, who is
acknowledged by all to have been the grand Politic States man, either of his
own, or precedent times. But neither this, nor the Cardinals good Approbation
of it, are the only causes of my Dedication.

This, Sir, is an excellent Foundation for a beautiful Structure. It Contains
an exact Method for the trayning up of youth in all manner of Sciences, and in
so short a time as no former Age afforded the like: and I am confident this our
Present cannot choose but approve of. But to take away all Scrupulous doubts,
from the common Reader, whether our Author has set down the right way to
atcheive this so laudable an Enterprise, I appeal to your Judicious
Approbation. If You think my labor well bestowed, I shall think my felf happy:
if not, I must fry to your Courteous Clement assuring my self of your pardon
for my bold Intrusion, which I hope you will look upon as only my Ambition to
deerve the Title of

Sir Your most humble Servant, Robert Gentilis.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, and most Excellent Mr. PETER EISSINGH, Magistrate of the
City of Groninghe, and Overseer of the Academie: Mr Osebrandt John Rengers,
Commissarie for the managing of the affairs of Omland, and overseer of the
Academie. Mr Jodocus Heinsius Syndicus, and Councellor of Omland, and Overseer
of the Academie.
SIRS,
THis discourse which will seem Paradoxicall both to the learned and unlearned,
does not promise it self to be so persuasive to the readers, as to draw them
all to side with the Author in his opinion. Himself had no such pretense; which
caused him, after he had once put it to the press, to call it in again. I had
also suppressed it, had not some persons of worth desired to see it, which has
caused me to publish it. Yet the Reader may find herein, what were the
thoughts and intentions; of one of the greatest Politicians of our age. Those
who wonder, why Socrates, Platoe's, and Aristotle's Schools, yield no more
Epaminonda's, Xenophons, nor Alexanders, shall here find satisfaction. These
great men made Sciences, as it were, natural to them, and caused them to grow
up with them, giving them the Principles thereof in their infancy, Whereas now,
the flower of man's youth is employed in learning of the Precepts of obsolet
Languages; and after he has gotten this vocal knowledge, when he comes to any
real, he meets with some unskillfull and shufling teachers, who either through
ignorance, or out of mere malice, obscure Arts and Sciences, under rude and
improper terms, clothing them, as I may say, with rags and tatters. Blame me
not then, gentlemen, if I present you this treatise: there being none, or but
very few extant upon such a Subject. Your affections to learning, and knowledge
of it has persuaded me, that such births as these ought to have approbation,
or disacceptance from such as you are. I know there are many things in it, at
which weak understandings may stumble. They will say, that the Author seeks
with unexampled boldness, to undervalue ancient Languages, to gain more tie and
auctority to his own native tongue. But those who shall consider, that all
Nations may apply that which is here particularly spoken of the French, as well
to their own mother tongue, will soon acquit him of that imputation. You must
moreover observe that he does not absolutely dissuade any from the study of
those he calls Obsolet Languages, but only restraines it within the bounds of
a public utility: He approves of learning of those Languages, so we do it as
the Greeks did the Aegiptiack, and the Arabians the Greek, namely to
appropriate to their own Language such Sciences as were first conceived and
written in the other. It were absurd to say, that we cannot in our Languages
do the like; For reason speaks all Languages, and through the necessity of
expressing ones self, all Nations (were they never so barbarous) did, and do
daily find out terms and words sufficient to express their thoughts. Is man's
understanding become so confined, and barren, that it cannot more dress and
trimm up Sciences after its own fashion? No indeed, it is as vigorous now as it
was in former ages, but more servile. It is become like those degenerous and
slowthfull painters, who dare not adventure to see forth any thing of their own
invention; But will rather be styled poor coppiers of others draughts, then by
some Masterpecce of their own, show that they understand the secret and order
of designing. And are content to bestow the uttermost of their art, and spend
their times in refreshing some old images, and renewing with some quaint
colors, the pourtraiture of a Judith and Holofernes. It is no wonder
therefore, if our modern Languages be so poor, seeing we bestow all the care we
should have of them, upon the beautifying and refining of the ancient ones,
whose very Antiquity otherwise is a manifest proof of their defect and
barrenness. For as those who spoke them, had seen fewer things then we, so
they needed fewer words to express them: and living in the first ages of the
world, they could not frame names for such things as have been discovered but
of late days. So that we may there find the mistake of those Critics, who
through a curious stupidity, will forsake Pistolets of weight for light
Medalls. As for those who imagine, that treating of Sciences in vulgar tongues,
will derogate from their Majesty, I believe they have as little ground for it,
as those who should conceive that the value of Gold is diminished by those who
digg it out of the entralls of the earth, to refine it, and make it serve for
commerce. Finally Gentlemen, those who shall know how to distinguish the
Authors reasons, from the praises which he attributes to the person to whom he
speaks; that is to say, can discern the matter from the accidents, the
substance from the colors, and the words of truth from those of insinuation,
shall find that it would be very advantageous for every country, to have such
Sciences, as concern Policy, taught in their mother tongue. And let such as
are of a contrary opinion, look upon this Treatise, as a trial of wit, and
read it only to pass the time. My only desire is, to show you that my duty
and affection caused me to dedicate it to you all jointly; desiring not to be
known by any other name, then of

Your most humble and obedient Servant.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, This speech was made in the presence of one of the ablest
Politicians of our age. Wherefore wonder not at the sublime titles which our
author gives him. I might have left them out, but I held it not fit to alter
any thing, either in the matter or form of this Treatise. There is a second
speech, which I shall also present you with, if I perceive you accept of this.
I have in the mean time imitated the Ancient Priests, who were wont to burn a
little of the hair of the beast, which they intended to offer, to make an essay
by the smoke thereof, whether the offering would be accepted or no. Read, and
judge favorably. Vale.

The First Speech made in the presence of The Late Cardinal of RICHELIEV.
SIR,
WHen the French Academie was first established by your Eminency for the
reforming and refining of our Language, those who are versed in History, did
presage the imminent glory of this Monarchy: having often read and observed,
that Monarchies, and Commonwealths never flourished more then when the Native
Language first was risen to its full perfection; as the corruption thereof was
always a certain forerunner of the ruin of Nations, and decay of Empires.

The regulating of words does insensibly produce in all places a conformity of
Language, which is the strongest bond that may be, to conjoyne the various
affections of people under one government, and keep them in a perfect
correspondencie, wherein consists the happiness and prosperity of all States*
uniting them in a true understanding of each other, wherein consists the
happiness and prosperity of States. Wherefore they who first founded Cities for
humane society, and all the wise Politicians who succeeded them, took as much
care for the beautifying and refining their Language, as for any other either
Sacred or Civil business, namely Fundamental Laws, Mysteries of Religion,
or the most holy Ceremonies.

The greatest Divines affirm, that the first Language after the Creation was
every way accomplished and complete, as well in its entire structure, as
invention, and expression. Because our first father who had an infused
knowledge of all things, gave them their names according to their specificall
virtue and property. By this means did he communicate his knowledge to his
posterity, making it easy for them to grow up to understanding, only by
learning to speak; being without any other precepts instructed in all manner
of knowledge. This language was of such efficacy, that every word was as a
whole Science, which truly declared the Essence and Nature of every thing:
whereby man, who naturally desires to know, found his desires fulfilled, and
satisfied without any difficulty. He began to Philosophate, and learn how to
live well, even from his birth and infancy. The intention of this first man,
who was framed by the immediate hand of God, was to make this language
invariable, and universal, and (for the benefit of his posterity) the
character and lively spring of all those rare lights, which God of his
goodness had infused in him. All succeeding languages have been most confused,
barren, and imperfect; by reason that men being become incapable of
communication, yea and even of society, through the confusion of languages, did
almost lose the use of discourse, and lived for a time like savages and
vagabonds. It was a horrible disorder amongst mankind, and a terrible curse
upon the builders of Babel.

But as soon as men began a little to associate, and reunite themselves, every
one in his own family invented names for such common things as were most
neceslarie for man's ordinary use, and then (as it is now adays in new
discovered countries) there were as many Idioms as Commonalties. Atlength
(through succession of tims) men beginning to rallie and gather together, and
lay the foundations of a civil life, all these particular Languages ceased,
and they agreed upon one common Language for the mutual understanding of
people.

True it is, that there remains no monuments amongst us in these times of
those Languages which were in those primitive Empires of the world, Assyrians,
Egyptians, and Persians, unless it be upon some Pyramides and Medalls, of
which the worth and signification is not known in our days. But the Chaldean
and Egyptian Priests and Magitians, who taught all manner of Sciences in their
mother tongue, witness sufficiently, that they had carefully refined it: seeing
that the first (after the confusion of Languages) invented sufficicient
terms, not only for ordinary discourse and commerce, but also for the
sublimest speculative Sciences, Mysteries of Religion, and in a word for all
manner of secret things, which came not to the knowledge of vulgar people.

The and ent Gauls, though they were so much addicted to war, that because
they would not be troubled with any other thing, they left the judging of Law
suits, the governing of Politic business and all other peaceable affairs to
be managed by their wives; And had a fundamental law amongst themselves to set
forth every seventy years, two hundred thousand choice fighting men in the
field, and send them away out of their own Kingdom to conquer some other
country. Yet so careful were they of maintayning and refining their native
language, that the Bards and Semnotheans, who were their Poets, have been
thought to exceed the Greek and Latin ones: And it is no small honor to this
country, that we read even in Roman Histories, how that Statius Cecilius, a
Gaul, was Schoolmaster to Ennius, the ancientest of their Poets, and that the
said Cecilius together with Valerius Cato, another Gaul, were the first that
brought Poetry to Rome. And in those days the ordinary employme^ts of Noble
men's children were to make verses, and learn all manner of sciences in their
own mother tongue. And the Greeks do not only confess they had their
characters and letlers of their Alphabet from the Gauls; but even Aristotle
himself (as Laertius reports) freely confesses that they borrowed their
Philosophy of our Druids and Semnotheans; whereby we may know, that our
forefathers were as skillful in Sciences, as they were practiced in well
speaking: and that they are not without reason esteemed to have been the
Authors of Physical and Moral Philosophy, Geometry, and other learning,
which had its original amongst them, and was from thence spread abroad into
other countries. For although Philosophy be natural to all men, and has
successively flourished in many parts of the world; yet one may in some manner
say, that ours is its native country, and that it is more proper and natural
to this Nation then to any other; seeing that when it was utterly extinguished
in Egypt, Greece, and Arabia, yet it remaieed still in this country, in
despite of all the revolutions and changes of State, which usually alter and
turn every thing upside down.

As soon as the Grecians had attained to any domination, they used their best
endeavors both to refine and perfect their Language, and also to make it
extend to the neighboring provinces: its original atfirst was in that little
country, which was called Hellas; and afterward it passed over into the
Kingdoms of Epirus and Macedonia the Islands of the Aegean Sea, Candie, Corfu,
Egypt, Rhodes, Natolia, Pontus Euxinus, Trebizond, to the very mouth of
Danubius, Thrace, Sicily, and all the southern coast of Italy, to the very
confines of France, which extend from the Rhosne to Genoa; it being certain
that Marseilles was once a Colonie of the Phoceans. Their Annalls testify that
the Areopagus had the charge of refining the Language; and the Areopagites did
oftentimes meet for the setting of the genuine meaning and true pronunciation
of a letter, or anaccent: and to it must be attributed the glory of preserving
this language the structure of which is so admirable in all its parts, that it
has served for a Model and Idea to the Latin, and other Languages that have
been since. And when the Greeks were divided into several States, that
division occasioned as many several Dialects, as there were Commonwealths,
whereof each one strove who should most polish and beautify its own manner of
speaking: As if they would have noted the difference of their Soveraigneties by
some diversity of Language: So that now reading those Authors whose works are
yet extant amongst us, we can hardly judge which of them has most refined his
Dialect.

The Roman Senate (the wisest, and most venerable assembly of the world)
judgeing it to be no less advantageous for their Republic to amplify their
Language, then to extend their frontiers, had resolved to make it as universal
as their domination. For the effecting of which glorious design, they sent out
Colonies into all parts, and gave the greatest cities of those countries which
they had conquered the privilege of Roman freedom to oblige them to speak
their language, without which they might not be capeable of bearing any Office
in the commonwealth. They also made decrees, that no foreign business,
suites, and Embassies should be discussed in the Senate, but in Latin, their
Provincial laws should be written in it, and their Prators and Governors of
conquered Provinces should give judgment in no other Language. It was a
policy religiously observed by the Roman Magistrates, never to give any
Audience to any strange Language, denying that privildge even to the Greek,
though it were famous and celebrated amongst them. They also set up public
Grammar Schools, to instruct and bring up youth in the Latin tongue in all
cities of their Dominions. These were the means by which these great
Politicians spread their language throughout the world, and taught Africa,
Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Valachia, England, and diverse other Northern
Regions to speak Latin, until the dissipation of that Empire. They had not
(I must confess) the like success toward the East, because the Greek, which
by reason of Sciences, was there in its luster, did that way stay the course of
the Latin tongue.

No sooner did the Arabians begin to build their greatness upon the ruins of
the Roman Empire, but they presently began likewise to refine, extend, and
amplify their I anguage, and having subd^^d a great part of Asia, Africa and
Europe, they brought it into diverse Eastern, Southern, and western countries,
and made it spread as far, or farther then any other, that we have yet known

The Turks, though they be enemies of Sciences, having banished them out of
Egypt, Greece, and Arabia, do notwithstanding intrude their Language into all
the countries which they conquer, causing the people to make use of it in their
military offaire;, and all public acts and instruments. And though the
Arabic tongue be the beautifullest, and richest of any National Language now
extant, and be yet used in Egypt for an Interpreter of their Religion, and
Alcoran: yet do they inslave the Inhabitants to the rigor of this law, to
destroy it utterly by degrees, and bring in the Turkish Speech in stead of it.

The Spaniards likewise, whose dominions are hard to be preserved, the parts
thereof being so far distant one from the other, had no sooner laid the
foundations of their Universal monarchy, but they indeavored to the uttermost
of their power, to spread their Language, not only in those countries which
they had gotten in Africa and Europe, but have extended it even into America.
So that Peru, which is also called the Golden Castile, though above fifteen
hundred leagues distant from Spain, speaks now no longer its own, but has
been constrained as well as the rest to embrace the conquerers language. Philip
King of Spain forced the Moors of Granada to change their habit and speech,
for no other reason, but only to keep so many different and several Nations
in perfect union and concord, by a conformity in all things.

Finally the French tongue only has had the ill fortune to remain for a long
season deformed, rough, and irregular, though the Nation has always been
potent and glorious; not through any barrenness or defect in the French
Genius, for both the Greeks and Romans have always given pregnant testimonies
of their eloquence; but the beginning of this disorder began in Julius Caesar's
time, who having conquered the Gauls (the better to subject them to the Romish
yoke) extirpated the ancient Gauls banished our Druides, who were the only
depositories of our Laws, Religion, and Sciences, that he might find so much
the less resistance to the introduction of Roman Customs. Afterward the
Northern nations, namely Franconians, Goths, Hunns, Vandalls, and others,
going in quest of a milder ^mate, and more fruitful countries, made several
inrodes into this, came and inhabited part of it, whence proceeded the mixture,
and confusion which we may this day observe in it. For on that side of France
which is next to Germany and the Netherlands, it received many harsh words, of
a difficult and hard pronunciation; toward Spain and Italy, it retained many
Latin words. And afterward being divided into several states, each people
contained themselves within the bounds of their own precincts, which hindered
the free commerce one with another: and this separation framed as many several
Dialects amongst them, as there were Principa^ities.

The hatred which the Romans bare the Gauls, by reason of their valout, and
the frequent victories they had gotten of them, was so excessive and
inveterate, that ransacking and pillaging the whole country, they suppressed
all the books, writings, and records of the Semnotheans, Bards, and Druides.
And the Emperor Tiberi^s, utterly to extingish the name of Gauls, interdicted
the Priests to sacrifice, and under a false pretense of Magic, and
enchantments, wherewith he accused them, he drove them all out of the country.
Antoninus the Emperor was no less an enemy to them, though he took a far
milder and more politic way to ruin them. For considering that the best way
to make our forefathers forget what things had been done before, was to
annihilate and abolish their native Language, he did not only command them to
learn the Latin, and to plead therein, and to make those Hymns which they
sung in their sacrifices, in that language; but forbad them likewise to treat
of any matters with the Emperors by means of any interpreter; saying it was a
thing misbeseeming Roman greatness, to be spoken to by a subjects Language.
Yet neither these, nor the succeeding Emperors could utterly abolish the
Gauls Language: And notwithstanding all these violent courses, some Colleges
which the Bards had erected in diverse cities, namely at Treves, Autun,
Besanson, Tolous, Marseilles, and Lions, stood many years after. But as soon
as they had shaken off the Roman yoke, and the French Monarchy was
reestablished, they began again to take some care of their native Language,
and Poetry began to be in repute amongst them, so far that even Kings and
Princes ordinarily addicted themselves thereunto. Chilperick the grand child of
Clovis the Grand would ad unto the French Alphabet some Greek letters, which
he thought we should want in our Orthographie, enjoining all Schoolmasters
within his Kingdom to make use of them in writing of French. Charlemaine writ
in verse the most memorable acts of his ancestors, and himself composed a
French Grammar. Philip the renowned, and diverse others of our Kings and
Princes did also beautify our native Language. But the Latin had taken such
deep root, that it always prevailed, and hindered our Language from coming
to its full perfection.

Lewis the Eleventh was the first that effectually employed his power and
authority in the restoration and reestablishment of our native Language. For
having reunited diverse Provinces to the Crown, to make the Language also
conformable, he caused diverse dispatches, which until that time had been
framed in corrupt Latin, to be afterward written in French. And by this
means this great King gave again some luster and subsistence to our Language,
so that to him we may attribute the glory of having him, in some sort, the
Founder of it seeing that by this his ordinance it began by little and little
to be regulated, and come again to some perfection, until the reign of
Francis, who seconding his predecessors Royal intentions, commanded all
pleadings to be in the Vulgar tongue, and judgments to be given therein, which
had before been done in Latin. This great Prince also caused many ancient
Authors to be translated into French, and granted several privileges and
prerogative, to Historians, Poets, and Orators of his time.

Our Language went on increasing under Henry the second, Charles the ninth,
Henry the third, and Henry the Great. For in their days a rose many rare and
sublime understandings who pricked forward by a noble emulation and desire of
beautifying the French tongue, invented many new words, and writ several
admirable works: the chief whereof were Amiet, Ronsard, Baif, Du Bellay,
Iodellus, and diverse others, who having written all much about one time, might
be said to have brought our Language to a most high point of perfection. But
do what these great Princes could, they hardly freed it from its Parbarismes,
it was so confused and intermingled with corrupt Latin, and diverse other
tongues. His Majesty has found out the true, and hitherto concealed way, to
regulate it in all its parts, and reduce it to a perfect accomplishment, by the
good advice and known wisdom of your Eminency, in founding the French
Academie, and filling it with men of eminent and refined learning, the choice
wits of the Kingdom, who discreetly omit and cut off unprofitable and
superfluous words, wisely adding whatsoever is wanting in our Language for the
happy expressing of our thoughts, banishing all those Gothic terms which were
crept in amongst us by the communion we had with those Northern nations,
preserving and establishing in their room such as we had borrowed from
politer and more civilized people; so that our speech is daily beautified, our
Authors write more without fault, our Lawyers grow more eloquent, expressing
themselves in rhetorical and fluent phrases, our Provinces are purged of their
several Dialects, which hindered their commerce, being hardly able to
understand one another without interprerers.

Give me leave to tell your Eminency that for the perfecting of this great
work, nothing was so necessary as the settling of an Academie in this Kingdom,
in which both the native and foreign gentry might learn Sciences in our
mother tongue. This being an infallible means to reform the Language even in
the remotest Provinces, and reduce the whole nation to an uniformity of speech
and Dialect, to make our Language famous in strange countries, causing all the
subjects of this Kingdom to observe the rules and precepts of the Academy. For
Sir, we read in Histories that there be four principal ways, to bring
languages to a full perfection, amplify, and immortalize them.

The first is by Arms, when the conqueror binds the vanquished to speak his
Language, either by planting colonies in it; or by causing all public acts and
Dispatces to be set down and framed in that speech which they intend to bring
in. The greatest mark of Soveraintie is to force conquered nations to alter
their Idiom: and the last King of the ancient Hetrurians, yielded to all
conditions which the victorious Romans would impose upon him, but only to that
of admitting the Latin tongue within his dominions. This was the means by
which the Romans made a great part of the world speak Latin, the Goths and
Arabians introduced their language within the bounds of the Roman Empire, and
whereby the Turks have so far extended their speech. And this way is reserved
for your Eminency to advance, by making our armies victorious, and enlarging
the bounds of our Monarchy.

The second means is, translation of writers, whereby we change and transform
into our own Language, the rare inventions, and rich conceits of other
Nations; making them speak such an idiom as they never understood. For which
cause Ptolomie King of Egypt filled up that famous Library with seven hundred
thousand Manuscripts, the greatest part whereof were translated out of other
Tongues into Greek, and bought at so high a rate the version of the Septuagint.
By means of translation also did Aristotle write those exquisite Politics
(whereof some fragments only remain to us) having the several sorts of
Governments of all Nations of the World brought unto him in writing; Alexander
having sent Ambassadors every where, on purpose to extract the best out of each
Countries Laws, to have a perpect Polity framed thereby, which should be
inviolably observed within all his Dominions.

The Romans, following this great Monarch's example, sent some of the
sufficientest men of their Commonwealth into Greece, to translate the best of
the Grecian Laws, out of which extracts, they framed their Law of the twelve
Tables, called Lex duodecim tabularum, which was afterward the spring and
foundation of all the Roman Laws. And at their return from Athens, their
ordinary employment was, to translate into Latin the most remarkable things
which they found written in the Greek tongue. And amongst the rest Cicero (as
zealous in the beautifying of his native language, as of the maintaining of his
Countries liberty) invented such exquisite terms for Moral Philosophy, tha^
all his works which are extant therein, are as so many of his Masterpeeces.
Some, to^ much affected to the Greek tongue, would have diverted him from his
intentions; but he rejecting their counsel, went happily on in his design,
and, had he not been prevented by a violent death, was resolved to translate
the whole course of Philosophy out of Greek into Latin, as he promises in
his second Book de Divinatione, and other several places. His death was one o^
the greatest misfortunes that ever befell, not only the Commonwealth of Rome,
but since that also, all the States of Christendom; For since that great man,
never durst any undertake so great a work, and consequently the Latin tongue
has wanted the pure terms of arts and sciences For though Boethius, upon the
decaying of the Latin tongue, did attempt to translate the course of
Philosophy, it was neither followed, nor taught. And those translators as have
undertaken any such thing since the first foundation of our Universities,
finding no proper Philosophical terms in any Latin Authors, were constrained
to frame new ones, so improper, barbarous, and remote from that primitive
elegancie, that they would scarce have been understood by the ancient Romans.

The Arabians used the same means, and there are even in these days extant
diverse Greek Authors, yea, even some books of Aristotle translated into the
Arabic tongue, which are not to be had, neither in their own Original, nor
yet in Latin; which books the Estates of the united Provinces, great lovers
and promoters of learning, are now causing to be translated out of Arabic into
Latin.

And this means belongs properly to those who are of the French Academie; it
is a commendable kind of work, which may be performed in a study at convenient
hours. And seeing they are so perfectly skilled in foreign Languages, that
they can prudently thereby regulate, and enrich ours; we do hope and expect
from this honorable company, faithful translations of the best books antiquity
has left us; which they may perform as a recreation in their vacant hours, to
solace themselves after their serious employments in producing and inventing
new and elegant words and expressions.

The third means is Grammar, by which we learn to decline and conjugate, read,
and pronounce in all places, in one manner. And for this end, Aristotle, Plato,
Aristophanes, Apollodorus, Aristarchus, Chrysippus, Cicero, Caesar, Varro,
Quintilian, Donatus, Priscian, Charlemaine, and many other great persons of
both Nations have written so carefully thereof. The Roman did for that end
erect two and twenty public schools in Rome, and many more in their several
Provinces, to instruct their children, and bring them up in an uniform
pronunciation. Though they had not in those days any Colleges founded for
Sciences, but Greek teachers only made use of in private houses, to teach them
Sciences in the Greek language.

And if Francis the first had well be thought himself, and first endeavored to
have an uniformity of language in all his Dominions, and had to that end
founded French Grammer-sch ooles in several Cities of his Kingdom; he had
saved much of that vast expense which he was a^ in erecting of so many
Colleges for the Hebrew, Greek, Arabian, and Latin tongues and there had not
been at this time so many several sorts of speeches, in this Kingdom, but all
would have spoken after one manner.

But the most certain, and powerful means to regulate Languages, and make
them lasting and universal, is to make them interpreters of Sciences, which are
no sooner brought into a National Language, but they grace it with all
necessary ornaments, and make it every way complete. By their means, the
Egyptian, Greek, and Arabian tongues have obtained so much credit in the world;
and learned Nations have made all the Earth speak their particular and Mother
Languages. Their works have crossed the Seas, and when they have been banished
out of their Native Country, they have found courteous entertainment amongst
foreign Nations. The authority of Sciences has given the Eastern Languages
their pass to travel into our parts. Conquerors can extend their Languages no
further then the bounds of their Conquests, nor can they make them last there
any longer then their own power. Translators and Grammarians have also in some
manner their bounds. Sciences only enjoy the privilege and prerogative of
making anguages immortal, and extending them beyond the bounds of those
Kingdoms in which they had their origin: So that when they are dead in their
own natural Country where they were first spoken, they survive amongst other
Nations, or at least find an honorable tomb in the memory of the learned and
wisest men.

Want of this last means, has been the cause that our French tongue has
remained barren and unpolisht, without rule and order within the Kingdom,
restrained within it, and for a long time unknown to strangers. It wants not
all dispositions required for the perfecting of it, if it were but well
followed; for questionless all Languages are of themselves equally able to
express their thoughts: and if any one has a prerogative above the other, it
must be attributed only to the labor and industry of the most excellent men
of each Nation. When Homer and Demosthenes, Cicero, and Virgil, Boccace and
Petrarch, Grenada and Lopezde Vega, Amiot and Ronsard, framed a design to write
in their own Languages, they were then but in their infancy, and yet these
famous Persons brought them almost to the height of their accomplishment.
Whence we may infer, that those famous and stately Languages, which antiquity
has so much admired, were in their beginning weak and abject; they have in
time been brought to perfection by the care and industry of wise and learned
men, who have labored to find out as many names, as there were things, wherein
consists the essence and perfection of Languages; whereas hitherto we have
servilely bestowed our times and studies to the refining and restoring of
Foreign and obsolet Languages, unfortunately neglecting our own. Whence it
proceeds, that we have not found needful and fitting words and terms to
express our selves; and, to our shame and ignominy, we can not name many
things in French, for which we have names both in Greek and Latin; whereas
other Nations, that have not known those foreign and obsolet Languages, or at
least have made no use of them in discourse, have found out moralls enough of
their own, to express their thoughts and Knowledges.

As soon as children become rational, and have attained to such an age that
they can speak well and correct those childish utterances which they had
gotten from nurses in stead of making them eloquent in their language, they
teach them Greek and Latin* contemning the French; so that when they forsake
the Colleges, wherein they have spent the prime of their youth, they seem to
be strangers in their own country, and retain the ill tones, and unsavory
pronunciations of their several provinces, which afterward they can never
leave, so that after fifteen or twenty years study, they speak like the
vulgar and common sort of people, and never become eloquent in the French
tongue, whatsoe ver profession they follow.

The self same thing is the reason why it is impossible for us to become
truly learned, because that to be right Philosophers we must of necessity do
as they did in ancient times, namely, make use of a popular usual and
national mother tougue. For though the names which we learn even from the
breast, be not more significant then the other, yet because that long custom
has made them familiar unto us, and as it were natural, the Ideas or images
of the names, and of the things insinuating themselves into us jointly at one
time, the former through the ears, and the latter through the eyes, and are
joined and inseparably united in our memory, and knit together by so perfect a
sympathy and strict covenant, that it is impossible to think upon the one
without remembering the other; and whilst the love of these two Ideas is
reciprocal, and they are faithful to each other, they engender knowledge and
polite speech in our minds; but if either of them violates the I awes of this
sacred union, and suffers it self to be transported to illegal Objects; they
produce nothing but barbarism and confusion. Now this misunderstanding
happens chiefly two ways, either when ye understanding abandoning the
consideration of fair and solid truth, seeks only after frivolous and
chimericall things; or when it addicts it self to strange languages which are
but servants; and contemns his mother tongue which is his true spouse, and
imitates Polygamie which is familiar to some Nations where Concubines are
preferred before the Lawful Wife. Which cannot choose but be very prejudicial
to discourse, because that on the one side, the images of those things which
are not, can engender in our minds nothing but false and spuirous notions, such
as blind men have of colors, of which they know only the name: and on the
other side, the idea of one only thing coming to unite it self in the memory
to the Ideas and images of so many strange and differing words, alters, and
confounds not only the species of the mother tongue, but also breeds so great a
confusion in the species of other languages, that in stead of stirring up the
Image of a Spanish word, and uttering of it, oftentimes it stirrs up and utters
some Italian or French words: and thence it comes that those who have learned
many languages, cannot choose so^times but confound and mix the^ together.

The Ideas of things, and of names, have been freely bestowed upon us at one
time, the former by nature, and the latter by our nurses, to make us capable of
discourse and communication; but be cause the Ideas of names commonly make not
so deep an impression in us, as the Ideas of things; we ought to practice them
carefully from our tender age, and strengthen them in such sort by frequent
repetition; that the memory may not labor more in preserving and uttering
them, then it does in conceiving the Ideas of things; otherwise we shall never
obtain in the faculty of well speaking, but shall still be troubled with
conceiving, and not have power to bring forth; which is one of the greatest
disasters and troubles that can befall our minds. And to make it appear, that
we may longer and easier remember the species of things then the names of them,
we find by experience, that every man is oftentimes troubled to remember some
names which he has almost daily uttered, and yet shall not easily forget the
species of a thing which he has once or twice attentively marked and observed.
Finally experience teaches us, that he tongue and the thought do always
retain somewhat of the quality of the climate: Which is the cause that a Greek,
or Italian thought, that has always even from its infancy been brought up and
nourished with its own Country language, as with a sister; has more relation
and conformity to, and with it, then with any other, and that a Science which
consists all in word and thought, is never natural, nor can enter or take any
deep root in the spirit, unless it be taught in the mother tongue. That is the
reason, why when we speak French, our words come from us easily, and a polite
phrase is uttered by us as sudainly as a well conceived thought; whereas in a
Greek or Latin discourse, we must continually attend to the choice of terms,
studying upon every word we utter, which turmoiles our mind, and hinders it
from employing it self with full liberty in the indagation of a truth; which
is also the cause that we do not easily forget our Mother tongue; whereas
strange languages are as soon blotted out of our memories, as we give over the
use of them; and the professors thereof no sooner discontinue the practice, but
they lose that habit which they had obtained with so much labor, and
difficulty.

Ever fince the Creation of the World, until about the time of Charles the
great, all the Nations of the Earth, Gauls, Egystians, Persians, and Grecians
taught Sciences in National and Mother tongues, and if they did borrow any
help of foreign Languages, they were such as were still in use, and had their
course among the learned, who were consulted with as so many Oracles; and
besides, it was but only until such time that their own Language was brought
to perfection, and they had invented terms enough for Sciences. But this great
Bruce, being chosen King of the Romans, absolute in a great part of Europe, and
considering that the Language was extremely corrupted in the Roman Empire,
through the incursions of the Barbarians, and espcially in these Western parts;
so that it was almost impossible to regulate it, and in it to teach Sciences
(which he savoured as much as any Monarch in the World) he judged it more
expedient at that time to reestablish the Latin tongue every where, and restore
it to its pureness, then to refine and bring in use that Latin which was
usual in his time. To this end he set up Universities, caused all Pleas, and
acts to be pleaded and set down in Latin. Questionless nis intentions were
commendable, and Noble; yet they had no prosperous success: For he suppressed
a certain mixed Language, which was then popular, and might easily have been
made perfect and complete; and yet did not revive the ancient Roman tongue
which was quite dead and extinguished. Which occasioned a mighty disorder,
because that out of the corruption of one Language, there were three framed,
which in a small time grew so different one from another, that they could not
be understood, but only by those who particularly professed them. For then the
French, Spanish, and Italian Grammarians studied nothing but the pureness of
the Roman Language, Philosophers the gross vulgar and new invented Latin, and
the common people wanting rules and instructions touching the mixed Language,
from those who could speak well in it, could not of themselves turn the
barbarous foreign words into Latin, which of it self is difficult enough;
and were forced to fly for relief to thy Substantive and auxiliarie Verbes.
And by this means were framed in France, Italy, and Spain a kind of bastard
Languages, which are nothing but a kind of corrupt Latin. Philosophy is very
natural to man; and rarest wits have in all ages been curious in the search of
truth; which we might more clearly have perceived by their works, had they not
been lost by the corruption of Languages, deluges, firings, wars, and
transmigrations of Nations. Philosophy is the worthiest Object of our
admiration, and one of the rarest presents Heaven has bestowed upon us; by its
means we are raised, and elevated to the knowledge of divine things, we
peretrate into the secrets of nature; we regulate our manner of living, and
entertain humane society; and yet now it is made odious unto us, through the
difficulty of those Languages which are isntrumental to her, and the barbarism
of new invented terms. The light of men's understandings seems to be darkened,
and yet certainly reason does not degenerate. All ages produce gallant men, and
most acute wits, who ought to be more learned then those who lived in former
times, having this advantage, to have the use of all their inventions, and time
daily disclosing some new experiment. Is it not a great ease unto us in these
days to have Euclide's Elements so carefully set forth, Aristotle's Philosophy
so solidly established, Hippocrates his Maxims so judiciously ordered, and so
many other rare and excellent works, which lost, could never have been made
good again? How comes it then, that we are not as learned as they were in those
daves, and have not in these latter Ages such men as Hippocrates, Aristotle,
Euclide, Archimedes, Diophantus, Tullie, Plutarch, and Seneca? What is the
reason that Philosophy still degenerates, and that so many studious brains
who watch continually, and burn of a desire to learn, can not so much as add
one degree of perfection to Philosophy, nor yet exquisitely tread those paths
in which they formerly walked? Questionless it is, because we do not as those
discreet and well advised people did, who brought their Children directly to
learn Sciences when they were but seven or eight years of age, and never put
them to fruitless studies of unused and strange Languages. They reasoned
fluently without any trouble; whereas now within these seven or eight hundred
years, we employ the flower of our age, in which we might make most
proficiencie in our studies, toward obtaining of Sciences in a kind of
apprentice-ship, in seeking to restore those obsolete Languages; setting more
by a few Grammatical observations, and Etymologies of words, then
Mathematical Demonstrations, or Maxims of Philosophy.

Yet questionless we see this apprenticeship which we are tied to in atta
ining of these abolished Languages, is bevond comparison more tedious and hard,
then all moral and natural Sciences. How watchful, studious, and turmoiled
must we be before we can attain, not only to the polite speaking, but even to
a rough understanding of the Greek or Latin tongue? Our minds, and all the
faculties of our souls, suffer a thousand torments in the compassing of it; in
so much that a free spirit, and a Noble Genius, can hardly captivate it self to
so many rudiments of Grammar, so many particles and frivolous observations; it
dashes and dulls it self, and in the end shakes off this cumbersome yoke, and
by that means it happens oftentimes to the great damage of the public good,
that the French Nobility, endowed with most rare natural faculties, being not
able to subject it self to such an intricate study, conceives a mortal hatred
against all manner of learning, which of it self is a thing so rare, and to
which they have so great a natural inclination.

This is the reason that Northern Nations, who have but a mean and dull
spirit, do more willingly apply themselves to the learning of Languages, employ
their whole time therein, and are not tired with this bondage and servitude;
whereas the Southern, abhorring so fruitless a labor, unworthy of a high and
lofty mind, addict themselves wholly to Sciences, and meditation.

Trismegistus, who is accounted to have been the founder of Sciences, a great
King, Priest, and Philosopher, made so little esteem of the Greek tongue, in
respect of the Egyptian, that he was even afraid least those rare works which
he had compiled concerning all Divine and humane Sciences, should be translated
into that Language. The Grecians, having learned from the Egyptians to cherish
and refine their own Language, did so contemn all others, that they called them
Barbarians. And thereupon Plutarch cared not for learning of the Latin tongue;
though it was in his time most flourishing, and he lived in Traian's Court,
where it was most purely spoken, and that he had undertaken the writing of the
Roman History.

Saint Augustine, the honor of Africa, and of the Church, who easily could
comprehend and penetrate into any thing; complains in diverse places, and
especially in his Confessions, of the difficulty he found in learning the Greek
tongue by precepts; and averreth that it cannot be inculcated into the memory,
without rough threatenings, and severe correct ons, which dulls the courage of a
child, and distracts his Senses. He says that also he found more distaste then
pleasure in the reading of Homer himself, though it was so full of varieties,
and recreative and pleasant fictions: and that contrariwise he learned the
Latin tongue in sporting among women and children, though it was no more
natural to him then the Greek, because he was sent to learn it in a City of
Africa, which was a Roman Colonie, and where they ordinarilse did speak Latin.

We have in these days far greater occasion to complain; they put us in
prison, and torment us in Colleges for the space often or twelve years, to
learn Preterits, Supines, Syntaxes, Heteroclites, and Anomala, which, one may
in truth say, are but the excrements, and impurities of an irregular, and
imperfect Language. For in Saint Augustines days, there was yet some pretense
and color for the learning of Latin and Greek, which was national and popular
in a great part of the East; but now why should we in vain trouble our selves
to revive obsolet Languages, which serve no longer for any commerce? The
learned amongst the Grecians, in former times, were wont to blame the
Grammarians, who bestowed so much time in teaching the Grammar, and the Mother
tongue, to the prejudice of Sciences; But what would they say, I pray you, if
they saw now the disorders of our school? would they not have far greater
occssion to complain of the length of the bondage we endure in learning of
strange languages; which robbs us of the best time we have to attain to
learning? All Languages ought to be learned by practice, and not by precepts:
and we find by experience, that the Dutch, and Switzers, which come to dwell
in France amongst us, cause their Language to continue in their own private
families, and their children are brought up in it without violence or precepts.
Nations frame every day amongst themselves new speeches naturally; and as it
were unawares: and yet these numberless Greek and Latin teachers cannot in
seven or eight hundred years make these Languages familiar in any College,
nor bring youth to speak them naturally: But yet we need not marvel, if
Languages follow the order of Generations, of which we never see the beginning,
nor ending; and as we can not raise them up again to their spring and origin,
so it is impossible to hinder them from descending, and wearing away.

The Egyptians reproved the Grecians, who came to study amongst them, saying,
they remain in continual infancy all their life time, without Knowledge or
discourse: because they did not profit by their instructions, and could not all
under one, learn a foreign Language, though it were usual both in the
Masters and the Scholars mouths, and apprehend the Mysteries of their
Doctrines. But as soon as the Grecians began to learn and teach Philosophy
in their own proper and natural tongue, they soon went beyond the Egyptians,
who were their masters, in all manner of learning: and afterward began to
contemn all other Languages, holding the Romans, Spaniards, and Carthaginians
for barbarous Nations, because they had not Sciences in their own proper
Idioms. Whereas if they had still learned Philosophy in the Chaldean and
Egyptian Languages, they had continued in their infancy for ever.

By this means, all those Nations which studied Philosophy in their own
mother tongue, became betimes solid in learning, and eloquent, and have left
behind them solid and eloquent works. Galen studying in his own tongue,
happily attained to perfection, and was both a Mathematician, a Philosopher,
and a Physician in fifteen or sixteen years, as well as diverse others of his
time: and contrariwise those Nations which taught, and do teach in obsolet
Languages, never taste the sweet of Sciences, the very entrance thereinto
seeming to them craggy and ine acceslible: and if at last they
attainethereunto, it is with infinite labor; and although they be learned, yet
are they barbarous in their manners, actions, and words. How many learned men
are there amongst us that cannot speak French, and when they should come to the
chair to read, or the bar to plead, they wonder they must again the second
time learn their Grammar; which is almost impossible for them to do, because
their memory fails them, and they have gotten such a continual habit of
their evil Provincial accent, and terms which are notusuall in Court, nor
will pass in gentile companies. For the same was the reason, why, whilst they
pleaded and preached in Latin here in France, the pulpets, and b^rres swarmed
with gross, ignorant, and barbarous persons; But as soon as they began to
speak French, we have had such rare Preachers and famous Advocates, that the
French eloquence, which may yet be styled to be but in its infancy, may
contest either with Greek or Latin.

Advocates indeed had more reason then any others, to retain, and preserve the
use of the Latin tongue, because most of our Laws are derived from it; the
Roman Law was compiled in it in exquisite terms, and it has been so carefully
polished and refined by the Roman Senate, both in civil and criminal matters,
that one may say, it was the first and perfectest school of eloquence that
ever was; and that the Greek, which has so many other excellencies, is in this
point inferior to it, and has been forced in matters of Law to borrow many
Latin words, and cloth them in a Greek habit. Yer they were the first, who
through a generous desire to serve their Country, and honor their Nation, did
cast off the Latin, our Language being indebted to them for its politenesse and
elegancie; and I admire that this their rare example, seconded with such a
happy success, has not obliged Philosophers, Mathem^^icians, and Physicians
to forsake their barbarous terms, and remnants of Latin, to join with the
Lawyers in the completing of their own mother tongue.

Man is born for Sciences, whereof he has the seed within himself; and to the
end that he may discourse in his infancy, and lose no time, nature, as soon
as he comes out of his cradle, gratifies him with means neceslary for him to
become learned, causing him to suck and draw his own native tongue together
with his nurses milk, when he is not yet capable of any thing else, that he
may enter into his Philosophy, as soon as he has the very first degree of
reason. And that our common mother Nature has not destinated us to learn
languages, we may perceive by this, that the older we grow, the more unfit we
are for the attaining of them; and a man who is come to a perfect and mature
age, shall labor more to attain one Language, then a child in learning three
or four several ones. Besides, Sciences trouble not the mind as Languages do;
and the more a man learne^h, the apter he is to learn; Sciences having such a
relation to one another, and being so linked together, that they lend mutual
assistance to one another; they are sisters which live in perfect unity,
without any misunderstanding, finding a joint habitation in our mind, as it
were in their fathers house, which conceiving every where objects of the same
kind, needs but one Image to comprehend all those things which are of the same
nature. Whereas the Memory, by reason of the diversity of Languages, is saine
to burden itself with an infinite number of specificall nominations, which
trouble one another, and make a horrible confusion in that faculty. And
furthermore we find by experience, that those who have many Languages, are
never so fitting for sublime meditations, and deep discourses: and that to be a
sound Philosopher, it is better to speak but one, and have the understanding at
liberty, and free from the great intricacie of strange words.

The Egyptian, Greek, and Arabian Philosophers, considering that Nature,
repleat both with goodness, and wisdom, did bring up children all at once to
the Knowledge both of names, and things, and that she did suggest unto u^
words, according as she inspired us with thoughts; did also at the same time
respect as well the one as the other, and were equally careful of instructing
children in well speaking, and in doctrine; As soon as the light of reason
began to appear, they sowed into the memory as in a fruitful soil, the seeds
and principles of Knowledge, which served for a guide and conduct of their
life; so that good and wholesome Maxims taking deep root in the understanding,
did in process of time fructify, and increase there: whereby former ages
brought forth such men as posterity admired, and whose very names were honored
and respected.

But now, in stead of bestowing our tender age in things which might edify
youth, we cast it into the briars of Grammar, and such tr^ublesome
difficulties, as dull the acuteness of the understanding: they oppress the
memory with the troublesome study of obsolet Languages, the Knowledge of which
is many times fruitless, and to no purpose especially for such as do not make
a profession of writing or speaking Greek and Latin. That time might be
employed far better in the refining of our own Language, and the search of
truth: and questionless the French, who are endowed with singular and rare
natural gifts, would quickly become, as they were in the Druides times, the
most learned and eloquent in the World, and Philosophy would once again
flourish amongst us. Is it not a shame, that through neglect of our own
language, we should speak many things in Greek and Latin which we might as
well express in our mother tongue? Is not this a making our selves strangers
in our own Country, and never behold learning but in borrowed robes?

One might object, that children are not capable of Sciences, and that studying
of them is too serious and important an employment for them. Yet experience
teaches us the contrary; and Aristotle himself in his Politics says, that
children are capable of learning Philosophy at seven or eight years of age,
because they begin then to be capable of reason, their imagination is vivid,
and hot, their Memory tender, and apt to receive any good impression: and it
is far easier for them to apprehend Reasons, whereof they have the principles
within themselves then the Rudiments of Grammar, which are fruitless blossoms,
and to which they have no natural disposition.

This error has by little and little crept into the minds of men, because they
have not considered that there are two sorts of Sciences, namely of Invention,
and Discipline. As for the first, children indeed are not capable of them, and
even amongst men none can attain thereunto, unless they be sublimed wits, and
spirits fitted to invent new things: they are endeasours of an extraordinary
Genius, or a continual study of 20. or 30. years, accompanied with long and
profound meditations, and solitary reflections, which at last discover unto us
some particular lights. And such wits deserve even to be admired; they are the
honor of mankind, and raise it up to a kind of divinity. As for the Sciences
of Discipline, or disposition, they are not of the same nature: all such as
have any memory, even women and children are capable thereof; they are but
reiterations of what has been said before, which may be easily apprehended,
when they are explained and expounded; yet are they seeds of the high Science
of Invention, when they are sown in a fruitful, sublimed, and extraordinary
understanding. Therefore even the Northern dull Nations are capable of
knowing, and apprehending what has been written and experimented by others,
because they have good memories, which in some manner supply their default of
Invention. And the Southern people being more Ingenious, having sought out the
truth in Ancient writers, are fitter through their acuteness to discover new
inventions. Wherein we may admire divine providence, which having made all men
rational, guides them several ways to one end, giving the one a more lively
judgment, and the others a more happy memory. Why should then that time,
which is ordained for sciences, be so ill employed in an apprentiship to learn
grammatical observations and precepts, far harder and more difficult then the
language it self? why should we spend ten or twelve years in studying Greek
and Latin, to make use of the^ afterward but one year or two in the study of
Philosophy? Is it not an unjust and insufferable thing, to consume the most
precious time of our life, and most fitting to learn sciences, namely from
seven or eight, to eighten or twenty years of age, in learning of the grammar
and some books of humanity, with intolerable trouble and labor, then, when
youths begin to incline to dissoluteness, and desbauches, gaming, hunting, and
traveling, they are put to Logic, in which they must again begin to learn a
new kind of Latin, so barbarous and obscure, that it seems to have been
invented, only to make Sciences odious, and distasteful. And by this means, in
stead of prolonging the Gentries time of studying, they are forced abruply to
cut it off; their employments calling them to state affairs, so that what they
have not learned at fifteen or sixteen years of age, they must be ignorant of
all the days of their lives, to the great damage and prejudice of the state.

And thus through the difficulty and tediousness of learning Greek and Latin,
our great ones are frustrate of their rudiments of Philosophy, which is one of
the greatest mishaps that can befall a State. For there are but very few that
can attain to the fight of the luster of Sciences thorough so much mist and
darkness: sublime and most subtle understandings only can comprehend all
things, without any intricacy or confusion. And it is a miraculous thing how a
perfect knowledge of languages, joined with deep learning (which ordinarily
make a man pensive, solitary, and most fitting for a private life) can consist
in your Eminency, together with such clearenesse of spirit, grave carriage,
majestic and bewitching entertainment, which does charm and captivate men's
hearts unto you; and the knowledge of all these things, has furnished and
fittingly disposed you to become the most absolute Statesman that ever was in
France. So that in you sir is verified that Maxim which Aristotle sets down,
namely, that Policy is the mistress and Queen of all other Arts and Sciences;
because she it is that regulates their functions, and applies them to the good
of the public. And now France finds by experience, to its honor and glory,
that Kingdoms never flourish and prosper better, then when prudent and learned
men sit at the stern of public affairs. I must notwithstanding confess that
many wise and understanding people, have studied in foreign Languages, some
have traveled into Egypt, to Marseilles, Greece, and other countries famous
for excellent and learned professors; which have lived and taught in them: but
they were then naticnall Languages, and needful for the learning of Sciences,
and useful in the chiefest ports in the world, into which one could not
travail without them: And they were so far from being difficult and hard to
learn, that one could not almost avoid nor shun the learning of them through
daily conversation with the men, women and children of that country. But why do
we now adays without any necessity so much seek after I anguages, that lie
buried in Libraries as in their Sepulchers? Let us stir up their ashes as
long as we will, we shall never revive them: the fragments and relics which
are left of them, are but so many shadows, and defaced monuments. And
sometimes we turmoile our selves about them all our life time, and yet cannot
attain to the true Genius and pronunciation of them; in which, as the Greek
orator says, consists the spirit and soul of a language. Is not this I pray
a kind of husbanding another man's land, letting our own lie fallow?

The Greeks did in former ages see the Egyptians Language and Philosophy
fall to decay, and the Arabians, the Greeks; and yet those politic nations
never went about to support, or re-establish them: Yea contrariwise they sought
all means, utterly to abolish and suppress them, to bring their own mother
tongue into credit. Considering that it was no less disgrace for them to be
governed by foreign tongues, then by foreign arms and powers.

Some testie Critic, or absurd Politician will peradventure say, that it is
not fitting to lay open the mysteries of a Science, nor make them common. And
that a Science is the more majestic and venerable, when it is obscure and
hidden from the common sort of people. And therefore Egyptians set down their
Philosophy in Hieroglyphics; the first Greeks, and the ancient Gauls in
obscure verses! But this was an error, which great Aristotle both opposed, and
reformed. For whereas Pythagoras reduced all Sciences to numbers, and treated
of all things as an Arithmetician; Plato reasoned of all natural things as a
Geometrician; Anaxagoras as an Astonomer, and every sect in some Enigmaticall
and extravagant manner: This divine Genius of Nature spoke of every thing
without any mixture, and in its own purity, physical matters as a Physic, of
Policy, as a Politician, of Logic as a Logician, of Metaphysics as a Divine,
and so laid open the whole course of Philosophy, dispersing those shadows and
Chimeras made it obscure, and dark. And indeed we ought to take the shortest,
and nearest way we can find, to conduct us to Sciences; for if we linger, or
go astray never so little, we shall never come to an end of this brave
journey, there are so many things to be known in this world. The volume which
Nature gives us to read over is so large, shenath so many secrets hidden in
her breast, that we are so far from attaining to the knowledge of all things,
that the rarest and most understanding men and wits have averred, that all
that we know is nothing, in comparison of things which are unknown to us: and
it may truly be said, that the terms of Sciences and Arts are so particular,
and peculiar, and alien from an ordinary Language, that they cannot be
understood in any kind of speech, but only by such as profess the said Arts,
and Sciences. Finally, men are borne for knowledge, and it is a notable wrong
done to them, to take away the means, and make the way thereunto hard and
difficult. The Schools (as they were in former times in Egypt Greece, and
Arabia) ought to be open to all the world. In those days children had
fininished their study of Mathematics, and Philosophy at fourteen or
fifteen years, before they were of age to undertake that profession whereunto
they were destinated for the residue of their life; which made them more
capable and fitting for public employments. For all the parts of philosophy
and Mathematics are app^iable to the necessity of living, and welfare of
Commonwealths. Logic cleares and strengthens discourse, giving a method and
rule unto it. Moral Philosophy governes and mitigates our passions, makes us
good fathers of families, and good Citizens. Physic gives us the Principles,
and disposes us to be good Physicians: The Mathematics fit us for affairs
belonging either to war or peace, either in Mechanic or Liberal Arts, which
are the grounds, and maintainers of Societies: But after we have consumed all
our youthful days in learning of Greek and Latin, all this labor and
watchfulness stands us in no stead, but only to read some Greek and Latin
Authors, which is but an unprofitable curiosity for the party, and casts us
into a kind of dronishnesse, and disables us from doing any thing else; so that
those who have so spent their time, are not capable of any profession, and are
but unprofitable Citizens, which can contribute nothing to the good of a
Commonwealth, nor ornament of a State.

So that many men who are not apt to learn Languages, or have not time to
employ themselves therein, are frustrate of the fruits of Sciences, who might
otherwise become great persons; if the said Sciences were taught in the vulgar
or mother tongue; Whereof we have notable and famous examples in Simon of
Athens, Polemon, and Protagoras, who coming by chance into the Schools of
Socrates, Aristhenes, and Xenocrates were so feelingly touched, and powerfully
edified by their Doctrine, that they presently resolved to forsake those sordid
trades in which they had spent the greatest part of their lives, and reforming
their behaviors, addicted themselves wholly to Philosophy and virtue.

If Philosophy had no other interpreter but the Latin tongue, we should
indeed adheare, and apply our selves to that, neither could we any way avoid
the learning of it, seeing that without it we could not attain to ^hilosophie.
But all I anguages are fitting for it, and subservient to it: And though it be
contrary to the common opinion, we may say and a verr, that the Latin is
extremely defective in that particular; because it appears, that in its most
flourishing time, the terms for Sciences were not known in Rome, and those
which were invented since, savor not of the Genius of pure Latin, and could
not outlive a life less Language.

The Latin as well as other Languages has been subject to mixture and
corruption, and has not long remained in one state, as diverse learned Authors
have written. We may observe in it five several Idiomes, or kinds of
Language. Namely, the first, and Ancient; the Latin, the Roman, the Mixed, and
the Bastard. The Ancient, which the first and primitive people of Italy used,
wherein some obsolet verses were extant in Varroes time, though hardly
understood, flourished under Ianus and Saturn. The Latin, which the Latins
used, was spoken under the reigns of the Tuscan Kings, and in that Language
were written the Decemvires tables, the holy and sacred laws, and the public
Edicts. The Roman, which setes down the Roman Histories, and the Civil Law,
began immediately after the Kings were expelled, and was refined by the Poets,
Plautus, Nevius, Pacuvius, Ennius, Virgil, Ovid. and Horace; amongst Orators
and Historiographers, by Cato, Hortensius, Cicero, Caesar, Salust, and Livie.
The Mixed began with the increase of the Empire, and was in Esteem under the
Empercurs, who admitting diverse nations to the right of being Roman Citizens,
and to city honors, were thereby constrained to admit also of a mixture of
feverall barbarous words; by which means the Roman virtue began to degenerate,
and by little and little, with its liberty, lost the purity of its Language.
Finally, the Bastard, and Spurious Latin which has lasted from the
dissipation of the Empire to this time, every day receding more and more from
its primitive pureness, at last was divided into the Italian, Spanish, French,
and several other tongues.

As for the last, and the three first, those who are well read in Histories
know they never had the terms of Sciences, the fourth only, namely the Mixed
had that privilege toward its declining, and it was not long a national
Language, nor had not age or time enough to be brought to the height of its
perfections. And now Latin is made use of but only in some parts of Europe
where it is so subjest to the corrupt pronu^ciation of several Nations, that a
French man can hardly understand a Germans Latin, nor an Italian an Irish
man's, etc. And besides the Latin tongue is now so defective, that we can
hardly express our selves in it, the terms of all Arts and Sciences being so
far altered, hat they have no relation to the Language as was in former
times. And lastly, the knowledge of several tongues is no way availeable to
Philosophy, and if a man could speak all manner of Languages, he would be
never the more rational for that, nor more fitting to learn Sciences, then he
that has no more but his own mother tongue.

It were much to be wished for the satisfaction of men, the concord of Nations,
and the communicating of thoughts, that there were but one language in the
world; then were it easy to travail into far countries, there would be great
facility in commerce, and the whole world would be as it were but one state.
But since so much happiness is not to be hoped for, we are at least bound to
refine our own language, and make it uniforme throughout our whole Kingdom;
Which if we do, and fit it so, that we may teach Sciences in it, it will grow
in as great repute as other Languages were, and foreign Nations will come to
us, as they formerly did into Greece and Egypt to learn Sciences.

It may be objected that the Latin has a kind of prerogative above other
languages, which it holds by a public and universal right, that former ages
did with such a religious reverence, worship and observe the use of it, and
some modern writers, as Mirandula, Erasmus, Fernelius, Cardanus, Scaliger,
Ramus, Alciat, Cuiacius, Molineus, and Crassot, have left us many accurates
writing therein, of all which we should lose the benefit, and reading, if we had
no other language but French. But if we consider on the other side, that by
means of translation we may appropiate unto our selves any Authors works,
and that as soon as we have refined and polished our native tongue, we may
translate any either ancient or modern; this objection will be of no great
weight.

There may again be objected, that the structure of the Greek and Latin
tongues is more regular, and they may furnish us with larger means of
expressing our thoughts. But though it be far from us to lay any imputation
or blame upon those noble Languages, yet we may lawfully say, that their
excellency consists but in artificial beauties, and that their ornaments are
more necessary for Poets and Orators, then for Philosophers, who will have the
perfection of Languages to consist in having proper names for all known things;
with which expressions our tongue is very well furnished, and if it be wanting
in any thing, it has been our Ancestors fault, who have contemned their mother
tongue; which default we must now amend by our own care. And why are Plato,
Aristotle, Plutarch, Tullie, and Senecaes works in such great esteem, and
credit? it is not for their elegancie, which is but an Axcessorie, but because
they have been good Philosophers, and have had perfect knowledge of virtue and
Sciences. It is therefore, that Libraries are filled with their works, and all
solid spirits desire to read them; and not for their Eloquence, and
Rethoricall fluency.

Languages indeed have diverse kinds of perfections, some excel in abundancie
of words to express their thoughts. And those Nations which have the greatest
knowledge of Divine and Natural things, and of Arts and Sciences, have also a
more rich and abounding Language. And therein the first and imposed Language
was most excellent, it having a proper name for every mine ral, or mixed, that
was in the world. Some again excel in the framing of parts of speech, when
the Nownes, and Verbs are well composed, and the Tenses and Cases have their
just terminations, which make the beauty and variety of phrases, and is a most
rare ornament to a Language, and therein the Greek and Latin are much to be
commended. And some again excel in sweetness of words, pleasantness and
facility of pronunciation.

For the number of terms, it is true that there are some wanting in the
French, for want of refining and polishing of it, and because in stead of
inventing names in our own mother tongue, for such things as we are newly come
to the knowledge of, we have improperly taken them out of the Greek and
Latin, whereby they are not popular, nor intelligible. But if Sciences were
once brought in and taught amongst us in our own mother tongue, that defect
would soon be supplied and amended; seeing our Alphabet well known and
regulated, is questionless more large, and enriched with nine or ten letters,
and fifteen or sixteen diphthonges more then the Greek, Latin, Italian, or
many more, as we shall make it largely appear in our Grammar; wherein we will
propose the means of shortning our French Orthographie, and make it wholly
conformable to the pronunciation which will make the reading thereof much more
easy, as well for strangers as our own Countrymen.

As for the structure and frame of it, we must confess that it has this
defect common with other Languages, which decline their Nounes by Articles, and
conjugate their Verbes with the help and assistance of the Substantive and
Auxiliarie Verb, namely to speak in meeter often, and want variety of
terminations: and this is the point wherein we must chiefly labor in the
reformation of our language, it being impossible for it otherwise to be
perfect, and in all points complete: which those great Poets who lived in
Charles the ninth, and Henry the thirds time held to be absolutely necessary.
And though it be not so curiously regulated, yet it does not so much disquiet
and trouble the mind by the transposing of words, as artificial languages do
but contrariwise in imitation of natural ones, it expresses things in the
same orders as they come into the mind, and is more proper and easy for
Philosophy; neither has it so many Heteroclites, and irregular words, as the
Greek and ^atine have.

As for the sweetness and facility of it, strangers themselves will confess,
and certain it is, that it goes beyond any other language therein: and that
for two reasons. The first is because it makes an excellent conjunction of
betters, and composition of words, terminating them alternatively in Vowels,
Consonants, and sometimes Diphthonges whereas the Italian words end for the
most part in Vowe^ls, as the Dutch do in Consonants; which makes a kind of
unpleasing sound through a too frequent rei^eration. The second reason is,
because the Tones thereof are more uniforme, and do not fall and rise
excessively, as they do in some other Languages, men seeming to sing when they
speak them, and having such different accents, that it forces one to writh
his mouth and face in pronouncing them. There are also proud and boasting
languages, as the Spanish, which boasts it self to be the Language of the
Gods; Soft and effeminate, as the Italian, which is termed to be women's
language; Rough and fierce, as the Northern, therefore by some termed the
language of Devils. But the French has none of these faults, it is more
upright and uniform in its pronunciation, and therefore is called the language
of men, as being most proper for discourse, being calm and without agitation.

And yet further to take notice of the excellency and worth of our Language, we
may note that there are diverse sorts of utterances in the world. Some Nations
seem to draw their speech out of the very bottom of their breasts and
throats, as the Hebrew, Dutch and Tuscan, Italian: Others out of the palate,
and the nose, as the Italian, and Spaniard. Others speak between the teeth,
as the English, Irish, Danes and others. The French only speak through the
lips, as the most proper organ, and instrument: Which is the cause they speak
quicker, and express their thoughts more diligently: and this great
volubilitie proceeds from the faculty of applying the tongue to the lips, and
joining it with a pleasing kind of harmony, and so the words follow the
thoughts and Imaginations so close, that strangers take occasion thereupon to
accuse the French of lightness; whereas it is a great advantage, and as it
were a peculiar gift of our nation, a property of our climat, which makes our
entertainment more pleasing, our mind more ready at hand, and our discourse
more clear. And if our speech seem harsh to some strangers, it is by reason of
the writing, which is not agreeable to the pronunciation. But the reformation
of that is daily endeavored by regulating our Alphabet, and by giving unto
every letter its true and particular character. But it may be said unto me,
what art thou, that after so many ages, would restore the Egyptian, Greek,
and Arabian method, which has been so long banished out of the world, or
rather buried in the tomb of oblivion? who gives thee now leave to control
a custom approved of by the common consent of all Nations, for so many ages?
think thou to be only quick-sighted, and that all those learned men, who
were enlightened by the light of Sciences, were stricken with a spirit of
blindness, and did not know which way to teach them? Could thou not
consider that Sciences being immutable, required a language no way subject to
changes, and that national tongues which change almost every age are not so
proportinable to their soliditie as those ancient Languages, which being no
more popular, are not subject to any alteration? If thou have lived thus long,
and never did reflect nor look upon the inconstancy of popular and
national languages, behold I will show thee some authentical, and evident
proofs thereof.

Egypt in the time of its Kings, which were called Pharaohs, had a certain
peculiar and particular language, as may appear by some manuscripts extant
even in our days, which are no way to be understood: now the Arabic has
succeeded in its place, yet we have not retained one word of that ancient
Idiome which is reported to have been very large and copious, and more proper
then the Greek itself, to treat both of divine and humane Sciences. In
Palestine and Jerusalem in former times they spoke Syriack, and now the Arabic
is there national. Greece so renowned for her Language, is now constrained to
speak Turkish. The coast of Barbary, which in former times spoke the
Phaenician tongue, speaks now the Moors language. Gaul which had a dominion
vast and powerful enough to maintain it self against its enemies, being
through its own divisions at last conquered by the Romans, has changed its
language three or four times, in less then sixteen or seventeene hundred
years, and that which we have at this day, is composed of the Celtick, Roman,
Franconian and Gothic tongues, and is quite different from the ancient; which
Pliny who was a Gaul borne, and spoke the Language most perfectly, did extol
to the skies. Finally, the Polonians, Vandalls, Bulgarians, Croatians,
Dalmatians, Russians, Bohemians, Lituanians, Moscovites, and Scionians, who in
former times knew no other but the Teutonick or German tongue, now together
with diverse other Nations, speak nothing but the Sclavonian. And the Germans
confess that the Language which themselves now speak, is quite different from
that which they spoke formerly. We might easily name diverse other Nations; and
were it possible to have a register of all the Languages, we should therein
find how they art subject to a perpetual revolution; and that those words
which compose them, dying in one country, and reviving in another, differ in
nothing but in the exchange of the meaning, and that there are not in nature
generations and corruptions more worthy of admiration, and less admired.

To answer all these objections distinctly, they seeming to be somewhat hard to
resolve, I will first say, that there can be no valuable instance made against
the example of Trismegistus, Aristotle, Tullie, Avicen, and the general
custom of those learned men of former times, who had more understanding then
we, who never made use but only of national languages, in which, though they
be subject to change, the truth of moral and national things remains
perpetually. Of what color soever they painted Diana which was in Chio, made
of white marble, the next day they would find her again in her natural
whiteness, which painting could not cover, nor art corrupt. And if this
prescription seems an inviolable law to these protectors of Languages, and a
ground sufficient to make us forsake the method which was read in ancient
times; I would feign know of them whether any prescription can run against the
love which we are bound to bear to truth, our country, and our mother tongue?
and we might also conclude from thence, that old errors because they have been
allowed of for a long time, are no errors, which in understanding men's
judgment are notwithstanding the most pernicious. Custom then can not be a
sufficient defense against these great and learned men: neither must the
proceedings of these last ages, prevail against the Method used in ancient
times. They are but Waves beating against Rocks; truth will always prevail:
and though we be grown old and inveterate in errors and disorders, yet are we
not to be excused therefore, if we persist therein. Let us rather confess we
have foolishly gone astray, and acknowledge that the only means to bring us
again into the right way of wisdom, is, to imitate those who in Ancient times
preferred Popular, and National Languages before any obsolet and strange
tongues.

Secondly, we do not deny but National, and Mother tongues are subject to
mixture and corruption: many learned men have observed it, and there are too
many examples to prove it. But we deny that an obsolet Language can better
preserve the Doctrine and Learning of our forefathers then a National. For the
Languages do not cause Sciences to live, they are but the shadows and figures
thereof; but it is the Science which makes the Language to live; and though it
have equal dominion over them all she has it far more absolute over the
Nation, then over them which are out of date. For proof whereof, if our
Ancestors, who have written so many treaties concerning the firmness of
Sciences, and inconstancy of Languages, had thought it fitting to study in
obsolet Languages, they might have done it as well as we, seeing the Egyptian
tongue was in the time of the Grecians, and the Greek under the Arabians was
not mentioned, nor found but only in Books. But these great men knew too well
that they could not bring in so pernicious, and ridiculous a custom, without
encompassing Sciences with thousands of difficulties, and frustrating many men,
who could not learn strange Languages, of the hope of attaining to the
Knowledge of them Wherefore rejecting all other Languages, as unprofitable
ways, and extravagant means, they most judiciously brought their youth
directly to the Knowledge of Sciences by the abbreviate way of their mother
tongue.

But fully to satisfy the objection of those who say, that popular and
natural Languages are too variable to deserve the honor of being interpreters
of Sciences, and expositers of men's best thoughts; We affirm that they are more
constant, and less subject to change then the obsolet. For though they seem be
to exempted and free from alteration, and incapable of increase or diminution,
because they are not subject to the mutable will of men, but are continually
taught by the same rules; yet ought we not to attribute unto them a perpetual
lastingnesse; seeing that the power of a Conqueror, that hates learning, may on
a sudden annihilate those languages, as the Turk has done in all his
Dominions. And all things rightly considered, no Monarch can exempt those
remainders of ancient Languages which we have from the jurisdiction of time,
nor protect them against some inevitable chances, the least of which may
absolutely destroy them.

The first Language which had so many prerogatives above others, gives us a
fair example of this truch; the first inhabiters of the World had imprinted
it, not upon paper, as we do now, but upon most solid and hard columns, that
they might make it live for ever, and transmit the memory thereof to posterity:
Yet for all that, it vanished away by little and little, and that fair
monument has been so little regarded, that there remains not now any sign
thereof. We may likewise allege to this purpose, that the Jewish Language was
wholly extinguished during the Captivity. It was the Organ whereby the will of
God was set down, and the ancient Law was written in it: Esdras, and the
Doctors had preserved the understanding of it: yet at last they let it perish,
judging it more convenient to translate the sacred History in the mother
tongue, then to bind the people to the re-establishment, and the learned to the
preservation of a Language newly lost. Finally the Roman Annals make faith that
the ancient Roman Language, of which the Priests only had preserved the
knowledge, has been subject to the like overthrow: the Libraries were full of
it, the Sibylles verses, the Hymns and Canticles were written in it, the Roman
Senate had professed and declared it self to be the preserver of it, and yet
all this could not keep it from a total ruin.

Moreover, although the national languages be subject to the innovation of
some words; yet experience shows us, that those which have had any extent, or
merit, either by being polished by politic Nations, who knew how to bring them
to perfection, at home by the means of Sciences, and abroad by way of arms in
defending themselves, have not been so subject to perish; and will outlast many
ages before they be quite abolished. Witness the Greek, which remained entire
for above two thousand years, and would have lasted longer, if the Turkish
domination had not cut off the course of so many years, which it might yet have
lived. It is certain that the Romans strove with all their might to abolish the
language of the Gauls, whom they had subdued; yet their design could not fully
come to pass, and we have to this day some of it in this Kingdom, which has no
communion nor part with the Latin, which evidently shows that it was never
there: nor the vulgar and mother tongue never suppressed.

Whereby we may infer that popular Languages, which are so hardly suppressed,
may be continued far better and easilier then those forgotten ones which can
not be preserved without much difficulty; and that they are more proper to
serve for instruments to Sciences. National Languages likewise decay by
degrees, and are abolished by succession oftimes. But those obsolete ones,
which have no more being but only in Libraries, and subsist only by art, may
perish and comesist naught in an instant. And if the Romans, who were so
careful in universalising their language, had found none to oppose them but
only Obsolet tongues, and books; they would have abolished the memory of them
in an instant, and would not have found so much opposition in bringing in the
Latin tongue into all the Provinces which were subject to their Empire.

Moreover have we not great cause to to doubt, whether the Latin tongue which
has been extinguished these six or seven hundred years, and has lasted to our
times only by the means of Colleges and universities, will last so long as
the Greek, the Gaul, and many other. Those who come in after ages, will know
the Success thereof better than we. As for the present, to come to understand
why popular, and national Languages are more lasting, and fitting to teach
Sciences in then the obsolet, we ought to observe that in every Language there
are two sorts of words. Some are familiar and vulgar, which serve for common
discourse the other proper, pecul^ar and effectual only for Tra^es and arts.
The first depend upon the people, which has power to alter the names of such
things as it has use of to entertain society, the latter are within the
Philosophers jurisdiction, who have power to give names to all things,
especially to Arts and Sciences. The first are subject to change, and do not
last always; partly because they signify nothing but singular, contingent,
and casual objects; partly because they are subject to the fancies of a light,
and inconstant multitude: but that alteration that is, so small, that there
wilscarce be a hundred of those common words altered in a hundred years. It is
not so in those words which belong to Arts and trades, it is in a manner
impossible to alter them; and after they are once in use, the common people
have no power over them, they are kept in by a mysterious way, they are of so
good a temper, and such solid matter, that they stand firm and immovable,
whilst other names are tossed and turned upside down, by the giddy-headed
Rabble.

The reason why they are so firm and constant is because they are applied to
signify firm and constant things, such as the matter als and instruments of
Arts are; it is not cast to change them and put others in stead of them. And
if artists, who are the disposers of them, and to communicate and teach them to
their apprentices with the same fidelity as they received them of their master,
should assume so much liberty to themselves as to innovate and alterthem, and
bring in new according to their own fancies, naming one and the same thing
which belongs to their trade, in one country by one name, and in another
otherwise, they would not within a short time understand one another, nor
maintain that correspondency and brotherhood which is amongst them.

Therefore they are much misinformed concerning the nature of things, who
would have Sciences taught in obsolet and forgotten Languages, to give them as
it were innumerable terms. They do not consider that the terms of Arts and
Sciences may easily be perpetuated in all Languages, so they be polished and
refined: Wherefore we are both of one opinion in this; that we ought to teach
Sciences in firm and durable tongues, but we affirm that National Languages
are more durable then the obsolet ones; and that for diverse reasons.

First, because the terms of Arts and Sciences are no sooner invented, and
approved of in a speech, but they of themselves do preserve themselves
therein, even as the terms of a trade without any trouble or labor: and if
there should be any pains required therein, they might without comparison
befarre more eafilier learned and preserved in a National and popular
Language, then in an obsolet one.

The second reason is, because suppose the Language of the Country were subject
to some change, one may hinder them from changing with it, by forbidding any
new ones to be brought in, and so they remaining as they were, may be still
applied to the various changes of other popular words. By which means all
scholasticall terms have remained in their first being, for these five or six
last ages, though the rest of the Latin tongue have varied much since that
time, as we may see by those authors that have written in those ages.

The third is, that all ^anguages being preserved by the industry of men, it
will be far easier to keep a small portion of a National language from
perishing, then to revive a whole language which is quite out of date and
forgotten. For youth may easily and in a small time be instructed in the terms
of that profession, which it means to follow; they being but few in number,
and not the hundredth part of the words of a full and complete Language: so that
they may be learned with small pains, and as it were insensibly, before one
think of it; And learning their own Country Language naturally, they shall be
exempted from the tediousness and difficulty of learning the Latin tongue,
wherein they spend ten or twelve years of their best time, to make them
capable of understanding three or four hundred barbarous words, which have been
framed in the Universities within six or seven hundred years, by ignerant
persons who never knew the Latin tongue in its purity. Yet they have been so
industrious and fortunate in their proceedings, that they have brought these
words into so much credit and estimation, that it has been commonly thought
they could not be expressed in any other ^anguage, and that they had a
particular energie and virtue to signify those things. But, in truth there is
no such matter; for if you come to examine them necrly, you will find they
signify nothing at all, they are not polite, and cannot be translated, nor yet
understood in any language, if the phrase and Syntaxis of them be not mended;
it being most certain that the ^atin Philosophers speech is not less ridiculous
and barbarous in their own Language, then it is in ours. And if any esteem them
politer and more significant then ours, it is because they have been so long
accustomed to them, that they cannot easily find the defaults and
disorderliness of them.

But such as are well versed in the Genius of Languages, know, that the version
of a perfect discourse, has a great deal of grace, and Elegancy in all
Countries; and contrariwise a thing il penned in one Lauguage, is nonsense, and
absurd in all other. Whereby we may infer, that the difficulty in
translating of these terms proceeds not from any particular merit in them, or
from the imperfection of other Languages, but from their own defect and evil
construction. For proof and trial whereof, if you translate them into the
Greek or Arabic, which admit of none, but proper and usual terms in their
Philosophy; you shall find presently that your translation will be no more
intelligible, or better composed, then if it had been in Spanish, Italian, or
any other vulgar and National Language. And this is the reason why those who
have studied Philosophy in Latin, understand it not in their own Language, and
dare not speak of it before men of their own Nation, for fear of making
themselves ridiculous; whereas those who have learned it in an Elegant and
refined National Language of their own, can easily express themselves in any
other Language which they can understand and speak.

This is the chief argument which the protectors of these obsolet Lauguages
make use of against us, and which they ignorantly borrow from the lastingnesse
of them, never regarding the facility and easiness, which is the only
absolutely necessary condition required for the perfection of a Language which
is made isntrumental for the attaining of Scienences. And as the mother tongue
is most casie; so questionless it is the best fitted and proportioned to men's
spirits, and most conformable to the intentions of nature, which destining us
to some end, furnishes us with most easy and pleasing means to attain
thereunto, according as it self is most Noble, and excellent. I would wilingly
ask our Antagonists, whither they would not hold it a most ridiculous thing in
Artists, if they should introduce a custom amongst themselves to speak of
their Art only in a strange and unknown Language, putting their Apprentices to
the task of bestowing ten or twelve years study in learning of a hard and
troublesome tongue, only to make them capable of Understanding one hundred or
two strange terms of their calling and Vocation.

And if they answer, that the terms of Sciences, Arts, and Trades, will take
up half the words of a Language, and that therefore they are not so easy to
be learned. We reply again, that no man ought, or need, to learn them all, but
that every one is only bound to possess himself of those which necessarily
belong to his own profession. And again, suppose that even these terms should
alter and be subject to changes as well as the rest of a Language, yet that
argues not that we should teach Sciences in any other but the Mother Tongue.
Seeing translation may easily, and faithfully make an ancient Language Modern:
And that it is beyond comparison more easy, to translate our forefathers
Language into our own, then in those forlorn and foreign ones.

As for the translation of foreign Languages, all learned Nations, Jews,
Greeks, Romans, and Arabians, have used it. And though it be somewhat hard to
turn so many Ancient works into our mother tongue, yet we may truly say, that
it is nothing in comparison of the trouble and care which so many thousands of
brave spirits have undergone in the tedious compassing of those forgotten
Languages. And we have already naturalized, and taught to speak French, the
most excellent and rarest Authors that writ in former ages, so that if we
continue laboring in translations with the same fervencie as we have be^un
since the French Academy was erected; within these thirty years we shall not
have any thing left to translate, but shall in our own Mother tongue possess
the Riches of all other Languages.

Finally it would not be very difficult to invent a more general, more
constant, and more easy instrument, then that of forlorn tongues, which should
represent things by Characters, which youth might learn with a great deal more
ease then the words of an abolished Language, neither would they any way hinder
the Mother tongue: and those who had learned those Characters, seeing some
certain marks, would withal conceive the minds of others, and might presently
by other Characters disclose their own. So that those who should be well versed
in this secret, would understand one another without being understood; and
without speaking, would converse with one another, every one in his own
Language; which would questionless be a most pleasant kind of recreation. As
for example, if a Frenchman writes in the presence of an Italian, or a German,
1640 the other presently reads and understands, and can express in his own
Language what those Characters signify. This would indeed be a rare art, and
so much the more to be admired, because it would in many places represent the
same thing, neither would the Characters change, though the Languages did.
There might also use be made of these Characters only, for the terms of Arts
and Sciences, to the end the memory might not be overburthened with the
excessive number, and in all other things make use of the National speech. But
neither is this invention as proper as the mother tongue, and though it have
been formerly used by learned men, yet is it not worth the reviving, because it
would be accompanied with many difficulties, which ought as much as may be to
be avoided for the good and ease of learners. I question not but that Sciences
are very attractive, and every one naturally desires to attain them; but yet
they will be sought after but by very few, if the way unto them be not made
easy and pleasant. We are inventing every day new Methods, to shorten and
level the way which guides us thereunto, and yet it is every day more and more
encumbred, and difficulties increase continually. We shall never have any
famous men spring up amongst us, what art soever we use, unless we teach in
our own National Language.

Finally it is certain, that Sciences can not be preserved by any immutable
thing, but only by the Species, which always possessing the Understanding in
the same manner, oblige it to conceive all things in the same fashion. Nature
uses no other Language to speak to all men, and to instruct them in the
Knowledge of the truth. Thence it comes that they apprehend an Elephant, an
Eagle, a Dolphin, all after the same manner, and they every where produce the
same imaginations and Phantasmaes; in the use, and perfect connection whereof
consists all manner of discourse. The Species, and the word, have this common
to them, that they both represent the truth, but this is the difference between
them, that the Species being a natural, and immutable sign, must of necessity
be the same in all places: and the word being an arbitrary and transitory
mark, must be different every where; so that we may truly say, that the species
or notion which represents all things to the mind of man, is the only Language
which did never change, and will always be common to all men; because the
Objects which present them to our senses, are not changeable, and make
themselves to be known every where after the same manner: whereas Characters,
Gestures, and words depending merely upon our will, are every where different.
We apprehend the objects, not beause they are Greek, Latin, Dutch, etc. but
because they have a relation to our notion, and signify that which is in our
minds. Which is the reason that though the Languages of Nations be various, yet
they cause no diversity in the notions of the mind: That which the French
calls Pierre, the German Steen, the Latin Lapis, the Greek (...), and the
English Stone, is but one mere notion, although these names be different;
seeing they represent but one and the self same thing to the understandings of
all these Nations.

Therefore all things well considered, there is no readier way can be made to
Sciences, then by the natural and mother tongue; and if ours finds it self
wanting of some trains to explain the subtilities of Sciences, we may easily
supply that want by inventing names therefore by the help of the Professors of
the French Academy, and other learned men; to the end that they may pass
through their approbation, and that nothing may be innovated without good
advice. And our French tongue has herein this advantage, that in reference to
Sciences, it is not yet engaged in any evil or barbarous terms, introduced by
any long custom, which it would be more difficult to abolish, then to invent
new. Aristotle himself, though he disallowed of many Greek terms belonging to
Philosophy, durst not undertake to reform them, fearing to seeem an Innovator
of antiquity, and to make himself odious to those of his own times: So that
Philosophy has always been mixed with improper and ambiguous terms. But we
having now free liberty, and learned men good store amongst us, may very well
Naturalize Sciences in our own Country, inventing proper terms for them, and
laying aside all such as might make Philosophy ambiguous, barbarous, and
unpleasant.

And to this end we shall cut off all Polyonymies and Equivocalls which
confound the mind, and entangle and trouble Arts and Sciences. For Philosophy
will ^ever be plain, so long as one thought may have diverse names, and whilst
we strive to speak Equivocally in Philosophy: it were much more to the
purpose, to find out some one that would strike out al those Equivocall words
out of the Grammar.

When an opinion is introduced, authorized and rooted through prescription of
time, it has a mavelous power over our minds: which makes us so preoccupated
and prepossessed with the excellency of ancient Languages; Those who have not
attained to them, admire them because they do not understand them, and because
there is so much difficulty in the learning of them: and those who have
Knowledge in them, being interested in the preservation of them, set forth
their praises, but will by no means discover the defects of them; and wilfully
maintain that they are more effectual, and significant then the modern, the
very Gates that open the way to Sciences, and the only means to attain them;
notwithstanding if we may speak the truth freely, we may easily make it appear,
that they are all of equal value, and have no prerogative one above the other.

For all words that can be imagined are of like nature, having the same final,
and the same efficient cause, the same matter, and the same form. They have
the same final cause, namely to express our thoughts; The same, efficient
cause, proceeding from the power of the man which produces them: The same,
matter, namely Letters and Dipthonges: And finally they have the same form,
being made different only in termination, and the last letter, which is as it
were the seal and character, which has the power of making up their essence,
as the last unit makes up that of numbers. All the virtue and energie, they
have from the authority of men, which can give no advantage to the one more then
to the other; For it is but a mere Being of Reason, proceeding out of an
absolute hazard and occurrencie. For indeed there is, nor can be but one way of
speaking in the whole world, the difference is but only in characters, and
gestures, and we attribute to several impositions the name of difference of
Languages.

Languages proceed not from without, as some are of opinion, who imagine that
either they were divinely inspired, or came to us by tradition: but we have the
original or root of them in ourselves; and if we be ignorant of the causes of
he production of them, it is because they are too common, and are every day
subject to our senses. Common and continual custom deceaves us, and are the
cause that we perceive not the mouth to be the only Matrix and Alphabet, and
as it were a large case out of which all words do issue, and into which are
put, and as it were distributed by the Author of Nature, all the several
letters, as into a little box, from whence every man like to a Printer takes
them out when he pleases, composes them and makes up languages. And God having
endowed him with manifold perfections above all other creatures, has given him
nothing which is more advantageous to him then speech, seeing thereby he is
made capable of knowing and loving him his maker, lives in Society, and
attaines Wisdom: Wherefore he would have those parts wherein the voice of man
is framed, filled up with so many wonders, to make us the better apprehended
the worth of them, and withal bind us to an acknowledgement of so rare a
benefit.

But it is not sufficient to know that these parts do with such celeritie mix
the letters, and frame words out of them, which we make use of in familiar
communication; but we must also note that each part has its particular
functions, and proper motions, yet differing amongst themselves: and every man
pronouncing a letter, may know and mark the Organ which frames it, and gives
it its being, and what part concurres most to the production of it, whether it
be the lips, the palate, or the tongue, that has most operation in it. And
that which is most of all to be admited is, that all these organs are so well
regulated, and observe so r^ an order amongst themselves, that they can not
incroach nor usurp upon the rights of one another, their power being so well
limited, that they can justly to frame so many letters and no more, then a man
can make several and different motions and doublings in his mouth. Which
shows sufficiently all Languages to be of equal worth, and that if there be
any difference between them, it proceeds not from the words, which are all of
the same matter in all Languages, but rather from the Pronunciation, which
depending upon the Climates, is more mild and pleasant in those Countries,
where the peoples Organs are most clear and best composed; and contrariwise is
more harsh and dissonant in those where they are more grossly and rudely
framed. And this talent is the more considerable, being as it were destined to
some Nations, and does not vary though the ranguages alter, and change by
succession of time. The faculty we have of framing words in infinitum is the
richest treasure belongs to man, it is a continually flowing and running
fountain, which can never be dried up. Wherefore it is a folly to complain of
the barrenness of a I anguage, it is our faults if we do not enrich it, if
we will but apply our endeavors to it. And an ingen ous Arithmetician in
coupling of letters and joining of syllables, might give an admirable structure
to all the parts of speech, and frame a rarer, and more regular Language then
yet there is. For the combination of letters is a well that can never be drawn
dry, out of which one may frame, as out of materia prima, words enough, for an
infinite number of Languages, all different amongst themselves; so that in so
great a number of speeches as are spoken in the whole World, men do not hit
upon the imposition of the same names.

Whence it appears that the diversity of Languages proceeds from the
plurality of words, and the liberty of Framing them; and not from the
difference of Climates. Because we being all indifferent, and having no more
aptitude the one then the other to express the signification of things, the
will would always remain in suspense, and would never resolve upon any
Election; if the inclination which it has to declare its thoughts, did not
oblige it to take names by chance, and impose them at adventure. Which thing
would evidently appear, if a company of little Children were kept up in
several houses in one Plain, who would questionless make as many several
Languages as several companies which were shut together. For as concerning
that which is spoken of an infant, which was bred up in solitude, and apart,
and could pronounce but this word Bec, it was a most gross ignorance in those
who imagined to have a certain proof and evident testimony thereby, of which
was the most ancient and natural Language; seeing the child was brought up
solitary and alone, in which case fools and madmen only will lie talking and
discoursing with themselves: Outward speech being a thing necessary only to
impart our thoughts to others, and not to speak to our selves, who understand
our own thoughts without expressing them outwardly. They should therefore to
find out the effect of so rare a curiosity, have put a great number of
children, rather then one, or two, together. Whereupon we must observe, that
if Nature seem to have done man great prejudice, and much hindered the
communication of Nations, by giving them absolute power to make so many
Languages: She has also given him power and means to obviate that
inconvenience, making him politic, where by he might find, that to make up
most perfect Societies and Commonwealths happy, he should carefully suppress
all particular Languages, to bring in general and common speeches amongst all
Nations.

Now this great variety proceeds from two Original causes, Namely the
indifferency and infiniteness of words; They are indifferent, because
Naturally they signify nothing, and are equally proper to signify any thing.
They are almost infinite, because there results an infinite number, not only
of words, but also of Languages out of the conjunction and copulation of
letters and syllables; whereof one alone may signify all things one after
another, even as well as one only thing may receive all manner of names
successively according as men shall be willing to apply them unto it.

The number of letters which are daily used, is not yet well known, nor
regulated. Men seem to have been very careless in not ordering a matter of
such importance; for if they had well examined the nature of the Alphabet, they
might have had it a great deal more full and copious. But howsoever as it is,
we have twenty, or two and twenty letters which are now in use. And is it not
a thing worthy to be admired, to see so many Languages built upon so small a
foundation? and by the copulation and transposition of so few letters, so great
a number of words made, to which men unawares accustoming themselves, have
framed so many particular Languages: From whence we must necessarily conclude,
that all of them proceeding from one beginning, they are essentially equal,
and cannot any way differ, but only in the quantity of terms whereof they are
composed. Wherefore all men have equal Power and Right to give names to such
things, as yet have none: especially Philosophers, to whom it belongs to invent
names, to represent things rightly, and set them in a due course: they have
full power to set down terms for Sciences, and Arts, to make themselves
intell gible, and communicate their learning to others.

We may likewise in imitation of the Greeks and Romans, borrow of our
neighbor Languages some terms which may be wanting in our own; for although
for a time they pass for strangers, yet after some few years, they are
naturalized, and conform themselves so well to the tone of the Nation, that
there is no difference to be found in them. The Romans did not always strive
to translate into ^atin all Greek words, as Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Astrology, Philosophy, Chirurgerie, and most of the names of
Sciences, and Arts of Figures, of Herbs, of Diseases, and many other things:
They have been content to adopt them, and admit them into their community;
Knowing that all words, both Greek and other, are of common right, and belong
to all Nations equally who desire to make use of them; and that all ^anguages
lend and borrow words, to, and from each other continually. For though it be
not manifestly known that the Greeks borrowed the terms of Sciences from
other Nations, yet it is credible that they brought them with them out of
Egypt, where they went to study: and that the Egyptians likewise borrowed them
from some other more ancient Nation, which might invent them when they first
invented Philosophy. And if this dependencie be odious, to free our selves
from it, we need but alter the Etymology, imitating learned Varro therein,
who being ashamed that so many Latin words should descend from the Greek, for
the honor of his Nation, derived them from other several Languages of Italy.
When one does not indeed understand the signification of a strange word, he may
have recourse to the Original; but when it is once come into custom, it is no
more needful, the meanest artist knowing the signification thereof as well as
the greatest Doctor. As for example, the common people do not know that the
words Chirurgerie, Apoplexy, and Prophecy are Greek words; and yet they
understand as well what they mean, as he that has studied the Greek Grammar
twenty years.

Finally Pilots have found out terms enough for Sea affairs, Architects, for
Architecture, and so have all other Artists for their several Arts. And is it
not a shame, that Philosophers have not in so many ages found a way in France
to invent necessary words for our French Philosophy?

It is certain that when Gunnes, Printing, and other new Arts were first
invented, the Authors thereof had no proper terms for them, and yet now we
have abundance. And when King Francis the first commanded all to plead in the
Mother tongue, the people which belonged to the Courts of Justice were at first
astonished at it; and some did even despair of going forward in their
profession: Yet we see how in a short time they have found out as many terms
as ever the Greek or Roman law had; and would to God they had not invented so
many.

Likewise about a bundred years since, all Poetry lay as it were dead in
French, and especially Comic Poems were so barren and dull, that none did
scarce dare to show themselves upon the Stage. Yet by little and little they
have been so adorned and beautified, especially now of late days they have,
through your Eminencies beneficence, so increased in Elegancie and Politenesse,
that the Theaters Echo with acclamations and applauses.

If our Language were now as barren and imperfect as heretofore it has been,
I must confess our enterprise would at first be somewhat hard and difficult.
But it is now enriched, and has abundancie of words to explain our thoughts.
They now can read public Lectures of Philosophy and Mathematics in the
mother tongue, and Divines can unfold the deep mysteries of Divinity therein,
and make them intelligible even to the plainest and dullest understandings.

But against all these reasons they will peradventure allege, that those who
study Philosophy in French, never came to be absolute Philosophers. But that is
not through the defect of the Language, or of Philosophy it self but rather
through want of method. Those who learn it in Latin privately, profit not a
whit more: The reason is because that those masters which teach privately in
chambers, endeavor nothing but only to please and content their auditors;
reading lectures full of cavills, and ostentation, no way tending to solid
instruction. This schooling is but a kind of pastime; even as in Comedies,
where the Actor seeks only to tickle the itching ears of the hearers to draw
on more company, and so increase his gain. A Science requires Method and
Discipline; it is not enough to be a hearer, he must also excrcise himself in
what he hears, and reduce the precepts into practice, by disputat ons,
repititions, and conferences. Thus are the Spirits heated, and chafed, whereby
doctrine is the deeplier imprinted in our memories. Sciences are like Arts; to
become a good Artist, it is not sufficient to frequent the Shopps of the most
expert artists, unless we set our hands to work likewise. How many men do we
see daily, who have assiduously and with good attention heard famous preachers
for the space of twenty or thirty years, and yet are not so well versed in
Divinity as a Scholar of the Sorbonne, who has heard lectures there but a
year, by reason that the Professors in that reverend Society, are Methodicall
persons, who after their rare expositions, carefully exercise their auditors in
disputation, both in the Schools privately, and also in other public Acts.
And now that his Majesty has by his establishment as it were naturalized
Philosophy, and made it in a manner popular and methodicall, we must hope that
within a short time, youth will besolidely learned, through the care of a
regular discipline. For it is true both in School and State business, that it
is not sufficient to propound good Maxims, unless they be well maintained and
punctually observed, through the rules of a good government.

Now Sir, as for these two last means (which are of most moment) namely to
teach the Grammar and Discipline, the Professors of the Academy cannot employ
themselves about it; they have higher matters to look after, and have not
leisure to instruct youth. In those works which proceed from them, the rules of
Polite writing are indeed very punctually observed, but those works come not to
every ones hands, some few students, and refined court Spirits only make use
of them and profit thereby. How many Gentlemen are there in the country, who
never hear of them and if they should, yet are not capable of such high
reflections? They never came out of their fathers houses, but only to practice
their exercises, or to go to the wars, at their return from whence it is too
late for them to be instructed. They are not well prepared for the reading of
such books with any profit; which makes them all their life time to use the
British, Norman, or Gascoigne Dialect: Which many times keeps them from coming
to the Court, retired at their homes in idleness, where they bestow their
times in nothing but hunting and husbandry. Whereas their parents might in time
send them to the City of Richelieu, where for a small charge, and in a little
time they might be taught Sciences, Languages and Exercises altogether, whilst
they are yet young enough, and may easily forget the ill accent of their own
country Language, and without Labor accustom themselves to a better
Pronunciation, to choice and pureness of expressions. So that returning
afterward into their own country, though the Language be there extremely
corrupt, they will speak good French all their life time. Their companions and
Tenants will follow their example, men always naturally inclining to
novelties, especially when they are according to reason, and judiciously
invented.

So shall we make way throughout the whole Kingdom for those Maxims which the
Professors of the Academy shall set down; and your Eminency shall have the
glory of being the restorer both of your Native Country, and Language. The
Chancellor of the Hospital, judgeing that design, which now your Eminency
has approved of, would be very profitable, and useful to this Nation, had an
intent to erect certain French Colleges in Paris, where Sciences should be
taught in our mother Tongue, which he judged to be fitting therefore, even in
those days. This famous man perceiving the abuse and error of former ages,
could not endure to see the French Nation, which had founded so many brave
Schools, and maintained so many professers to teach the Hebrew, Arabic, Greek
and Latin tongus, neglect to build one for their own. Since his time the
Cardinal du Perron, inflamed with the like zeal did again attempt that
glorious design, and sought all means possible to bring it to pass. And last
of all Monsieur de Fresne Canage, willing by his example to animate us to teach
Sciences in French, writ an Organon in our Language to that purpose, fraught
with so much learning and eloquence, that we may boldly say he has not only
equalled, but even exceeded the most excellentest Greek and Latin Authors. But
the completing of this great work was reserved for your Eminency to
accomplish; and seems to have been deferred hitherto, only that you might have
the full glory of establishing a business of so great importance.

This Sir will be the first fruit which the institution of your Academy in the
City of Richelieu, will bring forth, namely the regulating and refining the
Language in all the Povinces of this Kingdom, which will be very advantageous
for the glory of it. And your Eminency will be pleased to let me tell you, that
there will other solid benefits accruew thereby. Gentlemen will no more spend
their youthful time in unprofitable toys, they will directly learn such
things as are necessary to direct and guide them through the whole course of
their life, the mutual duties of Society, their Princes service, the love of
their Native Country, and their due acknowledgement to your Eminency.

It is a great abuse to mix Nobility with persons of base extraction, and to
bring them up after the same manner* for besides that it takes sordide and base
inclinations, unworthy its birth, and such employments as it may one day hope
for, it also receaveth such instructions as are not fitting for it, and
overburthens its mind uselessely all the remainder of their lives.

True it is, that if parents did predestinate their children to be Churchmen,
Lawyers, Physicians, or to live continually within the precinct of a Library,
then it is fitting to have them to know the secrets of the Greek and Latin
tongue, the Origin and Etymology of words, and make them famous Critics;
because the Fathers of the Church, the Civil Law, and the Authors of Physic
are written in those Languages, and are not yet translated into French. But in
a gentleman that means to wear a sword by his side, these things are
needless; and the knowledge of these Languages, would make him never the
fitter for his countries service.

Why do Parents neglect to send their children to colleges, and let them lie
at home till they be of age to learn Exercises, in the mean time their youth
is spent in idleness, their memory and understanding grows weak through want
of employment, and become as it were languishing faculties? Others will not
send them to the Academies, as well by reason of the excessive charge, as also
because they are not there instructed in learning. They learn indeed to ride,
dance, and fence, which makes their bodies active, and their joints supple: but
though these qualities add some grace to the body, yet can they not make a
complete Gentleman; contrariwise they make him rash and bold, if they be not
accompanied with perfections of the mind. But if they were taught in the
vulgar, and mother tongue, Virtue, the duties of an honest man, and all those
things which belong both to peace and war together with their exercises, they
would profitably employ each moment of their youth, become at once active and
learned, and be fit for counsel, execution, and all manner of employment
whatsoever.

This is the order which your Eminency observes in his house, you cause your
Pages to be equally bred up in arts and Exercises, according to their age and
capacity; making choice of the best masters and tutors that can be had in every
profession. Your house being thus ordered is a Seminary of honor and virtue,
and there come more complete gentlemen out of your service, then out of all the
Colleges and Academies of this Kingdom. These are young plants which grow up
for your Glory, you engrave your benefits upon the bark of hose tender plants,
and the character which you imprint thereon increase with time, to your honor,
and the good of the state: and France acknowledges, amongst many other
benefits, that you daily store it with most virtuous and complete Nobility.

Your Eminency (who knows better then any one, that he education of youth is
the ground and foundation both of a public and private life, upon which
depends the happiness of families, and the greatness of Empires) erects
public Academies, and pays several great pensions in colleges for children,
who having rare natural parts, want means to give them education, charitably
easing the Parents poverty, and the Orphans misery, bestowing means upon them,
whereby they may become capable of serving the State, every one according to
his Genius and profession. Thus Sr. your Eminency does daily free the French
Nobility from the yoke of poverty and ignorance, the two greatest wants that
are incident to man: but though your liberality this way be very profitable,
yet it is in a manner particular, extending but to a certain number of
gentlemen. Now by this establishment it will become universal, all the youth
of the Kingdom may partake of it; and those who live not in the age wherein
they may profit by your example, will be instructed through your care and
bounty. The Nobility for a certain honors you, and frequents your court, more
through duty, and inclination, then for any particular interest. And Sir give
me leave to tell you, that by this foundation you will most powerfully win all
their hearts to your service. The Parents, whose greatest care is for the good
bringing up of their children, will bless your design, and you shall be an
occasion of joy in all families, which were often wont to their great grief to
see those who should be their glory and chief stay, prove ignorant, rude, and
gross, (I will not say brutish) all their life time. We may both in Court and
Country find Dancers, Fencers, and the like enough; But men capable of
negotiations, managing of affairs of moment, knowing the humors of nations and
how to take the best advantages thereupon of such men, I say there is but a
very small number to be had any where: which causes your Eminency to be so
much oppressed with business, being your self forced to have a vigilant eye,
and assisting hand every where, both within and witho^t the Kingdom and to bear
the burden of the whole state, having none to ease or assist you.

Strangers have long expected this establishment, especially the Northern
nations, who are so desirous to learn the French tongue, that they have set up
schools for the attaining to it, in their own countries; yet with very small
profit, because that those which teach it, are not perfect masters of it
themselves; and besides, to to learn a language completely, it is absolutely
required to abide for a time in that country where it is naturally spoken by
men, women, and children. Many therefore come over into France, where they
receive again but little satisfaction; for having private and particular
masters, they spend peradventure some part of the day in studying of French,
and the rest of their time they are amongst their country men, in whose company
they speak nothing but their own country language: whereas if they did daily
meet in assemblies of French Gentlemen, keeping company with them, and
continually hearing the Professors of Sciences, and Masters of Exercises, they
would easily attain the true country accent and pronunciation, and return home
well contented and satisfied. Have not they just cause of complaint against us,
if we neglect a thing of such great moment, and which would be so profitable to
us?

As soon as the news of this establishment shall be divulged, we shall
suddenly have a mighty concourse of all the Northern Nobility: and the great
men of those Countries will be glad to have such an occasion to bring up their
Children in the company of the flower of the French Youth, to gain amongst
them that activenesse, and civility which is in a manner natural to them,
learning withal Sciences, Languages, and Exercises. And on the other side the
French without any travail, by thus frequenting with strangers, shall learn
the manners, customs and dispositions of other Nations. By this means shall
strangers taste the mildness of our Climate, and see the stateliness of our
Government, our Language shall flourish in all the Northern parts, where it is
already in so much credit, that it is ordinarily spoken in the Emperors, the
Kings of Poland, Sweden, and Denmarkes Courts, in the Swissers Country, and in
Holland; so that it is a kind of ignominy to a Courtier, to have no Knowledge
of the French tongue. And so will the Echo of your praises sound every where,
and your City grow famous through out the Universe.

Your City of Richelieu Sir stands in a most wholesome air, fruitful and
pleasant Country and a most delightful situation. As for the wholsomnesse of
the air, there are (besides experience) several pregnant reasons for it.
First the soil being dry, and sandy, the subterraneall vapors cannot lurk
nor lie hidden there to corrupt themselves, and exhaling easily, finding free
passage through the pores of the Earth, they can not degenerate into malignant
exhalations, as might infect the lower region of the air. Secondly, the City
stands open and exposed to the most wholesome winds, namely the North wind,
which has its free passage by the plain of Champigny; and on the East side
likewise, there being no let to hinder it from receiving the benign influences
of the Sun. And contrariwise it is close sheltered from those winds and
aires which ordinarily bring contagious diseases and mortalities amongst us;
being defended from the Southern wind by a thick and high wood, and from the
air of the Sea by a great hill which is Westward.

The fruitfullnesse and goodness of the soil appears by the woods the trees
never growing up to that height in a bad ground, and likewise by the Corn and
Vines which grow plentifully upon the Counter scarfes of the ditches: Briefly
in all Tueaine, which is esteemed to be the Garden of France, there are not
rarer Gardens, nor producing better fruits. As for the superficies of the
Earth, it is covered with a great quantity of Simples of surpassing virtue, and
the inside is replenished with various Mines of Sulphur, Bitume, Vitrioll, and
Iron, and the very Castle and town ditches were full of Mineral Springs, which
could not be preserved because they lay too low. Now these Mineralls, and
Simples can not choose but fill the air with wholesome vapors and spirits,
which continually exhale from them, and purify and free it from corruption.
The Situation is neither high nor low, in a plain Country, a most temperate
Climate, watered by the Mable, a small River running by Richelieu, well woodded
with lofty Trees, which are certain evidences of the antiquity of the house,
tapistred with Meadows, with small hills rising amidst them, from which one
may of all sides discover the horizon, by which our view is pleasantly bounded
by an equal distance from the Town; there growing Vines upon the said hills
that produce most excellent Wine. Now seeing the air of its own Nature is
alike in all places, and that the goodness or malignity of it proceeds from
the celestial influences, the soil, the Situation, and the winds, which
fill it with good or ill vapouts; which we breathing amidst, are the chief
cause of our good, or bad constitutions: Seeing I say all these circumstances
concur so favorably, it would be absurd to say that the air is not mild
and benign in that City and places adjoining, and it was questionless through
the concurrences of so many rare qualities, that this Country brought forth the
most powerful Genius, and sublimed Spirit, that ever was Known in France. And
though your Eminency was constrained to give the water its course through
certain channels; that was not by reason of its deadness or moorishnesse;
there being no marshes or standing pools in that County, but it was to draine
the water out of some ponds which formerly encompassed an old ruinated Castle.

The City was indeed at first incommodated by certain wells, whose waters
communicating of the quality and taste of some Mines, were not fitting for
common use; But your Eminency considering that the goodness of waters was one
of the chiefest things that belonged to a man's health, and therefore the Romans
in their encamping would always make choice of such places as had wholesome
waters in them: You Sir have caused spring waters to be brought from without by
Pipes and Conduits, both into the Town and Castle, which preserve the
Inhabitants in perfect health. We must confess that at the first, when they
began to work there, the digging up of the ground did much incommodate the
workmen, who lying many times upon the ground, attracted the moisture thereof:
and the very buildings, when they were new, caused diseases amongst their first
inhabitants. But such discommodities as these are likely in all places* And
have we not in our days seen, when they first built upon the Church Marshes,
they were hardly habitable, and many of those who dwelt there first dyed, and
now there is not a braver place about Paris? it is the habitation of an
infinite number of Ladies of quality, who are always exceeding careful of
preserving their healths. And now likewise in Richelieu people of all ages, and
sexes, live in such perfect health, that though the Town be full of people of
all trades, yet no Physicians have as yet habited themselves there seeing no
employment there for their profession.

If any false reports have passed thereof in former times, we must impute it
to the malice and omulation of the neighbourning towns, which envying this
cittyes greatness and glory, have bin the Authors and raisers of them: and
false rumors have this common with rivers, that the further they run, the more
they increase: so these calumnies have been spread far into remote countries,
and to the Court it self, where it has been reported, that the country was
contagious, and in a manner inhabitable: and some officers of this city have
also caused this suspicion to increase, who having land and businesses
elsewhere, to have a pretense to absent themselves from home, where by their
places they were bound to reside, have seconded those slanderous reports: which
things have heretofore hindered many from coming to settle their abode amongst
us, and have been no small hindrance to our affairs. But Sir, since your
Academy has been settled in this your city, the professors thereof have so
stoutly opposed this error, upon several occasions, that people are now
undeceived, and those false rumors being to cease, truth appearing daily to the
contrary.

Finally if the Situation of the city of Riche^ieu be advantageous the
structure and sabrick thereof is also most admirable. Can there be a more
stately and magnificent sight, then such a row of houses, or rather Palaces, as
are all uniformely built in that long and spacious street which leads from the
Royal place, (where our Academy stands) to the Cardinal place, where you have
built that Stately Church, which is a magnificent and authentical monument of
your piety? Can there be any statelier or compleater building, then the Castle,
with its Courts, Park, Channels, Gardens, and other Dependencies belonging to
it? Were ever so many rare and excellent pieces of workmanship, all manner of
Arts seen together, especially for Tapistry, Sculpture, and Painting? Your
Gallery, wherein are drawn to the life the battles won, victories obtained,
and cities conquered by his Majesty? So that Greece Italy, and all other places
of the world, which are renowned for their industry and curiosity, seem to have
been spolyed of their most precious ornaments to adorn the place of your birth.
But I will not undertake particularly to describe all the rarities of this
place; they would fill up a volume. I will therefore be content o say only thus
much, that they come hither already from all parts, as they did in former times
to the Oracles, to behold those rare Antiquities which were admired throughout
the world.

We may therefore truly say, that Richelieu is a most fitting and convenient
place to settle your Academy in. First because the inhabitants themselves speak
as pure French, as can be spoken in any part of France; which is a great
advantage, seeing the design could hardly take esfect in a place where ill
Language were spoken. Secondly, the Country round about it abounds with all
manner of commodity, it is situated at equal disstance, from the Rivers of
Loire, and Vienna, which are the best nurses France has: and likewise from the
havens of Brittanny, and Poitou, from whence may be had all manner of things
conducing to man's life: it stands in a place of repose, retired from turmoil,
and negotiations of traffic, selected as it were a purpose for men seriously
and quietly to apply themselves wholly to Discipline and Exercises.

Thirdly it stands almost in the middle and center of all France, amidst those
Provinces where the worst French is spoken; Low Brittanny, the lower Poitou,
Perigord, Limosin, Auvergne, Gascoigne, and other Countries there about, from
whence they may the more conveniently send their youths to amend and correct
their defects, and learn the true accent and pronunciation of the French.

Fourthly, it is near the River Loyre, upon the banks whereof all strangers
delight to be, for the most part in Orleans, Bloys, Tours, Saumur, Angiers,
Nantes, and all those Cities by which that fair River runs. And finally
besides all these advantages of Situation, your Eminence when you please may
endow it with such franchises and immunities as you shall think fit, and as
other Princes and eminent men have done, who have founded Cites and
Universities.

But because this word Academie is now of late most improperly appropriated to
the Gymnastick, and to the instructing of youth in the Art of riding, by such
as know not the property of terms: whereby that Luster of this foundation
might be eclipsed, and strangers caused to imagine the Academies of Richelieu
to be like other Academies, appointed only for the completing the carriage of
the body, and adorning the outward behavior: We have thought it fitting in
this place to make known, that the art of riding is but one particular thing
taught in our Academie which being set up by the name of a Royal College, is,
to speak properly, a true University of Sciences, whereunto your Eminency
has thought good to add as accessory, and depending thereon, the Art of
managing of horses, and other Exercises of the body; to leave unto posterity,
in the place where you were born, a complete and perfect Model for education
of Gentry and Nobility, and to reform the disorders which were crept into other
Colleges and Academies of this Kingdom, where these two sorts of perfections
are taught severally, against the Maxims of all the Politicians as have been
in former ages: who were all of opinion, that the Mind, and Body, of man the
two essential parts of our being, ought to be exercised, and instructed both
at one time. Because that even as the Exercise of the Body, without that of the
Mind, breeds a kind of Cruelty, and Insolency in us; even so the Exercise of
the Mind, without that of the Body, causes a kind of Niceness and stupidity.
Wherefore your Eminency, who knows better then any, how much it concerns the
state, to have its Nobles throwly possessed, and qualified with rare qualities
both of body and mind; has most prudently ordered, that of those eight
Professors, whereof this Academy chiefly censists, six should be for Sciences,
and the other two for Exercises. To this we may add, that Universities both in
ancient and Modern times have always been, and still are called by the name
of Academies; witness those of Alexandria, Athens, Paris, Alcala, and many
other.

Thus your Eminency in reuniting the Exercises of the body to those of the
mind, procures this advantage to your Academie, that it being a Nurserie for
Sciences, which ordinarily attract a concourse of youth from all parts, there
will never be any want of Scholars for the Exercises of the body, as Fencing,
Dancing, Riding, and the like, whereby the teachers thereof being in continual
employment, this Academie will not be subject to those failings, as others,
which are not kept up by Sciences, and one day have store of Scholars, and the
next day are without any.

And finally I know that this City, by reason of its name, and eminent
qualities of the founder, is already famous throughout all this Kingdom, and
amongst foreign Nations also. So that if your Eminency continue your favor
toward this design, your Academie will cause this to be one of the most
populous and flourishing Cities of Europe; not less renouned then other
Cities, which our Kings have honored with the Professions of Divinity, Canon
and Civil Law, Physic and Arts; and equal to either Marseilles, or
Alexandria, or any other ancient Cities of Greece, with all theiry ceums and
Porticoes.

There are several ways to make Cities populous, and adorned, namely
Commerce, Jurisdictions, Franchises and immunities, Trades, and Handycrafts.
But the most noble way of amplifying and renouning of them, is by means of
Sciences, which were the cause that Memphis in Egypt, Athens in Greece, Naples
in Italy, and Paris in France, have grown up to such magnificence, that they
have drawn all Nations of the world to come and behold them with admiration.

FINIS.
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES For the Government Of the Academie, or Royal
College, founded by Order from the King, in the Gity of Richelieu: Under the
protection of the Dukes of Richelieu.
THE Royal Academie, established in the City of Richelieu, shall be governed by
a Director, or Supervisor.

The Supervisor shall take the Oath of Allegiance to the King, before the Duke
of Richelieu.

The Supervisor shall appoint men to supply the plaes as shall fall void, either
by death or otherwise, who after they have been there a year or two, shall be
presented to the King by the Supervisor, to receive their letters Patents, if
the Professors find them worthy thereof. And during their said time of Regency
or Probation, they shall enjoy the same Rights and Emoluments, as other
Professors do.

The Supervisor shall not depose or displace any Professor, without the
general consent of all the rest.

The Supervisor shall provide schoolmasters and Officers for the said Academy,
who shall have reasonable and sufficient wages assigned them.

The Supervisor shall have power to settle Schoolmasters and School mistresses:
to whom he shall prescribe a Method, to teach the children of the city to read
and write well.

The supervisor shall have power to call and break off all assemblies, as shall
be to deliberate upon affairs touching the commonalty, wherein all things shall
be decided by Plurality of voices.

The Dean, or Ancientest Professor, shall supply the supervisors place in his
absence, and perform his office.

The Academy shall be provided with movables and utensiles, at the common
charge of the Professors; and if any of them chance to die, or leave his place,
the part and portion which he shall have in the common goods, shall be kept for
him or his heirs, according to the estimation as shall be made thereof by the
said Professors.

The Incomes which shall be received of the Scholars, shall be laid in Common,
and divided equally between the Supervisor, Professors, Horserider, and Master
of Defense:

The Supervisor having first deducted the twentieth part thereof for other
Masters wages, officers, Servants, and other charges needful for the
maintenance of the Academy.

The Professors, as near as possible may be, shall of themselves supply all the
classes one after another, and shall successively teach all the Sciences.

The Professors, to perfect themselves every day more and more in the Sciences,
shall daily confer one hour in the day concerning their studies; and what the
one knows not, the other shall be obliged to teach him.

The Professors of Sciences shall take their places in all assemblies after the
Supervisor, according to the order and time of their reception, and after them
the Querry, or Horse rider, and Fence master.

The Professors shall in their turns every sunday cause public disputations
to be held.

The Professors, according to the ancient custom of the University of Paris,
shall not dictate any writings in the classis for Sciences: every one shall
have his book printed, and by that means, the time which should be spent in
writing, shall be more profitably employed in repetitions, and disputations.

The Professors shall not use any books in teaching of Sciences and Languages,
unless they have been first examined and approved of by the whole company.

The Professors shall carefully teach their scholars, and cause them often to
rehearse the Definitions, Divisions, Theoremes, and Propositions of Sciences
and Arts.

The Professors shall finish their course of Philosophy in six years, teaching
the Sciences, Arts, and Humanity in six dislinct Classes, as follows.

Namely In the sixth Glassis they shall teach Grammar, the Card in Plane,
Chronology, and Geneologie.

In the fifth, History, Mythology, Poesy, and Rhetoric.

In the fourth, Logic and Moral Philosophy, Namely Monastical, Oeconomicall,
and Political.

In the third, the Elements of Geometry, and Arithmetic, together with the
practice of both of them, and Music.

In the second, Natural Philosophy in general, and particular, with
Physiologie, and Pathologie, and Metaphysics.

In the first, the Mechanics, the Optics, etc. Astrology, Geography, and the
Gnomonicks.

The same Professors, who in the morning taught Sciences, shall in the
afternoon teach Languages, in order as follows.

Namely, In the sixth Classis they shall teach the Rudiments, Colloquies, Cato
and Onomasia, or Nomenclature, conformable to things as well natural as
artificial.

In the fifth, Grammar, writing of Epistles, the Curious Method, and Commenius.

In the fourth, the Quantities, Terence, Horace, Quintus Curtius, and the Poets.

In the third, the Figures, Tullies Offices, Virgil, Caesar's Commentaries, and
Orators.

In the second, the Principles of the Greek tongue, and the pre-eminence which
it has above other languages.

In the first, the Origin and Genius of the Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish and
French tongues, the conformity and difference that is between them.

The Querry, or Horse-master, Fence-mastor, and other inferior Masters shall
teach their several Exercises every day at a certain hour, but the Scholars
divided into several companies, shall come to learn but once in two days,
according to such order as shall be appointed them.

On Festivalls and Holidaies, the Querry or horserider shall appoint running at
the ring, and at the Quintune; and the Fence master shall cause his Scholars to
Exercise on those days publicly, and sometimes fight at Barriers.

The Scholars shall be bred up in the fear of God, and their due allegiance
and obedience to their King. The Scholars shall jointly learn Sciences,
Languages, and Exercises, at such hours as shall be set down by the
Supervisor, who shall also have power to dispense with any of them upon lawful
occasion.

Every week there shall be one play day appointed for all the Scholars.

The Classes shall always open the next day after Saint Luke's day, and the
Vacations shall begin the first day of September.

The last fifteen days of August, they shall publicly dispute upon general
positions in all Sciences, according to the Orders of the six Classes. And
every Professor shall in his turn be a Moderator in those disputations,
concerning such things as he has taught all the year; and all the other
Masters shall cause their Scholars publicly to do Exercises in their several
professions.

And to encourage the Scholars to the studying of Sciences, and learning of
Exercises, they shall have certain prizes, or rewards distributed amongst them,
according to their merits, by the Professors.

FINIS.

