A REMONSTRANCE TO THE CREDITORS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, Concerning
the Public Debts of the Nation.
HIS Excellencies New Representative being now Dissolved, and their Supreme
Power envolved in him, as the sapp of a Tree runs to the root in cold Winter;
It is not for the Creditors of the Commonwealth of England to despair of
their due Debts, and think themselves undone by what is done, but rather turn
their present fears into future hopes, considering that the late diseased, and
deceased Parliament before their dissolution in their last Will and Testament,
made their Noble General who is now our Lord Protector their sole Executor,
whom I hope will be careful to see you satisfied, and the grievances of the
people removed.

In him therefore you must confide, and render that honor, worship, and fear
which is due unto his Highness under God, and to him and his Counsel repair
and Petition for Justice, and due satisfaction of your just Debts, according to
that way and manner prescribed in my Remonstrance of the 22 of June last, and
much more abundant, that you may not run in vain but obtain your just desires.

For preparation hereunto, it is meet that you be thoroughly sensible of what
the late Parliament has done for you.

That well penned Act for Ireland, of the 26 of September. last, you ought not to
forget, considering that therein they have granted Lands to you at an easy
rate, for your Public Faith Bills and Debenters, which I suppose will be good
Accommodation for those who intend there to inhabit or plant. And it is
remarkable what special provision they have made therein for desolate Widows,
etc. But to speak as the truth is, they have not therein made Provision for
stating your Debenters, who have not served in Ireland, only they do (in a
manner) promise it Yet by the Act of the 19 of October last, they have
empowered the Committee of the Army, to cause the Accounts of all Officers and
Soldiers that either are or were in the Service of this Commonwealth at any
time since the 15 of January, 1647. to be stated, audited, and cast up. But not
for those that were disbanded before.

Nevertheless though some were contented to accept of Lands in Ireland, the
rest would not be so satisfied, but expected payment of their Bills and
Debenters, from the Forests and Chases, which was given by the old Parliament,
for Collateral Security, in the Act of the 17 of July, 1649. But incontinently
this late dissolved Parliament have put the Public Faith upon doubling
thereupon, wherein it is to be feared there will be double dealing, and that
the needy Creditors will be exposed (as it were) to be sold for a little
silver, and the poor for the price of a pair of shoes; for they being not
able to double, must be constrained in the midst of their great extreamities to
sell their Public Debts at an inconsiderable value, with many sighs and tears
into the bargain: And of all the Forests they have reserved but four for the
Collateral Security for the Soldiers Bills chargeable upon the late Kings
Lands, and that with such delatory Conditions, whereby their expectations are
frustrate, though they earned their Wages with the hazard of their lives and
dearest blood.

The Act of the 7 of October: last, which is for Public Creditors to bring or
send in their Claims of their Debts to the Commissioners therein named, is
said to be for the due stating and clearing of Public Debts in order to their
payment. It also promises payment to the discoverer of his own proper Debt:
But as the Act of Marriage is deficient, without telling how long they shall
hold together, So this Act is lame in diverse respects: It tells you of stating,
and of paying, but not by whom, nor when, Therefore it is not amiss for you to
Petition for an additionall Act, or that the remains of that Bill which was
read, and Ordered to be read again by the old Parliament, Nov: 30* 1642. may
pass for your better Security. And the 12 Undertakers be sufficiently
empowered, upon this, certain men have engaged to discover 500000. l. for
payment of public debts. I know many of you are very necessitous, and others,
though more able, cannot spare money out of their Trading to double. You have
waited many years with much patience, and I have labored many Months, and
attained experience of the said Calamities of the people more then before, I
have in my progress seen a dissolution of a Golden Parliament, coveting
profit, And a Parliament choice as silver, laboring for Credit, consisting (as
was said) most of religious and conscientious men, in whom the best affected
had hopes of good, But a house divided against it self cannot stand. The News
of this will go to Rome, but let not the uncircumcised in heart rejoice and
triumph. Most men upon this dissolution take occasion to cry Aha Aha, and to
speak their pleasure, but prudence may teach them when and how to speak. Indeed
the occasion of their dissolution is known to many, but few do rightly consider
the cause to be That in matters fundamental they laid aside Gods most righteous
Law, and leaned to their own: wherefore their dissolution was of God, who
says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. It proceeds from the Lord of Hosts,
who has determined to stayne the pride of all glory, and to bring into
contempt*all the Honorable of the Earth*

God Grant Repentance to Sinners. God Protect the Protector of his Saints. God
Preserve the Peace of the Commonwealth. From my House in Bow-lane, London, the
19 of December, 1653. S: Chidley.


