Chemical, Medicinal, and Chyrurgical ADDRESSES: Made to Samuel Hartlib,
Esquire. VIZ.

1. Whether the Vrim and Thummim were given in the Mount, or perfected by Art.
2. Sir George Ripley's Epistle, to King Edward unfolded. 3. Gabriel Plats
Caveat for Alchymists. 4. A Conference concerning the Philosophers Stone. 5. An
Invitation to a free and generous Communication of Secrets and Receipts in
Phy^ick. 6 Whether or no, each Several Disease has a Particular Remedy? 7. A
new and easy Method of Surgery, for the curing of all fresh Wounds or other
Hurts. 8. A Discourse about the Essence or Existence of Metals. 9. The New
Postilions, pretended Prophetical Prognostication, Of what shall happen to
Physicians, Chyrurgeons, Apothecaries, Alchymists, and Miners.
London, Printed by G. Dawson for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread Eagle at
the west end of Paul's. 1655.

A TABLE OF THE Chemical, Medicinal, and Chirurgical ADDRESSES, made to Samuel
Hartlib, Esquire.
A Short Discourse, proving Vrim and Thummim to be perfected by Art, and to be
of like pure Substance, with the White and Red Elixirs. From Page 1. to Page
18. Sir George Ripeley's Epistle to King Edward unfolded. From Page 19. to Pa.
49. Gabriel Plats his Caveat for Alchymists: Or a Warning to all ingenious
Gentlemen, whether Laics, or Clericks, that study for the finding out of the
Philosophers Stone, showing how they need not to be cheated of their Estates,
either by the persuasion of others, or by their own idle conceits. From Page 51.
to Page 88. One of Monsieur Renaudots French Conferences, concerning this
Question; Whether or no each several Disease, has a particular, and especial
Remedy. From page 89. to page 99. Another Conference of Monsieur Renaudots,
concerning the Philosophers Stone, Translated out of French. From page 101. to
page 112. An Epistolical Discourse of Philaretus to Empericus, written by a
Person of singular Piety, Honor, and Learning, inviting all true lovers of
Virtue and Mankind, to a free and generous Communication of their Secrets and
Receipts in Physic. From page 113. to page 150. A short and easy Method of
Surgery, for the curing of all fresh Wounds, or other Hurts, especially
commended to all Chirurgeous, serving in Wars, whither by Sea or Land. And to
all that are employed in the public Hospitals of the Commonwealth. Translated
out of Low Dutch. From page 153. to page 181. The Appendix containing Mr.
Gerard Malynes Philosophy: About the Essence or Existence of Metals. Delivered
accidentally in one Chapter of his ^ook, called Lex Mercatoria, or the Ancient
Law Merchant. A Translate of the Eleventh Chapter, taken out of a Theological
German Treatise, printed in the year, 1655. under the Title of Postilion;
pretending to be a Prophetial prognostication of what shall happen to
Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries, with their Dependants, Alchymists, and
Miners.
WHETHER The Vrim and Thummim Were given in the MOUNT, Or perfected by ART.
THe clear Vision of an Essence, causes men to glorify God, who has given
power unto man, to manifest his eternal purpose of renovation of the creature
by a natural operation: and although the true and natural essences of things
are seldom manifestly known by themselves, yet humane learning, being as a
sickle, whereby we reap divine knowledge, directs us to the mark; and the
Philosophers all agree, Essences are bright, pure, and clear, confused in the
creature, and may be purified, but the manner is not easily agreed, so that
they lead us to the consideration of several Arts, and of natural and
Artificial things, jointly and severally: some Arts have their termination in
silence, as Rhetoric and Pleadings: others have their perfection upon the
Superficies, as painting and carving: But the true Alchymist excludes all
vulgar operations to extract the internal beauty; and there are three kinds of
laborers in this Art, Alchymistae, Lauchymistae, Lachrymistae; yet no Art may
justly be condemned for the fault of the Professors. For Albertus Magnus says,
Hoc artificium omni art certius ac sublimius est, and certissimum habet
effectum. They name their Matter Adam, because from red earth he became the
salt and light of the world, so only man, and their corporate lights, are
called Microcosmus: therefore they consider wisdom in a created nature, as
well subject to sense as invisible, and consequently material, because quality
is as the matter of the Elements, and the central virtue is real, and may be
specificate; neither is it contrary to nature, but beyond nature, that the true
sense, and lively practice make one perfection. The Philosophers say, Whosoever
has their mystery, knows the thing in being, and in being and use before
practice, and each for himself affirms: I write nothing, save that I have seen
and done, nor have I done any thing, save that I knew before. Although that
which is hid, is more than can be spoken, yet their whole intent is to manifest
that which is hid, and to hide that which is manifest, therefore they conclude:
Felix scientia cum sciente, and the holy Text says, God gives wisdom to the
wise, Dan. 2.12.
and knowledge to them that know understanding. But because the question stands
betwixt divine tradition, and natural disposition, we must look to the
beginning, when the eternal Word commanded, Genesis 1.
and it was made: but in the Generation of Heaven and Earth, there is inserted
a power of the perpetuation of Creation, wherein Vrim and Thummim are created
remotissima. Genesis 2. Psalm: 33:9: Heb. 11.3.
For albeit the visible only are mentioned, yet the invisible are understood,
and difference taken betwixt things instituted without means, and those
produced by help of mean subjects. For Almighty God is not said to rest, as if
he had traveled in his work, Esaias. 48.3.40.28.
but because he created no more any new kind of Creatures, than by the power of
the word Fiat; Therefore not the Vrim and Thummim, save as they subsisted in
other things like Misseltoe, which has body, branch, and berry, yet no root of
it self. But if we remember the things of old, we may declare these last from
the first: Is. 96.9, 10.
For from the end of every intention springs the beginning, and the wisdom of
God has ordained diversity, but his power makes all things equal, and
thereby is manifested the eternal beauty. The Vrim and Thummim were substances;
for Moses put them into the breast plate, the words signify light and
perfection, knowledge and holiness, manifestation and truth, Lev. 8.1.
so the sense and substance does predicate each other, as the convertible terms
of Science and Essence make one perfection, and the substances were bright and
perfect: also joint and several, because none can come to perfection without
knowledge, and where the Almighty God appointed the end, he gives the means to
deliver the Creature from the bondage of the Elements. Wisdom, Understanding
and Knowledge, are the means to attain them, and the gifts of grace are
signified by them also. The Philosophers call the manifestation of the centrall
virtue, Donum Dei, In their sacred use they were objective to the golden
Cherubims, whose wings were stretched to the outmost side of the Temple, they
signified the plenitude of Science, which has identity with Essence; there was
also the scarlet vail, Eze. 28.5: 14, 16:
which seemed ever moving, and signified pure fire generative, and moving,
which selected and fixed in clear bodies, is Vrim and Thummim. For when the
four spirits of the heavens proceed from the Lord of all the Earth, and were
fixed in the North, then take silver and gold, and make crowns. There is a
spiritual and natural use of these things, Luc: 6:5, 8, 11
the Creator by his absolute power, may make children of stones, but his
ordinary power requires means; and because the insensible things should make
his love to man more apparent; he commands the Ark of Noah, and the Ark of
the Testimony, to be made after the proportion of man's body, Genesis 6:14:
the length six times the breadth, and ten times the thickness; in which
numbers are contained all perfections. Yet is objected, Exo: 28:30
they were not commanded to be made, but to be put into the breast plate. The
great and glorious works of God are not unknown unto himself, but unto us, they
are by present command, or by successive course, as the first fruits were
supernatural; and again, the trees brought forth the same year, according to
their natural course and perfection: also the word Essence, contains the
natural and spiritual condition of bodies, which are so fast connexed, that the
true and natural Essence, is with great difficulty made apparent, although the
matter be but as a light case to the form: In generation it moves a non ente ad
ens, in corruption it moves ab ente actu ad non ens. Also some things have
existence by the subject, which have no Essence in nature, neither are said to
be created, as darknels, and silence, and things of putrefactive kind. So in
the putrefaction of the Creature, that is not properly said to be made, which
by an inward power does purge it self by ebullition, and a kind of new
generation, as does the pure sulphur of Metal, the Artist being but as a
Midwife; so that there is a necessary difference betwixt that which has being
by the power of Gods work, and the work of man; for no effect is said to be
necessary from the first and remote causes, but from the second and nearer; as
in the spiritual operation in man, Esa: 32:17:
the work of Righteousness is peace, and the effect, quietness and assurance
for ever. Also taking away Evening and Morning, which is mixed knowledge, the
light of the seven days shall be a perpetual blessing, and perfect knowledge.
Now to descend again to the Philosophers, Morien Romanus says, secretum
secretorum est illa dispositio, quaemanibus perfici non potest. Haec enim
dispositio est naturarum mutatio. Another says, Ars ergo postcontemplationem
omnium horarum sequitur naturam, and recipit spiritus natura immundos, and eos
sublimando subluerat and mundat, and tunc volendo fugere ab igne, ars ministrat
naturas and natura eos convertit in corpora munda fixa, and de caeteris natura
corporum dominabitur naturae spirituum in aeternum, per hoc ingenium mir abile.
Bezaleel had the spirit of wisdom, Exo: 31:3, 4:
understanding and knowledge, which are the means to attain this effect, and
his ends directed to devise works in gold, silver and brass, which although in
sound of words they seem inferior, yet they are in exaltations in Art
progressive to the producing of Vrim and Thummim. For all the glorious
furniture of the Tabernacle was not for worldly pomp, but for spiritual
mystery and beauty of the Doctrine of the Law and the Gospel: so in natural
things, there is no greater mystery than that the incorrupted quality of pure
sulphur, should have regal power and rest, eternally visible, shining as the
Sun in glory. As a man is chiefest of the Creatures, so gold is purest of
bodies, Lord of stones, and noblest of Metals, which one calls secretum magnum
Dei, and another says, ille spiritus in Auro idem est cum spiritu generante
omnium creaturarum: estque cadem unica generativa natura per omnia diffusa. And
as the Sun is chiefest amongst celestial bodies, so his spirit does reign over
the fourfold nature, and being corporate is without shadow. One of the Rabbis
says, in the second Temple they made Vrim and Thummim, therefore that which
has been done, may be done, although the materials be concealed. For good in a
better, is ever more excellent; but if Phidias gave him rude and obstinate
stuff to carve, Esa: 45:2, 3
let his art do what it can, his work will want the beauty. And because nature
of her self cannot attain her highest perfection, the Artist must break the
gates of brass, and cut in pieces the bars of iron, that is ignorance, and
the matter of the Elements, whereby the treasures of darkness, and incorporeal
substances are hidden from us, but being removed, 2 Kin: 6:17
the invisible Essence is apparent, as the chariots of fire about Elisha. These
Rabbis also hold every natural beginning to be either matter, or the cause of
matter, viz. The four Elements sub nutu Dei, which they express in Numbers and
figures, for number is Unity folded up, and Unity is number unfolded. The
Mathematical number is collected of many Unites, as a line of many points; And
number is said to be formed, and material signifying Principia and Elementa,
because vocabulum natural est symbolum numeri, which is expressed in the
setting of the precious stones four rows, three in a row, Exo: 28:17
four to show the natural perfection, and three the inward genreration; as
three and four the artificial exaltation. For these natural bodies do not show
forth their virtues, Rev. 21:18
until they be made spiritual; the precious stones signified the excellency of
gifts in the Teachers, and the Vrim and Thummim the gifts of grace in the
heart, because the central virtues are their materials, quia virtutes formant
adspeciem. In things of greateft concordance are greatest virtues; for that
which is most abundant in virtue, does most excel in glory and beauty: Bezaliel
has the spirit of knowledge to devise works in gold, therefore his invention
must necessarily consider the possibility from the object, and how to work upon
the form, as well as upon the matter, and upon the center as upon the
superficies: For seeing the perfection of the matter is glorious, the
perfection of the form must necessarily be more glorious; because the bodily
nature shall eternally predominate: In the Creation the substance of the Sun
was light corporate the fourth day, light is never without heat, and radical
heat is the occultum corporis, which augmented and fixed, shines as the Sun in
glory, which shows the majesty of nature as in a liquid glass; notwithstanding,
1 Cor. 5:37
that which is sowed is not quickened, except it die, and it is a rule amongst
the Philosophers: Ad perfectionem omnium Artium requiritur renascentia. To like
purpose another says: Corpus ad omnes perferandas miserias est ordinatum.
Oportet enim transire per ignem and aquam and renasci, aliter in requiem
eternam ingredi non poterit. And another says, Post resurrectionem habemus
gloriam and fortitudinem sempiternam tunc gaudebunt omnes in prosperitate magna
qui sciunt nostrum progressum. So the end of every intention shows the
beginning, the Creatures were made perfect, and to be perfect; for the formal
and final cause is the same, the difference is in the perfections, Some hold
that the ancient Philosophers by this holy art have become Prophets: And
because Adam his dominion of the creatures was the knowledge of their natures
and Properties, by this Science he knew the world should be twice destroyed:
For both fire and water are necessarily required to the purification of the
creature. And as sense is the light of nature, so reason is the perfection of
sense, and by example we see with others eyes, but by reason with our own.
Notwithstanding we may consider Tubal-Cain, Gen: 4:32
who was an instructor of every Artificer in brass and iron, that is (says the
Philosopher) a perfect Master in the decoction of Mineral virtue, which
Daemogerger calls ferrum. Et Aurora consurgens has these words: Ego sum
ferrum siccum and durum and forte, pistans and pistatum omne bonum: Et non est
res mundi agens actionem meam. Per me enim generatur secretum secretorum,
quando convalesco a langu^ribus, tunc habeo vitam leonis rugientis, etc. Etiam
Raym Lullius, Absque ferro homines suam vitam sustentare non posse: Iterum
Ferrum potest quod aurum non potest, seipsum mortificat, seipsum vivificat,
seipsum rubore decorat. And this operative spirit is the regal sulphur, which
questioneth in Marlin his Allegory. Where are mine enemies that would not that
I should reign over them? bring them hither, that I may slay them. The
Antimonial and Arsenical spirits must be vanquished, for only to the benign,
gentle, and most suffering Mercurial spirit is given absolute victory: Lux sata
est justo, etc. Ps: 97:11:
Therefore sow light, and reap perfection, sow gold, and reap the internal
beauty. Notwithstanding the Philosophers work is not upon gold, no more than a
man does ride upon a block, because he mounts a great horse by it: but their is
use of it. And one says, gold is dissolved by wisdom, therefore in the power
of Art to better, yet the fast locked body must not only be made relative, and
the exterior form destroyed, but from the crude nature, and confused substance
does naturally arise, a subtle white fume, which is said to be vita quaedam
unica omnia replens, colligans and connectens, that is, aqua clarissima
putrefactionis, and being corporated is clear as a Crystal looking glass, and
then called ens enti admixtum essentia composita and Vrim, also by help of the
same pure body (save that formae ex materia non nascitur) is produced a more
perfect substance brighter than a carbuncle, giving sufficient light to read
by, which is called essentia simplox, ens omnis privationis expers and Thummim.
Rom: 8:21
For the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, unto a
glorious liberty, and the animality being changed into spirituality, the
corporal and spiritual virtues are eternally fixed. Isa: Holl: de mi: Dan: 22:3:
Some hold a glorified body shall be like a Crystal Lanthorn, with a taper in
it, and like them men shall differ in glory. Certainly the wise shall shine
like the brightness of the firmament, and the Creator has given power to men
to manifest the redintegration of the world, by a lineary and successive course
in short time, which himself shall make apparent, when time shall cease. But de
entibus a fortuna non potest esse veritas, nec scientia: Also we must specially
remember only the homogencal nature, is capable of so high excellence, which
Bezaleel did work upon, and has the spirit of knowledge, Exo. 38.22. Heb. 8.5.
which word in the original, is used for sense and experience, and he made all
the Lord commanded Moses, who might make nothing, save that he has seen a
pattern of in the Mount. Therefore Bezaleel was at least equal to those of the
second Temple, and the ancient Philosophers. Eze. 2^.5.14, 16. Zach. 4. Esaias
4.5. Job, 28, v. 5, 6.
It seems also the Prophets were not ignorant of these things; for there is
mentioned of the stones of fire attained by wisdom, the stone of Tin in the
hand of Zerubabel by the treasures, and stone of darkness, and as it were fire
turned up, yet they knew not the order of making the physical and Metaphysical
bodies. For in nature many things are produced by habitual virtue, which seem
incredible.

SIR GEORGE RIPLYE'S EPISTLE TO King Edward unfolded.
THis Epistle as it was imediately written to a King, who was in his
generation, both wise and valiant, so it does comprise the whole secret, both
learnedly described, and yet Artificially veiled, yet as the Author testifies,
that in this Epistle he does plainly untie the main knot. So I can and do
testify with him, that there is nothing desirable for the true attaining of
the mystery, both in the Theory and Practick of it, which is not in this short
Epistle fully taught. This then I intend as a key to all my former writings,
and assure you on my faithful word, that I shall not speak one word doubtfully
or mystically, as I have in all my other writings, seeming to aver some things
which taken without a figure, are utterly false, which we did only to conceal
this Art: This key therefore we intend not to make common; and shall entreat
you to keep it secret to your self, and not to communicate it, except it be to
a sure friend, who you are confident will not make it public. And this request
we make upon very good grounds, knowing that all our writings together, are
nothing to this, by reason of the contradictions which we have vvoven into them,
which here is not done in the least measure. I shall therefore in this Epistle
take up a new method, and that different from the former, and shall first draw
up the substance of the Philosophy couched in this Epistle, into several
Conclusions, and after elucidate the same.

The first Conclusion is drawn from the nineth stave of this Epistle, the eight
first staves being only complemental, and that is, That as all things are
multiplied in their kind, so may be Metals, which have in themselves a
capacity of being transmuted the imperfect into perfect.

The second Conclusion in the tenth stave is, That the main ground for the
possibility of transmutation, is the possibility of reduction of all Metals,
and such Minerals as are of Mettalick principles, into their first
Mercurialmater.

The third Conclusion is in the eleventh stave, That among so many Mettaline or
Mineral Sulphurs and so many Sulphurs there are but two that are related to our
work, which Sulphurs have their Mercuries essentially united to them.

The fourth conclusion from the same stave is, That he who understands these
two Sulphurs and Mercuries aright, shall find that the one is the most pure red
Sulphur of gold, which is Sulphur in manifesto and Mercurius in occulto, and
that other is most pure white Mercury, which is indeed true quicksilver, in
manifesto and Sulphur in occulto, these are our two principles.

The fifth Conclusion from the twelfth stave is, That if a man's principles be
true, and his operations regular, his event will be certain, which event is no
other than the true mystery.

These Conclusions are but few in number, but of great weight, the
amplification, illustration, and ilucidation therefore of them will make a Son
of Art truly glad.

For the first, Forasmuch as it is not for our purpose here to invite any to
the Art, only intending to lead and guide the Sons of Art; we shall not prove
the possibility of Alchimy, by many arguments, having done it abundantly in
another Treatise. He then that will be incredulous, let him be incredulous, he
that will cavil, let him cavil; but he whose mind is persuaded of the truth of
the Art, and of its dignity, let him attend to what is in the Illustration of
these five Conclusions discovered, and his heart shall certainly rejoice.

We shall therefore briefly Illustrate this first Conclusion, and insist there
more largely, where the secrets of the Art are most couched.

For this first then which concludes in effect the truth of the Art, and its
reality, he that would therein be more satisfied in it, let him read the
Testimoniy of all Philosophers, and he that will not believe the Testimones of
so many men, being most of them, men of renown in their own time, he will cavil
also against all other Arguments.

We shall only hold to Riplyes Testimony in this our key, who in the fourth
stave, assures the King that at Lovain he first saw the greatest and most
perfect secrets, namely the two Elixers; And in his following verses, craves
his confident credit, that he has himself truly found the way of secret
Alchimy, and promises the discovery of it to the King, only upon condition of
secrecy.

And in the eighth stave, though he protests never to write it by pen, yet
proffers the King at his pleasure, to show him ocularly the red and white
Elixer, and the working of them, which he promises will be done for easy
costs in time. So then he that will doubt the truth of the Art, must account
this famous Author, for a most simple mad Sophister, to write and offer such
things to his Prince, unless he were able in effect to do what he promised,
from which imputation his writings, and also the histories of him, of his fame,
gravity, and worth will sufficiently clear him.

We now come to the second Conclusion, the substance of which is, that all
Metals and bodies of Metaline principles, may be reduced to their first
Mercurial matter, and this is the main and chief ground for the possibility of
transmutation. On this we must insist largely and fully, for (trust me) this is
the very hinge on which our secrets hang.

First, then know that all Metals, and several Minerals have for their next
matter, to which (for the most part, nay indeed always) there adheres, and is
concoagulated an external Sulphur, which is not Mettaline, but distinguishable
from the internal kernel of the Mercury.

This Sulphur is not wanting even in common Argent vive, by the Mediation of
which, it may be precipitated into the form of a dry powder. Yea and by a
liquor well known to us, (though nothing helping the Art of transmutation) it
may be so fixed, that it may endure all fires, the Test and Coppel, and this
without the addition of any thing to it, the liquor (by virtue whereof it is
fixed) coming away entire, both in its Pondus and virtue.

This Sulphur in gold and silver is pure, in the other Metals less pure,
therefore in gold and silver it is fixed, in other it is fugitive, in all the
Metals it is coagulated in Mercury or Argent vive, it is coagulable in gold,
silver, and Mercury, this Sulphur, is so strongly united, that the Ancients did
ever judge Sulphur and Mercury to be all one, but we by the help of a liquor,
the invention of which, in these parts of the World we owe to Paracelsus
(though among the Moors and Arabians it has been and is (at this day)
commonly known to the acuter sort of Chemists) by this I say we know that the
Sulphur which is in Mercury coagulable, and in the Metals coagulated, is
external to the nature of Mercury, and may be separated in the form of a
tincted Mettalick Oil, the remaining Mercury being then void of all Sulphur,
save that which may be called its inward Sulphur, and is now inincoagulable of
it self (though by our Elixer it is to be coagulated, but of it self, it can
neither be fixed nor precipitated, nor sublimed, but remains unaltered in all
corrosive waters, and in all digestions of heat. One way then of Mercury
azating all Metals and Minerals, is by the liquor Alcabest, which out of all
such bodies as have Mercury in their constitution, can separate a running
Argent vive, from which Argent vive all its sulphur is then separated, save
that only which is internal and central to the Mercury, which internal Sulphur
of Mercury no corosive can touch, Next to this way of universal Reduction,
there are also some other particular ways, by which yea, even and may be
reduced into a running quicksilver, by the help of Salts, which because (being
corporeal, they pierce not so radically as the fore named liquor does, they
therefore do not so spoil the Mercury of its Sulphur but that as much Sulphur
as there is in common Mercury, so much also there is in this Mercury of the
bodies, only this Mercury has specificated qualities according to the nature
of the Metal or Mineral, from which it was extracted, and from that reason (as
to our work, which is to dissolve perfect species of Metals) it has no more
virtue than common Argent vive: There is then but only one humidity, which is
applicable unto our work, which certainly is neither of nor nor is drawn from
any thing, which nature has formed, but from a substance compounded by the Art
of the Philosopher. So then, if a Mercury drawn from the bodies, have not only
the same deficiency of heat and superfluity of foeces as common Mercury has,
but also a distinct specificated form, it must (by reason of this its form) be
so much the farther remote from our Mercury then common Argent vive is.

Our Art therefore is to compound two principles (one in which the salt, and
another in which the Mercury of nature does abound) which are not yet perfect,
nor yet totally imperfect and by consequence) may therefore (by our Art be
exalted with that (which is totally perfect, cannot be) and then by common
Mercury to extract not the Pondus, but the celestial virtue out of the
compound, which virtue (being fermental) begets in the common Mercury an
offspring more noble than it self, which is our true Hermaphrodite, which will
congeal it self, and dissolve the bodies; observe but a grain of Corn in which
scarce a discernable part is sprout, and this sprout, if it were out of the
grain, would dye in a moment; the whole grain is sown, yet the sprout only
produces the herb: So is it in our body, the fermental spirit that is in it,
is scarce a third part of the whole, the rest is of no value, yet all is joined
in the composition, and the faeculent corporeous, part of the body comes away
with the dreggs of the Mercury. But beyond the example given of a grain, it may
be observed that the hidden and spiritual virtue of this our body, does purge
and purify its matrix of water, in which it is sown, that is, it makes it
cast forth a great quantity of filthy earth, and a great deal of Hydropical
saline moisture. For instancemake thy washings (for a trial) with pure and
clean fountainwater, weigh first a pint of the same water, and take the exact
weight of it, then wash thy compound eight or ten times, save all the faeces,
weigh thy body and Mercury exactly, weigh thy faeces being very dry, then
distill or sublime all that will sublime a very little quick Mercury will
ascend; then put the Residue of the faeces in a crucible, set them on the
coals, and all the faeculency of the Mercury will burn like a coal, yet without
fume; when that is all consumed, weigh the remaining faeces, and thou shall
find them to be two thirds of thy body, the others being in the Mercury, weigh
the Mercury which thou sublimedst, and the Mercury prepared by it self, and the
weight of both will not recompense thy Mercury weight by far. So then boil
up thy water to a skin, in which thou made thy Lotions, for that is a thick
water: and in a cool place thou shall have Christals, which is the salt of
Mercury Crude, and no way fit for Medicines; yet it is a content for the
Artists to see how the Heterogeneyties of Mercury are discovered, which no
other Art save the liquor of Alcahest can do, and that in a destructive, and
not a generative way as this is, for this operation of ours is made between
male and female, within their own kind, between which there is a ferment which
effects that which no other thing in the world could do. In all truth, I tell
you, that if you should take our imperfect compound body, per se, and Mercury
per se, and them alone, though you might bring out of the one a most pure
Sulphur, and out of the other Mercury of Mercnry, which is the nut of Mercury,
yet with these thou could effect nothing, for fermental virtue is the wonder
of the World, and it is by it, that water becomes Herbs, Trees, and Plants,
Fruits, Flesh, Blood, Stones, Minerals and every thing, look then for it only,
and rejoice in it as in a deservedly invaluable treasure; Now know that
fermentation, work not out of kind, neither do salts ferment Metals; Will thou
know then whence it is that some fixed Alcalyes do extract a Mercury out of
Minerals, and out of the more imperfect Metals, consider then, that in all
these bodies the Sulphur is not so radically mixed and united, as it is in
Silver and Gold. Now Sulphur is of Kin to diverse Alcalyes, that are ordinarily
dissolved or melted with it, and by this means the Mercurial parts are
disjoined, and the Argent vive is by fire separated: The Mertury thus
separated, is spoiled of its Sulphur when as indeed there needs only a
depuration of the Sulphur by separating the impure from the pure; but these
salts having separated the Sulphur do leave the Mercury worse, that is, more
estranged from a Metallic nature, than it was before, for in its composition
that Sulphur of Saturn will not burn, but though it be sublimed, calcined, made
sugar, or vitrefied, yet by fire and fluxes it still returns to the same it was
in before, but its Sulphur being (as is aforesaid) separated, will take fire,
if joined with Saltpeter, even as common Sulphur does, So that the Salts act
on the Sulphur of which they rob the Mercury, they act not for want of ferment
which is not to be found, but only among Homogeneall things. Therefore the
ferment of bread leavens not a stone, nor does the ferment of any animal or
vigetable, ferment a metal or mineral.

So then, though out of Gold thou might obtain a Mercury by the help of the
Liquor, of the first ens of Salt, yet that Mercury would never accomplish our
work, whereason the otherside made out of Gold by our Mercury, though there be
three parts of our Mercury to one of Gold, This Mercury I say will by continual
digestion) accomplish the whole work, marvel not then, that our Mercury is
more powerful, which is prepared by Mercury, for certainly the ferment, which
comes between the compound Body and the Water, causes a death, and a
regeneration, it does that, which nothing in the world can do, besides it
severs from Mercury a terres treity, which burns like a Coal, and an
Hydropical humor melting in common water, but the residue is acuated by a
Spirit of life, which is our true embryonated Sulphur of our water, not
visible, yet working visibly; We conclude that all operations for our Mercury
but by common Mercury, and our body according to our Art are erroneous, and
will never produce our mystery, although they be otherwise never so wonderful.
For as the Author of the Newlight says, No water in any Island of the
Philosophers, was wholesome, but that which was drawn out of the reins of the
Soll and Luna. Will thou know what that means? Mercury in its pondus and
incombustibility is Gold fugitive, our Body in its purity, is called the
Philosophers Lune being farr^ more pure than the imperfect metals and its
Sulphur also as pure as the Sulphur of Soll, not that it is indeed Luna, for it
abides not in the fire, now in the composition of these three (1) our common
Mercury and the two principles of our compound there interceeds, the ferment of
Luna, out of which though it be a Body, proceeds yet a specificating odor: yea
and often the pondus of it is diminished: If the compound be much washed, after it
is sufficiently clean. So then the ferment of Soll and Luna interceeds in our
composition, which ferment begets an offspring, more noble than it self a 1000
fold, wheas should thou work on our compound Body by a violent way of Salts,
thou should have thy Mercury by far less noble, than the Body, the Sulphur
of the Body being separated and not exalted by such a progress.

We now come to the third conclusion, which is that among all metalline and
mineral Sulphur there are only two, that belong to our work, which two have
their Mercuries essentially united with them. This is the truth of our secrets,
though we (to seduce the unwary) do seem to aver the contrary, for do not think
that (because we do insinuate two ways, therefore) we really mean as we say,
for verily (as witnesses Ripley) There is no true principles but one, Nor have
we but one matter, nor but one way of working upon that matter, nor but one
regimen of heat, and one linear way of proceeding.

These two Sulphurs as they are principles of our work, they ought to be
homogeneal, for it is only Gold spiritual that we seek, first white, then red,
which Gold is no other then that which the vulgar see, but they know not the
hidden spirit that is in it. This principle wants nothing but Composition, and
this composition must be made, with our other crude white Sulphur which is
nothing but Mercury vulgar, by frequent cohobation of it upon our
Hermaphroditical Body, so long till it be come a fiery water.

Know therefore that Mercury has in its self a Sulphur, which being unactive,
our Art is to multiply in it a living active Sulphur, which comes out of the
loins of our Hermaphroditical Body, whose father is a metal and his mother a
mineral, Take then the most beloved daughter of Saturn, whose arms are a
circle Argent, and on it a sable cross on a blackfield, which is the signal
note of the great World, espouse her to the most warlike God, who dwells in the
house of Aries, and thou shall find the Salt of Nature, with this Salt acuate
thy water, as thou best know, and thou shall have the Lunary bath, in which
the Sun will be amended.

And in all truth I assure thee, that although thou had ourbody Mercurialized
(without the addition of Mercury of any of the metals) made per se, that is
without the addition of Mercury, it would not be in the least profitable unto
thee, for it is our Mercury only, which has a Celestial form and power, which
it receives, not only, nor so much from the compound body, as from the
fermental virtue which proceeds from the composition of both the body and the
Mercury, by which is produced a wonderful Creature: So then let all thy care
be to marry Sulphur with Sulphur, that is our Mercury which is impraegnated,
which Sulphur, must be espoused with our then have thou two Sulplers married
and two Mercuries of one off spring, whose father is the and the mother.

The fourth Conclusion makes all perfectly plain, which has been said before,
namely that these two Sulphurs are the one most pure red Sulphur of Gold, and
the other of most pure clean white Mercury.

These are our two Sulphurs, the one appears a coagulated body, and yet carries
its Mercury in its belly: the other is in all its proportions true Mercury, yet
very clean and carries its Sulphur within its self, though hidden under the
form and fluxibilitie of Mercury.

Sophisters are (here) in a labyrinth, for because they are not acquainted with
metalline love, they work in things altogether heterogeneal, or if they work
upon metalline bodies, they yet either join males with males, or else females
with females, or else they work on each alone, or else they take males, which
are charged with natural inabilities, and females whose matrix is vitiated.
Thus by there own inconsideration they frustrate their own hopes, and then cast
the blame upon the Art, when as indeed it is only to be imputed to their own
folly, in not understanding the Philosophers.

I know many pitiful Sophisters do dote on many Stones, vigitable, animal,
and mineral, and some to those add the fiery Angelical, Paradaical Stone, which
they call a Wonder working essence, and because the mark they aim at, is so
great, the Ways also, by which they would attain their Scope, they make also a
double, one Way they call the Via Humida, the other, the Via Sicca, (to use
their languages).

The latter Way is the labirinthian path, which is fit only for the great ones
of the earth to tread in, the other the dedalean path, an easy way of small
cost for the poor of the world, to enterprise.

But this I know and can testify that there is but one Way, and but only one
Regimen, no more Colors than ours, and what we say or write otherwise, is but
to deceive the unwary, for if every thing in the world ought to have its proper
causes, there cannot be any one end, which is produced from two ways of
working on distinct principles. Therefore we protest and must again admonish
the Reader that (in our former writings) we have concealed much, by reason of
the two ways we have insinuated, which is the play of children, and the work
of women, and that is decoction by the fire, and we protest that the lowest
degree of this our work, is that the matter be stirred up, and may hourly
circulate without fear of breaking of the vessel, which for this reason ought
to be very strong, but our linear decoction is an internal work, which advances
every day and hour, and is distinct from that of outward heat, and therefore is
both invisible and insensible. In this our work, our Diana is our body when it
is mixed with the water, for then all is called the Moon, for Laton is
whitened, and the Woman bears rule, our Diana has a wood, for in the first
days of the Stone, our body after it is whitened grows vegitably. In this
wood, are at the last found two Doves, for about the end of three weeks, the
soul of the Mercury ascends, with the soul of the disolved Gold, these are in
folded in the everlasting arms of Venus, for in this season the confection are
all tincted with a pure green color, these Doves are circulated seven times,
for in seven is perfection, and then they are left dead, for they then rise and
move no more, our Body is then black like to a Crows bill, for in this
operation all is turned to powder, blacker than the blackest. Such passages as
these we do oftentimes use, when we speak of the preparation of our Mercury,
and this we do to deceive the simple, and it is also for no other end that we
confound our operations speaking of one, when we ought to speak of another, for
if this Art were but plainly set down, our operatiations would be contemptible
even to the foolish. Therefore believe me in this, that because our works are
truly Natural, we therefore do take the liberty to confound the Philosophers
work, with that which is purely Natures work, that so we might keep the simple
in ignorance, concerning our true Vinegre, which being unknown, their labor is
wholly lost.

Let me then (for a close) say only thus much; Take our Body which is Gold,
and our Mercury which is seven times acuated by the martiage of it, with our
Hermaphroditieall Body, which is a Chaos, and it is the splendour of the soul of
the God Mars, in the earth, and water of Saturn, mix these two in such a pondus
as nature does require, In this mixture you have our invisible fires, for in
the water our Mercury is an active Sulphur or mineral fire, and in the Gold a
dead passive, but yet actual Sulphur now when that Sulphur of the Gold is
stirred up and quickened, there is made between the fire of nature which is as
the Gold, and the fire against nature, which is in the Mercury, a fire partly
of the one and partly of the other, for it partakes of both, and by these two
fires thus united into one, is caused both Corruption (which is Hnmiliation)
and Generation (which is Glorification and Perfection:) Now know that God only
governs this way of the internal fire, man being ignorant of the progress
thereof, only by his reason beholding its opetations, he is able to discern
that it is hot, that is, that it does perform the action of heat, which is
decoction, In this fire there is no sublimation, for sublimation is an
exaltation, but this fire is such an exaltation, as that beyond it, is no
perfection.

All our work then is only to multiply this fire, that is to circulate the
body so long until the virtue of the Sulphur be augmented. Again this fire is
an invisible Spirit, and therefore not having dimentions, is neither above nor
below, but every where in the Sphere of the activity of our matter in the
Vessel; So that though the material visible substance do sublime and ascend by
the action of the elemental heat, yet this spiritual virtue is always as well in
that which remains in the bottom, as in that which is in the upper part of the
Vessel. for it is as the soul in the body of man, which is every where at the
same time, and yet bounded or termined in none.

This is the ground of one Sophism of ours, (viz.) when we say that in this
true Philosophical fire, there is no sublimation, for the fire is the life, and
the life is a soul, which is not at all subject to the dimensions of Bodies,
Hence also it is that the opening of the Glass or cooling of the same during
the time of working kills the life or fire, that is in this secret Sulphur, and
yet not one grain of the metal is lost. The elemental fire then is that which
any child knows how to kindle and govern, but it is the Philosopher only,
that is able to discern the true inward fire for it is a wonderful thing, which
acts in the body, yet is no part of the body. Therefore the fire is a Celestial
virtue it is uniformed, that is, it is always the same until the period of
its operation is come, and then being come to perfection it acts no more, for
every Agent, when the end of its action is come then rests.

Remember then that when we speak of our fire which sublimes not, that thou do
not mistake and think that the moisture of the compound which is within the
Glass ought not to sublime, for that it must do uncesantly, but the fire that
sublimes not, is the metalline love, which is above and below and in all places
alike. Now then for a close to all that has been said, learn and be well
advised what matter you take in hand, for an evil Crow lays an evil Egg, as
the proverb has it, let thy seed be pure, and thy matrix also pnre, then shall
thou see a noble offspring, let the fire without be such, as in which our
confections may play to and fro uncessantly, and this (in a few days) will
produce that which thou most longest for, the Crows Bill.

To the Readers.
WHereas this Book is to be Printed by a well willer to all men, that love
knowledge more than riches, and to be cause red by all men: I desire no man to
assent, unless has reason do move him: therefore I am contented that every man
upon the reading thereof, shall have his free vote; if he praise my work, that
will make me neither fatter nor more proud; if de dispraise it, that will make
me no leaner, nor abate the courage of my noble mind: for the truth is, that my
mind is a size too great, to value, or regard the speeches of the common
people, more than the chattering of Magpyes, or the prattling of Parrots. So I
take my leave,

At Westminster, this 10. of March. 1643. Your loving Friend, G. P.

A CAVEAT FOR ALCHYMISTS, OR, A warning to all ingenious Gentlemen, whether
Laics or Clericks, that study for the finding out of the Philosophers Stone;
showing how that they need not to be cheated of their Estates, either by the
persuasion of others, or by their own idle conceits.
The first Chapter.
WHereas I am shortly to demonstrate before the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament in England, that there is such a thing feisible as the Philosophers
Stone; or to fpeak more properly, an Art in the transmutation of Metals, which
will cause many a thousand men to undo and beggar themselves, in the searching
for the same: I cannot choose but to publish these advertisements, for that is a
fundamental point in my Religion, to do good to all men, as well enemies as
friends: If I could be satisfied, that the publishing thereof, would do more
good than hurt; then the world should have it in plain terms, and as plain as
an Apothecaries receipt: But in regard that I have often vowed to God Almighty
upon my knees, to do the greatest good with it, that my understanding could
persuade me unto, I have craved the advice of the Honorable Parliament, for
that I have strongly conceived an opinion, that by the well contriving of the
use of it, the worlds ill manners may be changed into better: if this can be
done, then I should break my vow to God, if I should not do my best endeavors,
and therefore I dare not to cheat God Almighty (having obtained this blessed
science of his free gift) and go into a corner, and there eat, drink and sleep
like a swine, as many have done before me, upon whom this blessed knowledge,
has been unworthily bestowed: but had rather improve it to his glory, if my
counsel craved shall so think fit But howsoever my meaning is to do some
considerable good with it howsoever, that is, to make my self a sea-mark, to
the end, that no ingenious Gentleman shall from henceforth be undone by the
searching for this noble Art, as many have heretofore been

Therefore my first Caveat shall be to show, that no man needs to be damnified
above the value of 20. s. to try whether he be in a right way to it, or not?

The second Caveat shall be, to show a way how to try whether any wandering
Alchymist, that promises golden mountains, know any thing or not?

The third Caveat shall be, to show how any man's Judgment ought to be grounded
by a Concordance of the best books, before he fall to practice?

The fourth Caveat shall be, to show which are false books, and which are true
ones, to the end that every student in this excellent Art, may trouble himself
with fewer books, till he has made a Concordance, and has gathered the same
out of the aenigmatical discourses, and hieroglifical figures, wherein this Art
is hidden, and never to be found in plain terms, nor written plainly in any
receipt.

Well for the first Caveat, that no man needs to be damnified above 20. s. to
know whether he be in a right way, or not, let him be pleased to consider, that
without putrefactio unius, there can be no generatio alterius; as in all other
sublunary bodies, as well Animals as Vegetables, right so in Minerals and
Metals.

Therefore he that cannot take one ounce of the filings of copper, or any other
base Metal, and by an ingenious addition of a Mineral moisture of the same
kind, putrefie the same in a few months, and make it totally volatile, except a
few faeces of no considerable weight, then he is out of the way, and is not to
meddle with gold or silver, or any thing of great price: for he shall never
obtain his desire, (though he spend his whole life, time and estate.

Also he that has not gathered a Concordance, by reading of books, which
cannot be controlled by humane wit, is not fit to begin to practice this noble
Art, and not in one part thereof, but in six several parts, which are these
that follow.

First, it is clear that he must have a Mineral spirit, before he can dissolve
a Mineral body, or else he will work out of kind; and if he think that
Quicksilver, which is sold at the Apothecaries shops, is this Mineral spirit,
then he is deceived, and will find it to be so; but the truth is, that if
nature had not created quicksilver, this Art could never have been found; not
that it can be made the Philosopical dissolvent, by any preparation whatsoever,
but without it the first dissolvent (for there are three) cannot be gotten: for
it only has power to separate this Mineral spirit, from a crude Mineral,
taken from the mine, which the fire has never touched, and no other thing
under heaven can do it else, no more than an^ creature besides a Be, can
extract honey out of a flower.

Secondly, that he must know the secret of dissolution, (which is not by the
common way used by Alchymists, but by the way meant by Bernardus Comes
Trevisanus, where he says, hujus dissolutionis via paucissimis est nota: and I
know not one Alchymist this day, nor ever did, to whom, if I should have given
him the true dissolvent in one hand, which is a ponderous bright water, and the
disolved in the other hand, which is a powder, or filings of met^al: ye he knew
not how to dissolve it.

Thirdly, he must know what is meant by the hollow Oak, a comparison not very
unfit for the furnace, wherein this secret of dissolution, is to be
accomplished.

Fourthly, he must know the reason and manner of refixing his bodies when he
has made them volatile, by this secret way of dissolution.

Fifthly, he must know the secret of projection, which has beguiled many, when
by their great charges study and labor, they have made the Philosophers Stone,
so that they could make no use it. For when it is mingled with the imperfect
metals, yea, though prepared philosophically, not vulgarly, yet there is
another thing to be done, before the metal transmuted goes to the test, or
else all is lost: and if any one will not believe me, let him read the books of
Raymundus Lullius, and he shall find in three several places, in several
books, that after projection, the matter must be put in cineritio, in vasi
longo, but he says also, non intelligas quod ponas plumbum in cineritio: for
there is something to be separated by the Art of the Philosopher, before the
lead come to do its duty, or else all will be gone according to the saying:
totum vertitur in fumum, quicquid ineptus agit.

Sixthly, he must know the fire, and the regiment thereof; and also the nature,
which is to be gentle, continual, compassing round about the matter, and not
burning it.

And now that I have showed what an Artist must know, or else all his labor
and charge is lost, I wish every man to consider what a hazard he undergoeth,
if he meddle without the knowledge of these six secrets, for so much as he may
very well fail, though he have them, I mean, though he have the Theorick, yet
he may fail in the Practick.

Therefore if any smoke seller, or Wandering Alchymist, shall come to any
ingenious Gentleman that studieth this Art, though he bring with him a recipe
that promises golden mountains, and makes affidivit, I mean that searches
never so deeply, that he has done it, or seen it done, which is a common trick
amongst wandering Alchymists: believe him not, unless he can satisfy you
concerning all the six former mentioned secrets, for if you do believe him
having not that knowledge, I will give my word for him, that he shall cozen
you. For there is but unica via, unica operatio, to accomplish any work in
Alchymie, which is as hard to be found, as the way to heaven in this world,
where there are an hundred Religions, or rather an hundred Sects of Religion,
wherein the true Religion is smothered and bemisted, even as the way to make
the Philosophers Stone is, by the idle conceits of men, that are ruled by
opinion, more than by knowledge.

As for example, on Petrus Bonus ferrariensis, a great learned man, and a
Doctor of the chair of an University, wrote a book called Margarita Pretiosa,
and penned it most admirably, concerning the Philosophers stone, and the way to
make it; and when he had done, confessed that he never had made it, yet he
guessed indifferent well, but all his directions are not worth a button. I
would give an impression of his books away freely, that I had his
School-learning, but as for his knowledge, I would not give two pence: whereby
it may be seen how easily wife men may be deceived, and therefore let fools
look about them before they attempt this noble science.

Also one Gaston Dulco Clavens, a great Champion that quarrelled with all
opposers of this sacred Art, and wrote a book, which is greatly esteemed by
Alchymists, and seems very rational to all those, which have not the
practick, wherein he defends the truth of this Art by 32 Arguments, and many
experiments, which are all false, upon my certain knowledge, and if my purse
could speak it, should swear it.

And many others have written upon this subject, which knew nothing but what
they had collected out of books, to what end, I know not, unless it were to
draw other learned men unto them, thinking to gain some knowledge by their
conference.

Also another, whose name I have forgotten (for it is a great while since I
read any books) wrote a book entitled De interitu Aichymie, which is as
foolish as any of the other, unless that when all his hopes were at an end, he
thought that some man would have come unto him, and confuted him, by showing
him the experience of it.

Well thus much for false books; now as for true ones, I could name many, that
could not be written, but by those that had made certain trial of the work; but
for brevity sake, and to keep this book within the price promised, viz. two
pence. I will name only four, viz. The Compound of Alchymie, written by
Georgius Ripleus Anglus, The Hierogliphical Figures of Nicholaus Tilamellus,
whose body lies buried in Paris: The works of Raymundus Lullius; The two books
of Bernardus Comes Trevisanus: These four men showed by their actions, that
they had the Art of the transmutation of Metals. For Georgius Ripleus Anglus,
maintained an Army of soldiers at Rhodes against the Turks, at his own charge:
Nicholaus Tilamellus builded up seven Churches, and seven Hospitals at Paris,
and endowed them with good revenues, which may be easily proved: Raymundus
Lullius made gold in the Tower of London, to furnish an Army to go against the
Turks: Bernardus Comes Trevisanus, recovered his Ea^ldome again, which he had
formerly spent in the seeking of this Art. And now me thinks, I hear every one
demanding, how shall we do to find out this great secret?

But Geber an Arabian Prince, and a famous Philosopher shall answer in his own
words, viz. non per lectionem librorum, sed per immensam cognitionem, per
profundans imaginationem, and per assiduam praxim: and when all this is done;
he concludes, that est donum Dei Altissimi, qui cui vult, largitur, and
subtrahit.

Well now me thinks I hear the cousening Alchymists, saying, what shall we do
now, we have no other living? To which I answer, that I would gladly rid the
world of cheaters if I could: but if they must needs cousen, then let them
trade with those that have so little love to art, that they cannot afford to
read this book, to defend themselves, and that will improve the wits of the
world very much, so that it may possibly do more good than hurt: for the truth
is that the world is unhappy, only for want of wit, which I have demonstrated
in a little book lately printed, which shows how any Kingdom may live in
great plenty, prosperity, health, peace and happiness, and the King and
Governors may live in great honor and riches, and not have half so much
trouble, as is usual in these times* and if any one shall be cheated, and lay
the fault upon me for discovering of cheats in this book, I cannot help it: for
he that is willing to do good, must needs do some hurt, unless men were Angels.
But in this case I see not but my action is justifiable: for first, I have
given every one an antidote against cheating, and if they will not take it, let
them be cheated, and then I will show them a way to recover their losses, by an
experiment tried upon my self: for till I was soundly cheated of diverse hundred
pounds, I thought my self to be a very knowing man: but then I found that I was
a fool, and so disdained not to learn wit at any bodies hands that could teach
me, whereby I attained a considerable quantity of knowledge, which I will not
give or change, for any man's estate whatsoever; but though I sped so well by
being cheated, yet I wish all others to take heed, for fear least that their
fortunes prove not so good as mine.

The second Chapter.
Whereas I have professed my self to be an Anticheator, it behooves me to
discover the several ways whereby the world is so universally cheated by the
cosening Alchymists: and therefore though I could discover fourscore cheats,
yet at this time I will only discover fourgrand ones, and so conclude.

The first shall be to discover the knavery of Kelly. the grand Impostor of the
world, whom the Emperor of Germany kept prisoner in a Castle, and maintained
him honorably, thinking either by fair means or by foul, to get the
Philosophers Stone out of him, who God knows had it not, but made diverse
cosening projections before great men, which by the report thereof, have caused
many to spend all that ever they had; and it cannot be well estimated, how many
hundred thousand pounds have been spent in Europe about it, since that time,
more than before.

And thus one of his projections was made before three great men sent over by Q
Elizabeth, to see the truth of the business. He gave order to them to buy a
warming pan, which they did accordingly, and brought it to him; he took a
pair of compasses, and marked out a round plate in the middle of the cover
thereof, and with a round chisel he took out the piece; then he put it in the
fire, and when it was red hot, he put a little powder upon it, which flowed all
over it, and made it to look like to gold, which is an easy matter to be done:
but when he came to fit it to the hole, he had a piece of good gold, taken out
of a plate of gold by the compasses, not altered, and this by a trick of
Legerdemain, or slight of hand (a thing common, for I have known a Porter that
could have done it) he conveyed into the place, and delivered the warming pan
nto the hands of the spectators, who it into England, and the noise thereof
made almost all men's ears to tingle, and their fingers to itch, till they were
at the businels, and raised the price of Alchymie books fearfully. Now if he
had meant plain dealing, he would have given them some of his powder home to
their lodging, that they might have done the like again themselves at home, but
he neither offered it, neither did they desire it, at which I marvel: for if he
had denied that, as it is like that he would, then the knavery had been
presently discovered, so that this false news had not been brought into
England, whereby many men have received great loss. Some have reported that he
clipped out a sheard with a pair of Goldsmiths sheers, and then he took a
little more time, and cast one of gold like to it, which is easily done:
whethersoever he did, the whole scope of the business argues cheating, and his
meaning was nothing else, but by either of these ways, to make the spectators
to be less suspicious; like to a jugler that foldeth up his sleeves for the
like purpurpose. But admit that he had the true Philosophers Stone, and that
the body of a Metal might be altered by it, and turned into true gold, without
reduction of it to the first matter, which is altogether unpossble: yet he was
a detestable villain to publish it in such manner, to the great damage of so
many men as were thereby irritated to undo themselves, and not to give them
some Advertisements, like to these in this book, whereby they might be
preserved from undergoing any considerable loss. But the old saying proved
true, qualis vita, finis ita: he lost his ears in London for cheating, when he
was a young cousener; and when he was grown too skillful to be discovered by
men, then God Almighty took punishment of him; for he bought as much linen
cloth, pretending to make shirts and other things, as he thought would serve to
let him down to the ground out at a window in the Tower of the Castle, wherein
he was a prisoner; and whether his hold slipped, or the cloth was too short, I
could never learn certainly; but it is certain that he fell down and broke his
bones, and died, and there was an end of him.

The second Cheat.

A Nobleman in England thought that he had a transmutation of copper into
silver showed to him, and thus the cheat was done. First, the cheater made two
ingots of copper both alike, then he filed one of them into two equal parts, or
very near the middle; then he got a piece of silver fashioned like to the
long^r end, but a little longer; then he got a Silver-smith to let the one into
the other curiously, and soder it so, that the piecing could not be discerned,
but that it appeared plainly to be one piece of metal, only of two colors,
to wit, white and red; then he painted it all over with a color made of
copper, as is hereafter declared; then he dried it, and painted it over three
times or more, till the color was equal to the other, when this was done he
brought that which was all copper to the Earl, and prayed him to file it at
both ends, which was done; then he took it and went to fetch his white powder,
and a very little thereof, being made like to a Painters color, with a little
vinegar, he prayed the Earl to paint it half way over, and so it was done; the
Earl supposing he had painted the same ingot, which he formerly filed at both
the ends: well, then it was dried, and put into a cast of well tempered clay,
and when the clay was dry, it was put into the fire, and there being heated by
a little and little, till it was red hot, and not melted at all, it was left
red hot till the charcoals were almost burned out, which was done in a short
space; then it was taken out and made clean, and that half which was anointed
with the Alchymists white Philosophers stone, was transmuted into better
silver, than ever any Alchymist, or yet the best Philosopher in the world, did
ever make; for it was all fine silver, without any wast at all, which was
considerable before the refining: but if he had meant plain dealing, he would
have divided his white powder into two equal parts, and have made his ingots
but half so big, and would have done the first part himself before the Earl,
and would have left him to do the other part himself in his absence, but this
he neither offered, neither did the Earl desire it, whereat I marvel. This
ingot was showed to many, and caused many a thousand pound to be spent, some by
the said Earl, and some by others, that were thereby encouraged, and no doubt
but that he had a great reward for cousening him; for great men will have
honorable rewards to a man, that can satisfy them in the truth of this Art,
and that they are satisfied fully, so long as the deception is not discovered.

Now as for the making of the copper color, it might be thus done. Take
filings of copper, and twice as much quicksilver, and grind them upon a
Painters ma^ble stone, with a little salt and vinegar, and they will come into
a Mass, then wash away the salt and vinegar with common water, till the mass be
bright as silv^r, but ^oft; then set it in a gentle heat all night, and it will
be hard, then grind it with a little more quicksilver, not too much to make it
very liquid, and set it in a gentle heat again till it be very hard, and this
work reiterate, till it will drink up no more quicksilver, then are the filings
burst into attoms; then evaporate the quicksilver in a crucible, with a gentle
heat first, and afterward, make it red hot, so will the copper be in red
powder; this red powder must be stamped in a marble mortar, with warm water,
and ever as the water is colored red, it must be poured of into a great Jarre
glass, and new water put to it, and so the work must be reiterated, till it
will color the water no more, then let the water stand a night, till the
color be settled to the bottom, then pour off the clear water, and dry the
rest in the Sun, or in any gentle heat, and it will be as fine as any fine
wheat flower, which must be ground upon a Painters marble stone, with gumwater,
till a Painter may paint with it.

The third Cheat.

An Alchymist traveled with this cheat into many Kingdoms and Countries and it
may be done by one that has not the Art of Legerdemain, or slight of hand; and
thus it was done. He filed a twenty shiling piece of gold into dust, and put it
into the bottom of a crucible, or a Goldsmiths melting pot, then he made a thin
leaf of wax of a fit breadth, and ra^med it down a little hollow in the middle,
and with an hot iron sodered it, then he painted it over with a paint hereafter
mentioned, and dried it, and painted it again, and thus did till it was like
the crciuble; and when he wanted money, he would go to a rich hostess in some
City, and take a chamber for a week, and when he had been there a day or two,
and had paid royally, the next morning he would be sick, and keep his bed, and
when his Hostess came to vifit him, he would ask her, if she could help him to
a Gold smith, that would do some business for him, and he would pay him for his
pains very largely, so she was ready, and brought one; he asked him if he could
do him one hours work or two presently, the Gold smith answered him, yes Sir,
with all my heart: so he took his purse from under his pillow, and gave him
half a crown, and prayed him to buy half an ounce of quicksilver, and bring it
to him presently, the Goldsmith did so; then he gave him his key, and prayed
him to open his portmantle, and take out a little box, and open it, where he
sound a crucible, and a little Ivory box, filled with the red ponder of
Vermillion; the Cheater prayed him to weigh out a grain of the red powder, with
his gold weights, which he did; then he bid him look well upon the crucible if
it were a good one, and not cracked in the carryage; the Goldsmith said it was
as sound an one as he had seen, and had a good strong bottom, then he bid him
to put it into the quicksilver, and the grain of red powder, and set it into
the fire, and by degrees melt it down, the Goldsmith did so; when it was
melted, he bid him set it by to cool, and then break it; then he lay down in
his bed, and after a little while, he asked the Goldsmith what he found in the
bottom, to which the Goldsmith answered, that he found a little lump of gold,
as good as ever he saw, so he prayed him to help him to money for it, for his
money was almost all spent; that I will said the Goldsmith presently, and went
home, and weighed it, and brought him nineteen shillings in silver, and was
desirous to know, how that red powder was made; he said it was an extract out
of gold, which he carried with him in his long travels, for ease of carriage,
and that there was no other grain in it, or else he would tell it him. So the
Goldsmith asked him, how much he would have again of his half crown, and he
should have all if he please; for he was well enough paid for his work, in
seeing that tare piece of Art: no said the Alchymist, take it all, and I thank
you too; so the Goldsmith took his leave, with great respect: then he laid down
in his bed a little while, and by and by he knocked for his Hostess, who came
immediately, and he prayed her to call for a porter; whilst that he wrote a
note, she did so: when the porter came, he sent him to his fellow cheater, who
lay in the other end of the Town, who presently brought him a letter formally
framed betwixt them; upon the reading whereof, he called for his Hostess again,
and desired her to fetch the Goldsmith again, she did so; when she brought him,
he was rising, and gruntled and groaned, and told the goldsmith, that though he
was not well, yet necessity forced him to go about earnest business, and showed
him the Letter, and prayed him to read it whilst he put on his clothes, and
when the Goldsmith had read it, he said, you see what a strait I am in for
twenty pounds, can you furnish me, and to morrow or next day you shall work for
me, and pay your self, and I will leave you my box in pawn, which now you know
how to make five hundred pounds of it, as well as I? the Goldsmith answered, it
shall be done, and went down and told the Hostess all things; and also told
her, that the Gentleman was in great distress for twenty pounds, and that he
had promised to furnish him instantly, but he had but ten pounds by him, if she
pleased to furnish him with the other ten pounds, she should be sure enough to
have it with great advantage, for so short a time: for says he, we shall have
his box in pawn, and will make bold with twice as much of his powder, as our
money comes to; and besides that, he will pay us royally I warrant you; and all
the while I can do the work so well, that I should be glad never to hear of him
more; so she agreed, and they brought him up twenty pounds presently, whereupon
he delivered them the box, and made a motion to have it sealed up; but at
length he said, that because they had furnished him in his necessity, and
because he esteemed them to be honest people, in regard of his Host, he would
not stay to seal it, and so took his leave, and prayed the Goldsmith to be
ready within a day or two, to help him to work, but from that day to this, they
never saw him so; when he came not again within a week or a fortnight, they
concluded that some misfortone had happened to him, or that he had taken cold
by going abroad so hastily, being not well, and so was dead, for else he would
have sent about it before that time, if he were but sick; so they resolved to
make use of it, and fell to work with great alacrity; but when they could make
no gold, their hearts were cold, and they found themselves to be miscrably
cheated.

The fourth Cheat.

This Cheat is described in old Chawcer, in his Canterbury Tale; but because
everyone has not that book, I will relate it briefly, and those that would see
it more largely described, shall be referred to the said book.

And thus it was done: The Cheater took a charcoal about two inches long, and
one inch thick, and did cleave it through the middle, and made a little
concavity in the middle thereof, and put in a little ingot of gold, weighing an
ounce, into the middle of it, and glewed it up again, so that it seemed to be
nothing, but a very coal; then before the cheated, he put in one ounce of
quicksilver into a crucib^e, and a little red powder with it, and bid the
cheated to set it into the fire, and when it began to smoke, oh says he, I
must stir it a little, to mingle the powder with the Mercury, or else we shall
have great loss; so he took up a coal from the heap with the tongs, like to his
coal which he had prepared, and let it fall out of the tongs by the side of the
heap, and dropped down his own coal by it, and took it up in room of the other,
and stirred the quicksilver and the pounder together with it, and left the coal
in the pot, and then bid the cheated to cover the pot with charcoals, and to
make a good fire, and after a little space to blow it strongly with a pair of
good hand bellows, til it was melted, for he assured him, that the quicksilver
would be fixed and turned into gold, by the virtue of that small quantity of
powder; which the cheated found by expeperience, as he verily thought, and so
was earnest with the cheater to teach him his Art, but what bargain they made I
have forgotten, for it is twenty years since I read Chawcers book.

Now whereas I have received the reports of some of these Cheaters in diverse
manners, yet I am sure that they being wrought according to my prescription,
will cheat almost any man that has not read this book or Chawcers, unless a
man should happen upon one that knows the great work, which is hardly to be
found in ten Kingdoms; for he knows that none of these things can be done
unless they be mere albifications or citrinations, but are naught else but
sophistications and delusions, and will abide no trial, unless it be the eyes
of an ignorant man that has no skill in metals.

Well now I will add some more Caveats to fill up my book, and so make a short
conclusion.

And first, To sum up all, Let men beware of all books and receipts, that teach
the multiplication of gold or silver, with common quicksilver by way of
animation or minera, for they cannot be joined inseparably by any medium, or
means whatsoever.

2. Let all men beware of any books or receipts, which teach any dissolutions
into clear water like unto gold or silver dissolved in aqua fortis, or aqua
regis, or spirit of salt, made by any way whatsoever, or any dissolution
whatsoever, which is not done cum congelatione spiritus, according to the
manner used in the great work.

3. Let all men take heed of books, that teach any operations in vegetable, or
animals, be they never so gloriously penned; for it is as possible for a bird
to live in the water, or for a fish to live in the air, as for any thing that
is not radically mettallical, to live in the lead upon the test.

And lastly, let all men beware of his own conceit of wisdom, for that has
undone many a man in this Art. Therefore let every one take notice, that though
it be a thousand to one odds, that any seeker shall not obtain his desire, that
is because many men being unfit, and not quallified sufficiently to take in
hand this great business; let these remember what Solomon, the wisest of men
says, into a wicked heart wisdom shall not enter, and he says not great
wisdom, nor much wisdom, but ordinary wisdom; then how can any wicked or
foolish man hope to find out this great secret, which being the most sublime
knowledge that God has given to men, requires the greatest wisdom to
accomplish it, that God has bestowed upon men.

Therefore if any man attempteth this Art, which has not attained to such a
perfection in the knowledge of nature, especially in minerals, that by his own
speculation and practice, without the help of books, he can write a rational
discourse of either animals, vegetables, or minerals, in such a solid way, that
no man can co^tradict it, without shame upon fair trial, the questions being
rightly stated, then his labor and charge is the cause why so many men fail
and undo themselves in this Art; for if the searcher be quallified
sufficiently, then it is ten to one odds, that he speedeth.

But to draw to an end: What should I say more? Oh, if any man either in
England, or beyond the Seas, shall trouble himself to write to me, he shall be
sure to have an answer, if he come to me, he shall be sure to lose his labor,
if he think to win me by rewards, though never so great, he shall be sure to
get nothing but a Jeer; for I did not write this book with an intent to teach
the Art absolutely, but only to preserve men from undoing themselves
foolishly; which if it be well considered of, will be found to be large
charity: for but that I know where I am, to wit, in a free State, where the
subjects know so well their own Liberties and Privileges, that they will never
suffer any Tyrannical Government to prevail in this Nation, I should have been
sure to have lost my liberty by this single action.

But now I have been a Petitioner to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament, that I may demonstrate my ability, to do the the Commonwealth of
England service, which service consists in three things principally; to wit,
to show how the husbandry of this Land may be so improved, that it may maintain
double the number of people, which now it does, and in much more plenty: also
to show how the Art of Physic may be improved: and lastly, to show the Art of
the transmutation of Metals, if I may have a Laboratory, like to that in the
City of Venice, where they are sure of secrecy, by reason that no man is
suffered to enter in, unless he can be contented to remain there, being surely
provided for, till he be brought forth to go to the Church to be buried.

Geber an Arabian Prince, and a famous Philosopher, being overjoyed when he had
found out the Philosophers Stone, breathed out these words in the end of his
book; Benedictus sit Deus sublimis, glorio^us, and omnipotens, and benedictum
sit ejus nomen in secula seculorum.

But I having not only found out the Philosophers stone, but also a sore and
infallible way to make England, and so the world happy by it, which is ten
thousand times better than it, will exalt the praises of God in the superlative
degree, and conclude thus: benedictissimus sit Deus, sublimissimus,
gloriosissimus and omnipotentissimus, and benedictissimum sit ejus Nomen in
secula seculorum.

A CONFERENCE Concerning this QVESTION: Whether or no each several Disease has
a particular and specifical remedy.
THe first man said, That men, following the order of nature, always seek the
nearest way: which has caused them to make Maxims of all things, whereas in
truth, there is no Maxim of any thing; for by the most certain of all Rules,
there is no Rule so General, but it has some exception; nay there are so many
exceptions, that we have often cause to doubt on which hand the Rule is.

And yet nevertheless men make Axioms in all Sciences, but chiefly in Physic,
which taking upon it, the Government (as it were) of ^rture, wraps up in
general Laws, all diseases with their Causes, Symptoms, and Remedies; although,
as in the Law, so likewise in Physic, there never happen two cases alike. And
when these Rules come to be applied to practice, every one confesses that he
does not find that power of those Laws, which he had imagined to himself. But
this is chiefly to be understood of particular and specifical diseases, such as
the Pleurisy, the Cataract, and the Gout. For general diseases, and such as
meet distempers, may be cured by as general remedies; that is, by such things
as have contrary qualities.

The second said, That specifical is that which is determined to one; and has
above it, Generical, and below it, Individual: Now the question is, Whether
there be any remedies so determined to one species, or sort of disease, that
they are fit for none else. I do think, that seeing there are diseases of the
whole form, or frame of Man, as are pestilent, venomous, and malignant
diseases; so there are likewise as general remedies. And experience shows, as
in diverse admirable cures, that there are remedies; the effects of which, do
not depend upon their first qualities. As in Rheubarbe to be purgative, in
Mugwort, to be good against fits of the mother, and in Bezoar to be Cordial,
comes not from being cold or hot in such a degree; for then every thing of the
same temper with them, would be purgative; good against fits of the Mother, or
Cordial, which is not so. But there is no reason why the same Remedy may not be
fit for one particular disease, by its occult qualities, and yet good for
others by its manifest qualities, as food also is medicinal.

The third said, That this question depends upon another, namely, Whether mixed
bodies work only by their tempers and first qualities, or by their substantial
forms, and specifical virtues. For if the working of every thing do not depend
upon its whole form and substance, then Medicines cannot cure by their
qualities of heat and cold, but by a particular and specifical virtue,
proceeding from their form, and wholly contrary to that of the disease. For the
understanding whereof, it must be observed, That as the natural constitution of
each Mixed body does consist in a perfect mixture of the four Elementary
qualities, and in the fit disposition of the Matter, and in the intireness of
the form: so may it be changed one of these three ways, either in its Temper,
or in its Matter, or in its Form. And from thence it comes, that each mixed
body, (as all medicinals are) can work upon our nature by its first, second,
and third Faculties. The first Faculties come only from the Mixture of the
four qualities, according to the diversity of which, the compound body, is
either hot, as Pepper, or cold, as Mandrake, or moist, as Oil, or dry, as
Bole-Armeniack, not immediately, but in operation. And by this Faculty only
which proceeds from the temper of the thing, it is, that the Medicine works
chiefly upon the temper of man's body.

Their second Faculty comes from the different mingling of these same
qualities, with the Matter. For a hot temper joined with a matter, disposed
according to its degree of heat, shall be opening or eating in, or corrosive,
or burning, or of some other virtue, whereof there are many sorts, according to
the degrees of their mixture, from whence they are said to be either
Attenuating, or Thickning, Scouring, or Sticking to, Rarefying, or Condensing,
Loosning, or binding, drawing, or beating back, softning, or Hardening: and by
this second faculty only, do Medicines work upon the Matter.

The third Faculty of Medicines, is that which comes not from their quality,
nor from their Matter, but from their Form, and from their specifical and
occult virtue; and such is in the herb Sina, the faculty of purging away
melancholy, and in Terra Sigillata, or Lemnia, the fortifying of the heart
against poisons; as also the Scorpions killing with his tail, and thence some
poisons do kill, without altering the Temper.

The fourth said, That diseases are to be considered either in their genus, or
in their species, or in their individuals.

For the first, When the disease is nothing but a disposition disturbing the
workings of nature; it may be cured by regaining the natural disposition.

As for the second, If it be a distemper (for example) cold in the second
degree, then the specifical Medicine for it, is hot in the same degree; if it
be a disease in some of the members of a man's body, as (for example) an
obstruction, then the only remedy is, to open the Conduits. If it be a breach,
then the remedy is to piece again what is parted asunder: But if the disease be
considered in the individual, whose substantial Form it destroys; then must we
use particular remedies of the same nature; and those are the true spicifical
ones.

The fifth said, It is the same thing with the causes of health, that it is
with the causes of diseases, Now we see that the same thing is hurtful to one,
and not to another, and that not only in different species, but also in
several individuals of the same species, because of several circumstances. And
therefore some remedies will cure one, and will kill another; nay and that
which was lately good, may be now hurtful for the same Individual: so that it
is impossible to assign any specifical remedies for an Individual, and yet it
is an Individual man that must be cured, and not the whole species of man.

The sixth said, That in nature, every thing is determined to one particular
Action; and this proceeds alone from its Form and Being, which has a nearer
relation to that one Action, than to any other: So a Tree is determined to
bring forth one fruit rather than another, It is the same case with those
remedies, which are had from the three Families of Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals. Some are proper to purge one particular humor, as choler, or
melancholy, or water, or they provoke vomiting, or urine, or by sweat, or they
are discussive, or cause sneezing, or stop coughing. Other Medicines strengthen
one particular member, as the heart, the head, the liver, or the spleen; Some
again are good against particular poisons; So Treacle is specifically good
against a bite by a viper; So a Scorpion applied to a place, which he has
stung, heals it; So the Oil of Pine apple kernels is good against Orpiment; So
long Heart wort and Rue are good against Aconite or Wolf-bane, and the rind of
Lemon Tree against Nux Vomica: and the seeds of winter-cherry against
Cantharides, and Mummy against the Ulcers made by wild spurge: and the flower
of water, Lilly, against Hellebore. So the root of wild Roses, and the herbs
Gentiane, Balm, Betonie, and Pimpernel, are excellent against the biting of a
mad dog, and so it is with others.

There are others called Amulets, which being worn about the neck, or laid to
certain parts of the body, do preserve from diseases. So (as Galen himself
reports) Pionie worn, keeps from the falling sickness; So Wolfes dung allayes
the Cholick, and Jasper strengthens the stomach; And Trallian assures that the
Aetites, or Eagle-stone, cures the quotidian Agues; and snails, and green
lizards cure quartan Agues; and that an Asses forehead, and a nail taken out of
a broken ship, are good against the falling sickness; So the ashes of Tad-poles
and Frogs are used against the bloody Flux; Lapis Judaicus, and Goats blood,
against the stone in the kidneys; and the water of a Stags head, and the bone
of his heart, against the diseases of the heart Now there is no reason why all
these mavelous effects should be ascribed to the first qualities; and
therefore Galen laughs at his Master Pelops, who gave that reason for them.

The seventh said, That Physic, being first found out by use and experience,
has no need of reason in those things, which fall clearly under our senses;
but only in those things which are beyond the preception of our senses; the
which being confirmed by reason, are much the more infallible. However, when
reason seems to thwart experience, we ought rather to stick to experience, so
it be founded upon many observations: Seeing then that experience shows us
there are many specifical remedies, whereof the weak wit of man cannot find
out the cause, it is better in this case, to rely upon sense without reason,
than upon reason contradicted by experience. Now if there be specifical
remedies for some diseases, there are also for all; but they are so very many,
that we cannot know them. And who is that man that can know the virtues and
p^^perties of every thing in the world? The Chemists are of this mind, for they
hold that all Medicines have their signatures, or their peculiar marks and
figures, by which they resemble the parts or diseases of man's body, and that
they are writings, as it were) sealed with the hand of God, to teach men their
faculties.

Whence it comes that Lung-wort is good for the ungs, Stags tongue for the
spleen, Poppy and green Nuts for the head, Satvrium or Ragwort for the
testicies, Winter cherry for the Bladder, Hart-wort for the Womb, and Madder
for a broken shinbone, Eyebright for the Eyes, Salomons seal, and Through-leaf
for those that are burst, because the root of the first is like the Hemia, and
the stalk of the other passes through its leaf, as the gut does through the
cawl, the root of Tormentil, red Sanders, and the Bloodstone, for the bloody
Hux and Carduus Benedictus, and other prickled plants, are good against the
pricking stitches in the sides.

A CONFERENCE Concerning the Philosophers-Stone
THe first man said, That the Poets had reason to say that the Gods had lefs
hope formen in the bottom of Pandora's box, after all their other goods were
flown away; for nature dealing gently with man, does so order it, that the
almost infinite number of accidents of his life, (and those for the most part
troublesome ones) cannot on the one hand lay him too low, but on the other hope
will raze him again as high. For not to speak of Hope, as it is the chief of
Christian virtues, accompanying a man even in death, and easing him of the pain
of all his evils; Is a man in affliction? He comforts himself with hope of
coming out, of it; Is he of low birth? He hopes by his brave exploits to make
himself Noble. If poor, to enrich himself, if sick, to heal himself: Nay though
he want the ordinary means of obtaining these ends, yet is he not discouraged.

But that which most deserves to be laughed at by those which think it
impossibly, or to be admired by those who will search deeper into the whimsies
and fancies of men, is that an old, weak, sick, poor man, should nevertheless
hope to be one day attended like a Prince, and not only to grow sound again,
but also young and handsome. How can all this be? Why, by the Philosophers
Stone, which is the great work, the All-heal, the Elivir, and the universal
Restorative. Now this being far from all likelihood, and there being diverse
other absurdities in that Chymerical Art, it makes me believe that there is no
use of it, but to comfort miserable men with.

The second said, that the Chemists, who busy themselves about the
Philosophers stone, are of two sorts.

The one sort, though they promise transmutation of Metals by mixing, fixing,
cimenting and other operations, yet do nothing but give Tinctures to the
Metals by their Sophistications.

The other sort, call themselves the true Sons of knowledge, and meddle not
with particulars, but only with this great work, at which they all aim, though
by several ways some of these, think to get it by blowing, and their way is
to put gold and quicksilver together, which they keep for nine months long in
a furnace, over a lamp. Others think it a very easy business, and call it the
work of children, and say that to attain it there needs no knowledge but of the
matter, the Fire, the Vessel and the manner, for the rest comes as it were of
it self, after one has received it by tradition, which they say is the only
means to get it. There are some also who attribute this work to Revelation, and
say that we need only to pray to God for it, and these believe that it is
contained in the Scripture where it is said, That there needs a great deal of
clay to make Pots with, whereas a little powder will make gold; and that it was
this kind of knowledge which did so enrich Solomon, that Gold (as is said in
the Scripture) was in his reign as common as stones, and that the gold of Ophir
was that which the Philosophers Stone had changed, and made much more excellent
than natural gold; and what is said of the ships which he sent to fetch it, is
spoken but Parabollically, and figuratively, as was that story of the golden
Fleece; for the golden Fleece was nothing but a Parchment wherein this secret
was written; but the greatest number of Chemists are of an opinion made up of
both these; for they say, that to obtain it, men must work, and God must help
by an extraordinary grace and favor: I do think with them, that there is a
Philosophers Stone, or at least, that it is possible to be found out; That the
matter of it is salt, and that its fire is motion. For seeing both these are
found every where, this property fits them very well. For salt may be drawn out
of all bodies, and heat likewise proceeds from the rubbing of bodies one upon
another, in imitation of that heat which the Heavens do cause here below.

The third said, That the Philosophers Stone is a powder of projection, which
being in a very small quantity thrown upon imperfect Metals (as all Metals
except gold are imperfect) does purify and heal them of their Leprosy and
uncleanness, so that having purged them of their dross, and hightned their
degrees, they obtain a more perfect Nature: for Metals differ from one
another, only in degrees of perfection.

This powder is of two sorts, the white, which serves to make silver with; and
the red, which being more concocted, is fit to make gold with. To obtain this,
aman needs the perfect knowledge but of three things; that is to say, of the
Agent, the Matter, and the Proportion requisite, to the end that the Agent may
draw out the inquired Form, out of the very bosom of the Matter duly prepared,
by the application of Active to Passives: The two first of these three are
easy to know; for the Agent is nothing but heat, whether it be of the Sun
beams, or of our common fire, or of the dunghill, which they call the Horse
besly, or of Mary's bath, or of Animals? The Patients are Salt, Sulphur,
Mercury, Gold, Silver, Antimony, Vitriol, or some few other such like things,
from which what we have to look for, experience will easily show. But the
application of the Agent to the Patient, the determination of the degrees of
heat, the last preparation and disposition of the Matter, cannot be known but
by much pains and long experience, which being very difficult; from thence it
comes, that in this Art, we see more cheats and impostures, than truth; and yet
Histories do assure us that Hermes Trismegistus, Geber, Raymundus Lullius,
Arnoldus de Villa Nova, Flamellus, Trevisanus, and some others have had the
knowledge of it.

But whereas this small number of those which they assure have had it, an
almost infinite number of others have undone themselves by it; the search of it
seems to be more curious than profitable.

The fourth said, That as the Mathematicians, by endeavoring to square the
circle, though they have not done it, yet are come to the knowledge of diverse
things which they knew not before; So the Chemists, though they have not light
upon the Philosophers stone, yet have discovered admirable secrets in the three
great Families of Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals. Now though no body had
ever yet had it, yet may it be possible to be found out; not only for this
general reason, that nature has not given us desire in vain, but particularly
because all Metals are of one kind, being made of one Matter, which is Sulphur
and Mercury, and are concocted by the same heat of the Heavens, and differ
only in the coction, as the grapes of one bunch, which ripen at several times.
Which appears to be true, because gold and silver may be extracted out of all
Metals, yea, even out of Iron and Lead, which are the most imperfect of all.
So that Art ought not in this case to be counted inferior to those things
which it perfects. And the Greek Etymology of Metals does show that they may
be changed from one to another.

The fifth said, That as in the production of corn by Nature, the corn and the
fat juice of the earth are the Matter, and the Efficient cause is partly
internal and enclosed in the grain; and partly external, that is, the heat of
the Sun; and that the place is the bosom of the Earth. So also in the
production of gold by Art, the Matter is the gold it self and its quicksilver:
the Efficient cause is partly in the gold, and partly in the external heat; the
place is the furnace which holds the egg of glass, wherein is enclosed the
Matter, which dissolves and turns black, (and this they call the crows head)
then grows white, and after hardens into a red lump, so hard that they call it
a Stone, which being beaten to powder, and kept three days together over a
strong fire, in a vessel Hermetically sealed, turns into a purple color, and
then one dram of it will turn two hundred drams of quicksilver into pure gold,
and the whole Sea too, if it were of like Matter.

The sixth said, That Art may imitate Nature, but cannot outdo it; As it would
be, if men could change other Metals into gold, that being impossible for
nature to do, even in the Mines, and in never so long time.

For Mines of Iron, Lead, Tin, or Copper, never become Mines of Gold or Silver;
therefore muchless can the Alchymist do it in his furnace, and no more than he
can produce something more excellent than gold, as this Philosophers stone
would be: for gold is the most perfect compound of all mixed bodies, and is
therefore incorruptible; muchless can the Alchymist bring to pass a thing,
concerning the immediate Matter of which, its Efficient cause, its Place, Time,
and Manner of working, men are not agreed; there being as many several opinions
about it, as there are Authors, who are in great number.

And besides, it is a mistake to say, that Metals are all of one kind, and
that they differ but in coction, for we see that Iron is more concocted than
Silver, it being harder, and not so easy to melt, and because their differing
is needful for man's use. Now those perfect species which are near of the same
kind as Metals are, do never change into one another, no more than an horse
changes into a Lion. Nay, if there were such a Philosophers stone could work
upon Metals, yet would it not make gold or silver, but other stones like it
self, or else would only imprint its qualities in them, according to the
ordinary effects of all natural Agents. And if it were true that this powder of
Gold, being thrown upon other metals, could produce more Gold, as one grain of
corn, being sown in the ground, does produce many other grains; yet ought the
same order and progress to be observed in the multiplication of gold, that is
in the production of corn: but this the Chemists do not, for they will have
their multiplication to be done in an instant.

The seventh said, That seeing Art does draw so many natural effects out of one
fit matter, as out of little worms may be had Serpents, Frogs, Toads, Bees, and
Mice, and considering that the subject of these Metamorphosies, is a great deal
harder to receive life than metals (which are insensible) to receive a Form as
well divisible as its matter; He did not see, but that (at least, by the
extraordinary help of good or evil Angels) men might come to have some
knowledge of it. For besides, we see that several species do naturally change
the one into the other, as Egpytian Nitre turns into stone; Jasper into
Emerald, the herb Bazil into wild Time, Wheat into Cockle, and Caterpillars
into Butterflies.

And if we will believe the Scotchmen, they have a Tree, whose fruit falling
into the water, turns into a bird.

PHILARETVS TO EMPYRICUS.
SIR,
THough I am not ignorant that the Secrets you possess, are equally unknown in
their compositions, and famed for their effects; yet I dare confidently expect
from your goodness and Communication of that which was proved so successful in
the cure of that disease, that the Proverb has listed amongst the
inconveniences of Wealth. And though I doubt not but the charitableness of your
own disposition, needs no Auxiliary motives to obtain the grant of so just a
favor; yet a desire to let you see that Piety and Reason are no less your
Petitioners in this particular, then Philaretus will I hope excuse my zeal, if
to justify your good nature as well as my request, I take leave to represent
to your consideration, the immensity of that goodness, that excludes not its
very enemies from its gracious effects, and there heapeth benefits, not only
where they were never deserved, but where they never can be returned: this is a
noble president and fit for your raised spirit; whose imitation cannot possibly
mislead you: since both Gods, Wisdom and his happiness, being no less infinite
than his goodness, places it above controversy, that a transcendency in the
one, is not at all inconsistent with the possession of an equal degree of the
others. Our Savior assures us, that it is more blessed to give than to
receive, and in effect, we see that God that enjoys a felicity as Supreme as
any of his Attributes, makes it his continual employment to oblige, and that
there where he cannot expect a Retribution. And therefore the more diffused,
and the less selfish and mercinary our good actions are, the more we elevate
our selves above our own, and the nearer we make our approximations to the
perfections of the Divine nature. But to descend from these abstracted thoughts
into less Platonic considerations, we are all acquainted with the strong
obligation, that not charity only, but bare humanity lays upon us to relieve
the distresses of those, that derive their pedigree from the same father we are
descended from, and are equal partakers with us, of the Image of that God,
whose stamp we glory in. And can we fancy that all the duties of charity are
fulfilled with the emptying the refuse of our servants tables into the poor
man's basket, and flinging a piece of market money to a shivering Beggar?
(though we deny not those acts their just commendation) no, as our neighbor,
so far forth as he is afflicted, is the object of our charity; so all that we
are to do, either to remove or sweeten that misery, is to be comprehended
within the Acts of our charity, which does therefore not confine us to any
particular kind of assistance to our neighbor, that we may know it to be our
duty to assist him in all kinds. Therefore does the Scripture reckon the
visiting of the afflicted and the prisoners, and the comforting of the sick
amongst the prime and most eminent productions of that virtue; and therefore
our Savior himself (the exactest President sure, of what his whole life was a
continued practice of) did for seldomer employ his omnipotence to feed the
hungry, then he wrought miracles to heal, the diseased, Certainly the alms of
curing is it piece of charity, much more extensie than that other of relieving;
since only beggars are necessitous of the last: but Princes themselves do
often need the former. Why should we think it a greater charity (or more our
duty) to give a distressed wretch shelter from the natural cold of the air,
than to protect him from the aguish icyness of the blood? or to shade him from
the outward salutes of the hot Sun, then free him from the inward dog-dayes of
a burning Fever? Sure this is not a charity much inferior to the preserving
of men's lives, to restore them that good, without which, life it self is but a
misery. How greatly, and how justly do we detest those Usurers, that hoard up
all their bags from all those uses, that only can give riches the Title of a
good? And yet the avarice of profitable secrets, is by so much worse than that
of money, by how much the buried Treasure is most excellent. How universally
should he be execrated, that in a scarcity would keep his B^rns crammed, whiles
he beholds his pining neighbors starving for want of bread? And yet the
censured Miser cannot bestow his corn without losing it; whereas receipts, like
Torches, that in the lighting of others, do not wast themselves, may be
imparted without the least diminution. Certainly if (as a wise man
allegorically said) he is as much guilty of the extinction of a lamp, that
denies it necessary oil, as he that actually blows it out: they will not
have a little to answer for, that by a cruel refusal of Soverain receipts,
permit the torments, and the death of thousands; they might (without their own
least prejudice) have prevented, that had rather manifest a bad nature, than
reveal a good secret, and hazard the lose of an eternal life to themselves,
rather than either prolong or sweeten a temporal life unto others. Lastly, had
all men been of this Retentive humor, how many excellent receipts must they
themselves have wanted, for which they must acknowledge themselves beholding
unto others? Had all men been so covetous of, and in that particular, their
possessions would be, perhaps as narrow as their charity; that costive humor,
being not more fit to bury than unapt to acquire. So that a kind of interest
and justice as well as charity, seems to oblige us to make those goods
communicable, that became ours but upon that score. Let us not then be less
civil to our Posterity, than our Predecessors have been to us; but conveying to
our Succeeders at least those benefits we derive from our Ancestors; let us not
refuse our imitation to what we think worthy of our applause.

And now Sir, having thus presented you with such thoughts of mine upon this
Subject, as its Nature did readly suggest, I shall take the liberty succinctly
to discuss their evasions, that are of a contrary sense. And in the first
place, I find some Physicians objecting, that having laid outmuch of their
money, and more of their time, in the search of such and such a secret, that
discovery is now become either their Fortune, or their Subsistence, and by
consequent the divulging it to others, would prove destructive to themselves.
In this case I must ingeniously confess that all I can require is, that they
deny not those that want it the benefit of the Composition, whilst that bewrays
not the receipt, and refuse not to impart the Secret it self to those that need
it, upon reasonable terms: for they that will not assent to this, must fly for
shelter to some other excuse. In the next place it is objected by diverse, that
their receipts are of more curiosity, or at least have no relation to the cure
of our Diseases. In which case, though I will not precisely exact their
publication, yet let those whose secrets may any other way advantage the
public; (since it is not the kind so much as the utility of our knowledge,
that obliges us to dedicate it to the public service) Remember his fault that
folded up his Talent in a Napkin; and fear to feel his doom, whose fault they
commit. Another thing must require both of these and of the Antecedent
secretists, is, that they take a special care to have their receipts survive
their persons, consigning them into the hands of some confident or other, that
they may not follow their owners to the grave (where next a bad conscience the
worst companion is a good secret) and give men occasion to resemble them to
Toads; who if we may credit the vulgars uncontro led report, when they feel
themselves upon the point of dying, destroy that Antidotal stone in their
heads, which is all that is worth any thing in them; lest men should have cause
to vaunt themselves of being the better for them; such people are in this worse
than very Usurers and Hogs themselves; that these do some kind of good after
their decease, but they take a great deal of pains to be as little guilty of
that humanity after they have left the world, as they were whilst they lived in
it. Others there are, that to excuse themselves, will tell us, that they
received their receipts but upon condition, and that ratified, perhaps with an
oath, never to disclose them; or (to give it you in a Periphrasis) that never
any body should be the better for them. To which all that I can justly answer
is, that if this promise have indeed been seriously made, it is a greater fault
to violate it, than it was to make it. Though I am apt to believe that if all
men declined the taking of receipts upon these terms, they might have themupon
better. But by the way I must take leave to wonder at their niggard humor,
that will thus stint their own charity, and in the presenting us a good, clog
it with a restraint, so unsuitable to its Nature, that strips it of one of its
Noblest Prerogatives, which is to be diffusive of it self. Some I have known,
and those too conscientious, that allege, that the easy divulging of
receipts, makes our Physicians less careful to beat about for remedies
themselves when they find them already pared to their hands. To which I shall
reply, That granting that to be true, which is not undisputable, it is far
better to pleasure some few drones, than venture the perishing of whole swarms
of Bees. Shall we not ease the pains of Legions of anguish Christians, for fear
of sparing the pains of a few undiligent Physicians? We know how contrary this
practice is to his, that would have spared Sodom it self for the sake but of
ten good men. Besides that, if our Physicians be lazy, so much the greater is
our necessity of using other means to recompense that want. Of the like nature
with this is their excuse, or patience rather, that pretend a fear, that if
their compositions should come to be divulged, they would presently be
sophisticated or disguised: whereas themselves bestow the mixtures in their
native purity. But thus they decline the doing of a certain good upon the fore,
and perhaps causless suspicion of a contingent harm; grounding their own want
of chacharity, upon an uncharitable and unlikely apprehension of another. As
if the first inventor of navigation should have concealed from us that
admirable and beneficial Art, for fear Pirates should likewise happen to abuse
it. Had those Ancient Physicians that cure yet in their Coffins, and preserve
the Lives of others after the loss of their own) been frighted with these
groundless jealousies, the Churchyards had been frettily thronged ere this,
and the dull Sextons spade always might be as busy as the Gardners. Besides,
that it is very unlikely, there should be then more false receipts believed,
when there are more true ones extant to confute them. If men will counterfeit
receipts, they may easily suppose spurious compositions in spite of the
concealment of the true one: but sure the easiest way to prevent that kind of
cosenage, is to be so liberal of the Legitimate receipts, as to make men not
to need it. Others there are, that promise indeed a publication of their
secrets, but resolve to suspend it till they die.

But to omit how much the review and ordering of these secrets, or their
neglect will either distract or trouble us upon our deathbed, and not to
mention how unfit it is, to sow in harvest what should then be ready to be
reaped; and for a vain ostententation to delay both the good they might have
done all their life time, and lose all the praises it would justly have
deserved; To skip all this, I say, how many have we noted, whom either an
unripe Fate would not give respite to effectuate those Intentions, or the
falsusurpations of their Friends or Executors, has cheated of that glory
themselves might justly have expected. Sure these Posthumous Treatises on
Theames, that have so great a tendency to the public good, that are rather the
Authors dessein than his misfortune, are not usually more void of charity than
Judgment: Since they deprive the writer both of the praise of his labors, and
of the possibility to reform his errors. Others there are, that seek an Apology
intelling us that if 'twere any receipt of ordinary value, they would not
scruple at its communication, but being a rare and a most excellent secret, you
must pardon them forsooth if they think themselves only worthy its possession.
Whichis in my opinion the very same reason, that most should prevail with them
to disclose it: for the more sanative the remedy is, and the greater the
benefit is, its knowledge may afford, the greater obligation lies upon the
owner to impart it, since our services will be expected proportionable to our
abilities. For the nature of good is to grow greater by extension, but careful
providence foreseeing how inclinable frail men would be to selfishness in the
dispensation of such goods as these, has most wisely provided, that the
parting with these goods should not prejudice their possession, nor liberality
impoverish him that uses it. Whom the Nature of the riches he disperses,
resembles to the Sun, who though so bountifully he bestows his Beams on the
whole universe never finds a scarcity of them in himself: but the much
greatest number of our secretists does consist of those, who are ashamed to
confess it, smother their secrets, only that they may be still talked of for
the sole proprietaries of those rarities. But to let thousands perish, lest
another should have the honor of their cure, to endeavor rather that our
receipts should be known by few, then that they should cure many, and to
preferthe vanity of possessing a Rare secret, to the satisfaction of having
employed a successful one, are excuses that will hardly pass for current at
that great day, when many shall be excluded heaven for suffering others to be
snatched up thither before their natural time, and when all men shall be crowned
not for the excellency of what they have done. But because such a kind of
people, use to be very little touched with considerations of this nature, I
shall only entreat them a little to consider whether it be not a greater glory
to oblige (and have many wear ones Livery) than to gain the reputation of
having buried hoards, by keeping ones secrets more close than Ingeneers do
Mines, which the least vent defeats. Experience it self can teach us, that our
Physicians have got more honor by those few secrets that have died with them:
as indeed it is not over probable, that closness should have like advantages
with Liberality, in the acquisition of esteem and of applause. Lastly, some of
our Chemists do object, that had they in their power that great Elixer it self,
they call the universal Antagonist of all diseases, they should think it as
unlawful to disclose as happy to possess it; partly because such extraordinary
discoveries being rather inspired than acquired, ought not to be profaned by
being divulged, and partly too, because that in these dissolute times it would
be a tempting invitation to all kind of Riot and Intemperance, by securing us
from the danger of the diseases that attend them. It is strange me thinks, that
conscience should be fallen out with charity! But the objection it self
furnishes us with an answer to it; for if, since the negative is very
probable, the Elixir be a secret, that we owe wholly to our Makers Revelation,
not our own industry, me thinks we should not so much grudge to impart what we
did not labor to acquire, since our Saviors prescription in the like case was
this: Freely ye have received, freely give. Should God to one of our Divines
reveal some newer Truths and Secrets of his Gospel, would we not condemn him
for the concealment of what was imparted but to be communicated? Those secrets
that were intended for our use, are not at all profaned by being made to reach
their end: but by being fettered from the diffusiveness of their nature. And
therefore though God should address those special favors but to some single
person; yet he intends them for the good of all Mankind, and to make that
Almoner to whom he trusts them, not the grace but the steward of his graces.

As for the other edge of the objection, shall we that think it unIawful to do
evil that good may come of it; think it just to forbear duties left evil might
ensue? And shall we let good men languish and perish for want of opportune
relief lest others should be encoucouraged to expect it? besides, that the same
Reason that is here alleged, would justify the concealment of all other
secrets; since neither is there any of them that is not abusable, nor would our
Gallants venture upon excesses as they do, did they not conside in the virtue
of those receipts we have already. To omit that to imagine to restrain vices by
refusing men the remedies of those excesses they seduce them to; is a dessein
as unlikely as the means are uncharitable. Since our inclinations alone being
sufficient to vice, the obstracting only of the outward performance, whilst
the desires are unreformed, does make abstain not from the sin, but only from
the act. Sure many of these envious Salamanders, will one day find their
knowledge to be both their misery and their crime; when those rich secrets that
were bestowed as jewels for their charity, shall serve but to aggravate their
guilt. Then they will be forced to endure far greater torments than those that
they declined to cure, and with as little pity as they here expressed, it
being as foolish as unjust for them to expect that mercy that they refused to
give. But by this time Sir I fear that I have made you as much need a receipt
against impatience, as my friend does one against the Gout; and therefore I
will here conclude both your trouble, and this letter which beseeching you to
do me the right to believe, that I shall not more willingly owe my life to your
skill, than it shall be employed in your service, by

SIR, Your most humble and obliged servant PHILARETUS.

A SHORT And easy Method OF SVRGERY, For the curing of all fresh WOUNDS, Or
other Hurts: Especially commended to all Cyrurgions, serving in Wars, whether
by Sea or Land; And to all that are employed in the public Hospitals of the
Commonwealth.

Newly translated out of Dutch, 1654.

To the worshipful Tho. Allen, and Tho. Bowden, present Wardens, Mr. Martin
Brown Alderman, Mr. Edward Arris, Mr. Henry Boon, and the rest of the
Assistants of the Company of Barber-Cyrurgeons, London, etc. With all the
skilful Practitioners of that Noble Science in England, Scotland, Ireland, etc.
Gentlemen,
Upon my return out of the Low Countries, where in Holland, Brabant, and the
Province of Vtrecht, I have spent almost the time of an an ordinary
Apprentiship, visating the Universities of Leyden, Lovan, and Vtrecht, and
dwelling some years in the renowned City of Amsterdam to satisfy an honest
curiosity of knowing the world (which is justly said to be epitomized in
Amsterdam) and to accomplish my studies of nature, Philosophy and Physic, I
visited my very worthy friend Samuel Hartlib Esquire (the great lover and promoter
to his power) of all ingenious Arts, and Artists whatsoever, of whom I received
a paper printed in Dutch, with his earnest request that I would take the pains
to make it speak English, because (as he was very much persuaded) that the
common good of the English Nation would be hereby not a little promoted;
forasmuch as the spreading of these Chyrurgical Medicines was recommended to
him from his worthy and intimate friend Mr. Moriaen, a Gentleman of knowing
integrity and repute, dwelling in Amsterdam (as my self can witness)
excellently versed in the Mathematics, curiously seen in the Mechanics (as
becomes him that was born at A City famous for ingenious inventions,
Mathematical, and Mcchanical.
Noremburgh in upper Germany) studied in Divinity and Physic, but especially
seen and practiced in the Chemical Laboratory, as well as in the subtle and
sagacious co^ceptions of the witty Van Helmont, Paracelsus, and the rest of the
Tribe (a generation of writers in main respects, deserving largest
commendations from others, if it were not their ill luck for the most part to
be over large in praise of themselves, and their preparations; but peradventure
the want of good neighbors may excuse them (at least in some measure) from so
ingenious and learned hand Mr. Harblib received this discourse, not as from the
Author, but as Promoter of the same, as having full knowledge of the truth of
the Contents, when I had presented my much honored friend with his paper in
English, his former request begot another, viz. that I would devise some way
how the Contents might be published to the best advantage, so as the matter
might come to trial, I could devise no better way (worthy Gentlemen, ingenious
Artists) than by recommending the same to your impartial trial, as knowing you
both able to judge, abounding with oppertunities of trial, and of that candor
and ingenuity, that you will make a true report of what you find, not being
offended at the appearance of Empericalness in the discourse or practice
therein commended, nor fearing that if these Medicaments prove so effectual as
it is said, that they shall hinder threpute of the ingenious Chyrurgion, or
make him seem less useful, forasmuch as the Author requires a skilful Artist,
and refers many things in the application of his Balsoms, to the judgment of
of the expert Operatour, What the Author is I can say no more, but that it
appears in the discourse that he was no natural Dutchman, but rather as I
guess a German, which Nation God has made very happy in the invention of many
profitable remedies in Physic and Chyrurgery, by reason I suppose of their
pertinacious industry in manual nual experiments, and because of their great
courage in daring to haunt untrodden paths in the Quest of natures Secrets. I
commend the whole to your skilful trial, and sincere judgment, and rest,

A real well-wisher to you all, Wiliam De Rand.
From my house in White Crossstreet, near Cripplegate, Nov. 2. 1654.
Necessary Considerations for all learned and experienced men, who deal in
Chyrurgery, either as Practitioners or Teachers thereof.
BEing a lover of all knowledge as well in Chemistry as Physic and Chyrurgery,
and having observed many things in my Travels, I came at last to consider the
multitude of miserable souls, which perish in Armies and Hospitals, and by all
manner of wars. I forbear to say that they have been sent unto their last home
through manifest negligence in cutting, burning and dismembring, so frequently
practiced in Hospitals, and the like houses of charity. By which considerations
I was convinced in my mind, and brought into a continual thought, if there were
no better, safer, and more compendious means to be used in the aforesaid cases,
than what is commonly practiced. And having weighed the matter, I found, that
in general respecting the whole practice of Chyrurgery, as well in new as old
hurts, it would be an hard matter at present to propound such a way; but in
particular, in reference to fresh hurts received in war, either in Water or
Land service, as by shooting of Guns, cutting off any part or member, stabbing,
gashing, beating or bruising, or what ever other fresh hurt, there may such a
Chyrurgery be avouched to heal them all. To which end I have a Method, which
(by Gods help) will not fail, which I have for mine own part practiced, for
above 25 years, finding by experience, that there is none like to it. Wherefore
judging it needful in the highest degree to publish the same to the world, as
one that should make conscience to die with such a secret unrevealed: I
conceive (under correction, and without offense to any man be it spoken) that
all Governors and Magistrates ought to recommend the same in charity, to all
their respective Hospitals, and to make such maimed persons as lie in their
houses of charity partakers hereof. And besides the charitableness of such a
practice, it would prove likewise very beneficial and profitable unto
themselves, when the maimed persons shall depart the sooner from the Hospitals,
and the cries of the distressed shall not so long vex their ears, by reason
that many violent and offensive practices of Chyrurgery, in such cases usual,
shall by this Method be avoided.

Think but what a pleasant and comfortable thing it would be for a
compassionate Chyrurgeon both at Sea and Land, so lightly, and with so small
charge to dress and bind up a Patient, after the way that I shall show anon.
Consider what a work it is for a young Chyrurgion that would travel, to carry
so many Instruments with him, such an innumerable company of Irons, so many
Salves, and Ointments, and Oils, as would lade an Ass. So that it is work
enough for a beginner in Chyrurgery, to know the Medicaments and Instruments
which he is to use, too much labor to carry them, and contrary to the
gentleness of his disposition to use them, to the grief of the Patients, by
raking in their wounds, and cutting their flesh, etc. O Cruel way of Healing,
many times unnecessarily used, and which oftentimes troubles the conscience of
the Operator, especially being once convinced how unnecessary that ordinary way
of practice is. I know very well that Ignorance offends not, that men knowing
no better must do as well as they can, and that they must not throw away the
foul water before they have clean. And therefore will I by Gods help, discover
a better, more convenient and easier way of practice, only beseeching the
Readers that they will not through any misaffection, or other conceit, cast the
same behind their backs, nor say what news have we here with this outlandish
sojouner? We have lived so long, and our fathers before us, and have used this
Method of Chyrurgery, we desire no better, we reft upon the Antiquity of our
Art. Nay, but we ought to know, that in all Antiquity, or under the name of
oldness, there has still new matters been set on foot: and in all ages there
have been, are and will be rare men, who bring things to light which are
accounted and called new things, whereas such things are often older than those
which are accounted of greater age. And every understanding man in his own
faculty daily sees, that there is (as Solomon said) nothing new under the Sun:
it has been but for a while out of the knowledge and memory of men, and then
returns into their knowledge, and therefore by such as did not know it before,
it is called a Novelty. So is this that I propound, a thing that has been long
in the world, that is of age and Antiquity, only it has been parceld out, one
man having one part, another a second, another a third, etc. and my work it
has been with great diligence, pains and cost to collect all into a Sum, yea,
and by long practice I am so experienced, that I am able sufficiently to imform
thousands of men to practice the same.

Now I desire the Reader not to misunderstand me, but to remember that this
Method pertains only to fresh hurts, and that it is invented to spare (for the
most part or very near) for the future, all use of tents, corrosives, sawes,
tongs, probes, hammers, nails, yea, and the greatest part of oils, salves,
unguents, and other usual implements: forasmuch as in our Method, we very
feldome or never make use of them. It may happen in some rare accident, that we
may put a tent into some wound that goes just through the skin and no more, to
keep the skin from closing (though I seldom find occasion so to do) and it may
fall out in a great exulceration where the matter lies visible and at hand, and
the patient is impatient and unruly -- that we cut the skin just thorough, and
so with hurting and forcing the Patient, we let the matter purge away. Howbeit
this falls not often out, forasmuch as I hold it together with defensatives,
and put it into good digestion by my Balsoms, so that it seeks and makes its
own way into the light, breaking of it self; and so it becomes quieter and
better disposed to the cure, forasmuch as all manual incisions, either close up
of themselves, or at least are very apt to close up, which is the cause that
men are forced to use a tent; which an hurt, breaking of it own accord has no
need of, which commonly keeps open of it self to the very last, and then shuts
it self up, as I by many years experience have found. And I do assure the
honest truth-loving Chyrurgion, that I speak nothing at random or uncertainly,
but that I propound (with Gods blessing) a sure, sweet, soft way, which will
stand him in stead at his greatest necessity. And though I propound this
method, as proper for fresh hurts, yet may the skilful Attist do incredible
wonders hereby, in other cures that occur to the diligent Practitioner; of
which I think not fit to make any further speech.

Know then, that this Chyrugery which I propound and offer unto you, consists
only in three Balsoms, and two Plasters. But although a good Chyrurgion may
satisfy all intentions herewith, yet I have thought good to augment the number
to five Balsoms; all which being experimented by the skillful Artist, he may
make use of that which shall serve his intent the best; especially seeing one
Chyrurgion has a better hand in curing than another, and there is great
difference in the flesh of several men, in the point of aptness to be healed.
Neither is it my meaning, that men should presently cast away, and throw aside
what ever belongs to the present practice of Chyrurgery, and use only this way
of mine, by no means; but my advice is, that the Cyrurgion would have in his
shop, or in his Chest, some of my Medicaments, that so upon occasion having
made proof of mine and his own, he may give the commendation to those
Medicaments that best deserve it. I shall now proceed to number and describe
unto you my Balsoms.

The Balsoms numbered up, with their properties and manner of Application.
Number 1.
This Balsom marked Number 1. I call, Balsamum universalem naturalem, that is
an universal natural Balsom; because that it is the greatest Actor in all my
Method of Chyrurgery; for, whether the Patient be shot, or flashed, or stabbed,
or otherwise hurt: take this Balsom and apply thereof presently after the blood
is stopped; or if by reason of the extremity of the hurt falling upon reins and
Arteries, the blood cannot so soon be stopped, yet apply of this Balsom
thereto, after it is cleansed in a spoon, so much as the nature of the wound
shall require, whether it be deep or shallow, etc. make the spoon so hot, that
you can but endure your finger upon it without burning. If it be a deep shot or
a stab, squirt it in very warm with a seringe, whether it go through the wound
or not; for if the wound go through the member or part hurt, the Balsom will
fly through, if it go not through, the Balsom will recoile back. If it be a
flat, bruised, or battered hurt, anoint it with a feather dipped in this
Balsom, so that it come to the ground or bottom of the wound, and then lay on
the Plasters according to the ordinary practice of Art, so as to cover the
whole maimed place. And this must be done once a day, unless some great
quantity of matter do work out, for then it may be opened in the evening to air
it and discharge it from the matter; and lay the Plasters on again, without
using any more of the Balsom.

With this Balsom are in a manner all wounds healed substantially, and from the
bottom; and take notice that in such hurts as you apply this Balsom to, you
need not to try or search with tent or probe how deep the wound is, the Balsom
will do that for you, searching through and through better than you can do by
any means whatsoever; neither need you to put any tent in to keep it open, for
the Balsom will not suffer it to close, till the ground or bottom of the wound
or hurt have sufficiently purged it self. I speak not of clensing the wound
every time it is dressed with warm Brandewine, salt water, or other wine; seeing
the skillful Chyrurgion knows that the wound must always be cleansed, before
the Balsom be applied. This method you must observe in all wounds and hurts,
from the top of the head to the soles of the feet. So must you dress the shins
-- likewise, only be sure to set the shins -- even and just together, and dry
them and lay the Plasters upon them, and this must be done when the hurt is not
deep, but shallow, lay an whole plaster of Opodeltod, or if you want that of
Emplastrum albumcoctum, or a clean washed cloth is also good, for it serves
chiefly but to cover the wound. I order the Shins to be thinly anointed,
because if they be clean without proud flesh, they need little healing; and
after they have been anointed, they must be dried, and the plaster laid over
them.

The use of this Balsom is very Sovereign, for where it is used according to
the foresaid direction, men have hardly ever any symptomatical fevers to speak
of, nor any inflammation or mortification; for this Balsome peirceth forthwith
to the Center or bottom of Nature, and supplies the neceisities of Nature, by
making flesh to come where it is wanting, how deep soever the wound is; and by
eating out the proud flesh, or what ever grows up besides the intent of nature.
And it makes the wound to yield a well digested matter; if a wound want
digestion, it brings it to digest, and into a posture of healing; if the wound
be inflamed, it brings it to temper and cooling; if it be cold and crude, it
brings the same again to a natural warmth; if there be a swelling, it brings it
down, and takes it quite away, a man needs but with his warm finger anoint the
wound lightly round about, and it allays the swelling, which is very good for a
Cyrurgion to prevent the Gangraena, and all accidents. And this is but
childrens play, which may be done sporting, by him that understands but to
handle a wound, and rightly to bind and swathe the same.

Number 2.
This Balsom marked Number. 2. does work as the so rmer in some respects, howbeit
it is a degree hotter, which in some men's flesh is necessary, and a Chyrurgion
must make use of his experience. All good effects and no other are to be
expected from this Balsom, and this is added to the former by way of
superogation, and not for necessity, only where there is need of matter
thicker than ordinary, we commend this Balsom to the skilful Chyrugion to that
intent.

As for the former Balsom, marked with Number. 1. It is so tempered, that there is
in it no excesses of the four qualities, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness; so that
by its perfect virtue, it fully satisfies all the wants of nature, removes all
that burdens her. So that it were a sad thing and inconsistent with a good
conscience for me to neglect the presentation of this Balsom, and more sad if
those that need the same shall not be made partakers of the benefit thereof.
And therefore I recommend the same to all such as love God, and are of ability
to help those that stand in need. This small provision of one balsom, is more
worth than all that the Chyrurgions ordinarily make use of, not to speak of the
rest adjoined thereunto, as I am able to make it in reality to appear.

A young novice in Chyrurgery may pass through all Spittles and Hospitals, and
to the astonishment of bystanders, do wonderful and incredible cures. As a
friend of mine past therewith through all the Hospitals of Italy, and was
requested by the Pope to take care of the sick and wounded men of his Army,
where he did wonders, received all honor possible and no small recompense.

Number. 3.
The Balsom marked with Number. 3. is called Balsamum natural perse, or natural
Balsom of it self, because it is so kindly disposed, and sympathetical to the
nature of man's flesh, which may be seen when any member is out of joint, or
sprained, or bruised, etc. for then some of this Balsom being put into a spoon
(as was said of the former) put your warm finger into it, and anoint the member
all about the joint, or bruise, and then dry it in with your warm finger or
hand, and wipe off all foulness very well, with a warm cloth, and lay on your
defensative plasters, or pultesies, in case you want good defensatives. And
this will take away the swelling, be it never so much; and if you would use
this Balsom in case of an Ulcer, it will cause it to ripen and make the matter
break out, and bring it to a good end, observing the directions given for the
first. It does wonders in healing many outward wounds, as the former, and I
have known in great Camps, such as used this and no other, and did wonders
therewith. The reason whereof is, because it is so like the nature of man,
which is the reason that I call it the natural Balsom. And ten or twenty drops
thereof, daily drunk down with wine or Beer, strengthens the maimed person, and
serves him for a wound-drink, so that, used either inwardly or outwardly, it
has more virtues than I dare mention. The truth is, it is of a far differing
quality from the first Balsom, which I have termed Balsamum universalem. But
this likewise will act its part, as the sincere experimenter shall find:
wherefore I thought good to assign it a place in this my small Cyrurgery; that
besides open wounds, men might also have a remedy for bruised, strained and
dislocated, or disjointed members upon all occasions.

Number 4.
Is a Balsom which I call Nerve or Sinnew-Balsom, which may very profitably
even to admiration be used, when the Sinnews are in part cut off, or lie bare,
and when their watery dropping cannot be stopped; yea, when the natural moisture
of the limbs drops away; a case in which the Cyrurgeon is much troubled, the
Patients health decaies. and the member, be it Arm, Leg, Finger, or any other
whatever, commonly remains ever after stiff, as long as the patient lives.
Which miserable condition to prevent, take so much of this Balsom, Number. 4. as
shall seem needful, and heat it as hot as the patient can endure it, and squirt
it with a syring into the wound, or do it on with a clean feather, so shall you
day after day see wonders. The member becomes suddenly refresht, the Patient
strengthened, the pain allaid; the matter digested, thicker, and whiter; the
waterish moisture leaves running, and the Patient is prevented from having a
stiff limb or member as aforesaid; in which case it is requisite, the
Chyrurgion have a good hand to bind the Patie^ts hurt, as the condition thereof
shall require. This Balsom is used after the same manner in all wounds, that
abound with watery moisture; especially when they have been purged by Balsom 1.
so that no proud flesh remains in them.

With these 4 Balsoms may a man perform all the Cyrurgery requisite in fresh
wounds or other hurts: Notwithstanding by way of surplusage I shall add.

Number 5.
The Philosophers water, which is used in all such hurts, as are troubled more
than ordinary, with the growing up of proud flesh, which Cyrurgions commonly
eat away with burnt Alum and Praecipitate. Wet a clean feather in this water,
and strike over the proud flesh lightly every day, and lay a plaster on, to
cover the wound, until such time as it is healed. It is remarkable, how this
matter eats off, and separates the proud flesh, from the sound and natural,
never hurting the good or natural flesh: many wounds are healed from the bottom
with this water, which is not of so fierce and corrosive nature as the Alume
and Praecipitate; not hurting the adjacent veins or Arteries, for it meddles
only with that which is unsound, and not with that which is well and healthy.

And now I hope I have set open a Door, and pointed out a sure way for all
Practioners in Chyrurgery to proceed in the cure of all fresh wounds and hurts
whatsoever: only I shall exhort the skilful Masters in Cyrurgery, and the
young Barber-Chyrurgions, where ever they travel, that they set their hand to
the work in due season, and be careful in their Operations.

The Medicaments are to be bought of Remeus Franck, who is to be found at Mr
Hartlib's house, near Charing Cross, over against Angel-Court, viz.

Number.

1. The universal Balsom. for 2. guldens, and ten stivers, the ounce of each,
which is about an English crown. 2. The second Balsom. for 2. guldens, and ten
stivers, the ounce of each, which is about an English crown. 3. The Balsom
called, naturalis per se. for two gilders the ounce, which is about 4 shillings
English. 4. The Nerve or Sinnew Balsom for three guldens the ounce, which is
about 6. shil. English. 5. Philosophers Water. for three guldens the ounce,
which is about 6. shil. English.
FINIS.
The Appendix, Containing Mr. Gerard Malynes Philosophy, about the Essence or
Existence of Metals.
Delivered accidentally in one Chapter of his Book, called, Lex Mercatorium,
or, The Ancient Law-Merchant.
ALl Philosophers, by the light of Nature and long observation have determined,
that the sperme or seed of all things created of the four elements, does in a
secret manner lowre within the two elements of water and earth; and that Nature
does continually work to produce perfect things, but is hindered therein by
accidental causes, which are the begetters of corruption and imperfection of
all things, whereby we have variety of things which are defectable to the
spirit of man. Herein they observe the operation of the Sun and Moon, and the
other Planets and Startes, in the generation of all things which either have a
being or existence, as the Elements have; or a being and life, as vegitable
Trees or Plants; or a being, life and sense, as Beasts, Birds, and other living
Creatures; or a being, life, sense and reason, as Man has, and all reasonable
Creatures; which knowledge and wisdom, no doubt, the holy Prophet Moses did
learn amongst the Egyptians. But had these Philosophers read the Book of Moses,
( Acts 17.22. Genesis) of Creation and Generation, they would not have ascribed
the guiding and conducting of all natural things to the two Leaders, namely,
the Stars and Nature. Hence it proceeds, that amongst vegitable things (which
have a Being and life) they reckon all Metals, which have their beginning from
Sulpher and Mercury, tanquam ex patre and matre; which meeting and concurring
together in the veins of the earth, do engender through the heat and quality
of the Climate, by an assidual concoction, according to the nature of the earth
wherein they meet, which being either good and pure, or stinking and corrupt,
produces the diversity of the Metals of gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and
Iron, in their several natures: and hereupon they have assigned them under
their distinct Planets, to be benevolent, or malevolent; as Lead under Saturn,
Tin under Jupiter, Iron under Mars, Gold under Sol, Copper under Venus,
Quicksilver under Mercury, and Silver under Luna. So Mercury or Quicksilver
is one of the seven Metals, which being volatile, and by his volubility running
with every one, is in nature as they are, either good or evil: and howsoever
they have placed Tin under the benevolent planet Jupiter, experience has
proved unto us, that Tin is the poison of all Metals. Sulphur is excluded,
which they say is of two colors, being white and corrupt in the Silver, which
therefore falls away, but red and pure in the Gold, and therefore permanent.

These diversities of metals being come to pass by accide^tal causes, is the
cause that Art (being Natures Ape by imitation) has endeavored to perform
that wherein Nature was hindered: whereupon Aristotle says, Facilius est
distruere Accidentale, quam Essentiale, so that the Accidental being destroyed,
the Essential remains, which should be pure.

But this cannot be done without projection of the Elixar or Quinteffence upon
Metals. Hence proceeds the study of all the Philosophers to make their
miraculous stone, which I confess is very pleasant and full of expectation,
when a man sees the true and perfect transmutation of Metals, Lead and Iron
into Copper, the Ore of Lead into Quick-si^ver or Mercury, with a small charge
to a very great profit, as it has been made for me, until the maker of it
died, within three months after he had made almost four thousand pound weight,
as good as any natura Mercury could be, and that in six weeks time.

To return to our Philosophers, concerning the essence of metals, they have
been transcended in the knowledge thereof, for they show the generation of
Sulphu^ and Mercury in this manner.

The exhalations of the earth being cold and dry, and the vapors of the seas
being cold and moist, according to their natures ascending and meeting in a due
proportion and equality, and falling upon some hilly or mountainous country,
where the influence of Sun and Moon have continual operation, are the cause of
generation; or properly from it is Sulphur ingendered, penetrating into the
earth where there are veins of water, and there they congeal into Gold or
Silver, or into the Ores of Silver, Copper, and all other metals, participating
or holding always some little mixture of the best, or being in nature better
or worse, according to the said accidental causes. So that they do attribute
the generation to the operation of the influences of the Sun and Moon; where
the Book of God shows us the creation of all things in heaven and earth, and
the furniture thereof. The earth (being the dry part of the globe of the world)
did appear and was made the third day, containing in it the Ores of all Metals
and Minerals; whereas the Sun and Moon were created afterward on the fourth
day, whose operation was incident to the things created, but not before. In
like manner (say they) are Diamonds, Rubies, and other precious stones
engendered, according to the purity of the matter, and the proportionable
participation of every element therein: if the exhalations (being subtle) do
superabound and prevail over the vapors, then hereof is Sulphur ingendered:
and if this subtle exhalation be mixed with the moist vapors, and wants
decoction, as being in a very cold place, it becomes Mercury or Quicksilver,
which can endure no heat or fire at all.

The first Metal mentioned in the holy Scripture is Gold, which was found in
the river Pison, running through the Garden of Eden into the Country of
Havilah, where Gold does grow, and this was in the East. According to which
observation, all the veins of Mines run from East toward West, with the course
of the Sun; as shall be more deciared.

To this argument appertains the Philosophical study of Prima Materia, to be
found out by experience for the great work of La pis Philosophorum, by the
operation of the Sun in seven years. The practice whereof was made about forty
years since, by a German Doctor of Physic, at Dansick in the East Countries
(as I have been informed by a friend of mine who was also a Physician) and was
done in this manner, according to the bigness of the body of the Sun, being 166
times bigger than the whole Globe of the earth and water, making the
circumference of the world. Whereupon he took 166 vials or glasses, wherein he
did put of all the Ores of Metals and Minerals, and other things which had any
affinity with Minerals, and some of them mixed, and calcined all of them, and
closing or nipping up all the glasses by fire, he did expose them to the Sun in
an eminent place, for and during the said time of seven years, and found
thereby (as it was reported) Prima Materia, which was reduced to seven glasses;
howsoever, it was certain that he grew very rich, and bought above an hundred
houses in that City before he died. Which was an occasion-that my friend
(imitating him) did likewise place not far from London seven glasses, with
calcined Metals and Minerals, upon a house top, against the back of a chimney,
where the repercussion of the Sun did work upon them, which was admirable to
behold from six month to six months, not only by the sublimation of colors,
very variable and Celestial, but also of the rare alteration of the stuff,
being sometimes liquid, another time dry, or part of it moist, ascending and
descending very strange to behold, as my self have seen diverse times from year
to year. Some had been there two, three, four, five, and one almost seven
years, the color whereof had been yellow, then white in the superficies, then
as black as pitch, afterward dark red, with stars of gold in the upper part of
the glass, and at last of the color of Oranges or Lemons, and the substance
almost dry. Many were the questions between him and me, but he was confident,
that there was the Elixar, howbeit very doubtful, that he should never enjoy
the same; and it came so to pass, for after a long sickness he died of a
burning Ague, and a Gentleman gave a sum of money to his wife for that glass,
whereof I have not heard any thing these seven years. In this glass he would
show me the working of this Quintessence, according to the description of
Ripley, who he was assured had the Lapis, and so had Friar Bacon, and Norton of
Bristol: Kelley had by his saying some little part to make projection, but it
was not of his own making. The charge to make it was little or nothing to speak
of, and might be done in seven months, if a man did begin it on the right day.
The twelve operations of Ripley, he declared unto me were but six, and then it
rests; for, says he, all Philosophers have darkened the study of this
blessed Work, which God has revealed to a few humble and charitable men,
Calcination, Dissolution, and Separation are but one, and so is Conjuction and
Putrefaction; likewise Cibation and Fermentation; then follows Congelation;
and at last Multiplication and Projection, which are also but one. For mine own
part, seeing that no man can be perfect in any one Science, I hold it not amiss
for a man to have knowledge in most or in all things: for by this study of
Alcumy, men may attain to many good Experiments of distillations Chemical,
Fireworks, and other excellent observations in Nature; which being far from
Merchants profession, I hope shall not give offense to the Reader of this book,
seeing it is but in one chapter accidentally handled Neither will I crave
pardon of the Muses, as it were, insinuating to the world to have a far greater
knowledge in these trials or conclusions. But to satisfy the curiosity of
some, that it may be with a gaping mouth expect to understand somewhat of the
Stuff put into these glasses; I may say as I was informed, That in some was
the calcined Ore of Silver and Gold, in some other Mercury calcined, and
Sulphur in some other; Arsenick for the air, Sulphur for the fire, Mercury for
the water, and Sea-cole for the earth, were put all together as the four
elements. In some other Glass was Vitriol and Orpiment, and what more I do not
now remember; concluding, That where Nature gives ability, Art gives facility.

I have read all the books of Panacelsus that I could find hitherto, and in his
Book De Transmutatione Rerum I do find to this purpose the Observations
following, concurring with my friends opinion concerning Ripleys 12 Divisions,
comprised into six, and the seventh is the matter it self, and the labor or
working rests, wherewith I ^oe end this chapter, and proceed to the surer
grounds of the Mine^ of Metals.

Omne quod in Frigore solvitur, continet Aerum spiritum Salis, quem in
sublimatione vel distillatione acquirit and assumit.

Omne quod in Frigore vel Aere solvitur, ^terum calore, Ignis coagulatur in
Pulverem vel lapidem. Solutio vero Caloris, solvit omnia pingua and omnia
Sulphurea: Et quicquid Calor ignis seluit: hoc coagulat, Frig us in massam, and
quicquid calor coagulat, hoc soluit rursus Aeer and Frigor.

Gradus ad Transmutationem sunt septem.

Calcinatio, Sublimatio, Solutio, Putrifactio, Distillatio, Coagulatio, and
Tintura.

Sub gradus Calcinaetionis comprehenduntur Reverberatio and Cementatio.

Sub Sublimatione, Exaltio, Elevatio, and Fixatio.

Sub Solutione, Dissolutio and Resolutio.

Sub Putrifactione, Digestio and Circulatio, qui transmutat Colores, separat
purum ab impuro: purum superius, impurum inferius.

Sub Distillatione, Ascentio, Lavatio, and Fixatio.

Coagulatio est duplex; una Aeris, altera Ignis.

Tinturatingit totum corpus, and est fermentum massae, farinacea and panis.

Secundum est, Quod calidius liquescunt, co celerius, Tintura transcurrit,
sicut Fermentum penetrat, and totam massam acetositate inficit, etc.

Sequitur Mortificatio and Fixatio Sulphuris, and in Libro de Resuscitatione
Rerum: Reductio Metallorum in Mercurium vivum.

A Translate of the ELEVENTH CHAPTER, taken out of a Theosophicall German
Treatise, printed in the year 1655. under the Title of Postilion or a New
Almanac; being an Astrological and Prophetical Prognostication.

Touching the end of the present Wars and Power of Rome, and that there are
many Calamaties yet to come, after which there shall be an everlasting Peace,
and a new World: and likewise what unheard of Miracles, and such as were never
known before, shall happen: and what shall be the State of the World from this
time, till the coming of Christ: and likewise every Man's Nativity is here cast,
and his Fortune foretold him.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. A Prognostication of what shall happen to Physicians,
Surgeons, Apothecaries, and their dependants, and Alchymists, and Miners.
WHat Griefs, Calamities, and Miseries, all Men are troubled with from their
coming out of their Mothers wombs till their going into their graves; none do
feel so much as they that are afflicted with diseases, and sickness; and to
recover and preserve the health of such, is the business of Physicians, and
Apothecaries with their dependants; nor is there any Calling or profession on
earth more useful for men, than is that of Physic, next to the Apostolical
and Prophetical Calling: For if a man were Master of the World, and yet had
not health; what were he the better for all other things. Iudeed this
profession of Physic has excellent testimonies, not only in the sacred
Scripture, but also from Experience. Now though this be so, yet nevertheless
shall there be an end put to the business of physicians, Apothecaries, and
Chyrurgeons, and they shall be eased of all their pains and care, and let them
know this Prognostication; that from my watch tower, I have heard, though not
yet seen, that within a short time we shall have an universal Medicine, which
will not only recover the sick and keep them well, but also take away death,
and for ever swallow it up. Can there be any thing more acceptable to Man?
seeing that death masters every Man, though Christ dyed and rose again, and
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Majesty of God. What a
great comfort was it to wretched men in the times of Christ and his Apostles,
that they were cured of diverse diseases, and for this reason did Christ and his
Apostles and Prophets, follow this profession, and therefore it is the most
honorable of all, next to that of Prophesying, so that it is a wonder why the
uncivil Civilians, should take place of the Physicians; but perhaps these wise
men know not, that health is better than all the goods and riches of the World.
But least you should think I tell you a Fable; I would have you understand my
Prognostication of the true universal Medicine, which shall serve not only
Men, but also all Flesh; namely, that there grows in Paradise a Tree, which
is, and is called the Tree of Life, which in the glorious and long expected
coming of Jesus Christ our God and Savior shall be made manifest, and then
shall it be afforded to men, and the fruits of it shall be gathered, by which
all men and all flesh shall be delivered from death, and that as truly,
solidly, and surely, as at the time of the fall, by gathering the fruit of the
forbidden Tree, we together withal flesh, fell into sin, death, and all ill.
And this glory and great joy has God reserved for Us, that live in these
latter days, and has kept his good Wine until now. Therefore as in these
times shall be made manifest, whatsoever has been hidden hitherto, and even
those things which are kept most secret, so now shall the way to the Tree of
Life be laid open, which time the Apostle Peter hints at, when he speaks of the
times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and of the times of
restitution, (namely of that good which was lost and taken away in paradise)
and the Prophet Daniel 9.24. Acts 3.19, 20, 21.
Of the great Apostle Paul we read that he was rapt into Paradise, and heard
words not to be uttered, (or which it was not fit for a man to tell) and of
this I will glory (says he.) 2 Cor. 21.4.
What do we believe those words were? wretch that I am; I am far beneath
Paul: for what should this before how should such thoughts arise in my heart?
but this I may say in the fear of the Lord, that what I tell you, I have heard
of the glory of the Sons of God, which is revealed to me, which every Creature
shall enjoy with Us, having hitherto expected it with long desire and groans.
Romans 8.19.20, 21. Esdrass 47.53. and 8.52, 53, 54.
But when Elias who was with Christ in the Mount shall come, he will declare
more to you of these things. So I tell you what I have heard of the Tree of
Life, which has been sealed up hitherto, and no man has dared to break up the
seal, nor indeed could: because a Fiery Mountain is in the way which shall not
be removed before Christ come with great power and Glory; whose coming we do
declare to you, is much nerer than men believe it is: and seeing it is so, I do
foretell all Physicians, that then their Physic shall be worth nothing; for
another Garden will be found, whence shall be had herbs, that shall preserve
men not only from sickness, but even from death it self. Who will not be glad
of this, especially when you may partake of the benefit of it, if you receive
and believe it, and do not despise my Prognostication. Besides let the
Alchymists know this from me, that the Philosophers Stone, wherewith they have
cured the sick; and their universal Medicine, and chief Remedy shall be worth
nothing, being indeed most vile in comparison of this universal Medicine of
which I have heard, and tell you of. What think you of this? you that have so
bragged of your Chemistry hitherto, and have written so many Books and brought
men into many errors; (I mean not the true Alchymists, that were good
Christians, and in simplicity of heart truly served their neighbor, such as
were the Benedictine Monk, Basilius, Valentinus, Paracelsus, and others, for
they shall have this said unto them, I was sick and ye visited me, and have not
so constanly taken fees from all, as many of our money-scrapers do, who forget
mercy and charity, and are therefore no true Samaritans,) but I mean the
knavish Cole-blowers, and pretenders to Chemistry. Know therefore ye
Alchymists, that all your glory shall vanish away, both of your universal
Medicine, and of your projection and Transmutation of baser Metals into Gold
and Silver, and this glory shall belong to the Miners, who in the New World
shall dig out of the ground more Gold and Silver than needs, and that very pure
and refined, without any cleansing or melting at all. Isa. 60.17.
Now have you not red a Prophecy of this in Isaiah, For Brass I will bring
Gold, and for Iron I will bring Silver, and for Wood Brass, and for Stones
Iron. It is not to be believed what great treasures and unexhausted riches are
hid in the Mountains, any and in the very fields and plains what a vast
quantity there is of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, which have hitherto
been hid and sealed up till these last days, wherein all shall be made
manifest, to the glory of God. But what are these earthly things, in respect of
that glory which is in the divine World, or the Original of these Worlds. For
there is a thing more noble and excellent than the very Tree of Life, which is
in Paradise, namely that Stone which hitherto the Builders have refused. Psalm.
118.
Here now will many think with themselves: what means all this? give me the
Philosophers Stone, or tell me where those treasures are hid which you speak of,
and keep your fine conceits to your self. Not so (say I) for it is a true
prophecy, 1 Ioh. 2.17.
that He which seeks these fading things, he shall decay with them. But he
which first seeks the Kingdom of God, him will God seek and enrich him for
ever. And therefore I wish from my very heart, that ye were of my mind, and
then we would presently berich our selves, and enrich others; I wish but as
much as will serve me and my small family from day to day, though I might
easily grow rich if I would worship the God of the world, but when I am offered
riches, I say to my self, away Satan. And who would think that I have not a
penny to buy my own supper and my poor little childrens with, but what I borrow.
O Man, if thou did but know the inexhausted riches of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and of his Kingdom and Glory: thou would utterly despise the riches
and glory of this World, and think as Paull does, Phil. 3.7 8.
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.
Teadoubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. And now is that glory
manifested unto thee on free cost, nor needs it to cost thee any thing, and
likewise the Gospel of the Kingdom is now preached unto the whole world, etc
unto al Nations, wholly on free cost; happy is he that acknowledges it, and
receives it with thankfulness, but who so despises and rejects it, shall
himself be despised and rejected.

FINIS.

