The most Heavenly and Christian SPEECH OF The Magnanimous and Victorious King
of SWEDEN, Carolus Gustavus Adolphus on his DEATHBED. IN His Royal Palace of
Gottenburg on the 10th. of February last, three days before his most untimely
and much lamented death. TOGETHER With his last Advice and Counsel to his
Nobles, the Lords of his Privy Council, and the chief Commanders of War for
concluding a Peace with the King of Denmark on the Conditions of Honor and
Safety, or otherwise for the prosecuting the War with greater Vigor

Faithfully translated out of High Dutch.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Vere, at the sign of the Angel without Newgate. 1660.

The last words of the King of Sweden, on his Deathbed, in his royal palace at
Gottenburg, before the Lords of his privy Council, on Friday the 10. of
February. There being present, Monsier Trelon, Ambassador of France, Sir
George Ayscough, a^^ many other honorable personages.
THe Spirits of his Majesty of Sweden, which, like a how continually bended,
found no relaxation, did in the midst of the month of January, bring a fever
on his body, which first confined him to his Chamber, and afterward to his
bed; his late losses, but especially that at Fuenen, kept his mind in a
perpetual agitation, and his courage to overcome all difficulties, did so
prevail upon him, that it brought with it the violence of a disease, by
denying him the benefit of sleep; his disease which was but a tame Ague at the
first, did by degrees become so predominant, that his Doctors of Physic, (the
most learned on that side of Europe) began to despair of his recovery.

It pleased God that at that time he had called together at Gottenburg, a
council of the most apparent of all his Nobility of Sweadland. Provission was
there made for carrying on the War with more vigor, against the Emperor, the
King of Denmark, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh, there potent Enemies, who had
attaqued him in Prussia, Pomerania, and in the Frontiers of Swedland, and given
him a memorial overthrow in the Island of Fuenen. Queen Mary of England, whose
reign was as short, as this King of Swedlands, was oftentime heard to speak in
the fits of her deepest Melancholy, that when she was dissected being dead,
they should find Calis engraven in her heart, I forbear to make any address of
Application, but certain it is, that at this Council the Lords of Swedland,
following the disposition, and constitution of their King did resolve, that
every third man in the Kingdom of Sweden, should put on Arms for the defense
and propagation of their Countries Liberties It was resolved that several
Regements both of horse and foot, should be formed out of Lapland, Gothland,
and Vandals, which on the beginning of the Spring, should like a Tempest come
Thundering in, into the desolate Dominions of Powerland, and Prussia, and
having reduced those places, should carry the war into the heart of the Empire.

This was agreeable unto all, and there was no other discourse heard of from
Gottenburg, until you come to Stockhalme. In the mean time it pleased God, that
the health of the King was every day weaker then other, although he wanted for
no encouragements. His Commanders were every day to att^nd him with their
Resolutions; his Physicians with their Cordials, and his Divines with their
counsels, but sleep being a stranger to his body, his body began to be a
stranger, and to abandon the acquaintance of his soul. It is a wonderful thing
to consider in how close a twist of respondency that sleep and health are
united, although that one of them is the Emblem of death, and the other of
Immortality.

On Friday Feburary the tenth, his Majesty of Sweden, by the strength of his
weakness perceiving the weakness of his strength, and finding nothing perfect
in himself, but his Vprightness and his Memory, he commanded that his
Councilors, and Lords of Sweden, should be called before him, who accordingly
having made their appearance, he did raise himself a little from his bed, and
with a countenance more cheerful then ordinary, he expressed himself unto them
in these words, My Lords, my faithful Councelours, and Deer Allies.

Many years are not yet passed, since by the gift of my renowned kinswoman
Queen Christina, the crown of Sweadland, has been devolved on me, it has been
my endeavor to follow the example of my famous Pre^ecessours, which was to
enlarge as much as to defend their Dominions; With what success I made war
first in Bremen, and afterward in Poland, I believe there is no part in the
world is ignorant. By the combinations, and secret practices of some Enemies
nearer home, I was called from thence into Denmark, where havin both the King
himself and his Kingdom at my mercy, I granted him peace, and contented with
the glory of the Conquest, I remitted to him the fruition of his Kingdoms. But
he to require so great a f^vour entered presently into a league with the
Hollander, and the Emperor to the apparent prejudice of the Crown of Sweden,;
This caused me presently to return with my forces to Denmark, being much
encouraged in it by the late Protector of England, had I not been interrupted
in my proceedings, by the Fleet of Holland, I had undoubtedly put a good period
to that war, and made both the Emperor and the King of Denm^rk, to feel the
effects of my power; I shall here make no mention of my Cousin, the Marquis of
Brandenburg, of whom I expected better things, neither too heavily will I say
the misfortune in Pomerania, to the neglect of my Brother Prince Adolphus, yet
I must needs say, that I am confident the affairs there had been carried more
to my honor, and advantage, if he had executed the instructions which I gave
him.

That which leaves the greatest impression of grief upon my soul, is the loss
sustained at Fuenen, and the imprisonment of many of my eminent Commanders now
at Gluck^tadt, but I hope (my Lord Ambassador) that the moneys promised from
your Master the King of France, will be either a speedy ransom for them, or an
assistance unto you to force open the gates of Gluckstadt, for their
deliverance.

My desire is, that my most deer Lady the Queen, may be Regent after me, during
the minority of my Son, to whom I do beseech God to be a father. I leave unto
you the management of all affairs, both spiritual and civil, conjuring you to
be zealous unto God, dutiful to your Queen, and faithful to one another.

I must commend unto your greatest care, the peace with the King of Denmark, of
which already some overtures have been made, but I would have it to be such a
peace as may be most advantageous to you, without the least blemmish or
tincture of dishonor. And because we have already found him so uncertain, I
would advise you to keep Elsenour, and Cronenburg, as Caution Towns for the
performance of his promises.

As for the late renowned Queen of Sweden now at Rome, I have something to
speak in relation to her, and her Dowry in great danger, by the ruin of
Pomerania, but -- Here his spirits fainting away, he sunk down on his bed, but
he was immediately recovered by some excellent hot waters, that were
administered to him, while his Lords and Councilours that stood round about him,
did drink hot watess as well as himself, but it was from the abundance of the
tears that did flow from their eyes.

The King after a little pause, having again raised himself, with a serious eye
did look upon them all, and observing rain within door, and none without, he
seemed to be much discontented at it, and thus again proceeded in his discourse.

I have hitherto spoken to you as a King, I shall now speak to you as a
Christian; Death is only terrible to the wicked, and it is not so much the fear
of Death, as the sense of hell that is so terrible to them, the apprehension of
the torment of the one swallows up the terror of the other. Did ever any man on
the rack afflict himself, because his Mistress slighted him? did ever man that
attained unto vast possessions, and was condemned to dye for bloodshed and
Extortion, call for the particulars of his purchase upon the Gallows? The
apprehension and horror of being damned (I do not say) will cure all other
sadness, but certainly it will swallow it up, But I who by the mirits of my
Redeemer, who by the grace of the Lord Jesus, do believe I shall be saved, I do
desire you to consider with me, how great is my joy? how infinite my advantage
is by this Exchange? How unspeakable is the glory, and how excellent is the
recompense for all the hard Marches, and the sufferings in this world?

My Lords! Take the counsel with you of your dying Prince, let us prepare our
selves against changes, always expecting them, that so we be not surprised when
they come; Oh death how bitter art thou to a man who has promised to himself
ease and fullness, by his large possessions, and to enjoy it for many years! it
was a sad Arrest, that his soul was surprised the first night.

Consider with me, that afflictions are often the occasion of great spiritual
advantages; We must not look upon them, as they sit heavy upon us, but as they
serve unto Gods ends, and the purpose of his eternal providence; When a Prince
fights justly, but unsuccessully; Could he but see the reason for which God did
so order it, he would find it unreasonable, nay ill, to have it otherwise. If a
man could have opened but one of the pages of the Divine counsel, and observed
the event of Joseph's being sold to the Merchants of Amaleck, he might with much
reason have dried up the young man's tears; God esteems it one of his glories,
to bring good out of evil; And therefore it is but reason that we should leave
unto God the Government of his own world, as he himself pleases, and that we
should patiently wait till the change comes, and not envy the happiness, and
prosperity of our enemies, fret not thy self (says that kingly Prophet)
because of him who prospers in his ways, because of him who brings wicked
devices to pass for evil doers at the last, shall be rooted out, but those that
weight upon the Lord shall stand like Mount Sion, that cannot be shaken

The Last great trial is Death, for which should we grieve, it would be of all
greifes the most unreasonable; For why should we grieve at that which is so
absolutely unavoydable? It is not so much to be cared for how long we live, as
how well we live, for that life is not best which is the longest, but that
which is most virtuous, and honorable: The shortning of our days, is an evil,
wholly depending upon opinion, let us still be ready for death, and it cannot
come too soon, for let us dye young or old, we have still an immortal soul, and
do lay down our bodies only for a time, as that which was the instrument of
our cares and troubles, and the scene of sickness, and disease; Let us not then
(my Lords) fear that which riddeth us of all these infirmities, for by fearing
it, we shall never the sooner avoid it, but make it more miserable. To dye is
natural and necessary, but to dye poorly and basely, is that alone which can
make a man miserable. No man can be a slave, but he who fears pain, or who
fears to dye, to such a man nothing but peaceable times can denote his
inclinations, or his duty, he depends only on external things for his
felicity, and therefore is no longer well, then during the pleasure of his
Enemy, a Theife or a Tyrant.

But blessed is he who willingly resigneth his soul into the hand of God which
gave it, as into the hands of a blessed Creator, and Redeemer: O blessed Jesus
thou did dye for me; grant that with joy I may submit to thy Summons, for
thou art as well my Advocate as my Judge, and came into the world to save
sinners; I acknowledge O Lord I am a great sinner, but thy mercies are infinite.
O God of mercy, and Father of all comfort, look upon the sadness, and the
sorrows of thy servant; my sins lie heavy upon me, and press me sore, by
reason of thy hot displeasure. My affflictions seem to be without comfort,
because they are the punishments of my sins; My sins have caused my sorrow, yet
my sorrow does not cure my sins; and unless thou, O Lord, for thy own sake, and
merely because thou art good, art pleased to pity me, I shall be left forlorn,
and as much without remedy as without comfort, Lord therefore pity me; I deny
my self, and wholly depend on thee, and on the blood and merits of my redeemer:
Let thy grace refresh my spirit, thy comforts support me, and thy mercies
pardon me, for thou art g^od and gracious, and I throw my self upon thy
mercies. Suffer me not to let go my hold, and do thou with me, as seems good
in thine own eyes. Thou art in finitely more merciful then I can be miserable;
O Lord make me the object of thy mercies as well in my death, as in my life;
And if even in this hour shall be pleased to remove me from this vale of
misery, when my poor soul shall go out of the prison of this body, may it be
received by Angels, and preserved from the horror and surprizal of evil
spirits, and be laid up in the bosom of our Lord, until the day of thy second
coming, when it shall be reunited to the body, which is now to be laid in the
dust, yet I doubt not but shall be raised up in joy, to live for ever, and
behold the face of God, in the glories of our Lord Jesus, who is my Hope, my
resurrection, and life, my blessed, and ever glorious Redeemer, to whom with
the father, and the holy Spirit, be rendered all honor, and glory, now and for
evermore.

Having spoke these words, his Lords and privy Counselours (who stood round
about his bed) were transported with as much admiration, as they were before
with grief, and taking at that time, their leave of him, they left him with two
of his Chaplains, who never ceased to confirm him in his holy and heavenly
confidence, and to administer those spiritual Consolations to him which were
suitable to the Master of so great a war-fare, who having conquered himself as
well as his Enemies, stooped his anointed head, as low as death, and in the
flourish of his years, wisely exchanged a sea of troubles in this world, for
the heaven of eternal rest, and a temporal Crown for a crown of Immortality.

The End.
His EPITAPH.
Who lies within this fatal Ring,
The honor of the growing Spring,
And Virtue that does man advance,
Who yet this Marble underneath,
(in the despite of deaths mischance)
Does valor to the Swedish breath.

