A MESSAGE SENT From the most illustrious, and Highborn PRINCE, CHARLES By the
Grace of God King of Sweden;

TO His most excellent Highness, OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.

With the Letters of Credence sent from His Royal Majesty, to Monsieur Bonnel,
Resident for the Crown and Kingdom, concerning the Articles of Peace and Union.

London, Printed for G. Mharton, 1654.

A Message sent from the most illustrious and high born Prince, Carolus
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, to His Highness, Oliver, Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
CArolus Gustavus Adolphus, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, etc. being
invested in the Royal Seat of Majesty, by the free consent of the Nobility
Gentlemen, and Bores, thought it requisite to congratulate His Highness the
Lord Protector with a Message, in confirmation of the Articles of Union, agreed
upon between the Commonwealth of England, and the Crown of Sweden: In order
whereunto, his Majesty sent new Letters of Credence to Monsieur Bonnel his
Resident; and thereupon his Lordship had Audience by his Highness in
White Hall, being attended by Sir Oliver Fleming master of the Ceremonies, and
diverse other Gentlemen. And after a very grave and learned Oration, he
presented his Highness with the Royal Condescensions of his Lord and Master, To
confirm and maintain all things partieularly contained and specified in the
Articles of Union, etc.

After which, the two Deputies from the Duke of Holdenburgh had both Audience
by his Highness; and then the Secretary from the States of Venice.

Unto whose assistance, a gallant Fleet is preparing for relief of the
Christians against the Turk: Between whom there has been two great Naval
Fights: but in the first the Venetians lost the Galley of Padua, Monsieur
Moricini Captain of the Golf was killed, and his Galley blown up with powder;
and the golden Eagle and an English Bottom were burnt; but after three days
vigorous and lamentable engagement the Venetians because Victors.

In which memorable and Christian Dispute, the Turks lost 20 Galleys, five
Mahones, and six men of war; and the rest were forced into the Isle of S^io,
where the Venetians have had a second Victory, and again sunk six of their
Galleys, and taken six ships, and three Mahones, with the loss of three of the
Venetian Galleys.

By an Express from Hainant the 20 of July it is certified, That the King of
Scots being gone from Peron toward the Spaw, was met within a League of Peron
by by the marshal Thurenne, and de la F^rte, who conducted him as far as the
Enemies Country; whence they returned with the Duke of York, who is now made
Lieutenant Generalissimo. Soon after the Governor of Cambray of the Spaniard,
met the King of Scots, and conducted him to his Lodgings, and there feasted him
like a Prince: Since which time he is gone to the Spaw.

An Abstract from the Navy.
ON the 8 of this instant July, diverse of the English Frigates having been upon
the Coast of Dunkirk, to convoy a fleet of Merchantmen; upon their return,
they espied the King of Scots fleet, unto whom they gave chase; and at last
comwithin shot, saluted them with several broad sides; Vice Admiral Bannister
being in the Eagle, answered them again; but after a sharp dispute, finding the
Arguments too high to dispense withal from the mouths of the English Canon,
he tacked about, for Calis, and got under the command of the Royal Fort, where
he presently hung forth a Flag of defiance; which Captain Benjamin Sacheverel
perceiving, attempted with the Eagle to strand him; but the great Canon from
the Fort and Block houses played so fast upon him, that he was constrained to
come off by the Leeward, his design proving unfeasible. However upon their
putting forth to the main Ocean, they espied another fleet, which proved
Frenchmen, and after 4 or 5 leagues chase, sunk one, and took another, without
the loss of one man. We have also taken their New found land fleet, and diverse
ships coming from Malaga, which adds far more Tryumphant Victories, when we
fought their great Armado. Yet notwithstanding, they fortify the sea Coast,
and say, that their Victories by Land will soon prove Conquests by sea: Indeed,
the truth of it is, great has been their success since the making of the Duke
of York Lieutenant General; and that upon his approach within a League of the
Spanish forces before Arras with the whole Army upon the way of Doway, where he
entrenched upon a design to cut off all provisions from the enemy; the Prince
of Conde at first represented his Opinion at a Council of Officers, that the
enemy being but 14000 the best way would be to engage them with hopes of
success, but his advice was waved. Then the Duke gave them an alarm, and faced
them with his horse, which the French perceiving, made a sally with some horse
and foot with such vigor and resolution, that they routed the Spaniards at
first; but the Prince of Conde coming in seasonably rallied them, and forced
the French into the Town again with some loss; in which conflict his Highness
fought half an hour sometimes on horseback and sometimes on foot, at the head of
the Trench, where the valiant Knight de Crequy, who commanded the French, had
his Arm broken to pieces, and was hardly gotten off, and several other Officers
and soldiers were killed and taken.

FINIS.

