THE TRIGONALL SECTOR, THE Description and use thereof: Being an Instrument
most aptly serving for the resolution of all Right lined Triangles, with great
facility and delight.

By which all Planimetrical, and Altimetrical conclusions may be wrought at
pleasure.

The Lines of Sines, Tangents, Secants, and Chords, pricked down on any
Instrument: Many Arithmeticall proportions calculated, and found out in a
moment. Dialls, delineated upon most s ^ts of plains: with many other
delightful conclusions. Lately invented and now exposed to the public view.

By John Chatfeilde.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Leybourn, and are to be sold by James Nuthall, over
against the George near Holbourn-bridge, 1650.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THou have here presented to thy view, the description, and use of a
Geometrical Instrument, whereby (if thou art yet a learner) thou may be helped
abundantly, in the right understanding of the Doctrine of Triangles, with
greater ease: but if thou have already waded through the greatest difficulties,
and art a Master in this Art, yet doubt not, but thou shall find something
here, which will admister unto thee some delight, and perchance may enable thee
to do those things with greater speed and ease, then in the way that thou
walkedst in before, however, I entreat thee to take it in good part, from him
that desires to be

A Servant unto all for their Advantage, J. C.

GG. sulps-
woodcut depicting the "trigonall sector"

Of the Trigonall SECTOR: The description and use thereof.
THe Trigonall Sector, is an Instrument Geometrical containing all variety of
rightlined Triangles, together with the proportions of every side betwixt
themselves and to their perpendiculars.

It consists of a square plate of metal, or piece of wood, on whose edges,
round about, are to be fixed certain laminae, or long slips that may stick up a
little above the plate, and two labels at the extremes of one of the sides,
which moving on their several centers, may be applied unto each other, till
crossing one another they make an angle betwixt themselves: which always shall
be the complement unto 180 gr. of those angles which both the labels make unto
the Radius, which is a line drawn directly betwixt their centers.

The inscriptions on the Instrument are first, three Scales of Lines divided
into 100 equal parts, and answering unto one another, (viz.) on the two labels
and the lower lamina that contains the Radius betwixt the centers of the labels.

Secondly, a reversed Tangent, containing 45 gr. on the lamina on the left hand
of the Instrument, and 45 more even to 90 gr. on the lamina at the top.

Thirdly, the Quadrant of a Circle on the inward body of the plate
concentricall with the label on the left hand, and whose limb or semidiameter
reaches exactly unto the center of the label on the right hand: so that the
Radius thereof is just the same with the Radius divided into 100 parts betwixt
the centers of the labels. This Quadrant is divided into 90. gr. reckoning from
the center of the right hand label, and in the area thereof are drawn lines
parallel both betwixt themselves, and with the Radius, exactly corresponding to
the divisions of the Scales of Lines before described, and marked as all the
other three scales are with there proper figures 1.2.3. etc. to 10.

Thus much of the general description of the Instrument, the lines consist all
of equal parts and therefore need no tables for their inscription, except only
the reversed Tangent, which may be done, as is commonly known, by the ordinary
tables. Only this must be observed, that the Tangent of 45 must be somewhat
longer then the semidiameter of the Quadrant, or the forementioned Radius,
because its distance from the center of the label at the right hand is greater
(by so much space as the breadth of the left hand label does contain) then the
semidiameter is. The label on the right hand being to supply the Secant of 45.
is longer then the other label, and reaches even to that angle of the
Instrument where the Tangent of 45 is placed, and therefore the divisions upon
it are 50 more then the other label (1) 150: yet though they are more in number
they correspond unto the divisions of the other, this label being in length
more then that, that so by it you may see the number of parts that a Secant of
any degree under 45 shall contain of a Radius containing 1000.

If the scale upon the lower lamina or Radius be so drawn as to make an angle
at the center of the left hand label with the edge of the lamina, as it is in
the line of lines in Mr. Gunter's Sector, and another scale correspondent unto
it, be inscribed on the left hand label, these 2 Scales shall perform all the
Propositions to be performed by the Sector one the line of Lines.

Thus much of the description of the Instrument and its parts: Now of the use
thereof.
THe use of this Instrument is very great and various, but it consists
especially in the resolution of all sorts of Rightlined Triangles, unto which
all Geometrical conclusions are reducible, and in Arithmeticall proportions or
the resolution of the Golden Rule.

In the resolution of Triangles, 4 things are considerable. 1 The quantity of
the Angles. 2 The proportions of the sides or subtendents and perpendicular
betwixt themselves. 3 The contents of the area in parts correspondent to the
parts of the sides. 4 The reduction of those parts to a perpendicular and basis
of another denomination: all which are performed by the Instrument in this
manner.

To find the quantity of any angle.
IF it be in Planimetry, having three sights placed on the Instrument, the
first at the center of the left hand label, the second at the center of right
hand label, and the third at the end of the right hand label, work thus. Lay
the Instrument upon a Geometrical tripos or staff, as the Semicircle or
Circumferentor is usually laid, by those that measure Land, horizontally, then
turn it till you can behold one of the marks through the sights at the center
of the labels, afterward turn the right hand label till you see the other
mark through the sight at its center, and that which is at the end thereof,
and then looking on the Tangent line, you shall see the angle among the
Tangents, where the intersection is of the label and the Tangent.

If the angle be above 90 gr. then you must have four sights, and behold the
first mark through the sights at the center, and the end of the left hand
labell, and leaning the Instrument at that position, turn the right hand label
till you can also behold the second mark through its sights, and then the angle
which the two labels make where they cross each other shall be the angle
sought, which that you may know how great it is, add together the angle found
in the Tangent cut by the right hand label, and that on the Quadrant cut by the
left hand, label and substract them both out of 180 gr. and you have the angle
required.

In Altimetry work thus, set the Instrument on one edge upright, so as that the
lower lamina, containing the distance betwixt the centers of the two labels,
may stand horizontall, and the right and left hand laminae Perpendicular; then
lift up the right hand label, till, through the sights thereof, you can behold
the object, and then in the Tangent line shall you see the angle. This is of
use to find the altitude of Sun, Moon ^or Stars, as also the altitude of any
Tower, Steeple, Hill, etc.

Two angles being known, to represent any Rightlined Triangle.
TRiangles of all sorts are distinguished two ways.

First, By their sides, and so they are said to be. 1 Equilaterall, having all
sides a like. 2 Equicrurall having only two sides equal; and the third
unequal. 3 Scalene, viz. Triangles neither of whose sides are equal.

Secondly, By their angles, and they are, 1 Rectangular containing one
Right-angle. 2 Obtuseangular wherein one of the angles is obtuse or greater
then a Rightangle, that is above 90 gr. 3 Acuteangular, wherein all the angles
are less then 90 gr.

Note that the three angles of every Triangle are equal to two Right angles,
that is 1 80 gr.

To represent any Rectangular Triangle.
Turn back the left hand label to the lamina of the Tangent, for then it
makes a right angle with the Radius, then turn the right hand label to the
degree of the other known angle in the Tangent line, and so the two labels and
the Radius shall give the Triangle, together with the proportions of the sides
betwixt themselves.

As suppose, the two known angles be 90. and 45. the distance betwixt the
centers (1) the Radius will be 100 parts, the right hand label shall cut the
left hand label also in 141 parts.

The one of these sides is the Radius, the second a Tangent of 45. equal
always to the Radius, the third, the Secant of 45. being a line drawn from the
center through the limb of the circle till it meet the tangent; if one of the
known angles be above 45: and the other 90 gr. then place the labell at the
tangent of its complement to 90. and then shall the parts on the labell on the
left hand represent the Radius, and the Radius of the Instrument shall
represent the tangent, and the labell on the right hand shall represent the
secant.

Thus supposing the known angles to be 90. and 63 gr. 30. because if I put the
right hand labell to 63 gr. 30 it will not cross the left hand labell, I
therefore take its complement (1) 26 gr. 30. and applying the right hand labell
unto this degree in the Tangent, the Triangle comprehended, as in the former
example, shall be the Triangle required; and the parts discovered in every
intersection or angle shall show the proportion of the Radius, Tangent, and
Secant, as here the Radius that is represented by the label on the left hand,
shall be 500, the Tangent represented by the Radius of the Instrument 1000, and
the Secant represented by the right hand label 1120 parts, which if reduced to
a Radius of 1000, the proportion holds thus, the Radius 1000, the Tangent 2000,
the Secant 2240, which agrees to the tables of Tangents and Secants, unto a
Unit, which is as near as can be expected by Instrument.

If one of the known angles be less then 45, and the other 90 gr. then you
need no more but apply the right hand label to the degree of the Tangent line,
and the Radius of the Instrument shall be the Radius or bases of the Triangle,
and the proportions of the other sides will be showed as abovesaid.

To represent any obtuse angular Triangle.
AS suppose the two known angles be 60 and 100 gr. this triangle must needs be
obtuse anglar, because 100 gr. is more then 90 gr. and because neither of the
labels can make an angle more then 90 gr. therefore the obtuse angle must be
found in the intersection of the two labels; therefore to find out this
triangle work thus, add the two known angles together, and they will make 160:
substract this out of 180, and there remains 20, which is the third angle;
therefore to represent this, put one labell in 20 gr. and the other in 60 gr.
and where they cross each other, the intersection shall be an angle of 100 gr.
because all three angles must make exactly 180 gr. and the labels thus applied
give you the Triangle required, and the divisions of the labells in their
intersection together, with the Radius show you the proportions of the three
sides thereof, as in the former examples.

To represent any Acuteangular Triangle.
THis is to be done only by applying the labels unto the degrees of the angles
known, both in the tangent line and quadrant.

But if any of the angles be above 60 gr. then it must be supplied, by putting
one of the labels to the complement of both added together, unto 180 gr. as
suppose two known acute angles be 60 and 80: the labels being applied to those
degrees in the Tangent and Quadrant, will not meet to cross each other;
therefore put the one label in 60, and the other in 40 gr. which is the
complement of the sum of both 140 to 180: and so you shall have the Triangle
required, the proportion of whose sides is to be found out as aforesaid.

To find the Content of any of these Triangles.
TO effect this, the perpendicular must be known, which being multiplied into
half the basis, the product shall give the Area.

I have showed before how to find the proportions of every side, and so by
consequence the length of the basis; with as great facility is the
perpendicular also to be found: for when you have applied the labels unto each
other, so as that the Triangle is by them represented, do but cast your eye
directly into that intersection, and under the labels amongst the parallel
lines; you shall find the distance from the basis, or the length of the
perpendicular: which multiplied as aforesaid, shall give the Area.

Or to work by the Instrument, I say thus.

As 1 to the Multiplicator,

So the Multiplicand, to the Product.

Supposing then the perpendicular to be 5, and the basis 10: whose half is 5,
that is to be multiplied by the perpendicular.

I apply 10 in the left hand labell, (which also may be reckoned for 1 or 100
or 1000: as occasion serves) unto 5, amongst the parallels, then looking for
5, upon the said labell, I find it directly meeting with 25 amongst the
parallels, which is the number sought.

And thus may any number be multiplied, only remembering to observe that the
same Figures and divisions stand sometimes for units, sometimes for decads,
100. 1000, etc. as occasion serves. So also working by the contrary way, may
any be divided.

For, as the divisor is to 1;

So the dividend, to the quotient.

Therefore apply the number belonging to the divisor on the labell to 1,
amongst the parallels, and then over against the number of the dividend in the
labell, shall be the quotient amongst the parallels. As if I would divide 9 by
3; here 3. is the divisor, and 9 the dividend.

I therefore bring down the 3: upon the labell, till it come exactly upon the
parallel of 1: and then over against 9: which was the dividend, I find the
parallel marked with the figure 3, which is the quotient

For 3. is contained in 9. three times.

But here is to be noted, that it sometimes falls out more convenient in
working proportions on this Instrument to find the first number amongst the
parallels, and the second upon the label, and then the third upon the
parallels, will exactly answer to the 4th or quotient upon the labell.

To reduce the Area of a Triangle found of one denomination, to a perpendicular
and basis of another denomination.
THe reason of the inserting of this proposition is, because that in measuring
of Triangles, whose Area we would find either in Acres, Perches, Yards, Feet,
or Inches; it seldom falls out that the perpendicular or basis measured,
gives just the same number as it does upon the Instrument: yet notwithstanding
the Triangles and their sides hold proportion unto each other; and therefore
there is a necessity of working by proportion, to reduce the one into the other.

As first, supposing we have a rectangle equicrurall Triangle containing 90.45,
45 gr. in its angles on the Instrument, the basis will be 100, and the
perpendicular 100. which perpendicular multipl^yed into half the basis, gives
5000 for the Area. Now suppose again, that by measure we find the basis to be
but 30, in a Triangle consisting of such angles, I say then.

As 100. the basis on the Instrument to 30. the basis measured. So 100 the
perpendicular on the Instrument, to 30 the perpendicular inquired

Which being multiplied into 15. half the basis, gives the Area 450.

Or 2. supposing the Triangle be scalene, having all its sides unequal, whose
angles shall be 30 gr. 40 gr. and 110 gr. upon the Instrument the basis will be
found to be 100, and the perpendicular about 35.

The Question is what the perpendicular shall be if the bases of such a
Triangle being measured shall be 80 perches.

I say then, as 100, the bases on the Instrument, to 80 perches.

So 35 the perpendicular found, to the perpendicular inquired.

Bring down the left hand label therefore till the figure of 10 come just to
the parallel of 8, and then just over against 35 on the label shall be found
amongst the parallels, the perpendicular required, (viz.) 28; by which multiply
half the bases, and the Area will be found 1120.

For, As 1. Is 28.

So is 40.61 half the bases, to 1120.

Bring down therefore the figure of 10 upon the label, (which here stands but
from 1) to 28 amongst the parallels, and over against 4. or 40. on the label
shall be found amongst the parallels, the number aforesaid 1120; which in a
large Instrument may easily be discerned.

And in this manner may most Arithmeticall Proportions be found out, and
Questions of the Golden Rule resolved; as also Lines and Numbers may be
increased in continual proportion. And Mr. Gunter's Canons for Land measure,
to find the contents of all oblong Superficies in Perches, Chains, or Acres,
may be made use of and resolved by the Instrument.

Thus has been showed its use in the resolution of Triangles, and in working
proportions.
BEsides it is appliable to many other Mathematical conclusions, as to find
the length in parts of any Line of Signs, Tangents, Secants, and Cords, and so
by consequence is of great use in the Projection of Spheres, describing of
Dials, whether Sciotericall, or Isntrumental.

To find the length of the Tangent line of any degree, to a Radius of 10000.
Turn back the left hand label to the left hand lamina, so as that it may
make a Rightangle with the Radius, then turn the right hand label to the
degree required in the Tangent line, and marking the place of its intersection
with the other label, you shall there see amongst the divisions of the left
hand label the number of parts that such a Tangent must be of.

As suppose the degree be 30, whose Tangent you would find; the labels being
applied unto each other, as aforesaid, the parts intercepted in the left hand
label, betwixt the right hand label, and the Radius, shall be 5773, which must
be the length of that Tangent.

But note, that if the Tangent be above 45 gr. then the right hand label must
be applied to the complement thereof, and then the parts intercepted shall
resemble the Radius, and the Radius of the Instrument shall represent the
Tangent, and the proportion that the intercepted parts bear unto the Radius of
the Instrument 10000, the same proportion shall the Radius of the Instrument
10000 bear unto the Tangent required.

As suppose you would find the Tangent of 60, apply the right hand label unto
its complement, that is the Tangent of 30 gr. and you shall find the parts
intercepted, that represent the Radius of 60 gr. 5773. and the Radius of the
Instrument that does represent the Tangent 10000. I say then.

As 5773 the Radius found, to 10000, the Radius of the Instrument.

So 10000 the Radius of the Instrument, to 17320 the Tangent of 60 gr.

And thus by proportion, may be found the length of the Tangent line for any
degree even unto 90 gr.
NOw then having known the length of the Tangent line in parts, it is easy (as
is commonly known) to make Scales and prick down a Tangent line to a Circle of
any Semidiameter, which when it is done, the use thereof is so commonly known,
that I need speak nothing of it, but refer to Mr. Gunter and others that have
written largely of its use.

To find the length of a Secant for any degree.
THis is to be done just in the same manner as in the former proposition the
Tangent was to be found, only with this difference, that whereas the parts
intercepted betwixt the intersection of the labels and the Radius of the
Instrument on the left hand label were to be reckoned for the Tangent, or else
for a Radius unto the Tangent represented by the Radius of the Instrument: here
the Secant is always to be found by observing the number of parts intercepted
betwixt the center of the right hand label, and its intersection with the other
label. This in the first of the two former examples, the Radius being found
10000, the Tangent 5773, the Secant shall be.11547, which is a Secant of 30 gr.
but if the degree be above 45: then must we work by proportion as we did in the
last, and the proportion will hold thus. As the parts intercepted on the left
hand labell, to the parts intercepted on the right hand label. So 10000 the
Radius of the Instrument, to the parts of the Secant required. Thus in the
forementioned example, the parts on the left hand label are 5773, on the right
hand label 11547. I say then, As 5773, to 11547. So is 10000 to 20000.

Bring down therefore 5773 on the left hand label, to 11547 amongst the
parallels in the quadrant; and then 10000 upon the left hand labell will meet
exactly with 20000 the secant of 60 gr. whose complement by which the work was
wrought is 30 gr.

The use of this line in Trigonometry and Horography, I leave to be searched
out in their Books, that have written largely of the use thereof.

To find the length of a line of sines for any degree.
THere is no more required to find out this, but to look the degree in the
quadrant; then observing amongst the parallels, just meeeting with the degree:
you shall find there the parts required. As if I would know the length of the
Sine of 30 gr. casting my eye upon the arch of the circle, where it is cut with
the degree of 30: I find meeting exactly in that intersection the parallel of
5: or 5000. I conclude then, if the Radius be 10000. the sine of 30 gr. must
needs be 5000.

The use of this line I also refer to the writings of others, because it is
so commonly treated of, and known of all.

To find the length of a line of Chords for any degree.
THis line so often made use for the dividing circles, or finding the quantity
of any arch or angle, may be found with as great facility and delight as the
three former; indeed it may be done without any more trouble, by doubling the
sine of half the arc, as if we would know the Chord of 60 gr. half its arc
is 30 gr. the sine whereof by the former proposition, as 5000. which doubled,
gives 10000, the Chord required.

But it may be found with great delight and pleasure by the instrument another
way: as follows.

Apply the edge of the right hand label, exactly to the degree in the limb of
the quadrant; whose Chord you desire, and the parts intercepted betwixt that
degree and the center of the label, are the Chord of that degree: thus in the
former example, the labell being applied to the 60 gr. the parts intercepted
shall be exactly 10000, that is the radius, if applied to the 30 gr. the parts
intercepted will be 5176: which is the Chord of 30 gr. directly double to the
sine of 15 gr. 2588. which is half the arc.

To find a line or number in continual proportion, having two numbers given
SUppose the numbers be 4: and 8: I say then.

As 4. to 8. So 8. to 16. So 16. to 32. etc.

Bring down 8. on the left hand labell till it meet with 4 amongst the
parallels, then against 8 amongst the parallels, shall be found 16, on the
label, and against 16 amongst the parallels shall be found 32 on the labell, and
so forward.

Having the Square and its Root to find the Cube thereof.
FOr as the Root is to the Square,

So is the Square unto the Cube.

As suppose, the Root be 3: and the Square 9: the Cube will be found to be 27.

work this.

Apply 9, on the left hand labell to 3: amongst the parallels, and then 9,
amongst the parallels shall meet exactly with 27: the Cube required.

Having the Cube and its Square whereof it was made to find the Root of both.
THis is to be wrought by working directly contrary to the former proposition.

For.

As the Cube is to the square, so is the square unto the root, apply therefore
the number, standing for the cube and square together, finding the one on the
label the other amongst the parallels, and then just over against the number
for the square shall stand the root. Always remembering that if the first number
be found upon the label, the third number must then be searched there also: but
if it be amongst the parallels then the third must be amongst them to, for the
third number in these proportions is always to be found on that line or Scale
where the first was; and the fourth on that line where the second was: whether
it be on the label or amongst the parallels.

Many other things might be wrought by this Instrument; I have only given hints
to those that are more curious and have greater leisure to follow these
studies, who I doubt not, but by their industry will be able from what I have
said to draw new conclusions, and from many pleasing propositions conducing
much to the satisfaction of those that are ingenious.

FINIS.
Postscript.
REader, thou haste had the Instrument with its use, the Author now takes leave
of thee for a time; if a favorable aspect shine on this, thou may ear long
expect more, he has another Instrument called an Horographicall Sphere,
whereby the whole Art of Dialling, will most plainly be set forth to the view
of all that understand the use of it; and Dialls of all sorts may be delineated
in all kind of Plains with great speed and pleasure, though they are never so
full of Gibosities or Concavities, which would puzzle the best Mathematician to
reduce to form: he is now in hand with it, thou shall hear more from him as he
perceives this to find exceptance.

THis Instrument called the Trigonall Sector, as also all other Mathematical
Instruments whatsoever, are exactly made by Mr, Anthony Thompson in Hosier-lane
near Smithfield, London.

FINIS.

