THE CHARTER OF THE Royal Lustring Company.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Whereas, Our well beloved Subjects Paul Cloudesly, Peter Lekeux and Hillary
Renew, on behalf of themselves and several others, have by their humble
Petition represented unto us, That they have, with great Expense and Industry
attained to the New Invention of Making, Dressing, and Lustrating of Silks
called plain black Allamodes, Renforces and Lustrings, and have already caused
to be made great Quantities of the said Silks, at least equalling the
Manufacture of France, as well in Luster as otherwise, for the sole Use,
Exercise, and Benefit, of which said Invention, the said Paul Cloudesly,
together with William Sherrard, and also Peter Du-cloux (who is since gone into
Parts beyond the Seas) obtained of the late King James II. Letters Patents
bearing date the Three and Twentieth Day of November, in the Fourth Year of his
Reign, for the Term of Fourteen Years from the Day of the Date of the said
Letters Patents: King James's Patent to Mr. Cloudesley and Company recited. 4.
Jac. 11.
And whereas they have also informed us, That they are further Resolved
Industriously to promote the said Work to the Honor and Common Good of this
Nation, by Employing many Thousands of Poor People, as well in Working the said
Silks, as by other Dependencies upon the same; as also by saving the vast
Expenses of Money that used to be sent Yearly into France for the said
Commodities; And have humbly besought us to Incorporate them and diverse others
hereafter mentioned to Manage and Carry on the same by a Joynt-Stock: Know ye
therefore, That We being desirous to promote all Endeavors tending to the
Public Good of this Our Kingdom, and to encourage so commendable an
Undertaking, of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, Have
Given, Granted, Constituted, Declared, and Appointed, and by these Presents for
Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do Give, Grant, Constitute, Declare, and
Appoint, That Our Right Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor,
Thomas Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery, the said Paul Cloudesly, William
Sherrard, Peter Lekeux; and also Our Trusty and well-beloved John Blondell,
Lewis Gervaize, Peter Lauze, Stephen Noguier, Paul Rey, John Lekeux, Peter
Floyer, Thomas Blythe, Joseph Paice, Robert Hackshaw, Edward Lloyd, William
Grosvenor, Richard Cooper, and Hillary Renew, and such others as shall be
admitted into the said Society, from henceforth be, and shall be One Body
Corporate and Politic in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Royal Lustring
Company for Making and Dressing of Allamodes, Renforces and Lustrings in
England: The Earl of Pembrooke and 17 Persons more and their Successors are
Incorporated for ever by the name of The Royal Lustring Company.
And them by the Name of the Royal Lustring Company, We do for the purpose
aforesaid really and fully for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Make, Erect,
Ordain, Constitute, Establish, Confirm, and Declare by these Presents to be one
Body Corporate and Politic in Deed and in Name for ever, for the Making and
Dressing of Alamodes, Renforces, and Lustrings in England, according to the
Tenor of the aforesaid Letters Patents, and that by the same Name of the Royal
Lustring Company, for Making and Dressing of Allamodes, Renforces, and
Lustrings in England, they shall have perpetual Succession, and that they and
their Successors by the Name of the Royal Lustring Company for Making and
Dressing of Allamodes, Renforces, and Lustrings in England be, and at all times
hereafter shall be Persons Able and Capable in Law to Have, Purchase, Receive,
Enjoy and Retain Lands, Rents, Privileges, Liberties, Franchises and
Hereditaments of what Kind, Nature, and Quality soever they be, to them and
their Successors; The Company (by the same Name) may Buy and Sell Land, etc.
and also to Give, Grant, Alien, Assign and Dispose of Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and to Do and Execute all and singular other things by the same
Name that to them shall, or may Appertain to do. And that they and their
Successors by the Name of the Royal Lustring Company for Making and Dressing of
Allamodes, Renforces, and Lustrings in England, The Company may Plead and be
Impleaded in any Courts, etc.
may Plead and be Impleaded, Answer, and be Answered unto, Defend and be
Defended in whatsoever Courts and Places, and before any Judges, Justices or
Officers of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in all, and singular Actions, Pleas,
Suits, Plaints, Matters and Demands of what Kind or Quality soever they shall
be in the same Manner and Form, and as fully and amply as any of Our Subjects
of this Our Realm of England, may or can, do Plead, or be Impleaded, Answer,
and be Answered unto, Defend and be Defended: And that the said Royal Lustring
Company for Making and Dressing of Allamodes, Renforces, and Lustrings in
England, and their Successors may have a common Seal for the Expedition of the
Business and Affairs of the said Company; The Company may have a Common Seal,
which they may break, alter, etc. or make anew as they shall think fit. One of
the Company shall be Governor.
And that it shall and may be lawful for them and their Successors, the same
Seal from Time to Time at their Wills and Pleasures, to Break, Change, Alter,
or Make anew, as to them shall seem expedient. And further, We will, and by
these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Ordain, that there shall
be from henceforth one of the said Company to be Elected and Appointed in such
Manner and Form as hereafter in these Presents is Directed, Mentioned, and
Expressed, who shall be, and be called Governor of the said Company: And there
shall also be from henceforth a Deputy Governor and Twelve Assistants of the
said Company, There shall be a Deputy Governor and 12 Assistants.
to be Elected and Appointed in such Manner and Form as hereafter in these
Presents is Directed, Mentioned, and Expressed, for the Managing and Carrying
on all Business and Affairs belonging to the said Company: And we do hereby
Nominate, Make, and Ordain the said Thomas Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, to
be the First and Present Governor of the said Company, The Earl of Pembrooke
Nominated Governor, to continue till another of the Company be Chosen and
Sworn.
to continue in the said Office of Governor from the Date of these Presents,
until another of the said Company in due Manner be Chosen and Sworn into the
said Office according to the Ordinances and Provisions hereafter in these
Presents Expressed and Declared, if the said Thomas Earl of Pembrook and
Montgomery shall so long live: And also We have Assigned, Named and Appointed,
and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, We do Assign, Mr.
Peter Lekeux Deputy Governor until the 25th. of Jan. 1692/3. etc.
Nominate, Constitute, and Make the said Peter Lekeux to be the First and
Present Deputy Governor of the said Company, to continue in the said Office of
Deputy Governor until the Five and Twentieth Day of January next ensuing the
Date of these Our Letters Patents, and from and after that Time, until some
other fit Person shall be duly Elected and Sworn into the said Office of
Deputy Governor of the said Company, if the said Peter Lekeux shall so long
live: And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, Direct and Appoint, That from and after the said Five and
Twentieth Day of January next ensuing, or the Election of some other fit Person
into the said Office of Deputy Governor of the said Company, the said Peter
Lekeux shall be and continue an Assistant of the said Company until the Five
and Twentieth Day of January, That from the 25th. of Jan. 1692/3. or new
Election, Peter Lekeux shall be an Assistant until the 25th. of Jan. 1696, etc.
which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and
Six, and from that Time, until some other fit Person shall be Elected and Sworn
an Assistant of the said Company in his Stead, if he shall so long live, and We
have Constituted, Nominated, and Appointed, and by these Presents, for Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors, do Constitute, Nominate, and Appoint the said John
Blondel, Lewis Gervaize, Mess. Blondell, Gervaize. Claudesly, Sherrard, Lauze,
Paul Clowdesly, William Sherrard, Peter Lauze, Stephen Noguier, Paul Rey, John
Lekeux, Peter Floyer, Joseph Paice, William Grosvenor, and Robert Hackshaw,
Noguier. Rey. John Lekeux, Floyer, Paice. Grosvenor, and Hackshaw Assistants.
to be the First and Present Assistants of the said Company, the said John
Blondel, Lewis Gervaize, Paul Cloudesly, William Sherrard, Peter Lauze, Stephen
Noguier, and Paul Rey, to continue in their said Offices of Assistants, until
the said Five and Twentieth Day of January, which shall be in the Year of Our
Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred, The first Seven to continue till the 25th. of
January, 1696, etc.
Ninety and Six, and from and after that Time, until some other fit Persons
shall be duly Elected and Sworn into their said Offices of Assistants of the
said Company, The other Five till the 25th. of January, 1696.
if they shall so long live, and the said John Lekeux, and Peter Floyer, Joseph
Paice, William Grosvenor, and Robert Hackshaw, to continue in their said Office
of Assistants until the Five and Twentieth Day of January next ensuing the Date
hereof, and from, and after that Time, until some other fit Persons shall be
duly Elected and Sworn into their said Offices of Assistants of the said
Company, if they shall so long live: And further, We do hereby for Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors, The Company have Power upon the 25th. of Jan. 1692/3. or
within 14 Days after to choose five Persons out of the said Mess. Floyer,
Lekeux, Blithe, Paice, Hackshaw Lloyd, Grosvenor, and Cooper, to be Assistants
till the 25th. of Jan. 1693, etc.
Give and Grant unto the said Company, and their Successors, or the Major Part
of them, full Power and Authority upon the said Five and Twentieth Day of
January next ensuing, or within Fourteen Days after, to Elect and Choose Five
Persons out of the before-named Peter Floyer, John Lekeux, Thomas Blithe,
Joseph Paice, Robert Hackshaw, Edward Lloyd, William Grosvenor, and Richard
Cooper, who shall be, and continue Assistants of the said Company, from the
Time of their Election, until the Five and Twentieth Day of January, which
shall be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Three,
and from thence until some other fit Persons shall be duly Elected and Sworn
into their said Offices of Assistants of the said Company: And likewise, We do
by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant unto the
said Company and their Successors, or the Major Part of them, whereof the
Governor, or in his Absence the Deputy Governor, The Company have Power, upon
the 25th. of Jan. 1693. or within 14 Days after and so yearly till the 25th. of
Jan. 1696. to choose five Persons of the Company having 10 Shares a piece at
least to be Assistants.
and in the Absence of the Governor and Deputy Governor, the Treasurer of the
said Company for the Time being, to be always one full Power and Authority,
upon the said Five and Twentieth Day of January, which shall be in the Year of
our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Three, or within Fourteen Days
after, and so Yearly, and every Year, upon every Five and Twentieth Day of
January following, or within Fourteen Days after until the Five and Twentieth
Day of January, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Ninety and Six, to Elect and Choose Five Persons, being Members of the
said Company, and have each of them Ten Shares at least in the Joint Stock of
the said Company, who after they are duly Sworn into their Offices, shall be
and continue Assistants of the said Company, from the Time of their Election,
until the Five and Twentieth Day of January, then next following, and from
thence, until some other fit Persons shall be duly Elected, and Sworn into
their said Offices of Assistants of the said Company. And We have further Given
and Granted, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give
and Grant to the said Company and their Successors, full Power and Authority,
That they the said Governor and Company, and their Successors, or the Major
Part of them, whereof the Governor, or in his Absence, the Deputy Governor,
and in the Absence of the Governor and Deputy Governor, the Treasurer of the
said Company (for the Time being) to be one, on the said Five and Twentieth Day
of January Yearly, or within Fourteen Days after, The Company shall on the
25th. of Jan. yearly, or within 14 Days after, Choose out of the then Assistants
two fit Persons to be Governor and Deputy Governor to continue for 1 Year.
shall, and may Elect and Choose out of the Then Assistants of the said Company,
Two fit Persons to be Governor and Deputy Governor of the said Company, who
shall continue in their said Offices for one whole Year next following such
their Election, and from thence, till some other fit Persons shall be duly
Elected and Sworn into the said Offices of Governor and Deputy Governor of
the said Company. And further, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Give and Grant to the said Company and their Successors, or the
Major Part of them (for the Time being) whereof the Governor, and in his
Absence the Deputy Governor, and in the Absence of the Governor and
Deputy Governor, the Treasurer of the said Company (for the Time being) to be
one full Power and Authority to Elect and Choose upon the said Five and
Twentieth Day of January, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, The Company
have Power, on the 25th. of Jan. 1696, or within 14. Days after and so upon
every 25th, of Jan. following, or within 14 Days, after for ever to Choose 12
Assistants, (besides the Governor and Deputy) having 10 Shares apiece at least.
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Six, or within Fourteen Days after, and so
on every Five and Twentieth Day of January following, or within Fourteen Days
after, forever. Twelve Persons besides the Governor and Deputy Governor of
the said Company, having Ten Shares a piece at least in the Joint Stock of the
said Company, who shall be Assistants of the said Company for one whole Year
next following such Election or Elections, and from thence till some other fit
Persons shall be duly Elected and Sworn in their Stead. And We do hereby for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, None shall be Governor, Deputy or Assistants
(except the Persons before particularly Named) who have not 10 Shares at least.
Direct and Command that no Person or Persons whatsoever, except such as are
before in these Presents particularly Named and Constituted, shall at any time
hereafter be admitted to the Office of Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Assistant of the said Company, who has not Ten Shares at least in the
Joint Stock of the said Company. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Declare and Grant to the said Company, If
Mess. Cloudesley, Sherrard, Peter Lekeux, Blondell, Gervaize, Lauze, Noguier
and Rey, or any of them shall dye etc. or leave this Realm, etc. before the
25th. of Jan. 1696. Then the Company may choose others in their Place out of
Mess. John Lekeux, Floyer, Grosvenor Blithe, Paice, Hackshaw, Lloyd and Cooper,
to continue till the 25th. of Jan. 1696.
and their Successors now, and for the Time being; That if it shall happen that
any of them the said Paul Clowdesley, William Sherrard, Peter Lekeux, John
Blondel, Lewis Gervaize, Peter Lauze, Stephen Noguier, and Paul Rey shall die,
or leave this Realm, or be permitted to Surrender his or their Office, or
Offices of Assistant, or Assistants of the said Company, at any Time before the
said Five and Twentieth Day of January, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and
Six, it shall and may be lawful for the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors, or the Major Part of them, whereof the Governor, and in his
Absence the Deputy Governor, and in the Absence of the Governor and
Deputy Governor, the Treasurer of the said Company) for the Time being) to be
one to Choose one or more other, or others out of the aforenamed John Lekeux,
Peter Floyer, William Grosvenor, Thomas Blithe, Joseph Paice, Robert Hackshaw,
Edward Lloyd and Richard Cooper into the Place or Places of him or them so
dying, departing this Kingdom, or being permitted to surrender his or their
Office or Offices; which said Person or Persons after being duly Sworn, shall
be and continue and Assistant or Assistants of the said Company, until the said
Five and Twentieth Day of January, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Six; and
from thence until some other Person or Persons shall be duly Elected and Sworn
in his or their stead. And We do hereby for Us, The Company may keep a Court
when and where they please.
Our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant unto the said Company, and their
Successors, full Power and Authority to hold, and keep a Court in some Hall or
Place, or Places within Our Cities of London and Westminster, or either of
them, or in any other Part of this our Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales, and there to assemble, and meet together so often as they shall see
Cause, to Treat and Consult concerning the Affairs of the said Company. The
Governor, Deputy, and Assistants or any 7 or more of them shall be a
Committee, who may as often at they Please Choose Treasurer, Secretaries and all
other under Officers.
And we do hereby for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Grant and Declare, That
the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants, or any Seven, or more of
them, whereof the Governor, Deputy Governor, or Treasurer (for the time
being) to be one be, and shall be called the Committee of the said Company, and
that it shall be Lawful for the said Committee from time to time, and so often
as they shall see cause to Choose and Appoint a Treasurer, or Treasurers,
Secretaries, Book-keepers, Clerks, Beadles, or other under Officers necessary
for the Service of the said Company: And to Constitute, Ordain, and make such,
and so many reasonable Laws, Orders, and Ordinances as to them, or the greater
Part of them being then and there present, shall seem necessary and convenient
for the well Ordering and Government of the said Company, The Committee or the
Major part to make and alter Laws, etc. to Punish, and Fine, and Mitigate.
and the said Laws, Orders, and Ordinances, or any of them to alter and annul
as the said Committee shall see requisite, and to set, impose, and inflict
reasonable Pains, Punishments, and Penalties by Fines, and Amerciaments upon
any Offender or Offenders, who shall Transgress, Break, or Violate the said
Laws, Orders, or Ordinances so made as aforesaid, and to mitigate the same as
they shall find Cause; which said Fines, Penalties, and Amerciaments shall, and
may be Levied, Sued for, Taken, Retained and Recovered by the said Governor
and Company, The Company or their Officers or Servants may Levy Fines by
Distress or Action of Debt.
or their Successors, or by their Officers and Servants from time to time, to
be appointed for that purpose, by Distress, or Action of Debt, or by any other
Lawful Ways or Means to the Use and Advantage of the Governor and Company, The
Charter requires the Company's Laws to be observed so as the same be Reasonable
and not Contrary to the Laws of this Realm.
and their Successors, without any Account to be rendered for the same to Us,
our Heirs and Successors, all, and singular, which Laws, Constitutions, Orders,
and Ordinances so as aforesaid to be made, We will to be duly observed and kept
under the Pains and Penalties therein to be contained so always, as the said
Laws, The Governor, Deputy, and Assistants, or the Major part (whereof the
Governor, Deputy, or Treasurer to be One) may as often as they please Appoint
Sub-Committees, and call together the Officers and Members to Courts and
Committees, to Consult of the Company's Affairs, and to put their Bylaws in
Execution.
Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, Fines, and Amerciaments be reasonable,
and not contrary or repugnant to the Laws or Statutes of this Our Realm: And
farther, For Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, We do Grant unto the said Company,
and their Successors, That it shall, and may be Lawful to, and for the said
Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants, and their Successors, or the Major
part of them; The Governor, Deputy Governor, or Treasurer being always one,
so often as they shall think necessary to appoint Sub-Committees, and to Summon
and Call together the Officers and Members of the said Company (for the time
being) to such Courts and Committees, as well in London, The Governor, or
Deputy, shall, Yearly hold a Court on or about the 25th. of Jan. in order to
the Election of Governor, Deputy and Assistants, and shall give Public Notice
10 Days before Election.
as in any other place or places within our Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales, to Treat and Consult concerning the Affairs of the said Company, and to
put their Bylaws in Execution, in any part or parts of our said Dominions: And
We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Declare our Will and Pleasure
to be, That the Governor, or Deputy Governor, for the time being, do, and
shall Yearly, Every Member having 10 Shares or more may Deliver, or send his
Vote in Writing when he shall have ^im^^ Notice. All Votes for Governor,
Deputy and Assistants shall be in Writing and Examined in open Court, the
Governor, Deputy and the Major part of the Assistants being present. None
shall Vote who has not 10 Shares. None to have more than One Vote for all the
Shares he has. And if there happen Equality of Votes, the Governor and in his
absence the Deputy shall have the Casting Vote.
and every Year, hold, and call a Court, on or about the said Five and
Twentieth Day of January, in order to the Election of a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assistants in Manner and Form, as is before expressed,
and shall give Public Notice of the same Ten Days before every such Election
or Elections: And We do hereby also for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant,
and Ordain that every Member of the said Company having Ten Shares, or more in
the Joynt-Stock, may deliver or send his Vote in Writing, whenever he shall
have due and timely Notice of such Election or Elections, and that all Votes in
every Election of a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants shall be
delivered, or sent in Writing, and shall be perused and examined in open Court.
The Governor or Deputy Governor, and Major part of the Assistants being
present, and that no Person shall be admitted to Vote, who has not Ten Shares
in the Joint Stock of the said Company, and no Person to have more than one
Vote for all the Shares he has in the said Joynt-Stock, and whenever there
shall happen to be equality of Votes in Election of any Officers or Members of
the said Company, the said Governor, That None shall be Admitted into any
Office till he has taken in open Court before the Governor, Deputy or
Treasurer the Oaths Appointed by the Act Primo Willielmi and Mariae, entitled,
And Act for Abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and Appointing
other Oath; and also an Oath for the due Execution of his Office.
and in his Absence, the Deputy Governor for the time being shall have the
Casting-Vote, and that no Person shall be admitted into any Office belonging to
the said Company, until he has first taken in open Court, before the
Governor, Deputy Governor, or Treasurer of the said Company, the Oaths
appointed by Act of Parliament made in the First Year of Our Reign, Entitled,
An Act for Abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and Appointing
other Oaths, and also an Oath for the due Execution of his or their Office or
Offices, and Trust, and faithful Observance of the Laws, Constitutions, Orders,
and Ordinances of the said Company: To which Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Treasurer, for the time being, We do hereby for us, our Heirs, and Successors,
Authority to the Governor, Deputy, or Treasurer to Administer the Oaths.
give full Power and Authority to administer such Oaths accordingly: And
further, Our Will and Pleasure is, that every Person who, being duly elected
into the Office of Governor, Every Person being duly Elected Governor, Deputy,
or Assistant, who shall within 14 Days after his Election refuse to take upon
him his Office or the Oaths, shall pay to the Company such Fines as by their
Laws shall be Appointed, and other Persons shall be chosen in their Places.
Deputy Governor, or Assistant of the said Company, shall within Fourteen Days
after his Election, Refuse to take upon him the Office or Place whereunto he
shall be elected as aforesaid, or to take any, or either of the said Oaths so
ordered and appointed to be taken by the Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Assistants, shall forfeit and pay to the Governor and Company, and their
Successors, such Fines and Amerciaments, as by the Laws aforesaid shall be
directed, limited, and appointed, and other Person and Persons shall be Chosen
and Elected into his or their Place and Places. And further, The Company or the
Major Part in Court have Power to displace any Governor, Deputy, Assistant, or
other Officer, for Misdemeanor, or any reasonable Cause, and to Elect others in
their Place.
We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant unto the said Company,
and their Successors, or the Major Part of them in Court assembled, full Power
and Authority to remove, and displace any Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistant,
or any other Officer of the said Company, for Misdemeanour, or any other
reasonable Cause, and to Elect others in the Place or Places of the Person of
Persons so removed; and that as often as it shall happen, that the Governor, or
Deputy Governor, That if the Governor, Deputy, or any of the Assistants shall
die, or be permitted to Surrender their Offices and that there be a Vacancy,
all who have ten Shares, upon timely Notice by the Governor or Deputy may choose
others in their Room to continue till the 25th of Jan. then following, first
taking the Oaths as aforesaid.
or any of the Assistants of the said Company (for the time being) shall die,
or shall be permitted by the Governor, or Deputy Governor, and Major Part of
the Assistants, in open Court, to surrender his or their Office or Offices, and
that there shall happen to be any Vacancy of a Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Assistant of the said Company, That it shall and may be lawful to, and for all
such Persons who have Ten Shares in the said Joynt-Stock, timely Notice being
given to them by the Governor or Deputy Governor of such Death or Vacancy, to
Choose and Elect into his or their Place or Places some other Person or Persons
of the said Company for Governor, Deputy Governor, or Assistant, by the
Methods, Manner, and Limitations herein before appointed, mentioned, and
expressed, the said Governor, Deputy Governor or Assistant to continue in his
or their Office or Offices till the Five and Twentieth Day of January, then
next following his or their Election, and till some other Person or Persons
shall be Elected and Sworn into his or their Office or Offices, he or they
having first in open Court taken the Oaths appointed to be taken by the
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants, before their Admittance into their
respective Offices, and in the Manner aforesaid. If any Member that has or
shall agree by Writing under his Hand to Adventure or pay in Money toward the
Joint Stock, and shall not within ten Days after Warning bring in the same,
that then the Company or the Major Part (whereof the Governor or Deputy to be
one) at a General Court to disfranchise such Members.
And of Our more abundant Grace and Favor to the said Governor and Company, We
do hereby declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That if it shall so happen that
any of the Persons herein before particularly Named, or who shall hereafter
become Members of the said Company, who has Promised and Agreed, or shall
Promise or Agree by Writing, under his or their Hands or Hands, to Adventure,
or to pay in any Sum or Sums of Money toward the Joynt-Stock of the said
Company, and shall not within Ten Days next, after Warning given to him or
them, bring in, and deliver to the Treasurer appointed by the Company such Sum
or Sums of Money as shall have been expressed or set down in Writing, and
Subscribed by the said Person or Persons, that then, and at all times after it,
shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Governor and Company, or the Major
Part of them present, whereof the said Governor, or Deputy Governor to be one,
at any of their General Courts or Assemblies, to Remove and Disfranchise such
Person or Persons from and out of the said Corporation or Company, so refusing
to Pay, or Answer his or their Subscription Money. The Earl of Pembrook is
required to take the Oaths before Mess. Peter Lekeux, Blondel, and Gervaize, or
any two of them.
And further, Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do also hereby Ordain, That the
said Thomas Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, herein before-named, to be
Governor of the said Company, shall take his Corporal Oath before the said
Peter Lekeux, John Blondel, and Lewis Gervaize, or any Two of them; and the
aforesaid several Persons herein before-named, to be the present
Deputy Governor and Assistants of the said Company, The present Deputy and
Assistants shall take the Oaths before the present Governor and Company, or the
Major Part in Public Court.
shall take their Corporal Oaths before the present Governor of the said
Company in such Manner and Form, as by the Governor and Company, or the greater
Part of them in any Public Court to be held for the said Company, shall be
Lawfully and Reasonably set down and devised, To whom severally and
respectively We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Give full Power and
Authority to administer the said Oaths to the said Officers accordingly. And We
do hereby further for Us, All Judges, Justices, and other Officers are
Commanded to Favor and Aid the Company.
Our Heirs and Successors. Will, Authorize, and Command all and singular our
Judges, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Headboroughs, and all other the Officers and Ministers whatsoever, of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors now (and for the time being) within this our Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, That they, and every of them respectively be
from time to time in their several and respective Offices, Favoring, Aiding,
Furthering, Helping and Assisting unto the said Governor and Company, and
their Successors, their Agents and Servants in all things, according to Our
Royal Will and Pleasure herein before declared. And of our further Especial
Grace, Certain Knowledge, and mere Motion for the carrying on, and promoting
the Interest of the Company aforesaid, We have given and granted, and by these
Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do Give and Grant unto the said
Company, and their Successors, That they the said Governor and Company, and
their Successors, shall and may be hereafter Persons able and capable to have,
and We do by these present for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant that they
shall and may have Full, Free, and Lawful License, Power, and Authority to
Take, Have, Purchase, Receive, Enjoy, The Company may purchase Lands and
Hereditaments, not exceeding 1000l. per Annum. above all Charges and Reprizes.
and Possess to them and their Successors for ever any Manners Lordships,
Messuages, Mills, Waters, Streams, Rents, Services, Reversions, Lands, Mines,
Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, so as the same Manors,
Messuages, Lordships, Mills, Waters, Streams, Rents, Services, Reversions,
Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments do not exceed the Yearly Value of one
Thousand Pounds above all Charges and Reprizes, and also Goods and Chattels,
The Company may buy Goods and Chattels of what Nature or Value soever.
of what Value, Nature, or Kind soever; and also to Give, Grant, Alien, Assign
and Dispose of Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Mills, Waters, Streams, The
Company may Sell their Lands, etc. and do all other Lawful Acts by the Name
aforesaid.
Rents, Services, Reversions, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises and Jurisdictions, and also to Do and
Execute all other Lawful Acts and Things whatsoever by the Name aforesaid: And
further, We have Given and Granted, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, do Give and Grant unto all and every Subject and Subjects
whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs, and Successors Especial License, Power, and
Authority, to Give, Grant, Sell and Alien unto the said Governor and Company,
Power given to all the Kings Subjects to Sell Land, etc. to the Company.
and their Successors any Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Mills, Waters,
Streams, Rents, Services, Reversions, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
whatsoever, so as the same do not exceed the Clear Yearly Value of One Thousand
Ponnds above all Charges and Reprizes whatsoever; and also Goods and Chattels,
of what Nature or Value soever: And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Give and Grant unto the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors full Power and Authority to Make and Raise a Joynt-Stock, The
Company may raise what Stock they please and increase, manage or diminish the
same as they shall think fit.
of any Value whatsoever, and the same Joynt-Stock to Order, Manage, and carry
on from time to time for the purposes aforesaid, and to receive the Benefit and
Advantage of the same to the use of them, the said Governor and Company, and
their Successors, according to such Shares and Proportions as they, or any of
them have, or shall have therein; And the same Joynt-Stock to Augment and
Increase, or Reduce and Diminish from time to time, as they the said Governor
and Company, and their Successors shall find most fitting and convenient.
Provided always, That these Presents, or any thing herein contained, shall not
extend, or be construed to extend to discharge any of the Covenants or
Proviso's contained in the beforementioned Letters Patents, A Proviso for
keeping in Force the Patent Granted to Mess.
Granted to the said Paul Cloudesly, William Sherrard, and Peter Ducleu for the
sole Use and Benefit of the said Invention of Making, Lustrating, and Dressing
of Allamodes, Renforces, and Lustrings for the Term of Fourteen Years: But that
the same shall be, and continue in as full force to all Intents and Purposes,
as if these Presents had never been had, or made any thing herein before
contained to the contrary, A Proviso that the Company shall not have the Sole
Benefit of the Invention for any longer Term than the Remainder of the 14 Years
Granted in the Patent. But that after the End of that Term all Persons may have
Liberty.
notwithstanding: Provided also, That this our Grant, or any thing herein
contained, shall not extend, or be construed to extend to the Granting the said
Governor and Company, the sole Exercise and Benefit of the aforesaid Invention
for any (...) time than the Remainder of the said Term of Fourteen Years, but
that after the ^^^^tion of that Term, all Persons who otherwise might Work the
same, may have full ^^^^ty so to do any thing herein before contained to the
contrary notwithstanding: Pro^^^^ likewise, A Proviso that this Charter shall
not prejudice the Corporation of Weavers, London.
That nothing herein contained shall be prejudicial to the Corporation of
^^^^rs, London; and that all Persons, their Apprentices and Servants that shall
at any (...) hereafter Weave any of the said Allamodes, Renforces, and
Lustrings, within the ^^^^s of the Charter of the said Company, shall from time
to time be bound Apprentices, That all Persons who shall Weave Allamodes,
Renforces and Lustrings within the Limits of the Weavers Charter shall be
Apprentices or Members of that Company, Subject to the Ordinances of the same.
(...) Members of the said Corporation, according to the purport of their
Ordinances, and (...) to Government and Regulation of the said Corporation of
Weavers. And (...), We have Granted, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs
and Suecessors, do (...) unto the said Company, and their Successors, That
these our Letters Patents, or (...) Enrollment thereof shall be in, and by all
things Good, Firm, Valid, Sufficient, That this present Charter shall in all
things be construed in Favor of the Company.
and ^^^tual in the Law, according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, and
shall be taken, ^^^rued, and adjudged in the most favorable and beneficial
Sense for the best Advan^^ of the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors, as well in all Courts, as ^^ere, and by all, and singular the
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, of Us, Our (...) and Successors in this Our
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, any De^^^ or Incertainties in these
Presents contained, or any Matter, Cause, or thing what^^^ to the contrary, in
any wise, notwithstandnig. In Witness whereof, We have (...) these Our Letters
to be made Patents, Witness Our selves at Westminster, the ^^^th Day of
October, in the Fourth Year of our Reign. By Writ of Privy Seal,

A Clause out of an Act of Parliament, passed in the Ninth and Tenth of William
the Third, confirming the Charter of the Royal Lustring Company.
AND whereas the King's most Excellent Majesty, together with the late Queen
(of Blessed Memory) by their Letters, Patents, or Charter under the Great Seal
of ^^^^d, bearing Date the Fifteenth Day of October, in the Fourth Year of
Their said ^^^^ies Reign, Reciting or taking Notice, that several Persons
therein Named did (...) the late King James the Second's Letters Patents,
bearing Date the Three and ^^^ieth Day of November, in the Fourth Year of his
Reign, for the Sole Use, Ex^^^, and Benefit of a New Invention of Making,
Dressing and Lustrating of Silks, (...) Plain Black Alamodes, Renforces and
Lustrings, for the Term of Fourteen Years (...) the Day of the Date of the said
Letters Patents Their said Majesty's did, for the ^^^raging so Commendable an
Undertaking, Give, Grant, Constitute, Declare and ^^point Thomas Earl of
Pembrooke and Montgomery, and several other Persons, in the (...) Charter
mentioned and Contained, and such others as should be admitted into their
^^^ety, to be from thenceforth One Body Corporate and Politic, in Deed and in
(...), by the Name of the Royal Lustring Company, for Making and Dressing of
^^^odes, Renforces, and Lustrings in England, and by that Name to have
Perpetual ^^^ession, and diverse and sundry Privileges, Liberties, Powers and
Authorities, with (...) Matters and Things in the said Charter of Incorporation
Mentioned and Expressed, (...) thereby Granted to, and Vested in the said
Company, and their Successors, in (...) Sort, Manner, and Form as in and by the
said Charter, or Letters Patents, or In^^^ent thereof is Mentioned and
Expressed, and as thereby it more fully Appears: (...) forasmuch as the said
Company have with great Labor and Charges brought the (...) Manufacture to
Perfection, but by reason of the fraudulent Importation of Ala^^^ and Lustrings
by diverse Persons, more regarding their own Interest, than the (...) of
England, their Duty to the King, and Obedience to the Laws of the Land, the
said Company have not Enjoyed the Benefit and Advantage intended them in and
(...) the said Charter, but wasted their Time and Stock, in Contesting with
many Diff^^^^ties and Obstructions, which they have met with since the Granting
thereof: And it ^^pearing that the said Manufacture cannot be so well Carried
on, and Secured to (...) Kingdom, by any other Means as by Establishing a
Company to Carry on the sa^^* Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the aforesaid Company, (...) their Successors, shall and may at
all Times from henceforth Stand, Continue, and (...) a Body Politic and
Corporate in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Ro^^^ Lustring Company; And
that the said Company, and their Successors shall and may (...) Do, Use,
Exercise and Enjoy all and singular the Liberties, Privileges, Pow^^^*
Authorities, Matters and Things in the said Letters Patents, or Charter of
Incorpor^^^on, mentioned to be Granted to them, as Amply, Fully, and Largely,
to all Inte^^^* Constructions, and Purposes, as if the same were Word for Word
Recited and Set d^^^ at large in this present Act.

FINIS.

